CONTENTS 
THREE 
• SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 147 
1. Internaliza
tion of Reality 149 
Primary Socialization 149 
Secondary Socialization 157 
Maintenance and Transformation of 
Subjective Reality 166 
2. Internalization and Social Structure, 183 
3· Theories about Identity 194 
4· Organism and Identity 201 
CONCLUSION 
• The Sociology of Knowledge and 
Sociological Theory 205 
NOTES 213 
INDEXES 
• Subject Index 237 
Name Index for Introduction and Notes 247 
Preface 
The present volume is intended as a systematic, theoretical 
treatise in the sociology of knowledge. It is not intended, 
therefore, to give a historical survey of the development of 
this discipline, or to engage in exegesis of various figures in 
this or other developments in sociological theory, or even to 
show how a synthesis may be achieved between several of 
these figures and developments. Nor is there any polemic 
intent here. Critical comments on other theoretical posi­
tions have been introduced (not in the text, but in the 
Notes) only where they may serve to clarify the present argu­
ment. 
The core of the argument will
 be found in Sections Two and 
Three ('Society as Objective Reality' and 'Society as Subjective 
Reality'), the former containing our basic understanding of 
the problems of the sociology of knowledge, the latter applying 
this understanding to the level of subjective consciousness and 
thereby building a theoretical bridge to the problems of social 
psychology. Section One contains what might best be described 
as philosophical prolegomena to the core argument, in terms 
of a phenomenological analysis of the reality of everyday life 
('The Foundations of Knowledge in Everyday Life'). The 
reader interested only in the sociological argument proper 
may be tempted to skip this, but he should be warned that 
certain key concepts employed throughout the argument are 
defined in Section One. 
Although our interest is not historical, we have felt obliged 
to explain why and in what way our conception of the socio­
logy of knowledge diff
ers from what has hitherto been
 generally 
understood by this discipline. This we do in the Introduction. 
At the end, we make some concluding remarks to indicate what 
we consider to be the 'pay-of£' of the present enterprise 
7 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
for sociological theory generally and for certain areas of 
empirical research. 
The logic of our argument makes a certain measure of 
repetitiveness inevitable. Thus some problems are viewed with­
in phenomenological brackets in Section One, taken up again 
in Section Two with these brackets removed and with an inter­
est in their empirical genesis, and then taken up once more in 
Section Three on the level of subjective consciousness. We 
have tried to make this book as readable as possible, but not in 
violation of its inner logic, and we hope that the reader will 
understand the reasons for those repetitions that could not be 
avoided. 
Ibn ul-' 
Arabi, the great Islamic mystic, exclaims in one of 
his poems- 'Deliver us, oh Allah, from the sea of names!' We 
have often repeated this exclamation in our own readings in 
sociological theory. We have, in consequence, decided to 
eliminate all names from our actual argument. The latter can 
now be read as one continuous presentation of our own posi­
tion, without the constant intrusion of such observations as 
'Durkheim says this', 'Weber says that', 'We agree here with 
Durkheim but not with Weber', 'We think that Durkheim has 
been misinterpreted on this point', and so forth. That our 
position has not sprung up ex nihilo is obvious on each page, 
but we want it to be judged on its own merits, not in terms of 
its exegetical or synthesizing aspects. We have, therefore, 
placed all references in the Notes, as well as (though always 
briefly) any arguments we have with the sources to which we 
are indebted. This has necessitated a sizeable apparatus of 
notes. This is not to pay obeisance to the rituals of Wissen­
schaftlichkeit, but rather to be faithful to the demands of 
historical gratitude. 
The project of which this book is the realization was first 
concocted in the summ
er of 1962, in the course of some 
leisurely conversations at the foot of and (occasionally) on top 
of the Alps of western Austria. The first plan for the book was 
drawn up early in 1963. At that time it was envisaged as an 
enterprise involving one other sociologist and two philo­
sophers. The other participants were obliged for various bio­
graphical reasons to withdraw from active involvement in the 
project, but we wish to acknowledge with great appreciation 
8 
PREFACE 
the continuing critical comments of Hansfried Kellner (cur­
rently at the U¦versity of Frankfurt) and Stanley Pullberg 
(currently at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes). 
How much we owe to the late Alfred Schutz will become 
clear in various parts of the following treatise. However, we 
would like to acknowledge here the influence of Schutz's 
teaching and writing on our thinking. Our understanding of 
Weber has profited immensely from the teaching of Carl 
Mayer (Graduate Faculty, New School for Social Research), 
as that of Durkheim and his school has from the interpreta­
tions of Albert Salomon (also of the Graduate Faculty). 
Lu:kman­, _ recollec®ng many fruitful conversations during a 
penod of JOint teaching at Hobart College and on other occa­
sio
_
ns, _wishes to express his appreciation of the thinking of 
Fnednch Tenbruck (now at the University of Frankfurt). 
Berger would
_¥ike to thank Kurt Wolff (Brandeis University) 
and Anton ZIJderveld (University of Leiden) for their con­
tinuing critical interest in the progress of the ideas embodied 
in this work. 
It is customary in projects of this sort to acknowledge 
various intangible contributions of wives, children and other 
private associates of more doubtful legal standing. If only to 
contravene this custom, we have been tempted to dedicate 
this book to a certainJodler of Brand(Vorarlberg. However, we 
wish to thank Brigitte Berger (Hunter College) and Benita 
¤uckmann (University of Freiburg), not for any scientifically 
Irrelevant performances of private roles, but for their critical 
observations as social scientists and for their steadfast refusal 
to be easily impressed. 
Peter L. Berger 
GRADUATE FACULTY 
NEW SCHOOL FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH 
NEW YORK 
Thomas Luckmann 
UNIVERSITY OF FRANKFURT 


Introduction 


The Problem of the Sociology of Knowledge 
The basic contentions of the argument of this book are imp­
licit in its title and sub-title, namely, that reality is socially 
constructed and that the sociology of knowledge must analyse 
the process in which this occurs. The key terms in these con­
tentions are 'reality' and 'knowledge', terms that are not only 
current in everyday speech, but that have behind them a long 
history of philosophical inquiry. We need not enter here into 
a discussion of the semantic intricacies of either the everyday 
or the philosophical usage of these terms. It will be enough, 
for our purposes, to define 'reality' as a quality appertaining to 
phenomena that we recognize as having a being independent 
of our own volition (we cann
ot 'wish them away'), and to 
define 'knowledge' as the certainty that phenomena are real 
and that they possess specific characteristics. It is in this 
(admittedly simplistic) sense that the terms have relevance 
both to the man in the street and to the philosopher. The man 
in the street inhabits a world that is 'real' to him, albeit in 
different degrees, and he 'knows', with diff
erent degrees of 
confidence, that this world possesses such and such charac­
teristics. The philosopher, of course, will raise questions about 
the ultimate status of both this 'reality' and this 'knowledge'. 
What is real? How is one to know? These are among the most 
ancient questions not only of philosophical inquiry proper, 
but of human thought as such. Precisely for this reason the 
intrusion of the sociologist into this time-honoured intellectual 
territory is likely to raise the eyebrows of the man in the street 
and even more likely to enrage the philosopher. It is, therefore, 
important that we clarify at the beginnin
g the sense in which 
we use these terms in the context of sociology, and that we 
immediately disclaim any pretension to the effect that sociology 
has an answer to these ancient philosophical preoccu
pations. 
13 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OP REALITY 
If we were going to be meticulous in the ensuing argument, 
we would put quotation marks around the two aforementioned 
terms every time we used them, but this would be stylistically 
awkward. To speak of quotation marks, however, may give a 
clue to the peculiar mann
er in which these terms appear in a 
sociological context. One could say that the sociological 
understanding of 
'reality' and 
'knowledge' falls somewhere in 
the middle between that of the man in the street and that of 
the philosopher. The man .in the street does not ordinarily 
trouble himself about what is 
'real' to him and about what he 
'knows' unless he is stopped short by some sort of problem. 
He takes his 'reality' and his. 
'knowledge' for granted. The 
sociologist cann
ot do this, if only because of his systematic 
awareness of the fact that men in the street take quite diff
erent 
'realities' for granted as between one society and another. The 
sociologist is forced by the very logic of his discipline to ask, if 
nothing else, whether the diff
erence between the two 
'realities' 
may not be understood in relation to various differences be­
tween the two societies. The philosopher, on the other hand, 
is professionally obligated to take nothing for granted, and to 
obtain maximal clarity as to the ultimate status of what the 
man in the street believes to be 
'reality' and 'knowledge'. Put 
differently, the philosopher is driven to decide where the 
quotation marks are in order and where they may safely be 
omitted, that is, to diffe:entiate between valid and invalid 
assertions about the world. This the sociologist cannot pos­
sibly do. Logically, if not stylistically, he is stuck with the 
quotation marks. 
For example, the man in the street may believe that he pos­
sesses 
'freedom of the will
' and that he is therefore 
'responsible' 
for his actions, at the same time denying this 'freedom' and 
this 'responsibility' to infants and lunatics. The philosopher, 
by whatever methods, will
 inquire into the ontological and 
epistemological status of these conceptions. Is man 
free? What 
is responsibility? Where are the limits of responsibilit
y? HOfJJ
 can 
one knor.o these things? And so on. Needless to say, the socio­
logist is in no position to supply answers to these questions. 
What he can and must do, however, is to ask how it is that the 
notion of 'free
dom' has come to be taken for granted in one 
society and not in another, how its 'reality' is maintained in 
INTRODUCTION 
the one socie'r and how, evÛ mÜrÝ interestingly, this 
'reality' 
may once agam be lost to an mdiVIdual or to an entire collec­
tivity. 
. Socioo£
.
cal ¢terc:st in questions of'reality' and 
'knowledge' 
IS thus 1Ill
tially JUStified by the fact of their social relativity. 
What is 'real' to a Tibetan monk may not be 'real' to an 
A:merican businessman. The 'knowledge' of the criminal 
diff
ers from the 'knowledge' of the criminologist. It follows 
thÞt specific
. 
aggloßerations of 'reality' and 'knowledge' per­
ñ to specific
. 
soctal contexts, and that these relationships 
will
 have to be mcluded in an adequate sociological analysis of 
these coà 
texts. !he need for a 
'sociology of knowledge' is thus 
already gven Wlth the observable differences between societies 
in terms o¡ 
what is taken for granted as 
'knowledge' in them. 
Báyond this, however, a discipline calling itself by this name 
will
 have to concern itself with the general ways by which 
'realities' are taken as 'known' in human societies. In other 
W?rds, a 'so oogy of knowledge' will
 have to deal not only 
Wlth the empmcal variety of 'knowledge' in human societies 
but also with the processes by which any body of 'knowledge! 
comes to be socially established as 'reality'. 
It is our contention, then, that the sociology of knowledge 
mât concern itself with whatever passes for 'knowledge' in a 
soCiety, regardless of the ultimate validity or invalidity (by 
whatever criteria) of such 'knowledge'. And in so far as all 
human 'knowledge' is developed, transmitted and maintained 
in social situations, the sociology of knowledge must seek to 
understand the processes by which this is done in such a way 
that a taken-for-granted 'reality' congeals for the man in the 
street. In other words, we contend that the sociology of know­
ledge is concerned with the analysis of the social construction of 
reality. 
This understanding of the proper field of the sociology of 
knowledge differs from what has generally been meant by this 
discipline since it was first so called some forty years ago. 
Before we begin our actual argument, therefore, it will
 be 
useful to look briefly at the previous development of the disci­
pline and to explicate in what way, and why, we have felt it 
necessary
 to deviate from it. 
The term 'sociology of knowledge' (Wiss
enssoziologie) was 
IS 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTIO N OF REALITY 
coined by Max Scheler.1 The time was the 1920s, the place 
was Germany, and Scheler was a philosopher. These three 
facts are quite important for an understanding of the genesis 
and further development of the new discipline. The sociology 
of knowledge originated in a particular situation of German 
intellectual history and in a philosophical context. Whiie the 
new discipline was subsequently introduced into the socio­
logical context proper, particularly in the English-speaking 
world, it continued to be marked by the problems of the 
particular intellectual situation from which it arose. As a result 
tl:e sociology of knowledge remained a peripheral concern 
among sociologists at large, who did not share the particular 
problems that troubled German thinkers in the 1920s. This 
was especially true of American sociologists, who have in the 
main looked upon the discipline as a marginal speciality with a 
persistent European flavour. More importantly, however, the 
continuing linkage of the sociology of knowledge with its 
original constellation of problems has been a theoretical 
weakness even where there has been an interest in the disci­
pline. To wit, the sociology of knowledge has been looked 
upon, by its protagonists and by the more or less indifferent 
sociological public at large, as a sort of sociological gloss on 
the history of ideas. This has resulted in considerable myopia 
regarding the potential theoretical significance of the sociology 
of knowledge. 
There have been different definitions of the nature and 
scope of the sociology of knowledge. Indeed, it might almost 
be said that the history of the sub-discipline thus far has been 
the history of its various definitions. Nevertheless, there has 
been general agreement to the effect that the sociology of 
knowledge is concerned with the relationship between human 
thought and the social context within which it arises. It may 
thus be said that the sociology of knowledge constitutes the 
sociological focus of a much more general problem, that of the 
existential determination (Seinsgebundenheit) of thought as 
such. Although here the social factor is concentrated upon, 
the theoretical difficulties are similar to those that have arisen 
when other factors (such as the historical, the psychological or 
the biological) have been proposed as determinative of human 
thought. In all these cases the general problem has been the 
J6 
INTRODUCTION 
extent to which thought reflects or is independent of the 
proposed determinative factors. 
It is likely that the prominence of the general problem in 
recent German philosophy has its roots in the vast accumula­
tion of historical scholarship that was one of the greatest 
intellectual fruits of the nineteenth century in Germany. In a 
way unparalleled in any other period of intellectual history the 
past, with all its amazing variety of forms of thought, was 
'made present' to the contemporary mind through the efforts 
of scientific historical scholarship. It is hard to dispute the 
claim of German scholarship to the primary position in this 
enterprise. It should, consequently, not surprise us that the 
theoretical problem thrown up by the latter should be most 
sharply sensed in Germany. This problem can be described as 
the vertigo of relativity. The epistemological dimension of the 
problem is obvious. On the empirical level it led to the concern 
to investigate as painstakingly as possible the concrete relation­
ships between thought and its historical sitmitions. If this 
interpretation is correct, the sociology of knowledge takes up a 
problem originally posited by historical scholarship - in a 
narrower focus, to be sure, but with an interest in essentially 
the same questions. 
2 
Neither the general problem nor its narrower focus is new. 
An awareness of the social foundations of values and world 
views can be found in antiquity. At least as far back as the 
Enlightenment- this awareness crystallized into a major theme 
of modern Western thought. It would thus be possible to make 
a good case for-a number of'genealogies' for the central prob­
lem of the sociology of knowledge. 
3 It may even be said that 
the problem is contained in nuce in Pascal's famous statement 
that what is truth on one side of the Pyrenees is error on the 
other.4 Yet the immediate intellectual antecedents of the 
sociology of knowledge are three developments in nineteenth­
century German thought - the Marxian, the Nietzschean, and 
the historicist. 
It is from Marx that the sociology of knowledge derived its 
root proposition- that man's consciousness is determined by 
his social being. 
s To be sure, there has been much debate as to 
just what kind of determination Marx had in mind. It is safe 
to say that much of the great 'struggle with Marx' that charac-
17 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION 01' ..tEALITY 
terized not only the beginnin
gs of the sociology of knowledge 
but the 'classical age' of sociology in general (particularly as 
manifested in the works of Weber, Durkheim and Pareto) 
was really a struggle with a faulty interpretation of Marx by 
latter-day Marxists. This proposition gains plausibility when 
we reflect that it was only in 1932 that the very important 
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 were re­
discovered and only after the Second World War that the full
 
implications of this rediscovery could be worked out in Marx 
research. Be this as it may, the sociology of knowledge in­
herited from Marx not only the sharpest formulation of its 
central problem but also some of its key concepts, among 
which should be mentioned particularly the concepts of 
'ideology' (ideas serving as weapons for social interests) and 
'false consciousness' (thought that is alienated from the real 
social being of the thinker). 
The sociology of knowledge has been particularly fascinated 
by Marx's twin concepts of 'substructure/superstructure' 
(UnterbaufUeberbau). It is here particularly that controversy 
has raged about the correct interpretation of Marx's own 
thought. Later Marxism has tended to identify the 'sub­
structure' with economic structure tout court, of which the 
'superstructure' was then supposed to be a direct 'reflection' 
(thus, Lenin, for instance). It is quite clear now that this mis­
represents Marx's thought, as the essentially mechanistic 
rather than dialectical character of this kind of economic deter­
minism should make one suspect. What concerned Marx was 
that human thought is founded in human activity ('labour', in 
the widest sense of the word) and in the social relations 
brought about by this activity. 'Substructure' and 'super­
structure' are best understood if one views them as, respec­
tively, human activity and the world produced by that 
activity.• In any case, the fundamental 'sub/superstructure' 
scheme has been
 taken over in various forms by the sociology 
of knowledge, beginnin
g with Scheler, always with an under­
standing that there is some sort of relationship between 
thought and an 'underlying' reality other than thought. The 
fascination of the scheme prevailed despite the fact that much 
of the sociology of knowledge was explicitly formulated in 
opposition to Marxism and that di1fcrent positions have been
 
18 
INTRODUCTION 
taken within it regarding the nature of the relationship between 
the two components of the scheme. 
Nietzschean ideas were less explicitly continued in the 
sociology of knowledge, but they belong very much to its 
general intellectual background and to the 'mood' within 
which it arose. Nietzsche's anti-idealism, despite the diff
er­
ences in content not unlike Marx's in form, added additional 
perspectives on human thought as an instrument in the 
struggle for survival and power. 
7 Nietzsche developed his own 
theory of 'false consciousness' in his analyses of the social 
significance of deception and self-deception, and of illusion as 
a necessary condition of life. Nietzsche's concept of 'resent­
ment' as a generative factor for certain types of human thought 
was taken over directly by Scheler. Most generally, though, one 
can say that the sociology of knowledge represents a specific 
application of what Nietzsche aptly called the 'art of mistrust'. 
8 
Historicism, especially as expressed in the work of Wilhelm 
Dilthey, immediately preceded the sociology of knowledge.• 
The dominant theme here was an overwhelming sense of the 
relativity of all perspectives on human events, that is, of the 
inevitable historicity of human thought. The historicist in­
sistence that no historical situation could be understood except 
in its own terms could readily be translated into an emphasis 
on the social situation of thought. Certain historicist concepts, 
such as 'situational determination' (Standortsgebundenheit) and 
'seat in life' ( 
Sitz im Leben) could be directly translated as 
referring to the 'social location' of thought. More generally, 
the historicist heritage of the sociology of knowledge pre­
disposed the latter towards a strong interest in history and the 
employment of an essentially historical method - a fact, 
incidentally, that also made for its marginality in the milieu of 
American sociology. 
Scheler's interest in the sociology of knowledge, and in 
sociological questions generally, was essentially a passing 
episode during his philosophical career 
.10 His final aim was the 
establishment of a philosophical anthropology that would 
transcend the relativity of specific historically and sociall
y 
located viewpoints. The sociology of knowledge was to serve 
as an instrument towards this aim, its main purpose being the 
clearing away of the difficulties raised by relativism so that the 
19 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
real philosophical task could proceed. Scheler's sociology of 
knowledge is, in a very real sense, ancilla philosophiae, and of a 
very specific philosophy to boot. 
In line with this orientation, Scheler's sociology of know­
ledge is essentially a negative method. Scheler argued that the 
relationship between 'ideal factors' (ldealfakroren) and 'real 
factors' (Realfaktoren), terms that are clearly reminiscent of 
the Marxian 
'sub/superstructure' scheme, was merely a 
regulative one. That is, the 'real factors' regulate the condi­
tions under which certain 'ideal factors' can appear in history, 
but cann
ot aff
ect the content of the latter. In other words, 
society determines the presence. (Dasein) but not the nature 
(Sosein) of ideas. The sociology of knowledge, then, is the 
procedure by which the socio-historical selection of ideational 
contents is to be studied, it being understood that the contents 
themselves are independent of socio-historical causation and 
thus inaccessible to sociological analysis. If one may describe 
Scheler's method graphically, it is to throw a sizeable sop to 
the dragon of relativity, but only so as to enter the castle of 
ontological certitude better. 
Within this intentionally (and inevitably) modest frame­
work Scheler analysed in considerable detail the manner in 
which human knowledge is ordered by society. He emphasized 
that human knowledge is given in society as an a priori to 
individual experience, providing the latter with its order of 
meaning. This order, although it is relative to a particular 
socio-historical situation, appears to the individual as the 
natural way of looking at the world. Scheler called this the 
'relative-natural world view' (relativnaturliche Weltanschauung) 
of a society, a concept that may still be regarded as central for 
the sociology of knowledge. 
Following Scheler's 'invention' of the sociology of know­
ledge, there was extensive debate in Germany concerning the 
validity, scope and applicability of the new discipline.11 Out of 
this debate emerged one formulation that marked the trans­
position of the sociology of knowledge into a more narrowly 
sociological context. The same formulation was the one in 
which the sociology of knowledge arrived in the English­
speaking world. This is the formulation by Karl Mannheim.12 
It is safe to say when sociologists today think of the sociology 
INTRODUCTION 
of knowledge, pro or con, they usually do so in terms of Mann­
heim's formulation of it. In American sociology this is readily 
intelligible if one reflects on the accessibility in English of 
virtually the whole of Mannheim's work (some of which, 
indeed, was written in English, during the period Mannheim 
was teaching in England after the advent of Nazism in Ger­
many, or was brought out in revised English versions), while 
Scheler's work in the sociology of knowledge has remained 
untranslated to date. Apart from this 'diffusion' factor, Mann­
heim's work is less burdened with philosophical 'baggage' 
than Scheler's. This is especially true of Mannheim's later 
writings and can be seen if one compares the English version 
of his main work, Ideology and Utopia, with its German 
original. Mannheim thus became the more 'congenial' figure 
for sociologists, even those critical of or not very interested in 
his approach. 
Mannheim's understanding of the sociology of knowledge 
was much more far-reaching than Scheler's, possibly because 
the confrontation with Marxism was more prominent in his 
work. Society was here seen as determining not only the 
appearance but also the content of human ideation, with the 
exception of mathematics and at least parts of the natural 
sciences. The sociology of knowledge thus became a positive 
method for the study of almost any facet of human thought. 
Significantly, Mannheim's key concern was with 
the 
phenomenon of ideology. He distinguished between the parti­
cular, the total and the general concepts of ideology - ideology 
as constituting only a segment of an opponent's thought; 
ideology as constituting the whole of an opponent's thought 
(similar to Marx's 'false consciousness'); and (here, as Mann­
heim thought, going beyond Marx) ideology as characteristic 
not only of an opponent's but of one's own thought as well. 
With the general concept of ideology the level of the sociology 
of knowledge is reached - the understanding that no human 
thought (with only the aforementioned exceptions) is imm­
une to the ideologizing influences of its social context. By 
this expansion of the theory of ideology Mannheim sought to 
abstract its central problem from the context of political usage, 
and to treat it as a general problem of epistemology and 
historical sociology. 
21 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OP REALITY 
Although Mannheim did not share Scheler's ontological 
ambitions, he too was uncomfortable with the pan-ideologism 
into which his thinking seemed to lead him. He coined the 
term 'relationism' (in contradistinction to 'relativism') to de­
note the epistemological perspective of his sociology of know­
ledge - not a capitulation of thought before the socio-historical 
relativities, but a sober recognition that knowledge must always 
be knowledge from a certain position. The influence of Dilthey 
is probably of great importance at this point in Mannheim's 
thought - the problem of Marxism is solved by the tools of 
historicism. Be this as it may, Mannheim believed that ideo­
logizing influences, while they could not be eradicated com­
pletely, could be mitigated by the systematic analysis of as 
many as possible of the varying socially grounded positions. 
In other words, the object of thought becomes progressively 
clearer with this accumulation of diff
erent perspectives on it. 
This is to be the task of the sociology of knowledge, which thus 
is to become an important aid in the quest of any correct 
understanding of human events. 
Mannheim believed that diff
erent social groups vary greatly 
in their capacity thus to transcend their own narrow position. 
He placed his major hope in the 'socially unattached intelli­
gentsia' (freischroebende Intelli'genz, a term derived from Alfred 
Weber), a sort of interstitial stratum that he believed to be 
relatively free of class interests. Mannheim also stressed the 
power of 'utopian' thought, which (like ideology) produces a 
distorted image of social reality, but which (unlike ideology) 
has the dynamism to transform that reality into its image 
of it. 
Needless to say, the above remarks can in no way do justice 
to either Scheler's or Mannheim's conception of the sociology 
of knowledge. This is not our intention here. We have merely 
indicated some key features of the two conceptions, which 
have been
 aptly called, respectively, the 'moderate' and 
'radical' conceptions of the sociology of knowledge.13 What is 
remarkable is that the subsequent development of the socio­
logy of knowledge has, to a large extent, consisted of critiques 
and modifications of these two conceptions. As we have al­
ready pointed out, Mannheim's formulation of the sociology 
of knowledge has continued to set the terms of reference for 
INTRODUCTION 
the discipline in a definitive mann
er, particularly in English­
speaking sociology. 
·The most important American sociologist to have paid 
serious attention to the sociology of knowledge has been
 
Robert Merton.14 His discussion of the discipline, which 
covers two chapters of his major work, has served as a useful 
introduction to the field for such American sociologists as have 
bee
n interested in it. Merton constructed a paradigm for the 
sociology of knowledge, restating its major themes in a com­
pressed and coherent form. This construction is interesting 
because it seeks to integrate the approach of the sociology of 
knowledge with that of structural-functional theory. Merton's 
own concepts of 'manifest' and 'latent' functions are applied 
to the sphere of ideation, the distinction being made between 
the intended, conscious functions of ideas, and the unintended, 
unconscious ones. While Merton concentrated on the work of 
Mannheim, who was for him the sociologist of knowledge par 
exceUence, he stressed the significance of the Durkheim school 
and of the work of Pitirim Sorokin. It is interesting that 
Merton apparently failed to see the relevance to the sociology 
of knowledge of certain important developments in American 
social psychology, such as reference-group theory, which he 
4iscusses in a diff
erent part of the same work. 
Talcott Parsons has also commented on the sociology of 
knowledge.16 This comment, however, is limited mainly to a 
critique of Mannheim and does not seek an integration of the 
discipline within Parsons's own theoretical system. In the 
latter, to be sure, the 'problem of the role of ideas' is analysed 
at length, but in a frame of reference quite diff
erent from that 
of either Scheler's or Mannheim's sociology of knowledge.141 
We would, therefore, venture to say that neither Merton nor 
Parsons has gone in any decisive way beyond the sociology of 
knowledge as formulated by Mannheim. The same can be 
said of their critics. To mention only the most vocal one, 
C. Wright Mills dealt with the sociology of knowledge in his 
earlier writing, but in an expositional manner and without 
contributing to its theoretical development.17 
An interesting eff
ort to integrate the sociology of knowledge 
with a nco-positivist approach to sociology in general is that of 
Theodor Geiger, who had a great influence on Scandinavian 
23 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
sociology after his emigration from Germany.l8 Geiger re­
turned to a narrower concept of ideology as socially distorted 
thought and maintained the possibility of overcoming ideology 
by careful adherence to scientific canons of procedure. The 
neo-positivist approach to ideological analysis has more re­
cently been
 continued in German-speaking sociology in the 
work of Ernst Topitsch, who has emphasiZed the ideological 
roots of various philosophical positions.19 In so far as the 
sociological analysis of ideologies constitutes an important 
part of the sociology of knowledge as defined by Mannheim, 
there has been a good deal of interest in it in both European 
and American sociology since the Second World War. 
20 
Probably the most far-reaching attemp¼ to go beyond Mann­
heim in the construction of a comprehensive sociology of 
knowledge is that of Werner Stark, another emigre continental 
scholar who has taught in England and the United States. 
21 
Stark goes furthest in leaving behind Mannheim's focus on 
the problem of ideology. The task of the sociology of know­
ledge is not to be the debunking or uncovering of socially 
produced distortions, but the systematic study of the social 
conditions of knowledge as such. Put simply, the central 
problem is the sociology of truth, not the sociology of error. 
Despite his distinctive approach, Stark is probably closer to 
Scheler than to Mannheim in his understanding 
of the 
relationship between ideas and their social context. 
Again, it is obvious that we have not tried to give an ade­
quate historical overview of the history of the sociology of 
knowledge. Furthermore, we have so far ignored develop­
ments that might theoretically be relevant to the sociology of 
knowledge but that have not been so considered by their own 
protagonists. In other words, we have limited ourselves to de­
velopments that, so to speak, sailed under the banner 'sociology 
of knowledge' (considering the theory of ideology to be a part 
of the latter). This has made one fact very clear. Apart from the 
epistemological concern of some sociologists ofknowledge, the 
empirical focus of attention has bee
n almost exclusively on the 
sphere of ideas, that is, of theoretical thought. This is also true 
of Stark, who sub-tided his major work on the sociology of 
knowledge 'An Essay in Aid of a Deeper Understanding of the 
History of Ideas'. In other words, the interest of the sociology 
INTRODUCTION 
of knowledge has been on epistemological questions on the 
theoretical level, on questions of intellectual history on the 
empirical level. 
We would emphasize that we have no reservations whatso­
ever about the validity and importance of these two sets of 
questions. However, we regard it as unfortunate that this 
particular constellation has dominated the sociology of know­
ledge so far. We would argue that, as a result, the full theore­
tical significance of the sociology of knowledge has been 
obscured. 
To include epistemological questions concerning the validity 
of sociological knowledge in the sociology of knowledge is 
somewhat like trying to push a bus in which one is riding. To 
be sure, the sociology of knowledge, like all empirical disci­
plines that accumulate evidence concerning the relativity and 
determination 
of 
human thought, 
leads towards episte­
mological questions concerning sociology itself as well as any 
other scientific body of knowledge. As we have remarked be­
fore, in this the sociology of knowledge plays a part similar to 
history, psychology and biology, to mention only the three 
most important empirical disciplines that have caused trouble 
for epistemology. The logical structure of this trouble is 
bascall½ the same
.
in all cases: How can I be sure, say, of my 
soaologcal analysts of American middle-class mores in view of 
the fact that the categories I use for this analysis are condi­
tioned by historically relative forms of thought, that I myself 
and everything I think is determined by my genes and by my 
ingrown hostility to my fellowmen, and that, to cap it all, I 
am myself a member of the American middle class? 
Far be it from us to brush aside such questions. All
 we 
would contend here is that these questions are not themselves 
part of the empirical discipline of sociology. They properly 
belong to the methodology of the social sciences, an enterprise 
that belongs to philosophy and is by definition other than 
sociology, which is indeed an object of its inquiries. The socio­
logy of knowledge, along with the other epistemological 
troublemakers among the empirical sciences, will
 'feed' prob­
lems to this methodological inquiry. It cannot solve these 
problems within its own proper frame of reference. 
We therefore exclude from the sociology of knowledge the 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
epistemol
ogical and methodological problems that bothered 
both of its major originators. By virtue of this exclusion we 
are setting
 ourselves apart from both Scheler's and Mann
­
hc:im's conception of the discipline, and from the later socio­
logists of knowledge (notably those with a nco-positivist 
orientation) who shared the conception in this respect. 
Throughout the present work we have firmly bracketed any 
epistemological or methodological questions about the validity 
of sociological analysis, in the sociology of knowledge itself or 
in any other area. We consider the sociology of knowledge to 
be part of the empirical discipline of sociology. Our purpose 
here is, of course, a theoretical one. But our theorizing refers 
to the empirical discipline in its concrete problems, not to the 
philosophical investigation of the foundations of the empirical 
discipline. In sum, our enterprise is one of sociological theory, 
not of the methodology of sociology. Only in one section of our 
treatise (the one immediately following this introduction) do 
we go beyond sociological theory proper, but this is done for 
reasons that have little to do with epistemology, as will
 be 
explained at the time. 
We must also, however, redefine the task of the sociology of 
knowledge on the empirical level, that is, as theory geared o 
the empirical discipline of sociology. As we have seen
, on  
level the sociology of knowledge has been
 concerned Wlth 
intell
ectUal history, in the sense of the history of ideas. Again, 
we would stress that this is, indeed, a very important focus of 
sociological inquiry. Furthermore, in contrast with our exclu­
sion of the epistemological/methodological problem, we con­
cede that this focus belongs with the sociology of knowledge. 
We would argue, however, that the problem of'ideas', includ­
ing the special problem of ideology, constitutes only part of 
the larger problem of the sociology of knowledge, and not a 
central 
part at that. 
Th4 sociology of knorDW,e must concern itself 
with erJerything 
t1uzt 
passes
 for 'knorDW,e' in society. As soon
 as one states this, 
one realizes that the focus on intell
ectUal history is ill-chosen, 
or rather, is ill
-chosen if it becomes the central focus of the 
sociology of knowledge. Theoretical thought, 'ideas', Weltan­
scluzattg
en are not that important in society. Although every 
society contains these phenomena, they are only part of the 
INTRODUCTION 
sum of what passes for 
'knowledge'. Only a very limited group 
of people in any society engages in theorizing, in the business 
of 'ideas', and the construction of Weltanscluluungen. But 
everyone in society participates in its 'knowledge' in one way 
or another. Put diff
erently, only a few are concerned with the 
theoretical interpretation of the world, but everybody lives in 
a world of some sort. Not only is the focus on theoretical 
thought unduly restrictive for the sociology of knowledge, it is 
also unsatisfactory because even this part of socially available 
'knowledge' cannot be fully understood if it is not placed in 
the framework of a more general analysis of 'knowledge'. 
To exaggerate the importance of theoretical thought in 
society and history is a natural failing of theorizers. It is then 
all
 the more necessary to correct this intellectualistic mis­
apprehension. The theoretical formulations of reality, whether 
they be scientific or philosophical or even mythological, do not 
exhaust what is 
'real' for the members of a society. Since this 
is so, the sociology of knowledge must first of all
 concern itself 
with what people 
'know' as 
'reality' in their everyday, non- or 
pre-theoretical lives. In other words, common-sense 'know­
ledge' rather than 'ideas' must be the central focus for the 
sociology of knowledge. It is precisely this 'knowledge' that 
constitutes the fabric of meanings without which no society 
could exist. 
The sociology of knowledge, therefore, must concern itself 
with the social construction of reality. The analysis of the 
theoretical articulation of this reality will
 certainly continue to 
be a part of this concern, but not the most important part. It 
will
 be clear that, despite the exclusion of the epistemological/ 
methodological problem, what we are suggesting here is a 
far-reaching redefinition of the scope of the sociology of 
knowledge, much wider than what has hitherto been
 under­
stood as this discipline. 
The question arises as to what theoretical ingredients ought 
to be added to the sociology of knowledge to permit its re­
definition in the above sense. We owe the fundamental insight 
into the necessity for this redefinition to Alfred Schutz. 
Throughout his work, both as philosopher and as sociologist, 
Schutz concentrated on the structure of the common-sense 
world of everyday life. Although he himself 
did not elaborate 
27 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
a sociology of knowledge, he clearly saw what this discipline 
would have to focus on: 
All
 typifications of common-sense thinking are themselves integ­
ral elements of the concrete historical socio-cultural Lebensr.oe
lt 
within which they prevail as taken for granted and· as socially 
approved. Their structure determines among other things the 
social distribution of knowledge and its relativity and relevance to 
the concrete social environment of a concrete group in a concrete 
historical situation. Here are the legitimate problems of relativism, 
historicism, and of the so-called sociology of knO'Wledge.22' 
And again: 
Knowledge is socially distributed and the mechanism of this distri­
bution can be made the subject matter of a sociological discipline. 
True, we have a so-called sociology of knowledge. Yet, with very 
few exceptions, the discipline thus misnamed has approached the 
problem of the social distribution of knowledge merely from the 
angle of the ideological foundation of truth in its dependence upon 
social and, especially, economic conditions, or from that of the 
social implications of education, or that of the social role of the 
man of knowledge. Not sociologists but economists and philo­
sophers have studied some of the many other theoretical aspects of 
the problem. 
23 
While we would not give the central place to the social 
distribution of knowledge that Schutz implies here, we agree 
with his criticism of 'the discipline thus misnamed' and have 
derived from him our basic notion of the manner in which the 
task of the sociology of knowledge must be redefined. In the 
following considerations we are heavily dependent on Schutz 
in the prolegomena concerning the foundations of knowledge 
in everyday life and gready indebted to his work in various 
important places of our main argument thereafter. 
Our anthropological presuppositions are strongly influenced 
by Marx, especially his early writings, and by the anthropologi­
cal implications drawn from human biology by Helmuth 
Plessner, Arnold Gehlen and others. Our view of the nature of 
social reality is gready indebted to Durkheim and his school in 
French sociology, though we have modified the Durkheimian 
thȿry of society by the introduction of a dialectical perspec-
INTRODUCTION 
tive derived from Marx and an emphasis on the constitution 
of social reality through subjective meanings derived from 
Weber.24 Our social-psychological presuppositions, especially 
important for the analysis of the internalization of social reality, 
are gready influenced by George Herbert Mead and some 
developments of his work by the so-called symbolic-inter­
actionist school of American sociology.25 We shall indicate in 
the footnotes how these various ingredients are used in our 
theoretical formation. We fully realize, of course, that in this 
use we are not and cannot be faithful to the original intentions 
of these several streams of social theory themselves. But, as 
we have already stated, our purpose here is not exegetical, nor 
even synthesis for the sake of synthesis. We are fully aware 
that, in various places, we do violence to certain thinkers by 
integrating their thought into a theoretical formation that 
some of them might have found quite alien. We would say in 
justification that historical gratitude is not in itself a scientific 
virtue. We may cite here some remarks by Talcott Parsons 
(about whose theory we have serious misgivings, but whose 
integrative intention we fully share): 
The primary aim of the study is not to determine and state in 
summary form what these writers said or believed about the sub­
jects they wrote about. Nor is it to inquire directly with reference 
to each proposition of their 'theories' whether what they have said 
is tenable in the light of present sociological and related knowledge. 
... It is a study in social theory, not theories. Its interest is not in 
the separate and discrete propositions to be found in the works of 
these men, but in a single body of systematic theoretical reason­
ing.2G 
Our purpose, indeed, is to engage in 'systematic theoretical 
reasoning'. 
It will already be evident that our redefinition of its nature 
and scope would move the sociology of knowledge from the 
periphery to the very centre of sociological theory. We may 
assure the reader that we have no vested interest in the label 
'sociology of knowledge'. It is rather our understanding of 
sociological theory that led us to the sociology of knowledge 
and guided the manner in which we were to redefine its prob­
lems and tasks. We can best describe the path along which we 
29 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
set out by ref
erence to two of the most f
amous and most 
infiuential 'marching orders' f
or sociology. 
One was given by Durkheim in The Rules o
f
 Sociological 
Method, the other by Weber in Wirtscha
ft und Gesellscha
ft. 
Durkheim tells us : 'The first and most f
undamental rule is : 
Consider social facts as things.'17 And Weber observes : 'Both 
f
or sociology in the present sense, and f
or history, the object 
of cognition is the subjective meaning-complex of action. 
'28 
These two statements are not contradictory. Society does in­
deed possess objective f
acticity. And society is indeed built up 
by activity that expresses subjective meaning. And, inci­
dentally, Durkheim knew the latter, just as Weber knew the 
f
ormer. It is precisely the dual character of society in terms of 
objective f
acticity and subjective meaning that makes its 
'reality sui generis', to use another key term of Durkheim's. 
The central question f
or sociological theory can then be put as 
f
ollows : How is it possible that subjective meanings become 
objective f
acticities? Or, in terms appropriate to the af
ore­
mentioned theOretical positions : How is it possible that 
human activity (Handeln) should produce a world of things 
(chases)? In other words, an adequate understanding of the 
'reality sui generis' of society requires an inquiry into the 
manner in which this reality is constructed. This inquiry, we 
maintain, is the task of the sociology of knowledge. 
30 
Part One 
The Foundations of 
Knowledge in Everyday Life 


I .  The Reality of Everyday Life 
Since our purpose in this treatise is a sociological analysis of 
the reality of everyday life, more precisely, of knowledge that 
guides conduct in everyday lif
e, and we are only tangentially 
interested in how this reality may appear in various theoretical 
perspectives to intellectuals, we must begin by a clarification 
of that reality as it is available to the common sense of the 
ordinary members of society. How that common sense reality 
may be influenced by the theoretical constructions of intellec­
tuals and other merchants of ideas is a f
urther question. Ours 
is thus an enterprise that, although theoretical in character, is 
geared to the understanding of a reality that f
orms the subject 
matter of the empirical science of sociology, that is, the world 
of everyday lif
e. 
It should be evident, then, that our purpose is not to engage 
in philosophy. All the same, if the reality of everyday life is to 
be understood, account must be taken of its intrinsic chararter 
before we can proceed with sociological analysis proper. 
Everyday lif
e presents itself as a reality interpreted by men 
and subjectively meaningf
ul to them as a coherent world. As 
sociologists we take this reality as the object of our analyses. 
Within the frame of ref
erence of sociology as an empirical 
science it is possible to take this reality as given, to take as data 
particular phenomena arising within it, without f
urther in­
quiring about the f
oundations of this reality, which is a 
philosophical task. However, given the particular purpose of 
the present treatise, we cannot completely by-pass the philo­
sophical problem. The world of everyday lif
e is not only taken 
f
or granted as reality by the ordinary members of society in 
the subjectively meaningf
ul conduct of their lives. It is a world 
that originates in their thoughts and actions, and is maintained 
as real by these. Before turning to our main task we must, 
33 


THE SoCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
theref
ore, · attempt to clarif
y the f
oundations of knowledge in 
everyday life, to wit, the objectivations of subjective processes 
(and meanings) by which the intersubjective common-sense 
world is constructed. 
For the purpose at hand, this is a preliminary task, and we 
can do no more than sketch the main f
eatures of what we 
believe to be an adequate solution to the philosophical prob­
lem-adequate, let us hasten to add, only in the sense that it 
can serve as a starting point f
or sociological analysis. The 
considerations immediately f
ollowing are, theref
ore, of the 
nature of philosophical prolegomena and, in themselves, pre­
sociological. The method we consider best suited to clarif
y the 
f
oundations of knowledge in everyday lif
e is that of pheno­
menological analysis, a purely descriptive method and, as such, 
'empirical' but not 'scientific' - as we understand the nature 
of the empirical sciences.1 
The phenomenological analysis of everyday lif
e, or rather 
of the subjective experince of everyday lif
e, ref
rains f
rom any 
causal or genetic hypotheses, as well as f
rom assertions about 
the ontological status of the phenomena analysed. It is impor­
tant to remember this. C-:mmon sense contains innumer­
able pre- and quasi-scientific interpretations about everyday 
reality, which it takes f
or granted. If we are to describe the 
reality of common sense we must refer to these interpretations, 
just as we must take account of its taken-for-granted character 
- but we do so within phenomenological brackets. 
Consciousness is always intentional; it always intends or is 
directed towards objects. We can never apprehend some 
putative substratum of consciousness as such, only conscious­
ness of something or other. This is so regardless of whether 
the object of consciousness is experienced as belonging to an 
external physical world or apprehended as an element of an 
inward subjective reality. Whether I (the first person singular, 
here as in the f
ollowing illustrations, standing f
or ordinary 
self-consciousness in everyday life) am viewing the panorama 
of New York City or whether I become conscious of an inner 
anxiety, the processes of consciousness involved are intentional 
in both instances. The point need not be belaboured that the 
consciousness of the Empire State Building differs f
rom the 
awareness of anxiety. A detailed phenomenological analysis 
34 
THE FOUNDATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
would uncover the various layers of experience, and the 
diff
erent structures of meaning involved in, say, being bitten 
by a dog, remembering having been bitten by a dog, having a 
phobia about all
 dogs, and so f
orth. What interests us here is 
the common intentional character of all
 consciousness. 
Diff
erent objects present themselves to consciousness as 
constituents of diff
erent spheres of reality. I recognize the 
f
ellowmen I must deal with in the course of everyday lif
e as 
pertaining to a reality quite diff
erent f
rom the disembodied 
figures that appear in my dreams. The two sets of objects 
introduce quite diff
erent tensions into my consciousness and I 
am attentive to them in quite diff
erent ways. My conscious­
ness, then, is capable of moving through diff
erent spheres of 
reality. Put diff
erently, I am conscious of the world as con­
sisting of multiple realities. As I move f
rom one reality to 
another, I experience the transition as a kind of shock. This 
shock is to be understood as caused by the shift in attentive­
ness that the transition entails. Waking up f
rom a dream 
illustrates this shif
t most simply. 
Among th multiple realities there is one that presents itself 
as the reality par excellence. This is the reality of everyday lif
e. 
Its privileged position entitles it to the designation of para­
mount reality. The tension of consciousness is highest in 
everyday life, that is, the latter imposes itself upon conscious­
ness in the most massive, urgent and intense manner. It is 
impossible to ignore, diffi
cult even to weaken in its imperative 
.presence. Consequently, it f
orces me to be attentive to it in 
the f
ullest way. I experience everyday lif
e in the state of being 
wide-awake. This wide-awake state of existing in and appre­
hending the reality of everyday lif
e is taken by me to be normal 
and self
-evident, that is, it constitutes my natural attitude. 
I apprehend the reality of everyday lif
e as an ordered reality. 
Its phenomena are prearranged in patterns that seem to be 
independent of my apprehension of them and that impose 
themselves upon the latter. The reality of everyday lif
e 
appears already objectified, that is, constituted by an order of 
objects that have been designated as objects before my appear­
ance on the scene. The language used in everyday lif
e con­
tinuously provides me with the necessary objectifications and 
posits the order within which these make sense and within 
3S 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
which everyday lif
e has meaning f
or me. I live in a place that 
is geographically designated; I employ tools, f
rom can­
openers to sports cars, which are designated in the technical 
vocabulary of my society; I live within a web of human 
relationships, f
rom my chess club to the United States of 
America, which are also ordered by means of vocabulary. In 
this mann
er language marks the coordinates of my lif
e in 
society and fills that lif
e with meaningf
ul objects. 
The reality of everyday lif
e
 is organized around the 'here' of 
my body and the 'now' of my present. This 'here and now' is 
the f
ocus of my attention to the reality of everyday lif
e. What 
is 'here and now' presented to me in everyday lif
e is the 
realissimum of my consciousness. The reality of everyday lif
e 
is not, however, exhausted by these immediate presences, but 
embraces phenomena that are not present 'here and now'. 
This means that I experience everyday life in terms of diff
er­
ing degrees of closeness and remoteness, both spatially and 
temporally. Closest to me is the zone of everyday lif
e that is 
directly accessible to my bodily manipulation. This zone con­
tains the world within my reach, the world in which I act so as 
to modif
y its reality, or the world in which I work. In this 
world of working my consciousness is dominated by the 
pragmatic motive, that is, my attention to this world is mainly 
determined by what I am doing, have done or plan to do in it. 
In this way it is my world par excellence. I know, of course, 
that the reality of everyday lif
e contains zones that are not 
accessible to me in thi$ manner. But either I have no pragmatic 
interest in these zones or my interest in them is indirect in so 
far as they may be, potentially, manipulative zones f
or me. 
Typically, my interest in the far zones is less intense and cer­
tainly less urgent. I am intensely interested in the cluster of 
objects involved in my daily occupation - say, the world of the 
garage, if I am a mechanic. I am interested, though less 
directly, in what goes on in the testing laboratories of the 
automobile industry in Detroit - I am unlikely ever to be in 
one of these laboratories, but the work done there will even­
tually affect my everyday lif
e. I may also be interested in what 
goes on at Cape Kennedy or in outer space, but this interest is 
a matter of private, 'leisure-time' choice rather than an urgent 
necessi
ty of my everyday lif
e. 
THE FOUNDATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
The reality of everyday lif
e further presents itself to me as 
an intersubjective world, a world that I share with others. This 
intersubjectivity sharply differentiates everyday life f
rom 
other realities of which I am conscious. I am alone in the world 
of my dreams, but I know that the world of everyday lif
e is as 
real to others as it is to myself. Indeed, I cann
ot exist in every­
day lif
e without continually interacting and communicating 
with others. I know that my natural attitude to this world 
corresponds to the natural attitude of others, that they also 
comprehend the objectifications by which this world is ordered, 
that they also organize this world around the 'here and now' 
of their being in it and have projects f
or working in it. I also 
know, of course, that the others have a perspective on this 
common world that is not identical with mine. My 'here' is 
their 'there'. My 'now' does not f
ully overlap with theirs. My 
projects diff
er f
rom and may even condict with theirs. All
 the 
.same, I know that I live with them in a common world. Most 
importantly, I know that there is an ongoing correspondence 
between my meanings and their meanings in this world, that 
we share a common sense about its reality. The natural attitude 
is the attitude of common-sense consciousness precisely be­
cause it ref
ers to a world that is common to many men. 
Common-sense knowledge is the knowledge I share with 
others in the normal, self
-evident routines of everyday lif
e. 
The reality of everyday lif
e is taken f
or granted as reality. It 
does not require additional verification over and beyond its 
simple presence. It is simply there, as self-evident and com­
pelling f
acticity. I know that it is real. While I am capable of 
engaging in doubt about its reality, I am obliged to suspend 
such doubt as I routinely exist in everyday lif
e. This suspen­
sion of doubt is so firm that to abandon it, as I might want to 
do, say, in theoretical or religious contemplation, I have to 
make an extreme transition. The world of everyday life pro­
claims itself and, when I want to challenge the proclamation, 
I must engage iti a deliberate, by no means easy eff
ort. The 
transition f
rom the natural attitude to the theoretical attitude 
of the philosopher or scientist illustrates this point. But not 
all
 aspects of this reality are equally unproblematic. Everyday 
lif
e is divided into sectors that are apprehended routinely, and 
others that present me with problems of one kind or another. 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
Suppose that I am an automobile mechanic who is highly 
knowledgeable about all American-made cars. Everything 
that pertains to the latter is a routine, unproblematic f
acet of 
my everyday lif
e. But one day someone appears in the garage 
and asks me to repair his Volkswagen. I am now compelled to 
enter the problematic world of f
oreign-made cars. I may do so 
reluctandy or with prof
essional curiosity, but in either case I 
am now f
aced with problems that I nave not yet routinized. At 
the same time, of course, I do not leave the reality of everyday 
lif
e. Indeed, the latter becomes enriched as I begin to incor­
porate into it the knowledge and skills required for the repair 
of f
oreign-made cars. The reality of everyday lif
e encompasses 
both kinds of sectors, as long as what appears as a problem 
does not pertain to a different reality altogether (say, the reality 
of 
theoretical physics, or of 
nightmares). As long as the routines 
of everyday lif
e continue without interruption they are appre­
hended as unproblematic. 
But even the unproblematic sector of everyday reality is so 
only until f
urther notice, that is, until its continuity is inter­
rupted by the appearance of a problem. When this happens, 
the reality of everyday lif
e seeks to integrate the problematic 
sector into what is already unproblematic. Common-sense 
knowledge contains a variety of instructions as to how this is 
to be done. For instance, the others with whom I work are 
unproblematic to me as long as they perform their f
amiliar, 
taken-f
or-granted routines - say, typing away at desks next to 
mine in my office. They become problematic if they interrupt 
these routines - say, huddling together in a comer and talking 
in whispers. As I inquire about the meaning of this unusual 
activity, there is a variety of possibilities that my COmmon­
sense knowledge is capable of reintegrating into the unprob­
lematic routines of everyday lif
e : they may be consulting on 
how to fix a broken typewriter, or one of them may have some 
urgent instructions f
rom the boss, and so on. On the other 
hand, I may find that they are discussing a union directive to 
go on strike, something as yet outside my experience but still 
well within the range of problems with which my common­
sense knowledge can deal. It will deal with it, though, as a 
problem, rather than simply reintegrating it into the un­
problematic sector of everyday lif
e. If, however, I come to the 
THE FOUNDATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
conclusion that my colleagues have gone collectively mad, the 
problem that presents itself is of yet another kind. I am now 
f
aced with a problem that transcends the boundaries of the 
reality of everyday lif
e and points to an altogether diff
erent 
reali. In.
dee, my conclusion that my colleagues have gone 
mad unplies tpso facto that they have gone off into a world 
that is no longer the common world of everyday lif
e. 
Compared to the reality of everyday lif
e, other realities 
appear as finite provinces of meaning, enclaves within the 
paramount rty marked by circumscribed meanings and 
mod.es of ex¦enence. The paramount reality envelops them on 
all s1des, as 1t were, and consciousness always returns to the 
paramount reality as f
rom an excursion. This is evident f
rom 
the illustrations already given, as in the reality of dreams or 
that of theoretical thought. Similar 'commutations' take place 
between the world of everyday lif
e and the world of play both 
the playing of children and, even more sharply, of adul. The 
theatre provides an excellent illustration of such playing on 
the part of adults. The transition between realities is marked 
by the rising and f
alling of the curtain. As the curtain rises the 
. 
' 
' 
, 
stor 1s 
transported to another world', with its own 
meanmgs and an order that may or may not have much to do 
with the order of everyday life. As the curtain f
alls, the spec­
tator 're§s to reality', that is, to the paramount reality of 
everyday lif
e by comparison with which the reality presented 
o? .
the stage now appears tenuous and ephemeral, however 
¨Vld the prese©qation may have been a few moments pre­
VIOus.
lª. Aesthett« an 
relious experience is rich in producing 
transltons of this kind, masmuch as art and religion are 
endeiDlc producers of finite provinces of meaning. 
All
 finite provinces of meaning are characterized by a turn­
ing away of attention f
rom the reality of everyday lif
e. While 
there are, of course, shif
ts in attention within everyday lif
e, the 
shif
t to a finite province of meaning is of a much more radical 
kind. A radical change takes place in the tension of conscious­
ness. In the context of religious experience this has been apdy 
call
ed 'leaping'. It is important to stress, however, that the 
reality of everyday lif
e retains its paramount status even as such 
'leaps' take place. If 
nothing else, language makes sure of this. 
The common language available to me for the objectification 
39 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
of my experiences is grounded in everyday life and 
.
keeps 
pointing back to it even as I employ it to interpret expenences 
in finite provinces of meaning. Typically, theref
ore, I 'distort' 
the reality of the latter as soon as I begin to use the common 
language in interpreting them, that is, I 'translate' the non­
everyday experiences back into the paramount reality of 
everyday lif
e. This may be readily seen in terms of dreams, but 
is also typical of those trying to report about theoretical, 
aesthetic or religious worlds of meaning. The theoretical 
physicist tells us that his concept of space cannot be conveed 
linguistically, just as the artist does with regard to the mearung 
of his creations and the mystic with regard to his encounters 
with the divine. Yet all these - dreamer, physicist, artist and 
mystic - also live in the reality of everyday lif
e. Indeed, one of 
their important problems is to interpret the coexistence of 
this reality with the reality enclaves into which they have 
ventured. 
The world of everyday lif
e is structured both spatially and 
temporally. The spatial structure is quite peripheral to our 
present considerations. Suffice it to point out that it, oo, has a 
social dimension by virtue of the f
act that my marupulatory 
zone intersects with that of others. More important f
or our 
present purpose is the temporal structure of evryday life. 
Temporality is an intrinsic property of consciousness. Te 
stream of consciousness is always ordered temporally. It IS 
possible to diff
erentiate between different levels f s te­
porality as it is intrasubjectively available. Every mdivtdual ts 
conscious of an inner flow of time, which in turn is f
ounded on 
the physiological rhythms of the organism though it is not 
identical with these. It would greatly exceed the scope of these 
prolegomena to enter into a detailed analysis of these levels of 
intrasubjective temporality. As we have indicated, however, 
intersubjectivity in everyday lif
e also has a temporal dimen­
sion. The world of everyday lif
e has its own standard time, 
which is intersubjectively available. This standard time may be 
understood as the intersection between cosinic time and its 
socially established calendar, based on the temporal sequences 
of nature, and inner time, in its af
orementioned diff
erentia­
tions. There can never be f
ull simultaneity between these 
various levels of temporality, as the experience of waiting 
THE FOUNDATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
indicates most clearly. Both my organism and my society 
impose upon me, and upon my inner time, certain sequences 
of events that involve waiting. I may want to take part in a 
sports event, but I must wait f
or my bruised knee to heal. Or 
again, I must wait until certain papers are processed so that 
my qualification f
or the event may be officially established. It 
may readily be seen that the temporal structure of everyday 
life is exceedingly complex, because the diff
erent levels of 
empirically present temporality must be ongoingly correlated. 
The temporal structure of everyday lif
e conf
ronts me as a 
f
acticity with which I must reckon, that is, with which I must 
try to synchronize my own projects. I encounter time in every­
day reality as continuous and finite. All my existence in this 
world is continuously ordered by its time, is indeed enveloped 
by it. My own lif
e is an episode in the externally f
actitious 
stream of time. It was there before I was born and it will be 
there af
ter I die. The knowledge of my inevitable death makes 
this time finite for me. I have onl
y a certain amount of time 
available f
or the realization of my projects, and the knowledge 
of this affe
.
cts my attitude to these projects. Also, since I do not 
want to die, this knowledge injects an underlying anxiety into 
my projects. Thus I cannot endlessly repeat my participation 
in sports events. I know that I am getting older. It may even 
be that this is the last occasion on which I have the chance to 
participate. My waiting will be anxious to the degree in which 
the finitude of time impinges upon the project. 
The same temporal structure, as has already been indicated, 
is coercive. I cannot reverse at will the sequences imposed by 
it - 'first things first' is an essential element of my knowledge 
of everyday lif
e. Thus I cannot take a certain exainination be­
f
ore I have passed through certain educational programmes, I 
cannot practise my prof
ession bef
ore I have taken this exaini­
nation, and so on. Also, the same temporal structure provides 
the historicity that deterinines my situation in the world of 
everyday lif
e. I was born on a certain date, entered school on 
another, started working as a prof
essional on another, and so 
on. These dates, however, are all 'located' within a much 
more comprehensive history, and this 'location' decisively 
shapes my situation. Thus I was born in the year of the great 
bank crash in which my f
ather lost his wealth, I entered 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
school just bef
ore the revolution, I began to work just after 
the Great War broke out, and so f
orth. The temporal structure 
of 
everyday lif
e not only imposes prearranged sequences upon 
the 'agenda' of any single day but also imposes itself upon my 
biography as a whole. Within the coordinates set by this 
temporal structure I apprehend both daily 'agenda' and overall 
biography. Clock and calendar ensure that, indeed, I am a 
'man of my time'. Only within this temporal structure does 
everyday lif
e retain f
or me its accent of reality. Thus in cases 
where I may be 'disoriented' f
or one reason or another (say, I 
have been in an automobile accident in which I was knocked 
unconscious), I feel an almost instinctive urge to 'reorient' 
myself within the temporal structure of everyday lif
e. I look 
at my watch and try to recall what day it is. By these acts alone 
I re-enter the reality of everyday lif
e. 
2. Social Interaction in Everyday Life 
The reality of everyday lif
e is shared with others. But how are 
these others themselves experienced in everyday lif
e? Again, 
it is possible to diff
erentiate between several modes of such 
experience. 
The most important experience of others takes place in the 
face-to-f
ace situation, which is the prototypical case of social 
interaction. All other cases are derivatives of it. 
In the f
ace-to-f
ace situation the other is appresented to me 
in a vivid present shared by both of us. I know that in the 
same vivid present I am appresented to him. My and his 
'here and now' continuously impinge on each other as lonr as 
the f
ace-to-f
ace situation continues. As a result, there is a 
continuous interchange of my expressivity and his. I see him 
smile, then react to my f
rown by stopping the smile, then 
smiling again as I smile, and so on. Every expression of mine 
is oriented towards him, and vice versa, and this continuous 
reciprocity of expressive acts is simultaneously available to 
both of us. This means that, in the f
ace-to-f
ace situation, the 
other's subjectivity is available to me through a maximum of 
symptoms. To be sure, I may misinterpret some of these 
symptoms. I may think that the other is smiling while in f
act 
he is smirking. Nevertheless, no other f
orm of social relating 
can reproduce the plenitude of symptoms of subjectivity 
present in the face-to-face situation. Only here is the other's 
subjectivity emphatically 'close'. All other f
orms of relating to 
the other are, in varying degrees, 'remote'. 
In the face-to-face situation the other is f
ully real. This 
reality is part of the overall reality of 
everyday lif
e, and as such 
massive and compelling. To be sure, another may be real to 
me without my having encountered him f
ace to f
ace - by 
reputation, say, or by having corresponded with him. Never-
43 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
theless, he becomes real to me in the fullest sense of 
the word 
only when I meet him face to face. Indeed, it may be argued 
that the other in the face-to-face situation is more real to me 
than I myself. Of course I 'know myself better' than I can 
ever know him. My subjectivity is accessible to me in a way 
his can never be, no matter how 'close' our relationship. My 
past is available to me in memory in a fullness with which I 
can never reconstruct his, however much he may tell me about 
it. But this 'better knowledge' of 
myself 
requires reflection. It 
is not immediately appresented to me. The other, however, is 
so appresented in the face-to-face situation. 'What he is', 
therefore, is ongoingly available to me. This availability is 
continuous and prereflective. On the other hand, 'What I am' 
is not so available. To make it available requires that I stop, 
arrest the continuous spontaneity of my experience, and deli­
berately turn my attention back upon myself. What is more, 
such reflection about myself is typically occasioned by the 
attitude towards me that the other exhibits. It is typically a 
'mirror' response to attitudes of the other. 
It follows that relations with others in the face-to-face 
situation are highly flexible. Put negatively, it is comparatively 
difficult to impose rigid patterns upon face-to-face interaction. 
Whatever patterns are introduced will be continuously modi­
fied through the exceedingly variegated and subtle interchange 
of subjective meanings that goes on. For instance, I may view 
the other as someone inherently unfriendly to me and act 
towards 
him within a pattern of'unfriendly relations' as under­
stood by me. In the face-to-face situation, however, the other 
may confront me with attitudes and acts that contradict this 
pattern, perhaps up to a point where I am led to abandon the 
pattern as inapplicable and to view him as friendly. In other 
words, the pattern cannot sustain the massive evidence of 
the 
other's subjectivity that is available to me in the face-to-face 
situation. By contrast, it is much easier for me to ignore such 
evidence as long as I do not encounter the other face to face. 
Even in such a relatively 'close' relation as may be maintained 
by correspondence I can more successfully dismiss the other's 
protestations of friendship as not actually representing his 
subjective attitude to me, simply because in correspondence I 
lack the immediate, continuous and massively real presence of 
44 
THE FOUNDATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
his expressivity. It is, to be sure, possible for me t? miinter­
pret the other's meanings even in the face-to-face sttuation, as 
it is possible for him 'hypocritically' to hide his meanings. All 
the same, both misinterpretation and 'hypocrisy' are more 
difficult to sustain in face-to-face interaction than in less 
'close' forms of social relations. 
On the other hand, I apprehend the other by means of typi­
ficatory schemes even in the face-to-face situation, althouh 
these schemes are more 'vulnerable' to his interference than m 
'remoter' forms of interaction. Put diff
erently, while it is 
comparatively difficult to impose rigid pattern o fae-.to-face 
interaction, even it is patterned from the begmrung if 1t tes 
place within the routines of everyday life. (We can leave astde 
for later consideration cases of interaction between complete 
strangers who have no common background of everyday lif .) 
The reality of everyday life contains typificatory schemes m 
terms of which others are apprehended and 'dealt with' in 
face-to-face encounters. Thus I apprehend the other as 'a 
man' 'a European', 'a buyer', 'a jovial type', and so on. All 
these' 
typifications ongoingly affect my interaction with 
him as, 
say, I decide to show him a good time on the to_wn bef?re 
trying to sell him my product. Our face-to-face mteracuon 
will be patterned by these typifications as long as they do not 
become problematic through interference on his part. Thus he 
may come up with evidence that, alth¡ugh 'a man', ·ð Euro­
pean' and 'a buyer', he is also a self-nghteous morahs¢, and 
that what appeared first as joviality is actually 
_an express10n ?f 
contempt for Americans in general and A£encan salesmen K 
particular. At this point, of 
course, my typtficatory 
_scheme w¤ll 
have to be modified, and the evening planned differently m 
accordance with this modification. Unless thus challenged, 
though, the typifications will hold until further notice and will 
determine my actions in the situation. 
The typificatory schemes entering into face-to-face situa­
tions are, of 
course, reciprocal. The other also apprehends me 
• 
• • 
A 
· 
' ' alesman' 'an 
in a typified way - as a man , an mencan , L s . 
, 
ingratiating fellow', and so on. The o¥er's typific¦ttons are as 
susceptible to my interference as mme are §o his. In o¨er 
words, the two typificatory scem© enter mto an ªngomg 
'negotiation' in the face-to-face sttuation. In 
everyday life such 
45 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
'negotiation' is itself likely to be prearranged in a typical 
manner - as in the typical bargaining process between buyers 
and salesmen. Thus, most of the time, my encounters with 
others in everyday lif
e are typical in a double sense - I appre­
hend the other as a type and I interact with him in a situation 
that is itself typical. 
The typifications of social interaction become progressively 
anonymous the f
urther away they are f
rom the f
ace-to-f
ace 
situation. Every typification, of course, entails incipient 
anonymity. If I typif
y my f
riend Henry as a member of 
category X (say, as an Englishman), I ipso facto interpret at 
least certain aspects of his conduct as resulting f
rom this 
typification - for instance, his tastes in f
ood are typical of 
Englishmen, as are his manners, certain of his emotional reac­
tions, and so on. This implies, though, that these characteristics 
and actions of my f
riend Henry appertain to anyone in the 
category of Englishman, that is, I apprehend these aspects of 
his being in anonymous terms. Nevertheless, as long as my 
f
riend Henry is available in the plenitude of expressivity of the 
f
ace-to-f
ace situation, he will constantly break through my 
type of anonymous Englishman and manif
est himself as a 
unique and theref
ore atypical individual - to wit, as my f
riend 
Henry. The anonymity of 
the type is obviously less susceptible 
to this kind of individualization when f
ace-to-f
ace interaction 
is a matter of the past (my f
riend Henry, the Englishman, 
whom I knew when I was a college student), or is of a super­
ficial and transient kind (the Englishman with whom I have a 
brief conversation on a train), or has never taken place (my 
business competitors in England). 
An important aspect of the experience of others in everyday 
lif
e is thus the directness or indirectness of such experience. 
At any given time it is possible to distinguish between con­
sociates with whom I interact in f
ace-to-f
ace situations and 
others who are mere contemporaries, of whom I have only 
more or less detailed recollections, or of whom I know merely 
by hearsay. In face-to-f
ace situations I have direct evidence of 
my f
ellowman, of his actions, his attributes, and so on. Not so 
in the case of contemporaries - of them I have more or less 
reliable knowledge. Furthermore, I must take account of my 
fellowmen in f
ace-to-f
ace situations, while I may, but need 
THE FOUNDATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
not, turn my thoughts to mere contemporaries. Anonymity 
increases as I go f
rom the former to the latter, because the 
anonymity of the typifications by means of which I apprehend 
fellowmen in f
ace-to-f
ace situations is constantly 'filled in' by 
the multiplicity of vivid symptoms ref
erring to a concrete 
human being. 
This, of course, is not the whole story. There are obvious 
differences in my experiences of mere contemporaries. Some I 
have experienced again and again in f
ace-to-f
ace situations and 
expect to meet again regularly (my f
riend Henry); others I 
recollect as concrete human beings f
rom a past meeting (the 
blonde I passed on the street), but the meeting was brief and, 
most likely, will not be repeated. Still others I know o
f
 as 
concrete human beings, but I can apprehend them only by 
means of more or less anonymous intersecting typifications 
(my British business competitors, the Queen of England). 
Among the latter one could again distinguish between likely 
partners in f
ace-to-f
ace situations (my British business com­
petitors), and potential but unlikely partners (the Queen of 
England). 
The degree of anonymity characterizing the experience of 
others in everyday life depends, however, upon another f
actor 
too. I see the newspaper vendor on the street comer as regu­
larly as I see my wife. But he is less important to me and I am 
not on intimate terms with him. He may remain relatively 
anonymous to me. The degree of interest and the degree of 
intimacy may combine to increase or decrease anonymity of 
experience. They may also influence it independently. I can be 
on f
airly intimate terms with a number of the f
ellow-members 
of a tennis club and on very f
ormal terms with my boss. Yet 
the f
ormer, while by no means completely anonymous, may 
merge into 'that bunch at the courts' while the latter stands 
out as a unique individual. And finally, anonymity may become 
near-total with certain typifications that are not intended 
ever to become individualized - such as the 'typical reader of 
The Times'. Finally, the 'scope' of the typification - and there­
by its anonymity 
- can be f
urther increased by speaking of 
'British public opinion'. 
The social reality of everyday lif
e is thus apprehended 
in a continuum of typifications, which are progressively 
47 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
anonymous as they are removed f
rom the 'here and now' of 
the 
f
ace-to-f
ace situation. At one pole of the continuum are those 
others with whom I f
requently and intensively interact in 
face-to-f
ace situations - my 'inner circle', as it were. At the 
other pole are highly anonymous abstractions, which by their 
very nature can never be available in f
ace-to-face interaction. 
Social structure is the sum total of these typifications and of 
the recurrent patterns of interaction established by means of 
them. As such, social structure is an essential element of the 
reality of everyday life. 
One further point ought to be made here, though we cann
ot 
elaborate it. My relations with others are not limited to con­
sociates and contemporaries. I also relate to predecessors and 
successors, to those others who have preceded and will follow 
me in the encompassing history of my society. Except f
or 
those who are past consociates (my dear f
riend Henry), I relate 
to my predecessors through highly anonymous typifications -
'my immigrant great-grandparents', and even more, 'the 
Founding 
Fathers'. 
My 
successors, 
for 
understandable 
reasons, are typified in an even more anonymous manner -
'my children's children', or 'future generations'. These typi­
fications are substantively empty projections, almost completely 
devoid of individualized content, whereas the typifications of 
predecessors have at least some such content, albeit of a 
highly mythical sort. The anonymity of both these sets of 
typifications, however, does not prevent their entering as 
elements into the reality of everyday life, sometimes in a very 
decisive way. M
ter all, I may sacrifice my lif
e in loyalty to the 
Founding Fathers - or, f
or that matter, on behalf of future 
generations. 
3· Language and Knowledge in Everyday Life 
Human expressivity is capable of objectivation, that is, it 
manifests itself in products of human activity that are available 
both to their producers and to other men as elements of a 
common world. Such objectivations serve as more or less 
enduring indices of the subjective processes of 
their producers, 
allowing their availability to extend beyond the f
ace-to-face 
situation in which they can be directly apprehended. For 
intance, a subjective attitude of anger is directly expressed in 
the f
ace-to-f
ace situation by a variety of bodily indices - f
acial 
mien, general stance of the body, specific movements of arms 
and f
eet, and so on. These indices are continuously available 
in the f
ace-to-f
ace situation, which is precisely why it aff
ords 
me the optimal situation for gaining access to another's sub­
jectivity. The same indices are incapable of surviving beyond 
the vivid present of the f
ace-to-f
ace situation. Anger, however, 
can be objectivated by means of a weapon. Say, I have had an 
altercation with another man, who has given me ample expres­
sive evidence of his anger against me. That night I wake up 
with a knife embedded in the wall above my bed. The knife qua 
object expresses my adversary's anger. It aff
ords me access to his 
subjectivity even though I was sleeping when he threw it and 
never saw him because he fled after his near-hit. Indeed, if I 
leave the object where it is, I can look at it again the f
ollowing 
morning, and again it expresses to me the anger of the man 
who threw it. What is more, other men can come and look at 
it and arrive at the same conclusion. In other words, the knif
e 
in my wall has become an objectively available constituent of 
the reality I share with my adversary and with other men. 
Presumably, this knif
e
 was not produced for the exclusive 
purpose of being thrown at me. But it expresses a subjective 
intention of violence, whether motivated by anger or by 
49 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
utilitarian considerations, such as killing f
or f
ood. The weapon 
qua object in the real world continues to express a general 
intention to commit violence that is recognizable by anyone 
who knows what a weapon is. The weapon, then, is both a 
human product and an objectivation of human subjectivity. 
The reality of everyday life is not only filled with objectiva­
tions ; it is only possible because of them. I am constantly 
surrounded by objects that 'proclaim' the subjective intentions 
of my f
ellowmen, although I may sometimes have difficulty 
being quite sure just what it is that a particular object is 
'proclaiming', especially if it was produced by men whom I 
have not known well or at all in face-to-f
ace situations. Every 
ethnologist or archaeologist will readily testif
y to such diffi­
culties, but the very fact that he can overcome them and recon­
struct from an artifact the subjective intentions of men whose 
society may have been extinct for millennia is eloquent proof 
of the enduring power of human objectivations. 
A special but crucially important case of objectivation is 
signification, that is, the human production of signs. A sign 
may be distinguished f
rom other objectivations by its explicit 
intention to serve as an index of subjective meanings. To be 
sure, all objectivations are susceptible of utilization as signs, 
even though they were not originally produced with this 
intention. For instance, a weapon may have been originally 
produced for the purpose of hunting animals, but may then 
(say, in ceremonial usage) become a sign f
or aggressiveness 
and violence in general. But there are certain objectivations 
originally and explicitly intended to serve as signs. For instance, 
instead of throwing a knif
e at me (an act that was presumably 
intended to kill me, but that might conceivably have been 
intended merely to signify this possibility), my adversary 
could have painted a black X-mark on my door, a sign, let us 
assume, that we are now officially in a state of enmity. Such a 
sign, which has no purpose beyond indicating the subjective 
meaning of the one who made it, is also objectively available 
in the common reality he and I share with other men. I recog­
nize its meaning, as do other men, and indeed it is available to 
its producer as an objective 'reminder' of 
his original intention 
in making it. It will be clear f
rom the above that there is a good 
deal of fluidity between the instrumental and the significatory 
so 
THE FOUNDATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
uses of certain objectivations. The special case of magic, in 
which there is a very interesting merging of these two uses, 
need not concern us here. 
Signs are clustered in a number of systems. Thus there are 
systems of gesticulatory signs, of patterned bodily movements, 
of various sets of material artif
acts, and so on. Signs and sign 
systems are objectivations in the sense of being objectively 
available beyond the expression of subjective intentions 'here 
and now'. This 'detachability' f
rom the immediate expressions 
of subjectivity also pertains to signs that require the mediating 
presence of the body. Thus perfonning a dance that signifies 
aggressive intent is an altogether diff
erent thing f
rom snarling 
or clenching fists in an outburst of anger. The latter acts ex­
press my subjectivity 'here and now', while the f
ormer can be 
quite detached f
rom this subjectivity - I may not be angry or 
aggressive at all at this point but merely taking part in the 
dance because I am paid to do so on behalf of someone else 
who is angry. In other words, the dance can be detached f
rom 
the subjectivity of the dancer in a way in which the snarling 
cannot f
rom the snarler. Both dancing and snarling are mani­
festations of bodily expressivity, but only the former has the 
character of an objectively available sign. Signs and sign 
systems are all characterized by 'detachability', but they can 
be diff
erentiated in terms of the degree to which they may be 
detached f
rom f
ace-to-face situations. Thus a dance is evi­
dently less detached than a material artifact signif
ying the 
same subjective meaning. 
Language, which may be defined here as a system of vocal 
signs, is the most important sign system of human society. Its 
f
oundation is, of course, in the intrinsic capacity of the human 
organism for vocal expressivity, but we can begin to speak of 
language only when vocal expressions have become capable of 
detachment from the immediate 'here and now' of subjective 
states. It is not yet language if I snarl, grunt, howl or hiss, 
although these vocal expressions are capable of becoming 
linguistic in so far as they are integrated into an objectively 
available sign system. The common objectivations of everyday 
lif
e are maintained primarily by linguistic signification. 
Everyday life is, above all
, lif
e with and by means of the 
language I share with my f
ellowmen. An understanding of 
51 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
language is thus essential f
or any understanding of the reality 
of everyday lif
e. 
Language has its origins in the f
ace-to-f
ace situation, but 
can be readily detached f
rom it. This is not only because I can 
shout in the dark or across a distance, speak on the telephone 
or via the radio, or convey linguistic signification by means of 
writing (the latter constituting, as it were, a sign system of the 
second degree). The detachment of language lies much more 
basically in its capacity to communicate meanings that are not 
direct expressions of subjectivity 'here and now'. It shares 
this capacity with other sign systems, but its immense variety 
and complexity make it much more readily detachable f
rom 
the f
ace-to-f
ace situation than any other (for example, a 
system of gesticulations). I can speak about innumerable 
matters that are not present at all in the f
ace··to-f
ace situation, 
including matters I never have and never will experience 
directly. In this way, language is capable of becoming the 
objective repository of vast accumulations of meaning and 
experience, which it can then preserve in time and transmit to 
following generations. 
In the face-to-f
ace situation language possesses an inherent 
quality of reciprocity that distinguishes it f
rom any other sign 
system. The ongoing production of vocal signs in conversation 
can be sensitively synchronized with the ongoing subjective 
intentions of the conversants. I speak as I think; so does my 
partner in the conversation. Both of us hear what each says at 
virtually the same instant, which makes possible a continuous, 
synchronized, reciprocal access to our two subjectivities, an 
intersubjective closeness in the face-to-face situation that no 
other sign system can duplicate. What is more, I hear myself 
as I speak; my own subjective meanings are made objectively 
and continuously available to me and ipso 
facto become 'more 
real• to me. Another way of 
putting this is to recall the previous 
point about my 'better knowledge• of the other as against my 
knowledge of myself in the f
ace-to-f
ace situation. This appar­
ently paradoxical f
act has been previously explained by the 
massive, continuous and prereflective availability of the other•s 
being in the f
ace-to-face situation, as against the requirement 
of reflection f
or the availability of my own. Now, however, as 
I objectivate my own being by means of language, my own 
THE FOUNDATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
being becomes massively and continuously available to myself 
at the same time that it is so available to him, and I can 
spontaneously respond to it without the 'interruption• of 
deliberate reflection. It can, theref
ore, be said that language 
makes 'more real' my subjectivity not only to my conversation 
partner but also to myself. This capacity of language to crys­
tallize and stabilize f
or me my own subjectivity is retained 
(albeit with modifications) as language is detached f
rom the 
face-to-face situation. This very important characteristic of 
language is well caught in the saying that men must talk about 
themselves until they know themselves. 
Language originates in and has its primary ref
erence to 
everyday lif
e; it ref
ers above all to the reality I experience in 
wide-awake consciousness, which is dominated by the prag­
matic motive (that is, the cluster of meanings directly pertain­
ing to present or f
uture actions) and which I share with others 
in a taken-f
or-granted manner. Although language can also be 
employed to ref
er to other realities, which will be discussed 
f
urther in a moment, it even then retains its rootage in the 
common-sense reality of everyday life. As a sign system, lan­
guage has the quality of objectivity. I encounter language as a 
f
acticity external to myself 
and it is coercive in its effect on me. 
Language forces me into its patterns. I cannot use the rules of 
German syntax when I speak English; I cannot use words 
invented by my three-year-old son if I want to communicate 
outside the famijy ; I must take into account prevailing 
standards of proper speech for various occasions, even if I 
would prefer my private 'improper• ones. Language provides 
me with a ready-made possibility for the ongoing objectifica­
tion of my unf
olding experience. Put diff
erently, language is 
pliantly expansive so as to allow me to objectify a great variety 
of experiences coming my way in the course of my life. Lan­
guage also typifies experiences, allowing me to subsume them 
under broad categories in terms of which they have meanin
g 
not only to myself but also to my fellowmen. As it typifies, it 
also anonymizes experiences, f
or the typified experience can, 
in principle, be duplicated by anyone falling into the category 
in question. For instance, I have a quarrel with my mother-in­
law. This concrete and subjectively unique experience is 
typified linguistically under the category of 'mother-in-law 
53 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
trouble'. In this typification it makes sense to myself
, to others, 
and, presumably, to my mother-in-law. The same typification, 
however, entails anonymity. Not only I but anyone (more 
accurately, anyone in the category of son-in-law) can have 
'mother-in-law troubles'. In this way, my biographical experi­
ences are ongoingly subsumed under general orders of mean­
ing that are both objectively and subjectively real. 
Because of its capacity to transcend the 'here and now', 
language bridges diff
erent zones within the reality of everyday 
lif
e and integrates them into a meaningf
ul whole. The trans­
cendences have spatial, temporal and social dimensions. 
Through language I can transcend the gap between my 
manipulatory zone and that of the other; I can synchronize 
my biographical time sequence with his; and I can converse 
with him about individuals and collectivities with whom we 
are not at present in f
ace-to-f
ace interaction. As a result of 
these transcendences language is capable of 'making present' a 
variety of objects that are spatially, temporally and socially 
absent f
rom the 'here and now'. Ipso 
facto a vast accumulation 
of experiences and meanings can become objectified in the 
'here and now'. Put simply, through language an entire world 
can be actualized at any moment. This transcending and 
integrating power of language is retained when I am not 
actually conversing with another. Through linguistic objecti­
fication, even when 'talking to myself' in solitary thought, an 
entire world can be appresented to me at any moment. As f
ar 
as social relations are concerned, language 'makes present' f
or 
me not only fellowmen who are physically absent at the 
moment, but f
ellowmen in the remembered or reconstructed 
past, as well as f
ellowmen projected as imaginary figures into 
the f
uture. All these 'presences' can be highly meaningful, of 
course, in the ongoing reality of everyday lif
e. 
Moreover, language is capable of transcending the reality of 
everyday lif
e altogether. It can ref
er to experiences pertaining 
to finite provinces of meaning, and it can span discrete spheres 
of reality. For instance, I can interpret 'the meaning' of a 
dream by integrating it linguistically within the order of 
everyday lif
e. Such integration transposes the discrete reality 
of the dream into the reality of everyday lif
e by making it an 
enclave within the latter. The dream is now meaningful in 
54 
THE FOUNDATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
terms of 
the reality of 
everyday lif
e rather than of 
its own dis­
crete reality. Enclaves produced by such transposition belong, 
in a sense, to both spheres of reality. They are 'located' in one 
reality, but 'ref
er' to another. 
Any significative theme that thus spans spheres of reality 
may be defined as a symbol, and the linguistic mode by which 
such transcendence is achieved may be called symbolic lan­
guage. On the level of symbolism, then, linguistic signification 
attains the maximum detachment f
rom the 'here and now' of 
everyday life, and language soars into regions that are not only 
de facto but a priori unavailable to everyday experience. Lan,­
guage now constructs immense edifices of symbolic representa­
tions that appear to tower over the reality of everyday lif
e like 
gigantic presences f
rom another world. Religion, philosophy, 
art, and science are the historically most important symbol 
systems of this kind. To name these is already to say that, 
despite the maximal detachment f
rom everyday experience 
that the construction of these systems requires, they can be of 
very great importance indeed f
or the reality of everyday lif
e. 
Language is capable not only of constructing symbols that are 
highly abstracted f
rom everyday experience, but also of 
'bringing back' these symbols and appresenting them as objec­
tively real elements in everyday lif
e. In 
this manner, symbolism 
and symbolic language become essential constituents of the 
reality of everyday life and of the common-sense apprehension 
of this reality. I live in a world of signs and symbols every day. 
Language builds up semantic fields or zones of meaning 
that are linguistically circumscribed. Vocabulary, grammar 
and syntax are geared to the organization of these semantic 
fields. Thus language builds up classification schemes to 
differentiate objects by 'gender' (a quite different matter f
rom 
sex, of course) or by number; forms to make statements of 
action as against statements of being ; modes of indicating 
degrees of social intimacy, and so on. For example, in lan­
guages that distinguish intimate and formal discourse by 
means of pronouns (such as tu and vous in French, or du and 
Sie in German) this distinction marks the coordinates of a 
semantic field that could be called the zone of intimacy. Here 
lies the world of tutoiement or of Bruderscha
ft, with a rich 
collection of meanings that are continually available to me f
or 
ss 


D
- -
_ _!HE 
j)ÇCIAL CoNSTRtJ<_
TION oF REALITY 
the ordering of my social experience. Such a semantic field, of 
course, also exists for the English speaker, though it is more 
circumscribed linguistically. Or, to take another example, the 
sum of linguistic objectifications pertaining to my occupation 
constitutes another semantic field, which meaningfully orders 
all the routine events I encounter in my daily work. Within the 
semantic fields thus built up it is possible f
or both biographical 
and historical experience to be objectified, retained and accu­
mulated. The accumulation, of course, is selective, with the 
semantic fields determining what will be retained and what 
'forgotten' of the total experience of both the individual and 
the society. By virtue of this accumulation a social stock of 
knowledge is constituted, which is transmitted f
rom genera­
tion to generation and which is available to the individual in 
everyday lif
e. I live in the common-sense world of everyday 
life equipped with specific bodies of knowledge. What is more, 
I know that others share at least part of this knowledge, and 
they know that I know this. My interaction with others in 
everyday lif
e is, therefore, constantly aff
ected by our common 
participation in the available social stock of knowledge. 
The social stock of knowledge includes knowledge of my 
situation and its limits. For instance, I know that I am poor 
and that, theref
ore, I cannot expect to live in a f
ashionable 
suburb. This knowledge is, of course, shared both by those 
who are poor themselves and those who are in a more privi­
leged situation. Participation in the social stock of knowledge 
thus permits the 'location' of individuals in society and the 
'handling' of them in the appropriate manner. This is not 
possible f
or o?e who does not participate in this knowledge, 
such as a f
oreigner, who may not recognize me as poor at all, 
perhaps because the criteria of poverty are quite diff
erent in 
his society - how can I be poor, when I wear shoes and do not 
seem to be hungry? 
Since everyday life is dominated by the pragmatic motive 
recipe knowledge,' that is, knowledge limited to pragmati 
competence in routine performances, occupies a prominent 
place in the social stock of knowledge. For example, I use the 
telephone every day for specific pragmatic purposes of my 
own. I know how to do this. I also know what to do if my 
telephone f
ails to f
unction - which does not mean that I know 
THE FOUNDATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
how to repair it, but that I know whom to call on for assismance. 
My knowledge of the telephone also includes broader mfor­
mation on the system of telephonic communication - for 
instance I know that some people have unlisted numbers, that 
under s	ecial circumstances I can get a simultaneous hooknup 
with two long-distance parties, that I must figure on the time 
diff
erence if I want to call up somebody in Hong Kong, and so 
f
orth. All of this telephonic lore is recipe knowledge since it 
does not concern anything except what I have to know f
or my 
present and possible f
uture pragmatic I?urposo. I am not 
interested in why the telephone works this way, m the enor­
mous body of scientific and engineering knowlpdge that 
makes it possible to construct telephones. Nor am I mterestqd 
in uses of the telephone that lie outside my purposes, say m 
combination with short-wave radio for the purpose of marine 
communication. Similarly, I have recipe knowledge of the 
workings of human relationships. For example, I know what 
I must do to apply for a passport. All I am interested in is 
getting the passport at the end of 
a certain w
.
aig period. I o 
not care, and do not know, how my application ts processed m 
government offices, by whom and af
ter what steps approval is 
given, who puts which stamp in the documrnt. I am not mak­
ing a study of government bureaucracy
.
- I JUSt wst to go on 
a vacation abroad. My interest in the hidden workings of the 
passport-getting procedure will be toused only if I f
ail to get 
my passport in the end. At that pomt, very much as I call on 
a telephone-repair expert af
ter my telephone has broken 
down I call on an expert in passport-getting - a lawyer, say, 
or m; 
Congressman, or the American <:ivil Liberties Union. 
Mutatis mutandis, a large part of 
the sooal stoc of 
knowledge 
consists of recipes for the mastery of routine pr
.
oblems. 
Typically, I have little interest in going beyond this prag­
matically necessary knowledge as long as the problems can 
indeed be mastered thereby. 
The social stock of knowledge diff
erentiates reality by 
degrees off
amiliarity. It provides complex and
. 
deled inf
?r­
mation concerning those sectors of everyday lif
e wtth which 
I must f
requently deal. It provides much more general and 
imprecise inf
ormation on reuoter sectvrs. Thws my knowledge 
of my own occupation and Its world IS very rtch and specific, 
51 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
while I have only very sketchy knowledge of 
the occupational 
wfrlds of gthers. Thh social stock of knowledge f
urther sup­
pliei me With the typificatory schemes required for the major 
routmes of everyday lif
e, not only the typifications of others 
that have been discussed before, but typifications of all sorts 
of events and experiences, both social and natural. Thus I live 
in a world of relatives, f
ellow-workers and recognizable public 
f
unctionaries. In this world, consequently, I experience 
f
amily gatherings, prof
essional meetings and encounters with 
the traffic police. The natural 'backdrop' of these events is also 
typified within the stock of knowledge. My world is structured 
in terms of routines applying in good or bad weather, in the 
hay-fever season and in situations when a speck of dirt gets 
caught under my eyelid. 'I know what to do' with regard to 
all these others and all these events within my everyday lif
e. 
By presenting itself to me as an integrated whole the social 
stock of knowledge also provides me with the means to inte­
grate discrete elements of my own knowledge. In other words, 
'what everybody knows' has its own logic, and the same logic 
can be applied to order various things that I know. For 
example, I know that my f
riend Henry is an Englishman, and 
I know that he is always very punctual in keeping appoint­
ments. 
Since 
'everybody 
knows' that punctuality is an 
English trait, I can now integrate these two elements of my 
knowledge of Henry into a typification that is meaningf
ul in 
terms of the social stock ofknowledge. 
The validity of my knowledge of everyday lif
e is taken f
or 
granted by myself and by others until f
urther notice, that is, 
until a problem arises that cannot be solved in terms of it. As 
long as my knowledge works satisf
actorily, I am generally 
ready to suspend doubts about it. In certain attitudes detached 
f
rom everyday reality - telling a joke, at the theatre or in 
church, or engaging in philosophical speculation - I may 
perhaps doubt elements of it. But these doubts are 'not to be 
taken seriously'. For instance, as a businessman I know that it 
pays to be inconsiderate of others. I may laugh at a joke in 
which this maxim leads to f
ailure, I may be moved by an 
actor or a preacher extolling the virtues of consideration and 
I may concede in a philosophical mood that all social relations 
should be governed by the Golden Rule. Having laughed, 
ss 
THE FOUNDATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
having been moved and having philosophized, I return to the 
'serious' world of business, once more recognize the logic of 
its maxims, and act acCQrdingly. Only when my maxims f
ail 
'to deliver the goods' in the world to which they are intended 
to apply are they likely to become problematic to me 'in 
earnest'. 
Although the social stock of knowledge appresents the 
everyday world in an integrated manner, diff
erentiated accord­
ing to zones of familiarity and remoteness, it leaves the totality 
of that world opaque. Put diff
erently, the reality of everyday 
lif
e always appears as a zone of lucidity behind which there is 
a background of darkness. As some zones of reality are illu­
minated, others are adumbrated. I cannot know everything 
there is to know about this reality. Even if, f
or instance, I am 
a seemingly all-powerful despot in my f
amily, and know this, 
I cannot know all the f
actors that go into the continuing suc­
cess of my despotism. I know that my orders are always 
obeyed, but I cannot be sure of all
 the steps and all
 the motives 
that lie between the issuance and the execution of my orders. 
There are always things that go on 'behind my back'. This is 
true a fortiori when social relationships more complex than 
those of the f
amily are involved - and explains, incidentally, 
why despots are endemically nervous 
. .  
My knowledge of 
everyday lif
e has the quality of an instrument that cuts a path 
through a f
orest and, as it does so, projects a narrow cone of 
light on what lies just ahead and immediately around; on all 
sides of the path there continues to be darkness. This image 
pertains even more, of course, to the multiple realities in 
which everyday lif
e is continually transcended. This latter 
statement can be paraphrased, poetically if not exhaustively, 
by saying that the reality of everyday lif
e is overcast by the 
penumbras of our dreams. 
My knowledge of everyday lif
e is structured in terms of 
relevances. Some of these are determined by immediate prag­
matic interests of mine, others by my general situation in 
society. It is irrelevant to me how my wif
e goes about cooking 
my f
avourite goulash as long as it turns out the way I like it. 
It is irrelevant to me that the stock of a company is f
alling, if I 
do not own such stock ; or that Catholics are modernizing 
their doctrine, if I am an atheist ; or that it is now possible to 
59 


THE SociAL CoNSTRUCTION oP REALITY 
fly non-stop to Af
rica, if I do not want to go there. However, 
my relevance structures intersect with the relevance structures 
of others at many points, as a result of which we have 'inter­
esting' things to say to each other. An important element of my 
knowledge of everyday lif
e is the knowledge of the relevance 
structures of others. Thus I 'know better' than to tell my 
doctor about my investment problems, my lawyer about my 
ulcer pains, or my accountant ahout my quest f
or religious 
truth. The basic relevance structures ref
erring to everyday 
lif
e are presented to me ready-made by the social stock of 
knowledge itself. I know that 'woman talk' is irrelevant to me 
as a man, that 'idle speculation' is irrelevant to me as a man of 
action, and so forth. Finally, the social stock of knowledge as 
a whole has its own relevance structure. Thus, in terms of the 
stock of knowledge objectivated in American society, it is irre­
levant to study the movements of the stars to predict the stock 
market, but it is relevant to study an individual's slips of the 
tongue to find out about his sex life, and so on. Conversely, in 
other societies, astrology may be highly relevant f
or econo­
mics, speech analysis quite irrelevant f
or erotic curiosity, and 
so on. 
One final point should be made here about the social distri­
bution of knowledge. I encounter knowledge in everyday lif
e 
as socially distributed, that is, as possessed diff
erently by 
diff
erent individuals and types of individuals. I do not share 
my knowledge equally with all my fellowmen, and there may 
be some knowledge that I share with no one. I share my pro­
fessional expertise with colleagues, but not with my f
amily, 
and I may share with nobody my knowledge of how to cheat at 
cards. The social distribution of 
knowledge of certain elements 
of everyday reality can become highly complex and even con­
fusing to the outsider. I not only do not possess the knowledge 
supposedly required to cure me of a physical ailment, I may 
even lack the knowledge of which one of a bewildering variety 
of medical specialists claims jurisdiction over what ails me. In 
such cases, I require not only the advice of experts, but the 
prior advice of experts on experts. The social distribution of 
knowledge thus begins with the simple f
act that I do not know 
everything known to my f
ellowmen, and vice versa, and cul­
minates in exceedingly complex and esoteric systems of 
6o 
THE FOUNDATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
expertise. Knowledge of how the socially available stock of 
knowledge is distributed, at least in outline, is an important 
element of that same stock of knowledge. In everyday life I 
know, at least roughly, what I can hide f
rom whom, whom I 
can turn to for inf
ormation on what I do not know, and 
generally which types of individuals may be expected to have 
which types ofknowledge. 
61 


Part Two 
Society as 
Objective Reality 


1 .  Institutionalization 
Organism and Activity 
Man occupies a peculiar position in the animal kingdom.1 
Unlike the other higher mammals, he has no species-specific 
environment, 
2 no environment firmly structured by his own 
instinctual organization. There is no man-world in the sense 
that one may speak of a dog-world or a horse-world. Despite 
an area of 
individual learning and accumulation, the individual 
dog or the individual horse has a largely fixed relationship to 
its environment, which it shares with all other members of 
its 
respective species. One obvious implication of 
this is that dogs 
and horses, as compared with man, are much more restricted 
to a specific geographical distribution. The specificity of 
these animals' environment, however, is much more than a 
geographical delimitation. It refers to the biologically fixed 
character of their relationship to the environment, even if 
geographical variation is introduced. In this sense, all non­
human animals, as species and as individuals, live in closed 
worlds whose structures are predetermined by the biological 
equipment of the several animal species. 
By contrast, man's relationship to his environment is charac­
terized by world-openness. 
3 Not only has man succeeded in 
establishing himself over the greater part of the earth's surf
ace, 
his relationship to the surrounding environment is everywhere 
very imperf
ectly structured by his own biological constitution. 
The latter, to be sure, permits man to engage in diff
erent acti­
vities. But the f
act that he continued to live a nomadic exist­
ence in one place and turned to agriculture in another cannot 
be explained in terms of biological processes. This does not 
mean, of course, that there are no biologically determined 
limitations to man's relations with his environment; his 
species-specific sensory and motor equipment imposes obvious 
limitations on his range of 
possibilities. The peculiarity of 
man's 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
biological constitution lies rather in its instinctual component. 
Man's instinctual organization may be described as under­
developed, compared with that of the other higher mamm
als. 
Man does have drives, of course. But these drives are highly 
unspecialized and undirected. This means that the human 
organism is capable of applying its constitutionally given 
equipment to a very wide and, in addition, constantly variable 
and varying range of activities. This peculiarity of the human 
organism is grounded in its ontogenetic development.' Indeed, 
if one looks at the matter in terms of organismic development, 
it is possible to say that the f
oetal period in the human being 
extends through about the first year after birth. 5 Important 
organismic developments, which in the animal are completed 
in the mother's body, take place in the human inf
ant after its 
separation f
rom the womb. At this time, however, the human 
infant is not only in the outside world, but interrelating with 
it in a number of complex ways. 
The human organism is thus still developing biologically 
while already standing in a relationship to its environment. In 
other words, the process of becoming man takes place in an 
interrelationship with an environment. This statement gains 
significance if one reflects that this environment is both a 
natural and a human one. That is, the developing human being 
not only interrelates with a particular natural environment, 
but with a specific cultural and social order, which is mediated 
to him by the significant others who have charge ofhim.6 Not 
only is the survival of the human infant dependent upon cer­
tain social arrangements, the direction of his organismic 
development is socially determined. From the moment of 
birth, man's organismic development, and indeed a large part 
of his biological being as such, are subjected to continuing 
socially determined interference. 
Despite the obvious physiological limits to the range of pos­
sible and diff
erent ways of becoming man in this double 
environmentalinterrelationship, the human organism manif
ests 
an immense plasticity in its response to the environmental 
f
orces at work on it. This is particularly clear when cine ob­
serves the flexibility of man's biological constitution as it is 
subjected to a variety of 
socio-cultural determinations. It is an 
ethnological commonplace that the 
ways of 
becoming and being 
66 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
human are as numerous as man's cultures. Humann
ess is 
socio-culturally variable. In other words, there is no human 
nature in the sense of a biologically fixed substratum deter­
mining the variability of socio-cultural formations. There is 
only human nature in the sense of anthropological constants 
(f
or example, world-openness and plasticity of instinctual 
structure) that delimit and permit man's socio-cultural f
orina­
tions. But the specific shape into which this humanness is 
moulded is determined by those socio-cultural f
ormations and 
is relative to their numerous variations. While it is possible to 
say that man has a nature, it is more significant to say that 
man constructs his own nature, or more simply, that man 
produces himself
. 
7 
The plasticity of the human organism and its susceptibility 
to socially determined interf
erence is best illustrated by the 
ethnological evidence concerning sexuality.8 While man pos­
sesses sexual drives that are comparable to those of the other 
higher mamm
als, human sexuality is characterized by a very 
high degree of pliability. It is not only relatively independent 
of temporal rhythms, it is pliable both in the objects towards 
which it may be directed and in its modalities of expression. 
Ethnological evidence shows that, in sexual matters, man is 
capable of almost anything. One may stimulate one's sexual 
imagination to a pitch of f
everish lust, but it is unlikely that 
one can conjure up any image that will not correspond to what 
in some other culture is an established norm, or at least an 
occurrence to be taken in stride. If the term 'normality' is to 
refer either to what is anthropologically f
undamental or to 
what is culturally universal, then neither it nor its antonym 
can be meaningf
ully applied to the varying f
orms of human 
sexuality. At the same time, of course, human sexuality is 
directed, sometimes rigidly structured, in every particular 
culture. Every culture has a distinctive sexual configuration, 
with its own specialized patterns of sexual conduct and its own 
'anthropological' assumptions in the sexual area. The empirical 
relativity of these configurations, their immense variety and 
luxurious inventiveness, indicate that they are the product of 
man's own socio-cultural f
ormations rather than of a bio­
logically fixed human nature.9 
The period during which the human organism develops 


THE SociAL CoNSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
towards its completion in interrelationship with its environ­
ment is also the period during which the human self 
is formed. 
The formation of the self
, then, must also be understood in 
relation to both the ongoing organismic development and the 
social process in which the natural . and the human environ­
ment are mediated through the significant others.10 The 
genetic presuppositions for the self are, of course, given at 
birth. But the self
, as it is experienced later as a subjectively 
and objectively recognizable identity, is not. The same social 
processes that determine the completion of the organism pro­
duce the self in its particular, culturally relative form. The 
character of the self as a social product is not limited to the 
particular configuration the individual identifies as himself 
(for instance, as 'a man', in the particular way in which this 
identity is defined and formed in the culture in question), but 
to the comprehensive psychological equipment that serves as 
an appendage to the particular configuration (for instance, 
'manly' emotions, attitudes and even somatic reactions). It 
goes without saying, then, that the organism and, even more, 
the self cannot be adequately understood apart f
rom the 
particular social context in which they were shaped. 
The common development of the human organism and the 
human self in a socially determined environment is related to 
the peculiarly human relationship between organism and self. 
This relationship is an eccentric one.11 On the one hand, man 
is a body, in the same way that this may be said of every other 
animal organism. On the other hand, man has a body. That is, 
man experiences himself as an entity that is not identical with 
his body, but that, on the contrary, has that body at its dis­
posal. In other words, man's experience of himself always 
hovers in a balance between being and having a body, a 
balance that must be redressed again and again. This eccen­
tricity of man's experience of his own body has certain con­
sequences f
or the analysis of human activity as conduct in the 
material environment and as externalization of subjective 
meanings. An adequate understanding of any human pheno­
menon will have to take both these aspects into consideration, 
for 
reasons that are grounded in fundamental anthropological f
acts. 
It should be clear from the foregoing that the statement that 
man produces himself in no way implies some sort of Prome-
68 
SociETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
thean vision of 
the solitary individual.12 Man's self
-production 
is always, and of necessity, a social enterprise. Men together 
produce a human environment, with the totality of its socio­
cultural and psychological f
ormations. None of these forma­
tions may be understood as products of man's biological 
constitution, which, as indicated, provides only the outer 
limits f
or human productive activity. Just as it is impossible 
for man to develop as man in isolation, so it is impossible f
or 
man in isolation to produce a human environment. Solitary 
human being is being on the animal level (which, of course, 
man shares with other animals). As soon as one observes 
phenomena that are specifically human, one enters the realm 
of the social. Man's specific humanity and his sociality are 
inextricably intertwined. Homo sapiens is always, and in the 
same measure, homo socius 
P 
. 
The human organism lacks the necessary biological means 
to provide stability f
or human conduct. Human existence, if it 
were thrown back on its organismic resources by themselves, 
would be existence in some sort of chaos. Such chaos is, how­
ever, empirically unavailable, even though one may theo­
retically conceive of it. Empirically, human existence takes 
place in a context of order, direction, stability. The question 
then arises : From what does the empirically existing stability 
of human order derive? An answer may be given on two levels. 
One may first point to the obvious f
act that a given social 
order precedes any individual organismic development. That 
is, world-openness, while intrinsic to man's biological make­
up, is always pre-empted by social order. One may say that the 
biologically intrinsic world-openness of human existence is 
always, and indeed must be, transf
ormed by social order into 
a relative world-closedness. While this reclosure can never 
approximate the closedness of animal existence, if 
only because 
of its humanly produced and thus 'artificial' character, it is 
nevertheless capable, most of the time, of providing direction 
and stability for the greater part of human conduct. The 
question may then be pushed to another level. One may ask 
in what manner social order itself arises. 
The most general answer to this question is that social order 
is a human product, or, more precisely, an ongoing human 
production. It is produced by man in the course of his ongoing 
69 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
externalization. Social order is not biologically given or derived 
from any biological data in its empirical manifestations. Social 
order, needless to add, is also not given in man's natural 
nvironmn, thoug particular features of this may be f
actors 
n deterg certam feaes of a social order (for example, 
Its economic or technological arrangements). Social order is 
not part of the 'nature of things', and it cannot be derived 
from the 'law f 
nature' .14 Social order exists only as a product 
ofum actiVIty. No other ontological status may be ascribed 
to 1t Without hopelessly obfuscating its empirical manif
esta­
tions. Bo¨  its gnesis. (social order is the result of past 
human a.ctivity) and It eXIstence in any instant of 
time (social 
order eXIsts only and ID so f
ar as human activity continues to 
produce it) it is a human product. 
While the social products of human externalization have a 
chacter sui generis as against both their organismic and their 
envrronmental context, it is important to stress that externali­
aon as s.uch i.s an anthropological necessity.15 Human being 
IS tmposs1le ID a close sphere of quiescent interiority. 
Han bemg must ongomgly externalize itself in activity. 
Thi anthropological necessity is grounded in man's biological 
eqwpe?t.11 Th.e inherent instability of the human organism 
makes It tmperative that man himelf provide a stable environ­
ment for his conduct. Man himself must specialize and direct 
his driIJ· These biological facts serve as a necessary pre­
supposition for the production of social order. In other words 
although no existing social order can be derived f
rom bio 
logical data, the necessity for social order as such stems f
rom 
man's biological equipment. 
. To ?Dderstand the causes, other than those posited by the 
btologtal. constants, for the emergence, maintenance and 
transmission of a social order one must undertake an analysis 
that eventuates in a theory of institutionalization. 
On"gins of Institutionalization 
All
 uman activity is subject to habitualization. Any action 
that ts repeated f
requently becomes cast into a pattern, which 
70 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
can then be reproduced with an economy of 
effort and which, 
ipso facto, is apprehended by its perf
ormer as that pattern. 
Habitualization further implies that the action in question 
may be performed again in the future in the same manner and 
with the same economical effort. This is true of non-social as 
well as of social activity. Even the solitary individual on the 
proverbial desert island habitualizes his activity. When he 
wakes up in the morning and 
resumes his attempts to construct 
a canoe out of matchsticks, he may mumble to himself, 'There 
I go again', as he starts on step one of an operating procedure 
consisting of, say, ten steps. In other words, even solitary 
man has at least the company of his operating procedures. 
Habitualized actions, of course, retain their meaningful 
character for the individual although the meanings involved 
become embedded as routines in his general stock of know­
ledge, taken for granted by him and at hand for his projects 
into the future.17 Habitualization carries with it the important 
psychological gain that choices are narrowed. While in theory 
there may be a hundred ways to go about the project of 
building a canoe out of matchsticks, habitualization narrows 
these down to one. This frees the individual f
rom the burden 
of 'all those decisions', providing a psychological relief that 
has its basis in man's undirected instinctual structure. Habitu­
alization provides the direction and the specialization of 
activity that is lacking in man's biological equipment, thus 
relieving the accumulation of tensions that result f
rom un­
directed drives.18 And by providing a stable background in 
which human activity may proceed with a minimum of 
decision-making most of the time, it f
rees energy for such 
decisions as may be necessary on certain occasions. In other 
words, the background of habitualized activity opens up a 
f
oreground f
or deliberation and innovation.19 
In terms of 
the meanings bestowed by 
man 
upon 
his 
activity, 
hab!tualization makes it unnecessary f
or each situation to be 
defined anew, step by step. 
20 A large variety of situations may 
be subsumed under its predefinitions. The activity to be 
undertaken in these situations can then be anticipated. Even 
alternatives of conduct can be assigned standard weights. 
These processes of habitualization precede any institu­
tionalization, indeed can be made to apply to a hypothetical 
71 


THE SoCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
solitary individual detached f
rom any social interaction. The 
fact that even such a solitary individual, assuming that he has 
been formed as a self (as we would have to assume in the case 
of our matchstick³canoe builder), will habitualize his activity 
in accordance with biographical experience of a world of social 
institutions preceding his solitude need not concern us at the 
moment. Empirically, the more important part of the habitu´ 
alization of human activity is coextensive with the latter's 
institutionalization. The question then becomes how do 
institutions arise. 
Institutionalization occurs whenever there is a reciprocal 
typification of habitualized actions by types of actors. Put 
diff
erently, any such typification is an institution. 
21 What must 
be stressed is the reciprocity of institutional typifications and 
the typicality of not only the actions but also the actors in 
institutions. The typifications of habitualized actions that 
constitute institutions are always shared ones. They are availĤ 
able to all members of the particular social group in question, 
and the institution itself typifies individual actors as well as 
individual actions. The institution posits that actions of type 
X will be perf
ormed by actors of type X. For example, the 
institution of the law posits that heads shall be chopped off in 
specific ways under specific circumstances, and that specific 
types of individuals shall do the chopping (executioners, say, 
or members of an impure caste, or virgins under a certain age, 
or those who have been designated by an oracle). 
Institutions f
urther imply historicity and control. Recipro´ 
cal typifications of 
actions are built up in the course of 
a shared 
history. They cannot be created instantaneously. Institutions 
always have a history, of which they are the products. It is 
impossible to understand an institution adequately without an 
understanding of the historical process in which it was pro­
duced. Institutions also, by the very fact of their existence, 
control human conduct by setting up predefined patterns of 
conduct, which channel it in one direction as against the many 
other directions that would theoretically be possible. It is 
important to stress that this controlling character is inherent 
in institutionalization as such, prior to or apart f
rom any 
mechanisms of sanctions specifically set up to support an in­
stitution. These mechanisms (the sum -<>f which constitute 
72 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
what is generally called a system of 
social control) do, of course, 
exist in many institutions and in all the agglomerations of 
institutions that we call societies. Their controlling efficacy, 
however, is of a secondary or supplementary kind. As we shall 
see again later, the primary social control is given in the exis­
tence of an institution as such. To say that a segment of 
human activity has been institutionalized is already to say 
that this segment of human activity has been subsumed under 
social control. Additional control mechanisms are required 
only in so far as the processes of institutionalization are less 
than completely successf
ul. Thus, for instance, the law may 
provide that anyone who breaks the incest taboo will have his 
head chopped off. This provision may be necessary because 
there have been cases when individuals off
ended against the 
taboo. It is unlikely that this sanction will have to be invoked 
cqntinuously (unless the institution delineateµ by the incest 
taboo is itself in the course of disintegration, a special case 
that we need not elaborate here). It makes little ::.ense, there­
f
ore, to say that human sexuality is socially controlled by 
beheading certain individuals. Rather, human sexuality is 
socially controlled by its institutionalization in the course of 
the particular history in question. One may add, of course, 
that the incest taboo itself is nothing but the negative side of 
an assemblage of typifications, which define in the first place 
which sexual conduct is incestuous and which is not. 
In actual experience institutions generally manif
est them­
selves in collectivities containing considerable numbers of 
people. It is theoretically important, however, to emphasize 
that the institutionalizing process of reciprocal typification 
would occur even if two individuals began to interact de novo. 
Institutionalization is incipient in every social situation con­
tinuing in time. Let us assume that two persons from entirely 
diff
erent social worlds begin to interact. By saying 'persons' 
we presuppose that the two individuals have formed selves, 
something that could, of course, have occurred only in a social 
process. We are thus for the moment excluding the cases of 
Adam and Eve, or of two 'feral' children meeting in a clearing 
of a primeval jungle. But we are assuming that the two indivi­
duals arrive at their meeting place f
rom social worlds that have 
been historically produced in segregation f
rom each other, and 
73 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION; OF REALITY 
that the interaction therefore takes place in a situation that has 
not been institutionally defined for either of the participants. 
It may be possible to imagine a Man Friday joining our 
matchstick-canoe builder on his desert island, and to imagine 
the former as a Papuan and the latter as an American. In that 
case, however, it is likely that the American will have read. or 
at least have heard about the story of Robinson Crusoe, whtch 
will introduce a measure of predefinition of the situation at 
least for him. Let us, then, simply call our two persons A and 
B. 
As A and B interact, in whate,ver manner, typifications will 
. be produced quite quickly. A watches B perf
orm. He attri­
butes motives to B's actions and, seeing the actions recur, 
typifies the motives as recurrent. As B goes on perf
orm_ing, A 
is soon able to say to himself
, 'Aha, there he goes agam.' At 
the same time, A may assume that B is doing the same thing 
with regard to him. From the beginàng, both A and !J 
assume this reciprocity of typification. In the course of thetr 
interaction these typifications will be expressed in specific 
patterns of conduct. That is, A and B will begin to play roles 
vis-a-vis each other. This will occur even if each continues to 
perform actions diff
erent f
rom those of the other. The possi­
bility of taking the role of the other will appear with regard to 
the same actions perf
ormed by both. That is, A will inwardly 
appropriate B's reiterated roles and mke theá the mo?e
.
ls f
or 
his own role-playing. For example, B s role m the act1v1ty of 
preparing food is not only typified as such by A, but ânters as 
a constitutive element into A's own f
ood-preparauon role. 
Thus a collection of reciprocally typified actions will emerge, 
habitualized f
or each in roles, some of which will be perf
ormed 
separately and some in common. 22 While this reciprocal typi­
fication is not yet institutionalization (since, there only bemg 
two individuals, there is no possibility of a typology of actors), 
it is clear that institutionalization is already present in nucleo. 
At this stage one may ask what gains accrue to the two in­
dividuals f
rom this development. The most important gain is 
that each will be able to predict the other's actions. Con­
comitantly, the interaction of both becomes predicta_bl
,
e. Tãe 
'There he goes again' becomes a 'There we go agam . '!_'his 
relieves both individuals of a considerable amount of tens10n. 
74 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
They save! time and eff
ort, not only in whatever external tasks 
they might be engaged in separately or jointly, but in terms of 
their respective psychological economies. Their lif
e together 
is now defined by a widening sphere of taken-f
or-granted 
routines. Many actions are possible on a low level of attention. 
Each. action of one is no longer a source of astonishment and 
potential danger to the other. Instead, much of what goes on 
takes on the triviality of what, to both, will be everyday lif
e. 
This means that the two individuals are constructing a back­
ground, in the sense discussed before, which will serve to 
stabilize both their separate actions and their interaction. The 
construction of this background of routine in tum makes 
possible a division of labour bet)¥een them, opening the way 
f
or innovations, which demand a higher level of attention. The 
division of labour and the innovations will lead to new habitu­
alizations, further widening the background 
common 
to 
both individuals. In other words, a social world will be in 
process of construction, containing within it the roots of an 
expanding institutional order. 
Generally, all actions repeated once or more tend to be 
habitualized to some degree, just as all actions observed by 
another necessarily involve some typification on his part. 
However, for the kind of reciprocal typification just described 
to occur there must be a continuing social situation in which 
the habitualized actions of two or more individuals interlock. 
Which actions are likely to be reciprocally typified in this 
manner? 
The general answer is, those actions that are relevant to both 
A and B within their common situation. The areas likely to be 
relevant in this way will, of 
course, vary in diff
erent situations. 
Some will be those facing A and B in terms of their previous 
biographies, others may be the result of the natural, pre-social 
circumstances of the situation. What will in all cases have to 
be habitualized is the comm-unication process between A and 
B. Labour, sexuality and territoriality are other likely foci of 
typification and habitualization. In these various areas the 
situation of A and B is paradigmatic of the institutionalization 
occurring in larger societies. 
Let us push our paradigm one step f
urther and imagine that 
A and B have children. At this point the situation changes 
75 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
qualitatively. The appearance of a third party changes the 
character of the ongoing social interaction between A and B, 
and it will change even f
urther as additional individuals con­
tinue to be added. 23 The institutional world, which existed in 
statu nascendi in the original situation of A and B, is now 
passed on to others. In this process institutionalization perf
ects 
itself. The habitualizations and typifications undertaken in the 
common lif
e of A and B, f
ormations that until this point still 
had the quality of ad hoc conceptions of two individuals, now 
become historical institutions. With the acquisition of histori­
city, these formations also acquire another crucial quality, or, 
more accurately, perfect a quality that was incipient as soon as 
A and B began the reciprocal typification of their conduct : 
this quality is objectivity. This means that the institutions 
that have now been crystallized (f
or instance, the institution 
of paternity as it is encountered by the children) are experi­
enced as existing over and beyond the individuals who 
'happen to' embody them at the moment. In other words, the 
institutions are now experienced as possessing a reality of 
their 
own, a reality that conf
ronts the individual as an external and 
coercive fact. 
24 
As long as the nascent institutions are constructed and main­
tained only in the interaction of A and B, their objectivity 
remains tenuous, easily changeable, almost playful, even while 
they attain a measure of objectivity by the mere f
act of their 
f
ormation. To put this a little differently, the routinized 
background of A's and B's activity remains fairly accessible to 
deliberate intervention by A and B. Although the routines, 
once established, carry within them a tendency to persist, the 
possibility of changing them or even abolishing them remains 
at hand in consciousness. A and B alone are responsible for 
having constructed this world. A and B remain capable of 
changing or abolishing it. What is more, since they themselves 
have shaped this world in the course of a shared biography 
which they can remember, the world thus shaped appears 
f
ully transparent to them. They understand the world that 
they themselves have made. All this changes in the process of 
transmission to the new generation. The objectivity of the 
institutional world 'thickens' and 'hardens', not only f
or the 
children, but (by a mirror effect) f
or the parents as well. The 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
'There we go again' now becomes 'This is how these things 
are done'. A world so regarded attains a firmness in con­
sciousness ; it becomes real in an ever more massive way and it 
can no longer be changed so readily. For the children, 
especially in the early phase of their socialization into it, it 
becomes the world. For the parents, it loses its playful quality 
and becomes 'serious'. For the children, the parentally trans­
mitted world is not f
ully transparent. Since they had no part 
in shaping it, it conf
ronts them as a given reality that, like 
nature, is opaque in places at least. 
Only at this point does it become possible to speak of 
a social 
world at all, in the sense of a comprehensive and given reality 
conf
ronting the individual in a !Danner analogous to the reality 
of the natural world. Only in this way, as an objective world, 
can the social f
ormations be transmitted to a new generation. 
In the early phases of socialization the child is quite incapable 
of distinguishing between the objectivity of natural pheno­
mena and the objectivity of the social f
ormations.25 To take 
the most important item of socialization, language appears to 
the child as inherent in the nature of things, and he cannot 
grasp the notion of its conventionality. A thing is what it is 
called, and it could not be called anything else. All institutions 
appear in the same way, as given, unalterable and self
-evident. 
Even in our empirically unlikely example of parents having 
constructed an institutional world de novo, the objectivity of 
this world would be increased for them by the socialization of 
their children, because the objectivity experienced by the 
children would reflect back upon their own experience of this 
world. Empirically, of course, the institutional world trans­
mitted by most parents already has the character of historical 
and objective reality. The process of transmission simply 
strengthens the parents' sense of reality, if only because, to 
put it crudely, if one says, 'This is how these things are done', 
of
ten enough one believes it oneself. 26 
An institutional world, then, is experienced as an objective 
reality. It has a history that antedates the individual's birth 
and is not accessible to his biographical recollection. It was 
there bef
ore he was born, and it will be there after his death. 
This history itself
, as the tradition of the existing institutions, 
has the character of objectivity. The individual's biography is 
77 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
apprehended as an episode located within the objective history 
of the society. The institutions, as historical and objective 
f
acticities, conf
ront the individual as undeniable f
acts. The 
institutions are there, external to him, persistent in their 
reality, whether he likes it or not. He cannot wish them away. 
They resist his attempts to change or evade them. They have 
coercive power over him, both in themselves, by the sheer 
f
orce of their f
acticity, and through the control mechanisms 
that are usually attached to the most important of them. The 
objective reality of institutions is not diminished if the indivi­
dual does not understand their purpose or their mode of opera­
tion. He may experience large sectors of the social world as 
incomprehensible, perhaps oppressive in their opaqueness, 
but real none the less. Since institutions exist as external reality, 
the individual cannot understand them by introspection. He 
must 'go out' and learn about them, just as he must to learn 
about nature. This remains true even though the social world, 
as a humanly produced reality, is potentially understandable 
in a way not possible in the case of the natural world. 
27 
It is important to keep in mind that the objectivity of the 
institutional world, however massive it may appear to the 
individual, is a humanly produced, constructed objectivity. 
The process by which the externalized products of human 
activity attain the character of objectivity is objectivation. 
28 
The institutional world is objectivated human activity, and so 
is every single institution. In other words, despite the objecti­
vity that marks the social world in human experience, it does 
not thereby acquire an ontological status apart f
rom the 
human activity that produced it. The paradox that man is 
capable of producing a world that he then experiences as 
something other than a human product will concern us later 
on. At the moment, it is important to emphasize that the 
relationship between man, the producer, and the social world, 
his product, is and remains a dialectical one. That is, man (not, 
of course, in isolation but in his collectivities) and his social 
world interact with each other. The product acts back upon 
the producer. Externalization and objectivation are moments 
in a continuing dialectical process. The third moment in this 
process, which is internalization (by which the objectivated 
social world is retrojected into consciousness in the course of 
SociETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
socialization), will occupy us in considerable detail later on. It 
is already possible, however, to see the f
undamental relation­
ship of these three dialectical moments in social reality. Each 
of them corresponds to an essential characterization of the 
social world. Society is a human product. Societ
y is an ob
jective 
reality. Man is a social product. It may also already be evident 
that an analysis of the social world that leaves out any one of 
these three moments will be distortive. 
29 One may f
urther add 
that only with the transmission of the social world to a new 
generation (that is, internalization as eff
ectuated in socializa­
tion) does the f
undamental social dialectic appear in its totality. 
To repeat, only with the appearance of a new generation can 
one properly speak of a social world. 
At the same point, the institutional world requires legiti­
mation, that is, ways by which it can be 'explained' and justi­
fied. This is not because it appears less real. As we have seen, 
the reality of the social world gains in massivity in the course 
of its transmission. This reality, however, is a historical one, 
which comes to the new generation as a tradition rather than 
as a biographical memory. In our paradigmatic example, A 
and B, the original creators of the social world, can always 
reconstruct the circumstances under which their world and 
any part of it was established. That is, they can arrive at the 
meaning of an institution by exercising their powers of recol­
lection. A's and B's children are in an altogether diff
erent 
situation. Their knowledge of the institutional history is by 
way of 'hearsay'. The original meaning of the institutions is 
inaccessible to them in terms of memory. It, therefore, be­
comes necessary to interpret this meaning to them in various 
legitimating f
ormulas. These will have to be consistent and 
comprehensive in terms of the institutional order, if they are 
to carry conviction to the new generation. The same story, so 
to speak, must be told to all the children. It follows that the 
expanding institutional order develops a corresponding canopy 
of legitimations, stretching over it a protective cover of both 
cognitive and normative interpretation. These legitimations 
are learned by the new generation during the same process 
that socializes them into the institutional order. This, again, 
will
 occupy us in greater detail f
urther on. 
The development of specific mechanisms of social controls 
79 


THE SoCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
also becomes necessary with the historicization and objectiva­
tion of institutions. Deviance f
rom the institutionally 'pro­
grammed' courses of action becomes likely once the institu­
tions have become realities divorced f
rom their original 
relevance in the concrete social processes f
rom which they 
arose. To put this more simply, it is more likely that one will 
deviate f
rom programmes set up for one by others than f
rom 
programmes that one has helped establish oneself. The new 
generation posits a problem of compliance, and its socializa­
tion into the institutional order requires the establishment of 
sanctions. The institutions must and do claim authority over 
the individual, independently of the subjective meanings he 
may attach to any particular situation. The priority of the 
institutional definitions of situations must be consistently 
maintained over individual temptations at redefinition. The 
children must be 'taught to behave' and, once taught, must be 
'kept in line'. So, of course, must the adults. The more con­
duct is institutionalized, the more predictable and thus the 
more controlled it becomes. If socialization into the institu­
tions has been eff
ective, outright coercive measures can be 
applied economically and selectively. Most of the time, con­
duct will occur 'spontaneously' within the institutionally set 
channels. The more, on the level of meaning, conduct is taken 
for granted, the more possible alternatives to the institutional 
'programmes' will recede, and the more predictable and con­
trolled conduct will be. 
In principle, institutionalization may take place in any area 
of collectively relevant conduct. In actual fact, sets of institu­
tionalization processes take place concurrently. There is no a 
pr-iori reason f
or assuming that these processes will necessarily 
'hang together' functionally, let alone as a logically consistent 
system. To return once more to our paradigmatic example, 
slightly changing the fictitious situation, let us assume this 
time, not a budding f
amily of 
parents and children, but a piquant 
triangle of a male A, a bisexual female B, and a Lesbian C. 
We need not belabour the point that the sexual relevances of 
these three individuals will not coincide. Relevance A-B is 
not shared by C. The habitualizations engendered as a result 
of relevance A-B need bear no relationship to those engen­
dered by relevances B-C and C-A. There is, after all
, no 
So 
SociETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
reason why two processes of erotic habitualization, one hetero­
sexual and one Lesbian, cannot take place side by side without 
functionally integrating with each other or with a third habitu­
alization based on a shared interest in, say, the growing of 
flowers (or whatever other enterprise might be jointly relevant 
to an active heterosexual male and an active Lesbian). In 
other words, three processes of habitualization or incipient 
institutionalization may occur without their being f
unctionally 
or logically integrated as social phenomena. The same reason­
ing holds if A, B and C are posited as collectivities rather than 
individuals, regardless of what content their relevances might 
have. Also, f
unctional or logical integration cannot be assumed 
a priori when habitualization or institutionalization processes 
are limited to the same individuals or collectivities, rather than 
to the discrete ones assumed in our example. 
Nevertheless, the empirical fact remains that institutions do 
tend to 'hang together'. If this phenomenon is not to be taken 
for granted, it must be explained. How can this be done? First, 
one may argue that some relevances will be common to all 
members of a collectivity. On the other hand, many areas of 
conduct will be relevant only to certain types. The latter in­
volves an incipient diff
erentiation, at least in the way in which 
these types are assigned some relatively stable meaning. This 
assignment may be based on pre-social diff
erences, such as sex, 
or on diff
erences brought about in the course of social inter­
action such as those engendered by the division of labour. 
For eample, only women may be concerned with fertility 
magic and only hunters may engage in cave painting. Or, only 
the old men may perf
orm the rain ceremonial and only 
weapon-makers may sleep with their maternal cousiils. In 
terms of their external social functionality, these several areas 
of conduct need not be integrated into one cohesive system. 
They can continue to coexist on the basis of segregated per­
formances. But while perf
ormances can be segregated, mean­
ings 
tend towards at least 
minimal consistency. As the 
individual reflects about the successive moments of his 
experience, he tries to fit their meanings into a consist¿nt 
biographical framework. This tendency increaÀes. as the .In­
dividual shares with others his meanings and their biographical 
integration. It is possible that this tendency to integrate 
81 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
meanings is based on a psychological need, which may in turn 
be physiologically grounded (that is, that there may be a 
built-in 'need' for cohesion in the psycho-physiological con­
stitution of man). Our argument, however, does not rest on 
such anthropological assumptions, but rather on the analysis 
of meaningf
ul reciprocity in processes of institutionalization. 
It follows that great care is required in any statements one 
makes about the 'logic' of institutions. The logic does not 
reside in the institutions and their external f
unctionalities, but 
in the way these . are treated in reflection about them. Put 
diff
erently, reflective consciousness superimposes the quality 
of logic on the institutional order. 30 
Language provides the fundamental superimposition of 
logic on the objectivated social world. The edifice of legitima­
?ons is built upon language and uses language as its principal 
Instrumentality. The 'logic' thus attributed to the institu­
tional order is part of the socially available stock of knowledge 
and taken f
or granted as such. Since the well-socialized 
individual 'knows' that his social world is a consistent whole, 
he will be constrained to explain both its f
unctioning and mal­
f
unctioning in terms of this 'knowledge'. It is very easy, as a 
result, for the observer of any society to assume that its 
institutions do indeed function and integrate as they are 
'supposed to'. 
31 
De facto, then, institutions are integrated. But their inte­
gration is not a functional imperative for the social processes 
that produce them ; it is rather brought about in a derivative 
f
ashion. Individuals perform discrete institutionalized actions 
within the context of their biography. This biography is a 
reflected-upon whole in which the discrete actions are thought 
of
, not as isolated events, but as related parts in a subjectively 
meaningf
ul universe whose meanings are not specific to the 
in?ividual, but socially articulated and shared. Only by way of 
thiÎ detour of socially shared universes of meaning do we 
arnve at the need for institutional integration. 
This has far-reaching implications for any analysis of social 
phenomena. If the integration of an institutional order can be 
understood only in terms of the 'knowledge' that its members 
have of 
it, it follows that the analysis of such 'knowledge' will
 
be essential for an analysis of the institutional order in ques-
82 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
tion. It is important to stress that this does not exclusively or 
even primarily involve a preoccupation with complex theo­
retical systems serving as legitimations for the institutional 
order. Theories also have to be taken into account, of course. 
But theoretical knowledge is only a small and by no means the 
most important part of what passes for knowledge in a society. 
Theoretically sophisticated legitimations appear at particular 
moments of an institutional history. The primary knowledge 
about the institutional order is knowledge on the pre­
theoretical level. It is the sum total of 'what everybody 
knows' about a social world, an assemblage of maxims, morals, 
proverbial nuggets of wisdom, values and belief
s, myths, 
and so f
orth, the theoretical integration of which requires 
considerable intellectual f
ortitude in itself
, as the long line 
of heroic integrators from Homer to the latest sociological 
system-builders testifies. On the pre-theoretical level, how­
ever, every institution has a body of transmitted recipe 
knowledge, that is, knowledge that supplies the institutionally 
appropriate rules of conduct. 32 
Such knowledge constitutes the motivating dynamics of 
institutionalized conduct. It defines the institutionalized areas 
of conduct and designates all situations falling within them. It 
defines and constructs the roles to be played in the context of 
the institutions in question. I
pso facto, it controls and predicts 
all such conduct. Since this knowledge is socially objectivated 
as knowledge, that is, as a body of 
generally valid truths about 
reality, any radical deviance from the institutional order 
appears as a departure from reality. Such deviance may be 
designated as moral depravity, mental disease, or just plain 
ignorance. While these fine distinctions will have obvious 
consequences for the treatment of the deviant, they all
 share 
an inf
erior cognitive status within the particular social world. 
In this way, the particular social world becomes the world 
tout court. What is taken for granted as knowledge in the 
society comes to be coextensive with the knowable, or at any 
rate provides the framework within which anything not yet 
known will come to be known in the f
uture. This is the know­
ledge that is learned in the course of socialization and that 
mediates the internalization within individual consciousness of 
the objectivated structures of the social world. Knowledge, in 


THE SoCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
this sense, is at the heart of the f
undamental dialectic of 
society. It 'programmes' the channels in which externalization 
produces an objective world. It objectifies this world through 
language and the cognitive apparatus based on language, that 
is, it orders it into objects to be apprehended as reality. 
33 It is 
internalized again as objectively valid truth in the course of 
socialization. Knowledge about society is thus a realization in 
the double sense of the word, in the sense of apprehending the 
objectivated social reality, and in the sense of ongoingly 
producing this reality. 
For example, in the course of the division of labour a body 
of knowledge is developed that ref
ers to the particular activities 
involved. In its linguistic basis, this knowledge is already in­
dispensable to the institutional 'programming' of these econo­
mic activities. There will be, say, a vocabulary designating the 
various modes of hunting, the weapons to be employed, the 
animals that serve as prey, and so on. There will f
urther be a 
collection of recipes that must be learned if one is to hunt 
correctly. This knowledge serves as a channelling, controlling 
f
orce in itself
, an indispensable ingredient of the institu­
tionalization of this area of conduct. As the institution of 
hunting is crystallized and persists in time, the same body of 
knowledge serves as an objective (and, incidentally, empirically 
verifiable) description of it. A whole segment of the social 
world is objectified by this knowledge. There will be an 
objective 'science' of hunting, corresponding to the objective 
reality of the hunting economy. The point need not be be­
laboured that here 'empirical verification' and 'science' are not 
understood in the sense of modern scientific canons, but 
rather in the sense of knowledge that may be borne out in 
experience and that can subsequently become systematically 
organized as a body of knowledge. 
Again, the same body of knowledge is transmitted to the 
next generation. It is learned as objective truth in the course 
of socialization and thus internalized as subjective reality. 
This reality in turn has power to shape the individual. It will 
produce a specific type of person, namely the hunter, whose 
identity and biography as a hunter have meaning only in a 
universe constituted by the af
orementioned body of 
knowledge 
as a whole (say, in a hunters' society) or in part (say, in our 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
own society, in which hunters come together in a sub-universe 
of 
their own). In other words, no part of 
the institutionalization 
of hunting can exist without the particular knowledge that has 
been socially produced and objectivated with ref
erence to this 
activity. To hunt and to be a hunter imply existence in a 
social world defined and controlled by this body of 
knowledge. 
Mutatis mutandis, the same applies to any area of institu­
tionalized conduct. 
Sedimentation and Tradition 
Only a small part of the totality of human experiences is 
retained in consciousness. The experiences that are so retained 
become sedimented, that is, they congeal in recollection as 
recognizable and memorable entities.34 Unless such sedi­
mentation took place the individual could not make sense of 
his biography. Intersubjective sedimentation also takes place 
when several individuals share a common biography, experi­
ences of which become incorporated in a common stock of 
knowledge. Intersubjective sedimentation can be called truly 
social only when it has been objectivated in a sign system of 
one kind or another, that is, when the possibility of reiterated 
objectification of the shared experiences arises. Only then is it 
likely that these experiences will be transmitted f
rom one 
generation to the next, and f
rom one collectivity to another. 
Theoretically, common activity, without a sign system, could 
be the basis f
or transmission. Empirically, this is improbable. 
An objectively available sign system bestows a status of 
incipient anonymity on the sedimented experiences by detach­
ing them f
rom their original context of concrete individual 
biographies and making them generally available to all who 
share, or may share in the f
uture, in the sign system in ques­
tion. The experiences thus become readily transmittable. 
In principle, any sign system would do. Normally, of course, 
the decisive sign system is linguistic. Language objectivates 
the shared experiences and makes them available to all within 
the linguistic community, thus becoming both the basis and 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OP REALITY 
the instrument of the collective stock of knowledge. Further­
more, language provides the means for objectifying new 
experiences, all
owing their incorporation into the already 
existing stock of 
knowledge, and it is the most important means 
by which the objectivated and objectified sedimentations are 
transmitted in the tradition of the collectivity in question. 
For example, only some members of a hunting society have 
the experience of losing their weapons and being f
orced to 
fight a wild animal with their bare hands. This f
rightening 
experience, with whatever lessons in bravery, cunning and 
skill it yields, is firmly sedimented in ·the consciousness of the 
individuals who went through it. If the experience is shared 
by several individuals, it will be sedimented intersubjectively, 
may perhaps even f
orm a prof
ound bond between t?ese 
individuals. As this experience is designated and transnutted 
linguistically, however, it becomes accessible and, perhaps, 
strongly relevant to individuals who have never gone through 
it. The linguistic designation (which, in a hunting society, we 
may imagine to be very precise and elaborate indeed - say, 
'lone big kill, with one hand, of male rhinoceros', 'lone big 
kill, with two hands, of f
emale rhinoceros', and so f
orth) 
abstracts the experience f
rom its individual biographical 
occurrences. It becomes an objective possibility f
or everyone, 
or at any rate f
or everyone within a certain typ° (sa±, fly 
initiated hunters) ; that is, it becomes anonymous m prmople 
even if 
it is still associated with the f
eats of 
specific individuals. 
Even to those who do not anticipate the experience in their 
own future biography (say, women f
orbidden to hunt), it may 
be relevant in a derived manner (say, in terms of the desir­
ability of a f
uture husband) ; in any case it is part of the com­
mon stock of knowledge. The objectification of the experience 
in the language (that is, its transformation 
.
int² a generly 
available object of knowledge) then allows 1ts mcorporatton 
into a larger body of tradition by way of moral instruction, 
inspirational poetry, religious allegory .and whatnot. Both. the 
experience in the narrower sense and 1ts appendage o 
wtder 
significations can then be taught to every new generatton, or 
even diffused to an altogether diff
erent collectivity (say, an 
agricultural society that may attach quite diff
erent meanings 
to the whole business). 
86 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
Language becomes the depository of a large aggregate of 
collective sedimentations, which can be acquired monothe­
tically, that is, as cohesive wholes and without reconstructing 
their original process of formation. 
86 Since the actual origin of 
the sedimentations has become unimportant, the tradition 
might invent quite a diff
erent origin without thereby threaten­
ing what has been objectivated. In other words, legitimations 
can succeed each other, f
rom time to time bestowing new 
meanings on the sedimented experiences of the collectivity in 
question. The past history of the society can be reinterpreted 
without necessarily upsetting the institutional order as a 
result. For instance, in the above example, the 'big kill' may 
come to be legitimated as a deed of divine figures and any 
human repetition of it as an imitation of the mythological 
prototype. 
This process underlines all objectivated sedimentations, not 
only institutionalized actions. It may refer, for instance, to the 
transmission of typifications of others not directly relevant to 
specific institutions. For example, others are typified as 'tall' 
or 'short', 'fat' or 'thin', 'bright' or 'dull', without any parti­
cular institutional implications being attached to these typi­
fications. The process, of 
course, also applies to the transmission 
of sedimented meanings that meet the previously given 
specification of institutions. The transmission of the meaning 
of an institution is based on the social recognition of that 
institution as a 'permanent' solution to a 'permanent' problem 
of the given collectivity. Theref
ore, potential actors of institu­
tionalized actions must be s
ystematically acquainted with these 
meanings. This necessitates some form of 'educational' pro­
cess. The institutional meanings must be impressed powerf
ully 
and unf
orgettably upon the consciousness of the individual. 
Since human beings are f
requently sluggish and f
orgetf
ul, 
there must also be procedures by which these meanings can be 
reimpressed and rememorized, if necessary by coercive and 
generally unpleasant means. Furthermore, since human be­
ings are f
requently stupid, instituticnal meanings tend to 
become simplified in the process of transmission, so that the 
given collection of institutional 'f
ormulae' can be readily 
learned and memorized by successive generations. The 'for­
mula' character of institutional meanings ensures their 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
memorability. We have here on the level of sedimented 
meanings the same processes of routinization and trivialization 
that we have already noted in the discussion of 
institutionaliza­
tion. Again, the stylized f
orm in which heroic f
eats enter a 
tradition is a usef
ul illustration. 
The objectivated meanings of institutional activity are con­
ceived of as 'knowledge' and transmitted as such. Some of this 
'knowledge' is deemed relevant to all, some only to certain 
types. All transmission requires some sort of social apparatus. 
That is, some types are designated as transmitters, other types 
as recipients of the traditional 'knowledge'. The specific 
character of 
this apparatus will, of course, vary from society to 
society. There will also be typified procedures for the passage 
of the tradition f
rom the knowers to the non-knowers. For 
example, the technical, magical and moral lore of hunting may 
be transmitted by maternal uncles to nephews of a certain age, 
by means of specified procedures of initiation. The typology 
of knowers and non-knowers, like the 'knowledge' that is 
supposed to pass between them, is a matter of social defini­
tion; both 'knowing' and 'not knowing' ref
er to what is 
socially defined as reality, and not to some extra-social criteria 
of cognitive validity. To put this crudely, maternal uncles do 
not transmit this particular stock of knowledge because they 
know it, but they know it (that is, are defined as knowers) 
because they are maternal uncles. If an institutionally desig­
nated maternal uncle, f
or particular reasons, turns out to be 
incapable of transmitting the knowledge in question, he is no 
longer a maternal uncle in the f
ull sense of the word, and, 
indeed, institutional recognition of this status may be with­
drawn f
rom him. 
Depending on the social span of relevance of a certain type 
of 'knowledge' and its complexity and importance in a parti­
cular collectivity, the 'knowledge' may have to be reaffirmed 
through symbolic objects (such as f
etishes and military em­
blems), and/or symbolic actions (such as religious or military 
ritual). In other words, physical objects and actions may be 
called upon as mnemotechnic aids. All transmission of institu­
tional meanings obviously implies control and legitimation 
procedures. These are attached to the institutions themselves 
and administered by the transmitting personnel. It may be 
88 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
stressed again here that no a priori consistency, let alone 
f
unctionality, may be presumed as existing between diff
erent 
institutions and the f
orms of the transmission of knowledge 
pertaining to them. The problem of logical coherence arises 
first on the level of legitimation (where there may be conflict 
or competition between diff
erent legitimations and their 
administrative personnel), and secondly on the level of sociali­
zation (where there may be practical difficulties in the inter­
nalization of successive or competing institutional meanings). 
To return to a previous example, there is no a priori reason 
why institutional meanings that originated in a hunting society 
should not be diff
used to an agricultural society. What is more, 
these meanings may, to an outside observer, appear to have 
dubious 'f
unctionality' in the first society at the time of 
diff
usion and no 'f
unctionality' at all in the second. The diffi­
culties that may arise here are connected with the theoretical 
activities of the legitimators and the practical ones of the 
'educators' in the new 
.society. The theoreticians have to satisf
y 
themselves that a hunting goddess is a plausible denizen in an 
agrarian pantheon and the pedagogues have a problem explain­
ing her mythological activities to children who have never 
seen a hunt. Legitimating theoreticians tend to have logical 
aspirations and children tend to be recalcitrant. This, how­
ever, 
is not a problem of 
abstract 
logic or technical 
f
unctionality, 
but rather of ingenuity on the one hand and credulity on the 
other - a rather diff
erent proposition. 
Roles 
As we have seen, the origins of any institutional order lie in the 
typification of one's own and others' perf
ormances. This imp­
lies that one shares with 9thers specific goals and interlocking 
phases of perf
ormance, and, f
urther, that not only specific 
actions but f
orms of action are typified. That is, there will be 
the recognition not only of a particular actor perf
orming an 
action of type X, but of type-X action as being perf
ormable by 
any actor to whom the relevance structure in question can be 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
plausibly imputed. For example, one may recognize one's 
brother-in-law engaged in thrashing one's insolent off
spring 
and understand that this particular action is only one instance 
of a f
orm of action appropriate to other pairs of uncles and 
nephews, indeed, is a generally available pattern in a matrilocal 
society. Only if the latter typification prevails will this incident 
f
ollow a socially taken-f
or-granted course, with the f
ather dis­
creetly withdrawing f
rom the scene so as not to disturb the 
legitimate exercise of avuncular authority. 
The typification of f
orms of action requires that these have 
an objective sense, which in turn requires a linguistic objecti­
fication. That is, there will be a vocabulary ref
erring to these 
f
orms of action (such as 'nephew-thrashing', which will belong 
to a much larger linguistic structuring of kinship and its 
various rights and obligations). In principle, then, an action 
and its sense can be apprehended apart f
rom individual per­
f
ormances of it and the variable subjective processes associated 
with them. Both self and other can be apprehended as per­
f
ormers of objective, generally known actions, which are re­
current and repeatable by any actor of the appropriate type. 
This has very important consequences f
or self
-experience. 
In the course of action there is an identification of the self 
with the objective sense of the action; the action that is going 
on determines, f
or that moment, the self
-apprehension of the 
actor, and does so in the objective sense that has been socially 
ascribed to the action. Although there continues to be a 
margina! awareness of the body and other aspects of the self 
not directly involved in the action, the actor, for that moment, 
apprehends himself essentially in identification with the 
socially objectivated action ('I am now thrashing my nephew' 
-a taken-f
or-granted episode in the routine of everyday life). 
M
ter the action has taken place there is a f
urther important 
consequence, as the actor reflects about his action. Now a part 
· of the self is objectified as the performer of this action, with 
the whole self again becoming relatively disidentifi.ed f
rom the 
perf
ormed action. That is, it becomes possible to conceive of 
the self as having been only partially involved in the action 
(af
ter all, the man in our example is other things besides being 
a nephew-thrasher). It is not difficult to see that, 
as 
these objectifications accumulate ('nephew-thrasher', sister-
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
supporter', 'initiate-warrior', 'rain-dance virtuoso', and so 
f
orth), an entire sector of self
-consciousness is structured in 
terms of these objectifications. In other words, a segment of 
the self is objectified in terms of the socially available 
typifications. This segment is the truly 'social self', which is 
subjectively experienced as distinct f
rom and even con­
f
ronting the self in its totality. 36 This important phenomenon, 
which allows an internal 'conversation' between the diff
erent 
segments of the self
, will be taken up again later when we 
look at the process by which the socially constructed world is 
internalized in individual consciousness. For the moment, 
what is important is the relationship of the phenomenon to 
the objectively available typifications of conduct. 
In sum, the actor identifies with the socially objectivated 
typifications of conduct in actu, but re-establishes .distance 
f
rom them as he reflects about his conduct af
terwards. This 
distance between the actor and his action can be retained in 
consciousness and projected to f
uture repetitions of 
the actions. 
In this way both acting self and acting others are apprehended 
not as unique individuals, but as types. By definition, these 
types are interchangeable. 
We can properly begin to speak of roles when this kind of 
typification occurs in the context of an objectified stock of 
knowledge common to a collectivity of actors. Roles are types 
of actors in such a context.37 It can readily be seen that the 
construction of role typologies is a necessary correlate of the 
institutionalization of conduct. Institutions are embodied in 
individual experience by means of roles. The roles, objectified 
linguistically, are an essential ingredient of the objectively 
available world of any society. By playing roles, the individual 
participates in a social world. By internalizing these roles, the 
same world becomes subjectively real to him. 
In the common stock of knowledge there are standards of 
role performance that are accessible to all members of a 
society, or at least to those who are potential perf
ormers of 
the 
roles in question. This general accessibility is itself 
part of the 
same stock ofknowledge; not only are the standards of role X 
generally known, but it is known that these standards are 
known. Consequently every putative actor of role X can be 
held responsible f
or abiding by the standards, which can be 
91 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
taught as part of the institutional tradition and used to verif
y 
the credentials of all perf
ormers and, by the same token, serve 
as controls. 
The origins of roles lie in the same fundamental process of 
habitualization and objectivation as the origins of institutions. 
Roles appear as soon as a common stock of knowledge con­
taining reciprocal typifications of conduct is in process of 
f
ormation, a process that, as we have seen, is endemic to social 
interaction and prior to instiwtionalization proper. The ques­
tion as to which roles become institutionalized is identical 
with the question as to which areas of conduct are affected by 
institutionalization, and may be answered the same way. All 
institutionalized conduct involves roles. Thus roles share in 
the controlling character of institutionalization. As soon as 
actors are typified as role perf
ormers, their conduct is ipso 
facto 
susceptible to enf
orcement. Compliance and non-compliance 
with socially defined role standards cease to be optional, 
though, of course, the severity of sanctions may vary from 
case to case. 
The roles represent the institutional order. 
38 This represen­
tation takes place on two levels. First, perf
ormance of the role 
represents itself. For instance, to engage in judging is to rep­
resent the role of judge. The judging individual is not acting 
'on his own', but qua judge. Second, the role represents an 
entire institutional nexus of conduct. The role of judge stands 
in relationship to other roles, the totality of which comprises 
the institution of law. The judge acts as the representative of 
this institution. Only through such representation in per­
formed roles can the institution manif
est itself in actual ex­
perience. The institution, with its assemblage of'programmed' 
actions, is like the unwritten libretto of 
a drama. The realization 
of the drama depends upon the reiterated perf
ormances of its 
prescribed roles by living actors. The actors embody the roles 
and actualize the drama by representing it on the given stage. 
Neither drama nor institution exist empirically apart f
rom this 
recurrent realization. To say, then, that roles represent institu­
tions is to say that roles make it possible f
or institutions to 
exist, ever again, as a real presence in the experience of living 
individuals. 
Institutions are also represented in other ways. Their lin-
92 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
guistic objectifications, from their simple verbal designations 
to their incorporation in highly complex symbolizations of 
reality, also represent them (that is, make them present) in 
experience. And they may be symbolically represented by 
physical objects, both natural and artificial. All these represen­
tations, however, become 'dead' (that is, beref
t of subjective 
reality) unless they are ongoingly 'brought to life' in actual 
human conduct. The representation of an institution in and 
by roles is thus the representation par excellence, on which all 
other representations are dependent. For example, the institu­
tion of law is, of course, also represented by legal language, 
codes of law, theories of jurisprudence and, finally, by the 
ultimate legitimations of the institution and its norms in 
ethical, religious or mythological systems of thought. Such 
man-made phenomena as the awesome paraphernalia that 
frequently accompany the administration of law, and such 
natural ones as the clap of thunder that may be taken as the 
divine verdict in a trial by ordeal and may eventually even 
become a symbol of ultimate justice, further represent the 
institution. All these representations, however, derive their 
continuing significance anä even intelligibility from their 
utilization in human conduct, which here, of course, is conduct 
typified in the institutional roles of the law. 
When individuals begin to reflect upon these matters they 
face the problem of binding the various representations to­
gether in a cohesive whole that will make sense. 39 Any concrete 
role perf
ormance ref
ers to the objective sense of the institution, 
and thus to the other complementary role performances, and 
to the sense of the institution as a whole. While the problem of 
integrating the various representations so involved is solved 
primarily on the level of legitimation, it is also dealt with in 
terms of certain roles. All roles represent the institutional 
order in the aforementioned sense. Some roles, however, 
symbolically represent that order in its totality more than 
others. Such roles are of 
great strategic importance in a society, 
since they represent not only this or that institution, but the 
integration of all institutions in a meaningf
ul world. Ipso 
facto, 
of course these roles help in maintaining such integration in 
' 
. 
the consciousness and conduct of the members of the soc1ety, 
that is, they have a special relationship to the legitimating 
93 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
apparatus of the society. Some roles have no functions other 
than this symbolic representation of the institutional order as 
an integrated totality, others take on this f
unction f
rom time 
to time in addition to the less exalted f
unctions they routinely 
perf
orm. The judge, f
or instance, may, on occasion in some 
. 
' 
particularly important case, represent the total integration of 
society in this way. The monarch does so all the time and 
indeed, in a constitutional monarchy, may have no othe; 
function than as a 'living symbol' for all levels of the society, 
don to the man in the street. Historically, roles that sym­
bolically represent the total institutional order have been most 
commonly located in political and religious institutions. 
40 
More important f
or our immediate considerations is the 
character of roles as mediators of specific sectors of the com­
mon stock of knowledge. By virtue of the roles he plays the 
individual is inducted into specific areas of socially objectivated 
knowledge, not only in the narrower cognitive sense but also 
. 
' 
m the sense of the 'knowledge' of norms, values and even 
emotions. To be a judge obviously involves a knowledge of 
the Iaw and probably also knowledge of a much wider range of 
human aff
airs that are legally relevant. It also involves, how­
evr, 'knowlege' of the val
.
ues and attitudes deemed appro­
pnate f
or a Judge, extendmg as far as those proverbially 
deemed appropriate f
or a judge's wif
e. The judge must also 
have appropriate 'knowledge' in the domain of the emotions : 
he will have to know, for example, when to restrain his f
eelings 
of compassion, to mention a not unimportant psychological 
prerequisite f
or this role. In this way, each role opens an 
entrance into a specific sector of the society's total stock of 
knowledge. To learn a role it is not enough to acquire the 
routines immediately necessary f
or its 'outward' perf
ormance. 
One must also be initiated into the various cognitive and even 
aff
ective layers of the body of knowledge that is directly and 
indirectly appropriate to this role. 
This implies a social distribution of 
knowledge. 
41 A society's 
stock of 
knowledge is structured in terms of what is generally 
relevant and what is relevant only to specific roles. This is true 
of even very simple social situations, such as our previous 
example of a social situation produced by the ongoing inter­
action of a man, a bisexual woman and a Lesbian. Here some 
94 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
knowledge is relevant to all three individuals (for instance, 
knowledge of the procedures necessary to keep this company 
econoxnically afloat), while other knowledge is relevant only to 
two of the individuals (the savoir-
faire of Lesbian or, in the 
other case, of heterosexual seduction). In other words, the 
social distribution of knowledge entails a dichotomization in 
terms of general and role-specific relevance. 
Given the historical accumulation of knowledge in a society, 
we can assume that, because of the division of labour, role­
specific knowledge will grow at a f
aster rate than generally 
relevant and accessible knowledge. The multiplication of 
specific tasks brought about by the division of labour requires 
standardized solutions that can be readily learned and trans­
Initted. These in turn require specialized knowledge of certain 
situations, and of the means/ends relationships in terms of 
which the situations are socially defined. In other words, 
specialists will arise, each of 
whom will have to know whatever 
is deemed necessary f
or the f
ulfilment of his particular task. 
To accumulate role-specific knowledge a society must be so 
organized that certain individuals can concentrate on their 
specialities. If in a hunting society certain individuals are to 
become specialists as swordsmiths, there will have to be pro­
visions to excuse them f
rom the hunting activities that are 
incumbent on all other adult males. Specialized knowledge of 
a more elusive kind, such as the knowledge of mystagogues 
and other intellectuals, requires sixnilar social organization. In 
all these cases the specialists become administrators of the 
sectors of the stock of knowledge that have been socially 
assigned to them. 
At the same time, an important part of generally relevant 
knowledge is the typology of specialists. While the specialists 
are defined as individuals who know their specialities, every­
one must know who the specialists are in case their specialities 
are needed. The man in the street is not expected to knoN the 
intricacies of the magic of inducing f
ertility or casting evil 
spells. What he must know, however, is which magicians to 
call upon if the need f
or either of these services arises. A 
typology of experts (what contemporary social workers call a 
ref
erral guide) is thus part of 
the generally relevant and acces:. 
sible stock ofknowledge, while the knowledge that constitutes 
95 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
expertise is not. The practical difficulties that may arise in 
certan societies (for instance, when there are competing 
cotenes of experts, or when specialization has become so com­
plicated that the layman gets conf
used) need not concern us 
at the moment. 
It is thus possible to analyse the relationship between roles 
and knowledge f
rom two vantage points. Looked at f
rom the 
perÏpeÐtive of the institutional order, the roles appear as 
msutut10nal representations and mediations of the institu­
tionally objectivated aggregates of knowledge. Looked at f
rom 
the perspective of the several roles, each role carries with it a 
socially defined appendage of knowledge. Both perspectives, 
of course, point to the same global phenomenon, which is the 
essential dialectic of society. The first perspective can be 
ÑuÒÓed up in the proposition that society exists only as 
IDdlVtduals are conscious of it, the second in the proposition 
that individual consciousness is socially determined. Narrow­
ing this to the matter of roles, we can say that, on the one hand, 
the institutional order is real only in so far as it is realized in 
performed roles and that, on the other hand, roles are rep­
resentative of an institutional order that defines their character 
(including their appendages of knowledge) and f
rom which 
they derive their objective sense. 
The analysis of 
roles is of particular importance to the socio­
logy of knowledge because it reveals the mediations between 
the macroscopic universes of 
meaning objectivated in a society 
and the ways by which these universes are subjectively real to 
individuals. Thus it is possible, for example, to analyse the 
macroscopic social roots of a religious world view in certain 
collectivities (classes, say, or ethnic groups, or intellectual 
coteries), and also to analyse tl- , manner in which this world 
view is manif
ested in the consciousness of an individual. The 
two analyses can be brought together only if one inquires into 
the ways in which the individual, in his total social activity, 
relates to the collectivity in question. Such an inquiry will, of 
necessity, be an exercise in role analysis.42 
SociETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
Scope and Modes o
f
 Institutionalization 
So far we have discussed institutionalization in terms of essen­
tial f
eatures that may be taken as sociological constants. 
Obviously we cannot in this treatise give even an overview of 
the countless variations in the historical manif
estations and 
combinations of these constants - a task that could be achieved 
only by writing a universal history from the point of view of 
sociological theory. There are, however, a number of historical 
variations in the character of institutions that are so important 
f
or concrete sociological analyses that they should be at least 
briefly discussed. Our f
ocus will, of course, continue to be on 
the relationship between institutions and knowledge. 
In investigating any concrete institutional order, one may 
ask the following question : What is the scope of institutionali­
zation within the totality of social actions in a given collectivity?· 
In other words, how large is the sector of institutionalized 
activity as compared with the sector that is left uninstitu­
tionalized?43 Clearly there is historical variability in this 
matter, with different societies allowing more or less room for 
uninstitutionalized actions. An important general considera­
tion is what factors determine a wider as against a narrower 
scope of institutionalization. 
Very formally, the scope of instituuunalization depends on 
the generality of the relevance structures. If many or most 
relevance structures in a society are generally shared, the scope 
of institutionalization will be wide. If only few relevance 
structures are generally shared, the scope of institutionaliza­
tion will be narrow. In the latter case, there is the further 
possibility that the institutional order will be highly frag­
mented, as certain relevance structures are shared by groups 
within the society but not by the society as a whole. 
It may be heuristically useful to think here in terms of 
ideal­
typical extremes. It is possible to conceive of a society in 
which institutionalization is total. In such a society, all prob­
lems are common, all solutions to these problems are socially 
objectivated and all social actions are institutionalized. The 
institutional order embraces the totality of social life, which 
97 


THE SociAL CoNSTRUCTION oF REALITY 
resembles the continuous perf
ormance of a complex, highly 
stylized liturgy. There is no role-specific distribution o f  
knowledge, or nearly none, since all roles are perf
ormed within 
situations of equal relevance to all the actors. This heuristic 
model of a totally institutionalized society (a fit topic for 
nightmares, it might be remarked in passing) can be slightly 
modified by conceiving that all social actions are institu­
tionalized, but not only around common problems. While the 
style of 
lif
e such a society would impose on its members would 
be equally rigid, there would be a greater degree of 
role-specific 
distribution of knowledge. A number of liturgies would be 
going on at the same time, so to speak. Needless to say, neither 
the model of institutional totality nor its modification can be 
found in history. Actual societies can, however, be considered 
in terms of 
their approximation to this extreme type. It is then 
possible to say that primitive societies approximate the type 
to a much higher degree than civilized ones.44 It may even be 
said that in the development of archaic civilizations there is a 
progressive movement away from this type. 
45 
The opposite extreme would be a society in which there is 
only one common problem, and institutionalization occurs 
onl
y with respect to actions concerned with this problem. In 
such a society there would be almost no common stock of 
knowledge. Almost all knowledge would be role-specific. In 
terms of macroscopic societies, even approximations of this 
type are historically unavailable. But certain approximations 
can be found in smaller social formations - for example, in 
libertarian colonies where common concerns are limited to 
economic arrangements, or in military expeditions consisting 
of a number of 
tribal or ethnic units whose only common prob­
lem is the waging of the war. 
Apart from stimulating sociological fantasies, such heuristic 
fictions are usef
ul only in so far as they help to clarify the con­
ditions that f
avour approximations to them. The most general 
condition is the degree of 
division oflabour, with the concomi­
tant diff
erentiation of 
institutions. 
48 Any society in which there 
is increasing division of labour is moving away from the first 
extreme type described above. Another general condition, 
closely related to the previous one, is availability of an 
economic surplus, which makes it possible for certain indivi-
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
duals or groups to engage in specialized activities not directly 
concerned with subsistence. 
47 These specialized activities, as 
we have seen, lead to specialization and segmentation in the 
common stock of knowledge. And the latter makes possible 
knowledge subjectively detached from any social relevance, 
that is, 'pure theory'. 
48 This means that certain individuals are 
(to return to a previous example) freed from hunting not only 
to forge weapons but also to fabricate myths. Thus we have 
the 'theoretical lif
e', with its luxurious prolif
eration of 
specialized bodies of knowledge, administered by specialists 
whose social prestige may actually depend upon their inability 
to do anything except theorize - which leads to a number of 
analytic problems to which we shall return later. 
Institutionalization is not, however, an irreversible process, 
despite the fact that institutions, once f
ormed, have a tendency 
to persist.49 For a variety of historical reasons, the scope of 
institutionalized actions may diminish ; de-institutionalization 
may take place in certain areas of social life. 50 For example, the 
private sphere that has emerged in modern industrial society 
is considerably de-institutionalized as compared to the public 
sphere. 
51 
A further question, with respect to which institutional 
orders will vary historically, is : What is the relationship of the 
various institutions to each other, on the levels of perf
ormance 
and meaning?52 In the first extreme type discussed above, 
there is a unity of institutional performances and meanings in 
each subjective biography. The entire social stock of know­
ledge is actualized in every individual biography. Everybody 
does everything and knows everything. The problem of the 
integration of 
meanings (that is, of the meaningful relationship 
of the various institutions) is an exclusively subjective one. 
The objective sense of the institutional order presents itself to 
each individual as given and generally known, socially taken 
f
or granted as such. If there is any problein at all, it is because 
of subjective difficulties the individual may have internalizing 
the socially agreed-upon meanings. 
With increasing deviance from this heuristic model (that is, 
of course, with all actual societies, though not to the same 
degree) there will be important modifications in the givenness 
of the institutional meanings. The first two of these we have 
99 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
already indicated : a segmentation of the institutional order¶ 
with only certain types of individuals perf
orming certain 
actions, and, f
ollowing that, a social distribution of knowledge, 
with role-specific knowledge coming to be reserved to certain 
types. With these developments, however, a new configuration 
appears on the level of 
meaning. There will now be an ob
jective 
problem with respect to an encompassing integration of 
meanings within the entire society. This is an altogether 
diff
erent problem from the merely subjective one of har­
monizing the sense one makes of one's biography with the 
sense ascribed to it by society. The diff
erence is as great as 
that between producing propaganda that will convince others 
and producing memoirs that will convince oneself. 
In our example of the man/woman/Lesbian triangle we 
went to some lengths to show that it cannot be assumed a 
priori that diff
erent processes of institutionalization will 'hang 
together'. The relevance structure that is shared by the man 
and the woman (A-B) does not have to be integrated with the 
one shared by the woman and the Lesbian (B-C), or with the 
one shared by the Lesbian and the man (C-A). Discrete 
institutional processes can continue to coexist without overall 
integration. We then argued that the empirical fact that insti­
tutions do hang together, despite the impossibility of assuming 
this a priori, can be accounted for only in ref
erence to the 
reflective consciousness of individuals who impose a certain 
logic upon their experience of the several institutions. We can 
now push this argument one step f
urther by assuming that one 
of our three individuals (let us assume that it is the man, A) 
becomes dissatisfied with the lack of symmetry in the situation. 
This does not imply that the relevances in which he shares 
(A-B and C-A) have changed for him. It is rather the rele­
vance in which he has not previously shared (B-C) that now 
bothers him. This may be because it interf
eres with his own 
interests (C spends too much time lll
aking love with B and 
neglects her flower-arranging activities with him), or it may be 
that he has theoretical ambitions. In any case, he wants to 
unite the three discrete relevances and their concomitant 
habitualization processes into a cohesive, meaningful whole -
A-B-C. How can he do this? 
Let us imagine him a religious genius. One day he presents 
IOO 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
the other two with a new mythology. The world was created in 
two stages, the dry land by the creator god copulating with his 
sister, the sea in an act of mutual masturbation by the latter 
and a twin goddess. And when the world was thus made, the 
creator god joined the twin goddess in the great flower dance, 
and in this way there came to be flora and f
auna on the f
ace of 
the dry land. The existing triangulation of heterosexuality, 
Lesbianism and flower cultivation is thus nothing less than a 
human imitation of the archetypal actions of the gods. Not 
bad? The reader with some background in comparative myth­
ology will have no difficulty finding historical parallels to 
this cosmogonic vignette. Our man may have more difficulty 
getting the others to accept his theory. He will have a problem 
of propaganda. If
, however, we assume that B and C have also 
had practical difficulties in keeping their various projects go­
ing, or (less likely) that they are inspired by A's vision of the 
cosmos, there is a good chance that he will be able to put his 
scheme over. Once he has succeeded and all three individuals 
'know' that their several actions work together f
or the great 
society (which is A-B-C), this 'knowledge' will influence 
what goes on in the situation. For instance, C may be more 
amenable to budgeting her time in an equitable way between 
her two major enterprises. 
If this extension of our example seems f
ar-f
etched, we can 
bring it closer to home by imagining a secularization process 
in the consciousness of our religious genius. Mythology no 
longer seems plausible. The situation has tQ be explained by 
social science. This, of course, is very easy. lc is evident (to 
our religious genius turned social scientist, that is) that the 
two sorts of sexual activity going on in the situation express 
deep-seated psychological needs of the participants. ·  He 
'knows' that to f
rustrate these needs will lead to 'disf
unctional' 
tensions. On the other hand, it is a f
act that our trio sell their 
flowers f
or coconuts on the other end of the island. That 
settles it. Behaviour patterns A-B and B-C are functional in 
terms of the 'personality system', while C-A is functional in 
terms of the economic sector of the 'social system'. A-B-C is 
nothing but the rational outcome of f
unctional integration on 
the intersystemic level. Again, if A is successful in pro­
pagandizing his two girls with this theory, their 'knowledge' 
101 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
of the functional imperatives involved in their situation will 
have certain controlling consequences for their conduct. 
Mutatis mutandis, the same argument will hold if we trans­
pose it from the face-to-face idyll of our example to the 
macro-social level. The segmentation of 
the institutional order 
and the concomitant distribution of 
knowledge will lead to the 
problem of 
providing integrative meanings that 
will encompass 
the society and provide an overall context of objective sense 
for the individual's fragmented social experience and know­
ledge. Furthermore, there will be not only the problem of 
overall meaningful integration, but also a problem oflegitimat­
ing the institutional activities of one type of actor vis-a-vis 
other types. We may assume that there is a universe of 
meaning 
that bestows objective sense on the activities of warriors, 
farmers, traders and exorcists. This does not mean that there 
will be no conflict of interests between these types of actors. 
Even within the common universe of meaning, the exorcists 
may have a problem of 'explaining' some of their activities to 
the warriors, and so forth. The methods of such legitimation 
again vary historically. 
53 
Another consequence of institutional segmentation is the 
possibility of socially segregated sub-universes of meaning. 
These result from accentuations of role specialization to the 
point where role-specific knowledge becomes altogether eso­
teric as against the common stock of knowledge. Such sub­
universes of meaning may or may not be submerged from the 
common view. In certain cases, not only are the cognitive 
contents of the sub-universe esoteric, but even the existence 
of the sub-universe and of the collectivity that sustains it may 
be a secret. Sub-universes of meaning may be socially struc­
tured by various criteria - sex, age, occupation, religious 
inclination, aesthetic taste, and so on. The chance of sub­
universes appearing, of course, increases steadily with pro­
gressive division of labour and econ01nic surplus. A society 
with a subsistence economy can have cognitive segregation 
between men and women, or between old and young warriors, 
as in the 'secret societies' common in M
rica and among 
American Indians. It may still be able to aff
ord the esoteric 
existence of a few priests and magicians. Full
-blown sub­
universes of 
meaning, such as characterized, say, Hindu castes, 
10.2 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
the Chinese literary bureaucracy or the priestly coteries of 
ancient Egypt, require much more developed solutions of the 
economic problem. 
Like all social edifices of meaning, the sub-universes must 
be 'carried' by a particular collectivity, 
54 that is, by the group 
that ongoingly produ.::
es the meanings in question and within 
which these meanings have objective reality. Conflict or 
competition may exist between such groups. On the simplest 
level, there may be conflict over the allocation of surplus 
resources to the specialists in question, for example, over 
exemption from productive labour. Who is to be officially 
exempt, all medicine men, or only those who perf
orm services 
in the household of the chief? Or, who is to receive a fixed 
stipend f
rom the authorities, those who cure the sick with 
herbs or those who do it by going into a trance? Such social 
conflicts are readily translated into conflicts between rival 
schools of thought, each seeking to establish itself and to dis­
credit if not liquidate the competitive body of knowledge. In 
contemporary society, we continue to have such conflicts 
(socio-economic as well as cognitive) between orthodox medi­
cine and such rivals as chiropractice, homeopathy or Christian 
Science. In advanced industrial societies, with their immense 
economic surplus allowing large numbers of individuals to 
devote themselves full-time to even the obscurest pursuits, 
pluralistic competition between sub-universes of meaning of 
every conceivable sort becomes the normal state of affairs. 
55 
With the establishment of sub-universes of meaning a 
variety of perspectives on the total society emerges, each view­
ing the latter from the angle of one sub-universe. The chiro­
practor has a different angle on society than the medical 
school professor, the poet than the business man, the Jew than 
the Gentile, and so on. It goes without saying that this multi­
plication of perspectives greatly increases the problem of 
establishing a stable symbolic canopy for the entire society. 
Each perspective, with whatever appendages of theories or 
even Weltanschauungen, will be related to the concrete social 
interests of the group that holds it. This does not mean, how­
ever, that the various perspectives, let alone the theories or 
We/tanschauungen, are nothing but mechanical reflections of 
the social interests. Especially on the theoretical level it is 
103 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
quite possible f
or knowledge to attain a great deal of detach­
ment f
rom the biographical and social interests of the knower. 
Thus there may be tangible social reasons why Jews have be­
come preoccupied with certain scientific enterprises, but it is 
impossible to predict scientific positions in terms of their being 
held by Jews or non-Jews. In other words, the scientific uni­
verse of meaning is capable of attaining a good deal of auto­
nomy as against its own social base. Theoretically, though in 
practice there will be great variations, this holds with any body 
of knowledge, even with cognitive perspectives on society. 
What is more, a body of knowledge, once it is raised to the 
level of a relatively autonomous sub-universe of meaning, has 
the capacity to act back upon the collectivity that has produced 
it. For instance, Jews may become social scientists because 
they have special problems in society as Jews. But once they 
have been initiated into the social-scientific universe of dis­
course, they may not only look upon society f
rom an angle 
that is no longer distinctively Jewish, but even their social 
activities as Jews may change as a result of their newly 
acquired social-scientific perspectives. The extent of such 
detachment of knowledge from its existential origins depends 
upon a considerable number of historical variables (such as 
the urgency of the social interests involved, the degree of 
theoretical refinement of the knowledge in question, the social 
relevance or irrelevance of the latter, and others). The 
important principle f
or our general considerations is that the 
relationship between knowledge and its social base is a dialec­
tical one, that is, knowledge is a social product and knowledge 
is a f
actor in social change. 
66 This principle of the dialectic 
between social production and the objectivated world that is 
its product has already been explicated ; it is especially 
important to keep it in mind in any analysis of concrete 
subuniverses of meaning. 
The increasing number and complexity of sub-universes 
make them increasingly inaccessible to outsiders. They be­
come esoteric enclaves, 'hermetically sealed' (in the sense 
classically associated with the Hermetic corpus of secret lore) 
to all
 but those who have been properly initiated into their 
mysteries. The increasing autonomy of sub-universes makes 
f
or special problems of legitimation 'Vis-a-vis both outsiders 
104 
SociETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
and insiders. The outsiders have to be kept out, sometimes 
even kept ignorant of the existence of the sub-universe. If, 
however, they are not so ignorant, and if the sub-universe 
requires various special privileges and recognitions from the 
larger society, there is the problem of keeping out the outsiders 
and at the same time having them acknowledge the legitimacy 
of this procedure. This is done through various techniques of 
intimidation, rational and irrational propaganda (appealing to 
the outsiders' interests and to their emotions), mystification 
and, generally, the manipulation of prestige symbols. The 
insiders, on the other hand, have to be kept in. This requires 
the development of both practical and theoretical procedures 
by which the temptation to escape f
rom the sub-universe can 
be checked. We shall look at some of the details of this double 
problem oflegitimation later. An illustration may serve f
or the 
moment. It is not enough to set up an esoteric sub-universe of 
medicine. The lay public must be convinced that this is right 
and beneficial, and the medical f
raternity must be held to the 
standards of the suq-universe. Thus the general population is 
intimidated by images of the physical doom that f
ollows 
'going against doctor's advice' ; it is persuaded not to do so by 
the pragmatic benefits of compliance, and by its own horror of 
illness and death. To underline its authority the medical pro­
f
ession shrouds itself in the age-old symbols of power and 
mystery, f
rom outlandish costume to incomprehensible lan­
guage, all of which, of course, are legitimated to the public and 
to itself in pragmatic terms. Meanwhile the f
ully accredited 
inhabitants of the . medical world are kept from 'quackery' 
(that is, f
rom stepping outside the medical sub-universe in 
thought or action) not only by the powerful external controls 
available to the prof
ession, but by a whole body of prof
es­
sional knowledge that offers them 'scientific proof' of the f
olly 
and even wickedness of such deviance. In other words, an 
entire legitimating machinery is at work so that laymen will 
remain laymen, and doctors doctors, and (if at all possible) 
that both will do so happily. 
Special problems arise as a result of diff
erential rates of 
change of institutions and sub.ulliverses.'>7 This makes more 
difficult both the overall legitimation of the institutional order 
and the specific legitimations of particular institutions or sub-
105 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
verses. A feudal society with a modern army, a landed 
artstocracy having to exist under conditions of industrial 
capitalism, a traditional religion forced to cope with the 
popularization of a scientific world view, the coexistence in 
one society of the theory of relativity and astrology - our 
contemporary experience is so full of examples of this sort 
that it is unnecessary to belabour the point. Suffice it to say 
that, under such conditions, the work of the several legiti­
mators becomes especially strenuous. 
A final question of 
great theoretical interest arising from the 
historical variability of institutionalization has to do with the 
manner in which the institutional order is objectified : To 
what extent is an institutional order, or any part of it, appre­
hended as a non-human f
acticity? This is the question of the 
reification of social reality.ss 
Reification is the apprehension of human phenomena as if 
they were things, that is, in non-human or possibly supra­
human terms. Another way of saying this is that reification is 
the apprehension of the products of human activity as zf they 
were something other than human products - such as facts of 
nature, results of cosmic laws, or manifestations of 
divine will. 
Reificati³n implies that man is capable of f
orgetting his own 
authorship of the human world, and, f
urther, that the dialectic 
between man, the producer, and his products is lost to con­
sciousness. The reified world is, by definition, a dehumanized 
w´rld. It is experienced by man as a strange f
acticity, an opus 
a/zenum over which he has no control rather than as the opus 
proprium of his own productive activity. 
It will be clear f
rom our previous discussion of objectivation 
that, as soon as an objective social world is established the 
possibility of reification is never far away. 58 The objectivicy 
of 
the µocial w¶rld means that it conf
ronts man as something 
outside of htmself. The decisive question is whether he still 
retains the awareness that, however objectivated, the social 
world was made by men - and, theref
ore, can be remade by 
them. In other words, reification can be described as an ex­
treme step in the process of objectivation, whereby the objecti­
vated world loses its comprehensibility as a human enterprise 
and becomes fixated as a non-hum.aJl. non-humanizable, inert 
f
acti 
city. 
80 Typically, the real relationship between man and 
Io6 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
his world is reversed in consciousness. Man, the producer of a 
world, is apprehended as its product, and human activity aµ an 
epiphenomenon of non-human processes. Human meanmgs 
are no longer understood as world-producing but as being, in 
their turn, products of the 'nature of things'. I.t must be em­
phasized that reification is a modality of consciousness, more 
precisely, a modality of man's objectification of the human 
world. Even while apprehending the world in reified terms, 
man continues to produce it. That is, man is capable para­
doxically of producing a reality that denies him. 
61 
Reification is possible on both the pre-theoretical and theo­
retical levels of consciousness. Complex theoretical systems 
can be described as reifications, though presumably they have 
their roots in pre-theoretical reifications established i· t?is or 
that social situation. Thus it would be an error to ltmtt the 
concept of reification to the mental
. constructions of int
.ellec­
tuals. Reification exists in the consciOusness of the man tn the 
street and indeed, the latter presence is more practically 
significant: 
It would also be a mistake to look at reification as 
a perversion of an originally non-reified apprehension of the 
social world, a sort of cognitive f
all f
rom grace. On the con­
trary, the available ethnological and psychological evie¸ce 
seems to indicate the opposite, namely, that the origtnal 
apprehension of the social w_orld is hi¹hlr reºed both 
phylogenetically and ontogeneucally.12 This Imph.es that a¸ 
apprehension of reification as a modality of consciOusness IS 
dependent upon an at least relative de-reification
.
of c
.onscious­
ness, which is a comparatively late development tn history and 
in any individual biography. 
. 
Both the institutional order as a whole and segments of It 
may be apprehended in reified terms. For example, the entire 
order of society may be conceived of as of a microcosm reflect­
ing the macrocosm of the total universe as made by the gods. 
Whatever happens 'here below' is but a pale reflection of what 
takes place 'up above'. 
ea Particular insti»tions may  app¼e­
hended in similar ways. The basic 'recrpe' f
or the reificauon 
of institutions is to bestow on them an ontological status in­
dependent of human activi½ and signification. .specific 
reifications are variations on this general theme. Marnage, f
or 
instance, may be reified as an imitation of divine acts of 
107 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
creativity, as a universal mandate of natural laws, as the neces­
sary consequence of biological or psychological f
orces, or, for 
that matter, as a functional imperative of the social system. 
What all these reifications have in common is their obf
uscation 
of marriage as an ongoing human production. As can be 
readily seen in this example, the reification may occur both 
theoretically and pre-theoretically. Thus the mystagogue can 
concoct a highly sophisticated theory reaching out f
rom the 
concrete human event to the f
arthest corners of the divine 
cosmos, but an illiterate peasant couple being married may 
apprehend the event with a similarly reifying shudder of meta­
physical dread. Through reification, the world of institutions 
appears to merge with the world of nature. It becomes neces­
sity and fate, and is lived through as such, happily or un­
happily as the case may be. 
Roles may be reified in the same manner as institutions. The 
sector of 
self
-consciousness that has been objectified in the role 
is then also apprehended as an inevitable fate, for which the 
individual may disclaim responsibility. The paradigmatic 
f
ormula for this kind of reification is the statement 'I have no 
choice in the matter, I have to act this way because of my 
position' - as husband, father, general, archbishop, chairman 
of the board, gangster or hangman, as the case may be. This 
means that the reification of roles narrows the subjective dis­
tance that the individual may establish between himself and 
his role-playing. The distance implied in all objectification 
remains, of course, but the distance brought about by dis­
identification shrinks to the vanishing point. Finally, identity 
itself (the total self, if one pref
ers) may be reified, both one's 
own and that of others. There is then a total identification of 
the individual with his socially assigned typifications. He is 
apprehended as nothing but that type. This apprehension may 
be positively or negatively accented in terms of values or emo­
tions. The identification of 'Jew' may be equally reifying for 
the anti-Semite and the Jew himself
, except that the latter will 
accent the identification positively and the former negatively. 
Both reifications bestow an ontological and total status on a 
typification that is humanly produced and that, even as it is 
internalized, objectifies but a segment of the self. 
64 Once more, 
such reifications may range from the pre-theoretical level of 
108 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
'what everybody knows about Jews' to the most complex 
theories of Jewishness as a manif
estation of biology ('Jewish 
blood'), psychology ('the Jewish soul') or metaphysics ('the 
mystery of Israel'). 
The analysis of reification is important because it serves as a 
standing corrective to the reifying propensities of theoretical 
thought in general and sociological thought in particular. It is 
particularly important for the sociology of knowledge, because 
it prevents it f
rom falling into an undialectical conception of 
the relationship between what men do and what they think. 
The historical and empirical application of the sociology of 
knowledge must take special note of the social circumstances 
that f
avour de-reification - such as the overall collapse of 
institutional orders, the contact between previously segregated 
societies, and the important phenomenon of social margin­
ality.85 These problems, however, exceed the f
ramework of 
our present considerations. 
109 


2. Legitimation 
Ori
gins o
f
 S
ymbolic Universes 
Legitimation as a process is best described as a 'second-order' 
objectivation of meaning. Legitimation produces new mean­
ings that serve to integrate the meanings already attached to 
disparate institutional processes. The function of legitimation 
is to make objectively available and subjectively plausible the 
'first-order' objectivations that have been institutionalized. 
66 
While we define legitimation by this function, regardless of 
the specific motives inspiring any particular legitimating pro­
cess, it should be added that 'integration', in one form or 
another, is also the typical purpose motivating the legitimators. 
Integration and, correspondingly, the question of 
subjective 
plausibility refer to two levels. First, the totality of the institu­
tional order should make sense, concurrently, to the partici­
pants in diff
erent institutional processes. Here the question of 
plausibility refers to the subjective recognition of an overall 
sense 'behind' the situationally predominant but only partial 
institutionalized motives of one's own as well as of one's 
f
ellowmen - as in the relation of the chief 
and the priest, or the 
father and the military commander, or even, in the case of one 
and the same individual, of the father, who is also the military 
commander of his son, to himself. This, then, is a 'horizontal' 
level of integration and plausibility, relating the total institu­
tional order to several individuals participating in it in several 
roles, or to several partial institutional processes in which a 
single individual may participate at any given time. 
Second, the totality of the individual's life, the successive 
passing through various orders of the institutional order, must 
be made subjectively meaningful. In other words, the indivi­
dual biography, in its several, successive, institutionally pre­
defined phases, must be endowed with a meaning that makes 
the whole subjectively plausible. A 'vertical' level within the 
1 10 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
lif
e
 span of 
single individuals must, therefore, be added to the 
'horizontal' level of integration and subjective plausibility of 
the institutional order. 
As we have argued before, legitimation is not necessary in 
the first phase of institutionalization, when the institution is 
simply a f
act that requires no f
urther support either inter­
subjectively or biographically; it is self
-evident to all con­
cerned. The problem of legitimation inevitably arises when 
the objectivations of the (now historic) institutional order are 
to be transmitted to a new generation. At that point, as we 
have seen, the self
-evident character of the institutions can no 
longer be maintained by means of the individual's own recol­
lection and habitualization. The unity of 
history and biography 
is broken. In order to restore it, and thus to make intelligible 
both aspects of it, there must be 'explanations' and justifica­
tions of the salient elements of the institutional tradition. 
Legitimation is this process of •explaining' and justif
ying. 67 
Legitimation •explains' the institutional order by ascribing 
cognitive validity to its objectivated meanings. Legitimation 
justifies the institutional order by giving a normative dignity 
to its practical imperatives. It is important to understand that 
legitimation has a cognitive as well as a normative element. In 
other words, legitimation is not just a matter of •values'. It 
always implies 'knowledge' as well. For example, a kinship 
strur.ture is not legitimated merely by the ethics of its parti­
cular incest taboos. There must first be 'knowledge' of the 
roles that define both 'right' and 'wrong' actions within the 
structure. The individual, say, may not marry within his clan. 
But he must first 'know' himself as a member of this clan. 
This 'knowledge' comes to him through a tradition that 
'explains' what clans are in general and what his clan is in 
particular. Such 'explanations' (which typically constitute a 
'history' and a 'sociology' of the collectivity in question, and 
which in the case of incest taboos probably contain an 'an­
thropology' as well) are as much legitimating instruments as 
ethical elements of the tradition. Legitimation not only tells 
the individual why he should perf
orm one action and not 
another; it also tells him why things are what they are. In 
other words, 'knowledge' precedes 'values' in the legitimation 
of institutions. 
I I I  


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
It is possible to distinguish analytically between diff
erent 
levels of legitimation (empirically, of course, these levels over­
lap). Incipient legitimation is present as soon as a system of 
linguistic objectifications of human experience is transmitted. 
For example, the transmission of a kinship vocabulary ipso 
facto legitimates the kinship structure. The f
undamental 
legitimating 'explan-ations' are, so to speak, built into the 
vocabulary. Thus a child learns that another child is a 
'cousin', a piece of inf
ormation that immediately and inher­
ently legitimates the conduct with regard to 'cousins' that 
is learned along with the designation. To this first level of 
incipient legitimation belong all the simple traditional affirma­
tions to the eff
ect that 'This is how things are done' - the 
earliest and generally effective responses to a child's questions 
of 'Why?' This level, of course, is pre-theoretical. But it is the 
f
oundation of self
-evident 'knowledge' on which all subse­
quent theories must rest - and, conversely, which they must 
attain if they are to become incorporated in tradition. 
The second level of legitimation contains theoretical pro­
positions in a rudimentary f
orm. Here may be found various 
explanatory schemes relating sets of 
objective meanings. These 
schemes are highly pragmatic, directly related to concrete 
actions. Proverbs, moral maxims and wise sayings are com­
mon on this level. Here, too, belong legends and f
olk tales, 
f
requently transmitted in poetic f
orms. Thus the child learns 
such adages as 'He who steals f
rom his cousin gets warts on 
his hands' or 'Go when your wif
e cries, but run when your 
cousin calls for you'. Or he may be inspired by the 'Song of 
the Loyal Cousins Who Went Hunting Together' and 
f
rightened out of his wits by the 'Dirge f
or Two Cousins Who 
Fornicated'. 
The third level of legitimation contains explicit theories by 
which an institutional sector is legitimated in terms of a 
diff
erentiated body of knowledge. Such legitimations provide 
f
airly comprehen,sive f
rames of ref
erence for the respective 
sectors of institutionalized conduct. Because of their com­
plexity and differentiation, they are f
requently entrusted to 
specialized personnel who transmit them through formalized 
initiation procedures. Thus there may be an elaborate eco­
nomic theory of 'cousinhood', its rights, obligations and 
1 12 
SociETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
standard operating procedures. This lore is administered by 
the old men of the clan, perhaps assigned to them after their 
own economic usef
ulness is at an end. The old men initiate 
the adolescents into this higher economics in the course of the 
puberty rites and appear as experts whenever there are prob­
lems of application. If we assume that the old men have no 
other tasks assigned to them, it is likely that they will spin out 
the theories in question among themselves even if there are no 
problems of application, or, more accurately, they will invent 
such problems in the course of their theorizing. In other 
words, with the development of specialized legitimating 
theories and their administration by full-time legitimators, 
legitimation begins to go beyond pragmatic application and to 
become 'pure theory'. With this step, the sphere of legitima­
tions begins to attain a measure of autonomy vis-a-vis the 
legitimated institutions and eventually may generate its own 
institutional processes. 68 In our example, the 'science of 
cousinhood' may begin to have a lif
e of its own quite in­
dependent of the activities of merely 'lay' cousins, and the 
body of 'scientists' may set up its own institutional processes 
over against the institutions that the 'science' was originally 
meant to legitimate. We may imagine an ironic culmination 
of this development when the word 'cousin' no longer applies 
to a kinship role but to the holder of a degree in the hierarchy 
of 'cousinhood' specialists. 
Symbolic universes constitute the f
ourth level of legitima­
tion. These are bodies of theoretical tradition that integrate 
diff
erent provinces of meaning and encompass the institutional 
order in a symbolic totality, 
59 using the term 'symbolic' in the 
way we have previously defined. To reiterate, symbolic pro­
cesses are processes of signification that refer to realities other 
than those of everyday experience. It may be readily seen how 
the symbolic sphere relates to the most comprehensive level of 
legitimation. The sphere of pragmatic application is trans­
cended once and for all. Legitimation now takes place by 
means of symbolic totalities that cannot be experienced in 
everyday lif
e at all - except, of course, in so far as one might 
speak of 'theoretical experience' (strictly speaking, a mis· 
nomer, to be used heuristically if at all). This level oflegitima­
tion is f
urther distinguished from the preceding one by its 
113 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
scope of meaningf
ul integration. Already on the preceding 
level it is possible to find a high degree of integration of parti­
cular provinces of meaning and discrete processes of institu­
tionalized conduct. Now, however, all the sectors of the 
institutional order are integrated in an all-embracing f
rame of 
ref
erence, which now constitutes a universe in the literal 
sense of the word, because all human experience can now be 
conceived of as taking place within it. 
The symbolic universe is conceived of as the matrix of all 
sociall
y objectivated and subjectively real meanings; the entire 
historic society and the entire biography of the individual are 
see
n as events taking place within this. universe. What is parti­
cularly important, the marginal situations of the life of the 
individual (marginal, that is, in not being included in the 
reality of everyday existence in society) are also encompassed 
by the symbolic universe. 
70 Such situations are experienced in 
dreams and fantasies as provinces of meaning detached f
rom 
everyday life, and endowed with a peculiar reality of their 
own. Within the symbolic universe these detached realms of 
reality are integrated within a meaningf
ul totality that 'ex­
plains', perhaps also justifies them (for instance, dreams may 
be 'explained' by a psychological theory, both 'explained' and 
justified by a theory of metempsychosis, and either theory will 
be grounded in a much more comprehensive universe - a 
'scientific' one, say, as against a 'metaphysical' one). The 
symbolic universe is, of course, constructed by means of social 
objectivations. Yet its meaning-bestowing capacity far exceeds 
the domain of social lif
e, so that the individual may 'locate' 
himself within it even in his most solitary experiences. 
On this level of legitimation, the reflective integration of 
discrete institutional processes reaches its ultimate f
ulfilment. 
A whole world is created. All the lesser legitimating theories 
are viewed as special perspectives on phenomena that are 
aspects of this world. Institutional roles become modes of 
participation in a universe that transcends and includes the 
institutional order. In our previous example, the 'science of 
cousinhood' is only a part of a much wider body of theory, 
which, almost certainly, will contain a general theory of the 
cosmos and a general theory of man. The ultimate legitimation 
f
or 'correct' actions in the kinship structure will then be their 
1 14 
SociETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
'location' within a cosmological and anthropological f
rame of 
ref
erence. Incest, f
or instance, will attain its ultimate negative 
sanction as an off
ence against the divine order of the cosmos 
and against the divinely established nature of man. So may 
economic misbehaviour, or any other deviance f
rom the ins­
titutional norms. The limits of such ultimate legitimation are, 
in principle, coextensive with the limits of 
theoretical ambition 
and ingenuity on the part of the legitimators, the officially 
accredited definers of reality. In practice, of course, there will 
be variations in the degree of precision with which particular 
segments of the institutional order are placed in a cosmic con­
text. Again, these variations may be due to particular prag­
matic problems on which the legitimators are consulted, or 
they may be the result of autonomous developments in the 
theoretical f
ancy of the cosmological experts. 
The crystallization of symbolic universes f
ollows the pre­
viously discussed processes of objectivation, sedimentation 
and accumulation of knowledge. That is, symbolic universes 
are social products with a history. If 
one is to understand their 
meaning, one has to understand the history of their produc­
tion. This is all the more important because these products of 
human consciousness, by their very nature, present themselves 
as f
ull-blown and inevitable totalities. 
We may now inquire f
urther about the manner in which 
symbolic universes operate to legitimate individual biography 
and the institutional order. The operation is essentially the 
same in both cases. It is nomic, or ordering, in character.71 
The symbolic universe provides order f
or the subjective 
apprehension of biographical experience. Experiences belong­
ing to diff
erent spheres of reality are integrated by incorpora­
tion in the same, overarching universe of meaning. For 
example, the symbolic universe determines the significance of 
dreams within the reality of everyday lif
e, re-establishing in 
each instance the paramount status of the latter and mitigating 
the shock that accompanies the passage f
rom one reality to 
another.72 The provinces of meaning that would otherwise 
remain unintelligible enclaves within the reality of everyday 
lif
e are thus ordered in terms of a hierarchy of realities, ipso 
facto becoming intelligible and less terrif
ying. This integration 
of the realities of marginal situations within the paramount 
115 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
reality of everyday lif
e is of great importance, because these 
situations constitute the most acute threat to taken-for­
granted, routinized existence in society. If one conceives of the 
latter as the 'daylight side' of human life, then the marginal 
situations constitute a 'night side' that keeps lurking ominously 
on the periphery of everyday consciousness. Just because the 
'night side' has its own reality, often enough of a sinister kind, 
it is a constant threat to the taken-f
or-granted, matter-of
-f
act, 
'sane' reality of life in society. The thought keeps suggesting 
itself (the 'insane' thought par excellence) that, perhaps, the 
bright reality of 
everyday lif
e is but an illusion, to be swallowed 
up at any moment by the howling nightmares of the other, the 
night-side reality. Such thoughts of madness and terror are 
contained by ordering all conceivable realities within the same 
symbolic universe that encompasses the reality of everyday 
lif
e - to wit, ordering them in such a way that the latter reality 
retains its paramount, definitive (if one wishes, its 'most real') 
quality. 
This nomic f
unction of the symbolic universe f
or individual 
experience may be described quite simply by saying that it 
'puts everything in its right place'. What is more, whenever 
one strays f
rom the consciousness of this order (that is, when 
one finds oneself in the marginal situations of experience), the 
symbolic universe allows one 'to return to reality' - namely, to 
the reality of everyday lif
e. Since this is, of course, the sphere 
to which all f
orms of institutional conduct and roles belong, 
the symbolic universe provides the ultimate legitimation of 
the institutional order by bestowing upon it the primacy in the 
hierarchy of human experience. 
Apart f
rom this crucially important integration of marginal 
realities, the symbolic universe provides the highest level of 
integration f
or the discrepant meanings actualized within 
everyday lif
e in society. We have seen how meaningf
ul inte­
gration of discrete sectors of institutionalized conduct takes 
place by means of reflection, both pre-theoretically and theo­
retically. Such meaningful integration does not presuppose 
the positing of a symbolic universe ab initio. It can take place 
without recourse to symbolic processes, that is, without tran­
scending the realities of everyday experience. However, once 
the symbolic universe is posited, discrepant sectors of every-
116 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
day life can be integrated by direct ref
erence to the symbolic 
universe. For example, discrepancies between the meaning of 
playing the role of cousin and playing the role of landowner 
can be integrated without ref
erence to a general mythology. 
But if a general mythological Weltanschauung is operative, it 
can be directly applied to the discrepancy in everyday lif
e. To 
throw a cousin off a plot of land may then be not only bad 
economics or bad morals (negative sanctions that need not be 
extended to cosmic dimensions) ; it may be understood as a 
violation of the divinely consptuted order of the universe. In 
this way, the symbolic universe orders and thereby legitimates 
everyday roles, priorities, and operating procedures by placing 
them sub specie universi, that is, in the context of the most 
general f
rame of ref
erence conceivable. Within the same con­
text even the most trivial transactions of everyday life may 
come to be imbued with prof
ound significance. It can be 
readily seen how this procedure provides powerful legitima­
tion f
or the institutional order as a whole as well as for parti­
cular sectors of it. 
The symbolic universe also makes possible the ordering of 
the diff
erent phases of biography. In primitive societies the 
rites of passage represent this nomic f
unction in pristine f
orm. 
The periodization of biography is symbolized at each stage 
with reference to the totality of human meanings. To be a 
child, to be an adolescent, to be an adult, and so f
orth - each 
of these biographical phases is legitimated as a mode of being 
in the symbolic universe (most of
ten, as a particular mode of 
relating to the world of the gods). We need not belabour the 
obvious point that such symbolization is conducive to f
eelings 
of security and belonging. It would be a mistake, however, to 
think here only of primitive societies. A modern psychological 
theory of 
personality development can f
ulfil the same f
unction. 
In both cases, the individual passing f
rom one biographical 
phase to another can view himself as repeating a sequence that 
is given in the 'nature of things', or in his own 'nature'. That 
is, he can reassure himself that he is living 'correctly'. The 
'correctness' of his life programme is thus legitimated on the 
highest level of generality. As the individual looks back upon 
his past life, his biography is intelligible to him in these terms. 
As he projects himself into the future, he may conceive of his 
II7 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
biography as unf
olding within a universe whose ultimate 
coordinates are known. 
The same legitimating f
unction pertains to the 'correctness' 
of the individual's subjective identity. By the very nature of 
socialization, subjective identity is a precarious entity.'3 It is 
dependent upon the individual's relations with significant 
others, who may change or disappear. The precariousness is 
further increased by self
-experiences in the af
ore-mentioned 
marginal situations. The 'sane' apprehension of oneself as 
possessor of a definite, stable and socially recognized identity 
is continually threatened by the 'surrealistic' metamorphoses 
of dreams and f
antasies, even if it remains relatively consistent 
in everyday social interaction. Identity is ultimately legiti­
mated by placing it within the context of a symbolic universe. 
Mythologically speaking, the individual's 'real' name is the one 
given to him by his god. The individual may thus 'know who 
he is' by anchoring his identity in a cosmic reality protected 
from both the contingencies of 
socialization and the malevolent 
self
-transf
ormations of marginal experience. Even if his neigh­
bours do not know who he is, and even if he himself 
may f
o . get 
in the throes of nightmare, he can reassure himself that his 
'true self' is an ultimately real entity in an ultimately real 
universe. The gods know - or psychiatric science - or the 
party. In other words, the realissimum of identity need not be 
legitimated by being known at all times by the individual ; it is 
enough, for purposes oflegitimation, that it is knowable. Since 
the identity that is known or knowable by the gods, by psy­
chiatry, or by the party is at the same time the identity that is 
assigned the status of paramount reality, legitimation again 
integrates all conceivable transf
ormations of identity with the 
identity whose reality is grounded in everyday lif
e in society. 
Once more, the symbolic universe establishes a hierarchy, 
from the 'most real' to the most f
ugitive self
-apprehensions of 
identity. This means that the individual can live in society 
with some assurance that he reall
y is what he considers himself 
to be as he plays his routine social roles, in broad daylight and 
under the eyes of significant others. 
A strategic legitimating function of symbolic universes for 
individual biography is the 'location' of death. The experience 
of the death of others and, subsequently, the anticipation of 
118 
SOCIETY A S  OBJECTIVE REALITY 
one's own death posit the marginal situation par excellence for 
the individual.74 Needless· to elaborate, death also posits the 
most terrifying threat to the taken-f
or-granted realities of 
everyday lif
e. The integration of death within the paramount 
reality of social existence is, theref
ore, of the greatest impor­
tance for any institutional order. This legitimation of death is, 
consequently, one of the most important fruits of symbolic 
universes. Whether it is done with or without recourse to 
mythological, religious or metaphysical interpretations of 
reality is not the essential question here. The modern atheist, 
for instance, who bestows meaning upon death in terms of a 
Weltanschauung of progressive evolution or of revolutionary 
history also does so by integrating death with a reality­
spanning symbolic universe. All legitimations of death must 
carry out the same essential task - they must enable the indivi­
dual to go on living in society after the death of significant 
others and to anticipate his own death with, at the very least, 
terror sufficiently mitigated so as not to paralyse the continued 
perf
ormance of the routines of everyday lif
e. It may readily be 
seen that such legitimation is difficult to achieve, short of 
integrating the phenomenon of death within a symbolic uni­
verse. Such legitimation, then, provides the individual with a 
recipe for a 'correct death'. Optimally, this recipe will retain 
its plausibility when his own death is imminent and will 
allow him, indeed, to 'die correctly'. 
It is in the legitimation of death that the transcending 
potency of symbolic universes manif
ests itself most clearly, 
and the fundamental terror-assuaging character of the ulti­
mate legitimations of the paramount reality of everyday life is 
revealed. The primacy of the social objectivations of everyday 
life can retain its subjective plausibility only if it is constantly 
protected against terror. On the level of meaning, the institu­
tional order represents a shield against terror. To be anomie, 
theref
ore, means to be deprived of this shield and to be ex­
posed, alone, to the onslaught of nightmare. While the horror 
of aloneness is probably already given in the constitutional 
sociality of man, it manif
ests itself on the level of meaning in 
man's incapacity to sustain a meaningful existence in isolation 
f
rom the nomic constructions of society. The symbolic uni­
verse shelters the individual f
rom ultimate terror by bestowing 
II9 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
ultimate legitimation upon the protective structures of the 
institutional order. 
75 
Very much the same may be said about the social (as against 
the just discussed individual) significance of symbolic uni­
verses. They are sheltering canopies over the institutional 
order as well as over individual biography. They also provide 
the delimitation of social reality; that is, they set the limits of 
what is relevant in terms of social interaction. One extreme 
possibility of this, sometimes approximated in primitive 
societies, is the definition of ever
ything as social reality; even 
inorganic matter is dealt with in social terms. A narrower, and 
more common, delimitation includes only the organic or 
animal worlds. The symbolic universe assigns ranks to various 
phenomena in a hierarchy of being, defining the range of the 
social within this hierarchy.76 Needless to say, such ranks are 
also assigned to diff
erent types of men, and it f
requently 
happens that broad categories of such types (sometimes every­
one outside the collectivity in question) are defined as other 
than or less than human. This is commonly expressed lin­
guistically (in th extreme case, with the name of the collecti­
vity being equivalent to the term 'human'). This is not too 
rare, even in civilized societies. For example, the symbolic 
universe of traditional India assigned a status to the outcastes 
that was closer to that of animals than to the human status of 
the upper castes (ari operation ultimately legitimated in the 
theory of karma-samsara, which embraced all beings, human 
or otherwise), and as recently as the Spanish conquests in 
America it was possible f
or the Spaniards to conceive of the 
Indians as belonging to a diff
erent species (this operation being 
legitimated in a less comprehensive manner by a theory that 
'proved' that the Indians could not be descended f
rom Adam 
and Eve). 
The symbolic universe also orders history. It locates all 
collective events in a cohesive unity that includes past, present 
and future. With regard to the past, it establishes a 'memory' 
that is shared by all the individuals socialized within the collec­
tivity.77 With regard to the f
uture, it establishes a common 
frame of ref
erence for the projection of individual actions. 
Thus the symbolic universe links men with their predecessors 
and their successors in a meaningful totality, 
78 serving to 
12.0 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
transcend the finitude of individual existence and bestowing 
meaning upon the individual's death. All the members of a 
society can now conceive of themselves as belonging to a 
meaningful universe, which was there bef
ore they were born 
and will be there af
ter they die. The empirical community is 
transposed on to a cosmic plane and made majestically 
independent of the vicissitudes of individ
ual existence. 79 
As we have already observed, the symbolic universe pro­
vides a comprehensive integration of all discrete institutional 
processes. The entire society now makes sense. Particular ins­
titutions and roles are legitimated by locating them in a 
comprehensively meaningful world. For example, the political 
order is legitimated by ref
erence to a cosmic order of power 
and justice, and political roles are legitimated as representa­
tions of these cosmic principles. The institution of divine 
kingship in archaic civilizations is an excellent illustration of 
the manner in which this kind of ultimate legitimation 
operates. It is important, however, to understand that the 
institutional order, like the order of individual biography, is 
continually threatened by the presence of realities that are 
meaningless in its terms. The legitimation of the institutional 
order is also f
aced with the ongoing necessity of keeping chaos 
at bay. All social reality is precarious. All societies are con­
structions in the f
ace of chaos. The constant possibility of 
anomie terror is actualized whenever the legitimations that 
obscure the precariousness are threatened or collapse. The 
dread that accompanies the death of a king, especially if it 
occurs with sudden violence, expresses this terror. Over and 
beyond emotions of sympathy or pragmatic political concerns, 
the death of a king under such circumstances brings the 
terror of chaos to conscious proximity. The popular reaction 
to the assassination of President Kennedy is a potent illustra­
tion. It may readily be understood why such events have to be 
f
ollowed at once with the most solemn reaffirmations of the 
continuing reality of the sheltering symbols. 
The origins of a symbolic up.iverse have their roots in the 
constitution of man. If man in society is a world-constructor, 
this is made possible by his constitutionally given world­
openness, which already implies the conflict between order 
and chaos. Human existence is, ab initio, 
an ongoing 
Ill 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
externalization. As man externalizes himself
, he constructs the 
world into which he externalizes himself
. In the process of 
externalization, he projects his own meanings into reality. 
Symbolic universes, which proclaim that all 
reality is humanly 
meaningf
ul and call upon the entire cosmos to signif
y the 
validity of human existence, constitute the f
urthest reaches of 
this projection. 
80 
Conceptual Machineries o
f
 Universe-Maintenance 
Considered as a cognitive construction, the symbolic universe 
is theoretical. It originates in processes of subjective reflection, 
which, upon social objectivation, lead to the establishment of 
explicit links between the significant themes that have their 
roots in the several institutions. In this sense, the theoretical 
character of symbolic universes is indubitable, no matter how 
unsystematic or illogical such a universe may seem to an 'un­
sympathetic' outsider. However, one may and typically does 
live naively within a symbolic universe. Whereas the estab­
lishment of a symbolic universe presupposes theoretical reflec­
tion on the part of somebody (to whom the world or, more 
specifically, the institutional order appeared problematic), 
everybody may 'inhabit' that universe in a taken-f
or-granted 
attitude. If the institutional order is to be taken for granted in 
its totality as a meaningful whole, it must be legitimated by 
'placement' in a symbolic universe. But, other things being 
equal, this universe itself does not require further legitimation. 
To begin with, it was the institutional order, not the symbolic 
universe, that appeared p{oblematic and to which, conse­
quently, theorizing was addressed. For example, returning to 
the previous illustration of kinship legitimation, once the 
institution of cousinship is 'located' in a cosmos of mytho­
logical cousins, it is no longer a simple matter of social f
act 
without any 'additional' significance. The mythology itself, 
however, may be held to naively without theoretical reflection 
about it. 
Only af
ter a symbolic universe is objectivated as a 'first' 
122 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
product of theoretical thought does the possibility of syste­
matic reflection about the nature of 
that universe arise. Whereas 
the symbolic universe legitimates the institutional order on 
the highest level of generality, theorizing about the symbolic 
universe may be described as, so to speak, legitimation to the 
second degree. All legitimations, f
rom the simplest pre­
theoretical legitimations of discrete institutionalized meanings 
to the cosmic establishments of symbolic universes, may, in 
turn, be described as machineries of universe-maintenance. 
These, it will readily be seen, require a good deal of conceptual 
sophistication f
rom the beginning. 
Obviously there are difficulties in drawing firm lines 
between 'naive' and 'sophisticated' in concrete instances. The 
analytic distinction, however, is useful even in such instances, 
because it draws attention to the question of the extent to 
which a symbolic universe is taken f
or granted. In this respect, 
of course, the analytic problem is similar to the one we have 
· already encountered in our discussion of legitimation. There 
are various levels of the legitimation of symbolic universes 
just as there are of the legitimation of institutions, except that 
the f
ormer cannot be said to descend to the pre-theoretical 
level, f
or the obvious reason that a symbolic universe is itself 
a theoretical phenomenon and remains so even if naively held 
to. 
As in the case of institutions, the question arises as to the 
circumstances under which it becomes necessary to legitimate 
symbolic universes by means of specific conceptual machineries 
of universe-maintenance. And again the answer is similar to 
the one given in the case of institutions. Specific procedures 
of universe-maintenance become necessary when the symbolic 
universe has become a problem. As long as this is not the 
case, the symbolic universe is self
-maintaining, that is, self
­
legitimating by the sheer f
acticity of its objective existence 
in the society in question. One may conceive of a society in 
which this would be possible. Such a society would be a harm­
onious, self
-enclosed, perf
ectly functioning 'system'. Actually, 
no such society exists. Because of the inevitable tensions of 
the processes of institutionalization, and by the very f
act that 
all social phenomena are constructions produced historically 
through human activity, no society is totally taken for granted 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
and so, a fortiori, is no symbolic universe. Every symbolic 
universe is incipiently problematic. The question, then, is the 
degree to which it has become problematic. 
An intrinsic problem, similar to the one we discussed in 
connexion with tradition in general, presents itself with the 
process of transmission of the symbolic universe f
rom one 
generation to another. Socialization is never completely suc­
cessf
ul. Some individuals 'inhabit' the transmitted universe 
more definitely than others. Even among the more or less 
accredited 'inhabitants', there will always be idiosyncratic 
variations in the way they conceive of the universe. Precisely 
because the symbolic universe cannot be experienced as such 
in everyday life, but transcends the latter by its very nature, it 
is not possible to 'teach' its meaning in the straightf
orward 
manner in which one can teach the meanings of everyday life. 
Children's questions about the symbolic universe have to be 
answered in a more complicated way than their questions 
about the institutional realities of everyday lif
e. The questions 
of idiosyncratic adults require f
urther conceptual elaboration. 
In the previous example, the meaning of cousinhood is con­
tinually represented by flesh-and-blood cousins playing cousin 
roles in the experienced routines of everyday lif
e. Human 
cousins are empirically available. Divine cousins, alas, are not. 
This constitutes an intrinsic problem f
or the pedagogues of 
divine cousinhood. Mutatis mutandis, the same is true of the 
transmission of other symbolic universes. 
This intrinsic problem becomes accentuated if deviant ver­
sions of the symbolic universe come to be shared by groups of 
'inhabitants'. In that case, f
or reasons evident in the nature of 
objectivation, the deviant version congeals into a reality in its 
own right, which, by its existence within the society, challenges 
the reality status of the symbolic universe as originally con­
stituted. The group that has objectivated this deviant reality 
becomes the carrier of an alternative definition of reality.81 It 
is hardly necessary to belabour the point that such heretical 
groups posit not only a theoretical threat to the symbolic uni­
verse, but a practical one to the institutional order legitimated 
by the symbolic universe in question. The repressive pro­
cedures customarily employed against such groups by the 
custodians of the 'official' definitions of reality need not con-
124 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
cern us in this context. What is important f
or our considera­
tions is the need f
or such repression to be legitimated, which, 
of course, implies the setting in motion of various conceptual 
machineries designed to maintain the 'official' universe :::
gainst 
the heretical challenge. 
Historically, the problem of heresy has of
ten been the first 
impetus for the systematic theoretical conceptualization of 
symbolic universes. The development of Christian theological 
thought as a result of a series of heretical challenges to the 
'official' tradition provides excellent historical illustrations f
or 
this process. As in all theorizing, new theoretical implications 
within the tradition itself appear in the course of this process, 
and the tradition itself is pushed beyond its original f
orm in 
new conceptualizations. For instance, the precise Christo 
logical 
f
ormulations of the early church councils were necessitated 
not by the tradition itself but by the heretical challenges to it. 
As these f
ormulations were elaborated, the tradition was 
maintained and expanded at the same time. Thus there 
emerged, among other innovations, a theoretical conception of 
the Trinity that was not only unnecessary but actually non­
existent in the early Christian community. In other words, the 
symbolic universe is not only legitimated but also modified by 
the conceptual machineries constructed to ward off the chal­
lenge of heretical groups within a society. 
A major occasion f
or 
the 
development 
of universe­
maintaining conceptualization arises when a society is con­
f
ronted with another society having a greatly different history. 82 
The problem posed by such a conf
rontation is typically sharper 
than that posed by intra-societal heresies because here there 
is an alternative symbolic universe with an 'official' tradition 
whose taken-f
or-granted objectivity is equal to one's own. It 
is much less shocking to the reality status of 
one's own universe 
to have to deal with minority groups of deviants, whose con­
trariness is ipso facto defined as f
olly or wickedness, than to 
conf
ront another society that views one's own definitions of 
reality as ignorant, mad or downright evil,83 It is one thing to 
have some individuals around, even if they band together as 
a minority group, who cannot or will not abide by the institu­
tional rules of 
cousinhood. It is quite another thing to meet an 
entire society that has never heard of 
these rules, perhaps does 
125 


THE SoCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
not even have a word f
or 'cousin', and that nevertheless seems 
to get along very well as a going concern. The alternative 
universe presented by the other society must be met with the 
best possible reasons f
or the superiority of one's own. This 
necessity requires a conceptual machinery of considerable 
sophistication. 
The appearance of an alternative symbolic universe poses a 
threat because its very existence demonstrates empirically 
that one's own universe is less than inevitable. As anyone can 
see now, it is possible to live in this world without the institu­
tion of cousinhood af
ter all. And it is possible to deny or even 
mock the gods of cousinhood without at once causing the 
downf
all of the heavens. This shocking f
act must be accounted 
for theoretically, if 
nothing more. Of course it may also happen 
that the alternative universe has a missionary appeal. Indivi­
duals or groups within one's own society might be tempted to 
'emigrate' f
rom the traditional universe or, even more serious 
a danger, to change the old order in the image of the new. It 
is easy to imagine, for example, how the advent of the patriar­
chal Greeks must have upset the universe of the matriarchal 
societies then existing along the eastern Mediterranean. The 
Greek universe must have had considerable appeal f
or the 
henpecked males of these societies, and we know that the 
Great Mother made quite an impression on the Greeks them­
selves. Greek mythology is full of the conceptual elaborations 
that proved necessary to take care of this problem. 
It is important to stress that the conceptual machineries of 
universe-maintenance are themselves products of social acti­
vity, as are all forms of legitimation, and can only rarely be 
understood apart f
rom the other activities of the collectivity in 
question. Specifically, the success of particular conceptual 
machineries is related to the power possessed by those who 
operate them. 
84 The conf
rontation of alternative symbolic 
universes implies a problem of power - which of 
the conflicting 
definitions of reality will be 'made to stick' in the society. Two 
societies confronting each other with conflicting universes 
will both develop conceptual machineries designed to maintain 
their respective universes. From the point of view of intrinsic 
plausibility the two forms of conceptualization may seem to 
the outside observer to offer little choice. Which of the two 
u6 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
will win, however, will depend more on the power than on the 
theoretical ingenuity of the respective legitimators. It is pos­
sible to imagine that equally sophisticated Olympian and 
Chthonic mystagogues met together in ecumenical consulta­
tions, discussing the merits of their respective universes sine ira 
et studio, but it is more likely that the issue was decided on the 
less rarefied level of military might. The historical outcome of 
each clash of gods was determined by those who· wielded the 
better weapons rather than those who had the better argu­
ments. The same, of course, may be said of intrasocietal con­
flicts of this kind. He who has the bigger stick has the better 
chance of imposing his definitions of reality. This is a saf
e 
assumption to make with regard to any larger collectivity, 
although there is always the possibility of politically dis­
interested theoreticians convincing each other without re­
course to the cruder means of persuasion. 
The conceptual machineries that maintain symbolic uni­
verses always entail the systematization of cognitive and 
normative legitimations, which were already present in the 
society in a more naive mode, and which crystallized in the 
symbolic universe in question. In other words, the material 
out of which universe-maintaining legitimations are con­
structed is mostly a further elaboration, on a higher level of 
theoretical integration, of the legitimations of the several ins­
titutions. Thus there is usually a continuity between the 
explanatory and exhortatory schemes, which serve as legitima­
tions on the lowest theoretical level, and the imposing intellec­
tual constructions that expound the cosmos. The relationship 
between cognitive and normative conceptualizations, here as 
elsewhere, is empirically fluid ; normative conceptualizations 
always imply certain cognitive presuppositions. The analytic 
distinction is usef
ul, however, especially because it draws 
attention to varying degrees of diff
erentiation between these 
two conceptual spheres. 
It would be obviously absurd to attempt here a detailed 
discussion of 
the diff
erent conceptual machineries of universe­
maintenance that are historically available to us. 85 But a few 
remarks 
about 
some 
conspicuous 
types 
of conceptual 
machineries are in order - mythology, theology, philosophy 
and science. Without proposing an evolutionary scheme f
or 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
such types, it is safe to say that mythology represents the most 
archaic form of universe-maintenance, as indeed it represents 
the most archaic form of legitimation generally.86 Very likely 
mythology is a necessary phase in the development of human 
thought as such. 
8 7  In any case, the oldest universe-maintaining 
conceptualizations available to us are mythological in form. 
For our purposes, it is sufficient to define mythology as a con­
ception of reality that posits the pngoing penetration of the 
world of everyday experience by sacred forces. 
88 Such a con­
ception naturally entails a high degree of continuity between 
social and cosmic order, and between all their respective legiti­
mations;89 all reality appears as made of one cloth. 
Mythology as a conceptual machinery is closest to the naive 
level of 
the symbolic universe - the level on which there is the 
least necessity for theoretical universe-maintenance beyond 
the actual positing of the universe in question as an objective 
reality. This explains the historically recurrent phenomenon 
of 
inconsistent mythological traditions continuing to exist side 
by side without theoretical integration. Typically, the incon­
sistency is felt only after the traditions have become proble­
matic and some sort of integration has already taken place. 
The 'discovery' of such inconsistency (or, if one prefers, its ex 
post 
facto assumption) is usually made by the specialists in the 
tradition, who are also the most common integrators of the 
discrete traditional themes. Once the need for integration is 
felt, the consequent mythological reconstructions may have 
considerable theoretical sophistication. The example of 
Homer may suffice to make this point. 
Mythology is also close to the naive level in that, although 
there are specialists in the mythological tradition, their know­
ledge is not far removed from what is generally known. Initia­
tion into the tradition administered by these specialists may be 
difficult in extrinsic ways. It may be limited to select candi­
dates, to special occasions or times, and it may involve arduous 
ritual preparation. It is, however, rarely difficult in terms of 
the intrinsic qualities of 
the body of knowledge itself, which is 
not difficult to acquire. To safeguard the specialists' mono­
polistic claim the non-accessibility of their lore must be ins­
titutionally established. That is, a 'secret' is posited, and an 
intrinsically exoteric body of knowledge is institutionally 
us 
SociETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
defined in esoteric terms. A brief look at the 'public relationŬ' 
of contemporary coteries of theoreticians will reveal that this 
ancient legerdemain is far from dead today. All the sŭe,. theµe 
are important sociological differences bŮtwen societies m 
which all universe-maintaining conceptuahzattons are mytho-
logical and societies in which they are not. . 
. 
. 
More elaborate mythologicůl systems stnve to ehmmate 
inconsistencies and maintain the mythological universe in 
theoretically integrated terms. Such 'canonica~' Űythologies, 
as it were, go over into theological conceptuahzatton prűpr. 
For our present purposes, theological thoug?t rnaŲ be distln­
guished from its mythologic¶l predecessoų SI·ply m term¸ of 
its greater degree of theoretical systemauzauon. Theological 
concepts are further removed from the naive level. The cos¹os 
may still be conceived of 
in termŴ of 
the sacred forces or bemgs 
of the old mythology, but these sacred entities have been 
removed to a greater distance. Mythological thought operates 
within the continuity between the human world aŵd the world 
of the gods. Thulogical thought serves. to ·:diate beºwen 
these two worlds, precisely because thetr ongmal conunwty 
now appears broken. With the transition. 
from mythology to 
theology, everyday life appears less ongomgly peneŶated by 
sacred forces. The body of theological knowledge IS, conse­
quently, further removed from thŷ ge_neµal stock ofkŸowledge 
of the society and thus becomes mtrmstcal§y Źore. diffiźult to 
acquire. Even where it is not dliberate}y mst.ItutlŻn|żd as 
esoteric, it remains 'secret' by virtue of lts uruntelhgibdlty to 
the general populace. This has the further consequence th¶t 
the populace may remain relatively unaffected by the sophi­
sticated universe-maintaining theories concocted by the theo­
logical specialists. The coexistence of naive mythology .aŽong 
the masses and a sophisticated theology among an ehte žf 
theoreticians, both serving to maintain the same sy_mbolſc 
universe, is a frequent historical phenomenoƀ. Only With thƁs 
phenomenon in mind, for example, is it posstble to call tradi­
tional societies of the Far East 'Buddhist', or, for that matter, 
to call medieval society 'Christian'. 
Theology is paradigmatic for the later philosƂphical and 
scientific conceptualizations of the cosmos. While theolƃy 
may be closer to mythology in the religious contents of 1ts 
129 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
definitions of reality, it is closer to the later secularized con­
ceptualizations in its social location. Unlike mythology, the 
other three 
historically 
dominant 
forms 
of conceptual 
machinery became the property of specialist elites, whose 
bodies of knowledge were increasingly removed from the 
common knowledge of the society at large. Modern science is 
an extreme step in this development, and in the secularization 
and sophistication of universe-maintenance. Science not only 
completes the removal of the sacred from the world of every­
day lif
e, but removes universe-maintaining knowledge as such 
from that world. Everyday lif
e becomes bereft of both sacred 
legitimation and the sort of theoretical intelligibility that 
would link it with the symbolic universe in its intended totality. 
Put more simply, the 'lay' member of society no longer knows 
how his universe is to be conceptually maintained, although, 
of course, he still knows who the specialists of universe­
maintenance are presumed to be. The interesting problems 
posed by this situation belong to an empirical sociology of 
knowledge of contemporary society and cannot be further 
pursued in this context. 
It goes without 
ºaying that the types of conceptual machinery 
appear historically in innumerable modifications and com­
binations, and that the types we have discussed are not neces­
sarily exhaustive. But two applications of universe-maintaining 
conceptual machinery still remain to be discussed in the con­
text of general theory : therapy and nihilation. 
Therapy entails the application of conceptual machinery to 
ensure that actual or potential deviants stay within the institu­
tionalized definitions of reality, or, in other words, to prevent 
the 'inhabitants' of a given universe from 'emigrating'. It does 
this by applying the legitimating apparatus to individual 
'cases'. Since, as we have seen, every society faces the danger 
of individual deviance, we may assume that therapy in one 
form or another is a global social phenomenon. Its specific 
institutional arrangements, from exorcism to psycho-analysis, 
f
rom pastoral care to personnel counselling programmes, be­
long, of course, under the category of social control. What 
interests us here, however, is the conceptual aspect of therapy. 
Since therapy must concern itself with deviations from the 
'official' definitions of reality, it must develop a conceptual 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
machinery to account f
or such deviations and to maintain the 
realities thus challenged. This requires a body of knowledge 
that include a theory of deviance, a diagnostic apparatus, and 
a conceptual system f
or the 'cure of souls'. 
For example, in a collectivity that has institutionalized 
military homosexuality the stubbornly heterosexual individual 
is a sure candidate f
or therapy, not only because his sexual 
interests constitute an obvious threat to the combat efficiency 
of his unit of warrior-lovers, but also because his deviance is 
psychologically subversive to the others' spontaneous virility. 
After all, some of them, perhaps 'subconsciously', might be 
tempted to f
ollow his example. On a more fundamental level, 
the deviant's conduct challenges the societal reality as such, 
putting in question its taken-f
or-granted cognitive ('virile 
men by nature love one another') and normative ('virile men 
should love one another') operating procedures. Indeed, the 
deviant probably stands as a living insult to the gods, who love 
one another in the heavens as their devotees do on earth. Such 
radical 
deviance 
requires 
therapeutic 
practice 
soundly 
grounded in therapeutic theory. There must be a theory of 
deviance (a 'pathology', that is) that accounts for this shocking 
condition (say, by positing demonic possession). There must 
be a body of diagnostic concepts (say, a symptomatology, with 
appropriate skills f
or applying it in trials by ordeal), which 
optimally not only permits precise specification of 
acute condi­
tions, but also detection of 'latent hetero-sexuality' and the 
prompt adoption of preventive measures. Finall», there must 
be conceptualization of the curative process 1tself (say, a 
catalogue of exorcizing techniques, each with an adequate 
theoretical f
oundation). 
Such a conceptual machinery permits its therapeutic appli­
cation by the appropriate specialists, and may also be inter­
nalized by the individual afflicted with the deviant condition. 
Internalization in itself will have therapeutic efficacy. In our 
example, the conceptual machinery may be so designed as to 
arouse guilt in the individual (say, a 'heterosexual panic'), a 
not too difficult f
eat if his primary socialization has been even 
minimally successf
ul. Under the pressure of this guilt, the 
individual will come to accept subjectively the conceptualiza­
tion of his condition with which the therapeutic practitioners 
131 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
conf
ront him ; he develops 'insight', and the diagnosis becomes 
subjectively real to him. The conceptual machinery may be 
further developed to allow conceptualization (and thus con­
ceptual liquidation) of any doubts regarding the therapy f
elt 
by either therapist or 'patient'. For instance, there may be a 
theory of 'resistance' to account f
or the doubts of the latter 
and a theory of 'counter-transf
erence' to account f
or those of 
the former. Successful therapy establishes a symmetry be­
tween the conceptual machinery and its subjective appro­
priation in the individual's consciousness ; it re-socializes the 
deviant into the objective reality of the symbolic universe of 
the society. There is, of course, considerable subjective satis­
f
action in such a return to 'normalcy'. The individual may 
now return to the amorous embrace of 
his platoon commander 
in the happy knowledge that he has 'found himself', and that 
he is right once more in the eyes of the gods. 
Therapy uses a conceptual machinery to keep everyone 
within the universe in question. Nihilation, in its turn, uses a 
similar machinery to liquidate conceptually everything outside 
the same universe. This procedure may also be described as a 
kind of negative legitimation. Legitimation maintains the 
reality of the socially constructed universe ; nihilation denies 
the reality of whatever phenomena or interpretations of 
phenomena do not fit into that universe. This may be done in 
two ways. First, deviant phenomena may be given a negative 
ontological status, with or without a therapeutic intent. The 
nihilating application of the conceptual machinery is most 
of
ten used with individuals or groups f
oreign to the society in 
question and thus ineligible f
or therapy. The conceptual 
operation here is rather simple. The threat to the social 
definitions of reality is neutralized by assigning an inferior 
ontological status, and thereby a not-to-be-taken-seriously 
cognitive status, to all definitions existing outside the symbolic 
universe. Thus, the threat of neighbouring anti-homosexual 
groups can be conceptually liquidated for our homosexual 
society by looking upon these neighbours as less than human, 
congenitally bef
uddled about the right order of things, 
dwellers in a hopeless cognitive darkness. The fundamental 
syllogism goes as f
ollows : The neighbours are a tribe of bar­
barians. The neighbours are anti-homosexual. Theref
ore, 
132 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
their anti-homosexuality is barbaric nonsense, not to be taken 
seriously by reasonable men. The same conceptual procedure 
may, of course, also be applied to deviants within the society. 
Whether one then proceeds from nihilation to therapy, or 
rather goes on to liquidate physically what one has liquidated 
conceptually, is a practical question of policy. The material 
power of the conceptually liquidated group will be a not 
insignificant f
actor in most cases. Sometimes, alas, circum­
stances force one to remain on f
riendly terms with barbarians. 
Second, nihilation involves the more ambitious attempt to 
account f
or all deviant definitions of 
reality in terms o
f
 concepts 
belonging to one's own universe. In a theological f
rame of 
ref
erence, this entails the transition from heresiology to apolo­
getics. The deviant conceptions are not merely assigned a 
negative status, they are grappled with theoretically in detail. 
The final goal of this procedure is to incorporate the deviant 
conceptions within one·s own universe, and thereby to liqui­
date them ultimately. The deviant conceptions must, there­
f
ore, be translated into concepts derived f
rom one's own 
universe. In this manner, the negation of one's universe is 
subtly changed into an affirmation of it. The presupposition is 
always that the negator does not really know what he is saying. 
His statements become meaningful only as they are translated 
into more 'correct' terms, that is, terms deriving f
rom the 
universe he negates. For example, our homosexual theoreti­
cians may argue that all men are by nature homosexual. Those 
who deny this, by virtue of being possessed by demons or 
simply because they are barbarians, are denying their own 
nature. Deep down within themselves, they know that this is 
so. One need, therefore, only search their statements caref
ully 
to discover the def
ensiveness and bad faith of their position. 
Whatever they say in this matter can thus be translated into an 
affirmation of the homosexual universe, which they ostensibly 
negate. In a theological frame of reference the same procedure 
demonstrates that the devil unwittingly glorifies God, that all 
unbelief is but unconscious dishonesty, even that the atheist 
is reall
y a believer. 
The therapeutic and nihilating applications of conceptual 
machineries are inherent in the symbolic universe as such. If 
the symbolic universe is to comprehend all reality, nothing 
133 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
can be allowed to remain outside its conceptual scope. In 
principle, at any rate, its definitions of 
reality must encompass 
the totality of being. The conceptual machineries by which 
this totalization is attempted vary historically in their degree 
of sophistication. In nuce they appear as soon as a symbolic 
universe has been crystalliz
ed. 
Social Organization for Universe-Maintenance 
Because they are historical products of human activity, all 
socially constructed universes change, and the change is 
brought about by the concrete actions of human beings. If 
one 
gets absorbed in the intricacies of the conceptual machineries 
by which any specific universe is maintained, one may f
orget 
this fundamental sociological fact. Reality is socially defined. 
But the definitions are always embodied, that is, concrete indi­
viduals and groups of individuals serve as definers of reality. 
To understand the state of the socially constructed universe 
at any given time, or its change over time, one must understand 
the social organization that permits the definers to do their 
defining. Put a little crudely, it is essential to keep pushing 
questions about the historically available conceptualizations of 
reality f
rom the abstract 'What?' to the sociologically concrete 
'Says who?'90 
As we have seen, the specialization of knowledge and the 
concomitant organization of personnel for the administration 
of the specialized bodies of knowledge develop as a result of 
the division of labour. It is possible to conceive of an early 
stage of this development in which there is no competition 
between the diff
erent experts. Each area of expertise is de­
fined by the pragmatic f
acts of the division of labour. The 
hunting expert will not claim fishing expertise and will thus 
have no ground f
or competing with the one who does. 
As more complex f
orms of knowledge emerge and an eco­
nomic surplus is built up, experts devote themselves f
ull-time 
to the subjects of their expertise, which, with the development 
of conceptual machineries, may become increasingly removed 
134 
____
 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALIT
_!_ 
---
·
----
from the pragmatic necessities of everyday lif
e. Experts in 
these rarefied bodies of knowledge lay claim to a novel status. 
They are not only experts in this or that sector of the societal 
stock of knowledge, they claim ultimate jurisdiction over that 
stock of knowledge in its totality. They are, literally, universal 
experts. This does not mean that they claim to zow e¬er­­
thing, but rather that they claim to know the ulumate stgm­
ficance of what everybody knows and does. Other men may 
continue to stake out particular sectors of reality, but they 
claim expertise in the ultimate definitions of reality as such. 
This stage in the development of knowledge has a number 
of consequences. The first, which we have already discussed, 
is the emergence of pure theory. Because the universal experts 
operate on a level of considerable abstraction f
rom the vicissi­
tudes of everyday lif
e, both others and they themselves may 
conclude that their theories have no relation whatever to the 
ongoing lif
e of the society, but exist in a sory of Platonic 
heaven of ahistorical and asocial ideation. This ts, of course, 
an illusion, but it can have great socio-historical potency, by 
virtue of the relationship between the reality-defining and 
reality-producing process. 
. 
. 
. 
A second consequence is a strengthening of tradiuonahsm 
in the institutionalized actions thus legitimated, that is, a 
strengthening of the inherent tendency of institutionalization 
towards inertia.91 Habitualization and institutionalization in 
themselves limit the flexibility of human actions. Institutions 
tend to persist unless they become 'problematic'. Ultimate 
legitimations inevitably strengthen this tendency. The more 
abstract the legitimations are, the less likely they are to be 
modified in accordance with changing pragmatic exigencies. 
If there is a tendency to go on as before anyway, the tendency 
is obviously strengthened by having excellent reasons for doing 
so. This means that institutions may persist even when, to an 
outside observer, they have lost their original functionality or 
practicality. One does certain things not because they wor{, 
but because they are right - right, that is, in terms ®f the ulu­
mate definitions of reality promulgated by the uruversal ex-
perts.82 
. 
. 
The emergence of f
ull-time personnel f
or uruverse-mam­
taining legitimation also brings with it occasions f
or social 
135 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
conflict. Some of this conflict is between experts and practi­
tioners. The latter, for reasons that need not be belaboured;, 
may come to resent the experts' grandiose pretensions and the 
concrete social privileges that accompany them. What is likely 
to be particularly galling is the experts' claim to know the 
ultimate significance of the practitioners' activity better than 
the practitioners themselves. Such rebellions on the part of 
'laymen' may lead to the emergence of rival definitions of 
reality and, eventually, to the appearance of new experts in 
charge of the new definitions. Ancient India provides us with 
some of the best historical illustrations of this. The Brahmans, 
qua experts in ultimate reality, succeeded to an astounding 
degree in impressing their definitions of reality upon society 
at large. Whatever may have been its origins, it was as a Brah­
man construction that the caste system expanded over a period 
of centuries until it covered most of the Indian subcontinent. 
Indeed, the Brahmans were invited by one ruling prince af
ter 
another to serve as 'social engineers' f
or the setting up of the 
system in new territories (partly because the system was seen 
as identical with higher civilization, partly also, no doubt, be­
cause the princes understood its immense capacity f
or social 
control). The Code of Manu gives us an excellent idea of both 
the Brahman design f
or society and the very mundane advan­
tages that accrued to the Brahmans in consequence of being 
accepted as the cosinically ordained designers. It was inevit­
able, however, that conflict would ensue between the theo­
reticians and the practitioners of power in such a situation. 
The latter were represented by the Kshatriyas, the Inilitary 
and princely caste. The epic literature of ancient India, the 
Mahabharata and the Ramayana, give eloquent witness to this 
conflict. Not accidentally the two great theoretical rebellions 
against the Brahman universe, Jainism and Buddhism, had 
their social locations in the Kshatriya caste. Needless to say, 
both the Jain and the Buddhist re-definitions of reality pro­
duced their own expert personnel, as was probably also the 
case with the epic poets who challenged the Brahman universe 
in a less comprehensive and less sophisticated manner.93 
This brings us to another, equally important, possibility of 
conflict - that between rival coteries of experts. As long as 
theories continue to have immediate pragmatic applications, 
SoCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
---------------
what rivalry may exist is fairly amenable to settlement by 
means of pragmatic testing. There may be competing theories 
of boar-hunting in which rival coteries of hunting experts 
develop vested interests. The question can be decided with 
relative ease by seeing which theory is most conducive to kill­
ing the most boars. No such possibility exists f
or deciding 
between, say, a polytheistic and a henotheistic theory of the 
universe. The respective theoreticians are f
orced to substitute 
abstract argumentation for pragmatic testing. By its very 
nature such argumentation does not carry the inherent convic­
tion of pragmatic success. What is convincing to one man may 
not be to another. We cannot really blame such theoreticians 
if they resort to various sturdier supports f
or the f
rail power of 
mere argument - such as, say, getting the authorities to employ 
armed Inight to enforce one argument against its competitors. 
In other words, definitions of reality may be enf
orced by the 
police. This, incidentally, need not mean that such definitions 
will remain less convincing than those accepted 'voluntarily' -
power in society includes the power to determine decisive 
socialization processes and, theref
ore, the power to produce 
reality. In any case, highly abstract symbolizations (that is, 
theories greatly removed f
rom the concrete experience of 
everyday life) are validated by social rather than empirical 
support.94 It is possible to say that in this manner a pseudo­
pragmatism is reintroduced. The theories may again be said 
to be convincing because they work 
- work, that is, in the 
sense of 
having become standard, taken-f
or-granted knowledge 
in the society in question. 
These considerations imply that there will always be a 
social-structural base f
or competition between rival definitions 
of reality and that the outcome of the rivalry will be aff
ected, 
if not always determined outright, by the development of this 
base. It is quite possible f
or abstruse theoretical f
ormulations 
to be concocted in near-total isolation from the broad move­
ments in the social structure, and in such cases competition 
between rival experts may occur in a sort of societal vacuum. 
For instance, two coteries of eremetical dervishes may go on 
disputing about the ultimate nature of the universe in the 
Inidst of the desert, with nobody on the outside being in the 
least interested in the dispute. As soon, however, as one or the 
137 


THE SociAL CoNSTRUCTION oF REALITY 
other of these viewpoints gets a hearing in the surrounding 
society, it will be largely extra-theoretical interests that will 
decide the outcome of the rivalry. Different social groups will 
have different affinities with the competing theories and will, 
subsequently, become 'carriers' of the latter.95 Thus dervish 
theory A may appeal to the upper stratum and dervish theory 
B to the middle stratum of the society in question, f
or reasons 
far removed f
rom the passions that animated the original in­
ventors of these theories. The competing coteries of experts 
will then come to attach themselves to the 'carrier' groups, and 
their subsequent f
ate will depend on the outcome of whatever 
conflict led these groups to adopt the respective theories. Rival 
definitions of reality are thus decided upon in the sphere of 
rival social interests whose rivalry is in turn 'translated' into 
theoretical terms. Whether the rival experts and their respec­
tive supporters are 'sincere' in their subjective relationship to 
the theories in question is of only secondary interest f
or a 
sociological understanding of these processes. 
When not only theoretical but practical competition arises 
between groups of experts dedicated to diff
erent ultimate defi­
nitions of reality, the de-pragmatization of theory is reversed 
and the pragmatic potency of the theories in question becomes 
an extrinsic one ; that is, a theory is 'demonstrated' to be prag­
matically superior not by virtue of its intrinsic qualities, but 
by its applicability to the social interests of the group that has 
become its 'carrier'. There is considerable historical variability 
in the social organization of theoretical experts resulting f
rom 
this. While it is obviously impossible to give an exhaustive 
· typology here, it will be useful to look at some of the more 
general types. 
There is first of all, perhaps paradigmatically, the possibility 
of the universal experts holding an eff
ective monopoly over 
all ultimate definitions of reality in a society. Such a situation 
may be regarded as paradigmatic because there is good reason 
f
or thinking that it is typical of the earlier phases of human 
history. Such a monopoly means that a single symbolic tradi­
tion maintains the universe in question. To be in the society 
then implies acceptance of this tradition. The experts in the 
tradition are recognized as such by virtually all members of 
the society and have no eff
ective competitors to deal with. All 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
-----------
primitive societies empirically open to our inspection seem to 
fall under this type, and, with some modifications, most 
archaic civilizations do too.96 This does not imply that such 
societies have no sceptics, that everyone has without exception 
fully internalized the tradition, but rather that what scepticism 
there is has not been socially organized to offer a challenge to 
the upholders of the 'official' tradition.97 
In such a situation the monopolistic tradition and its expert 
administrators are sustained by a unified power structure. 
Those who occupy the decisive power positions are ready to 
use their power to impose the traditional definitions of reality 
on the population under their authority. Potentially competi­
tive conceptualizations of the universe are liquidated as soon 
as they appear - either physically destroyed ('whoever does 
not worship the gods must die') or integrated within the tradi­
tion itself (the universal experts argue that the competing 
pantheon Y is 'really' nothing but another aspect or nomen­
clature f
or the traditional pantheon X). In the latter case, if 
the experts succeed with their argument and the competition 
is liquidated by 'merger', as it were, the tradition becomes 
enriched and diff
erentiated. The competition may also be 
segregated within the society and thus made innocuous as f
ar 
as the traditional monopoly is concerned - f
or example, no 
member of the conquering or ruling group may worship gods 
of type Y, but the subjugated or lower strata may do so. The 
same protective segregation may be applied to foreigners or 
'guest peoples'.98 
Medieval Christendom (certainly not to be called primitive 
or archaic, but still a society with an eff
ective symbolic mono­
poly) provides excellent illustrations of all three liquidating 
procedures. Open heresy had to be physically destroyed, 
whether it was embodied in an individual (say, a witch) or a 
collectivity (say, the Albigensian community). At the same 
time, the Church, as the monopolistic guardian of 
the Christian 
tradition, was quite flexible in incorporating within that tradi­
tion a variety of f
olk beliefs and practices so long as these did 
not congeal into articulate, heretical challenges to the Christian 
universe as such. It did not matter if the peasants took one of 
their old gods, 'baptized' him as a Christian saint, and con­
tinued to tell the old stories and to celebrate the old f
easts 
139 


THE S ociAL CoNSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
associated with him. And certain competing definitions of 
reality at least could be segregated within Christendom with­
out being viewed as a threat to it. The most important case of 
this, of course, is that of the Jews, although similar situations 
also arose where Christians and Muslims were f
orced to live 
close to one another in times of peace. This sort of segregation, 
incidentally, also protected the Jewish and Muslim universes 
from Christian 'contamination'. As long as competing defini­
tions of reality can be conceptually and socially segregated as 
appropriate to straugers, and ipso facto as irrelevant to oneself
, 
it is possible to have f
airly f
riendly relations with these 
strangers. The trouble begins whenever the 'strangeness' is 
broken through and the deviant universe appears as a possible 
habitat for one's own people. At that point, the traditional 
experts are likely to call for the fire and the sword - or, 
alternatively, particularly if fire and sword tum out to be un­
available, to enter into ecumenical negotiations with the 
competitors. 
Monopolistic situations of this kind presuppose a high 
degree 
of social-structural stability, and are themselves 
structurally 
stabilizing. Traditional definitions of 
reality inhibit 
social change. Conversely, breakdown in the taken-f
or-granted 
acceptance of the monopoly accelerates social change. It 
should not surprise us, then, that a prof
ound affinity exists 
between those with an interest in maintaining established 
power positions and the personnel administering monopolistic 
traditions of universe-maintenance. In other words, conserva­
tive political f
orces tend to support the monopolistic claims of 
the universal expvrts, whose monopolistic organizations in 
tum tend to be politically conservative. Historically, of course, 
most of these monopolies have been religious. It is thus pos­
sible to say that Churches, understood as monopolistic com­
binations off
ull-time experts in a religious definition of 
reality, 
are inherently conservative once they have succeeded in 
establishing their monopoly in a given society. Conversely, 
ruling groups with a stake in the maintenance of the political 
status quo are inherently churchly in their religious orientation 
and, by the same token, suspicious of all innovations in the 
religious tradition.99 
Monopolistic situations may f
ail to be established or main-
SociETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
rained f
or a variety of historical reasons, both 'international' 
and 'domestic'. It is then possible for a struggle between 
competing traditions and their administrative personnel to 
continue for a long time. When a particular definition of reality 
comes to be attached to a concrete power interest, it may be 
called an ideology. 100 It should be stressed that this term has 
little utility if it is applied to the sort of monopolistic situation 
discussed above. It makes little sense, f
or example, to speak of 
Christianity as an ideology in the Middle Ages - even though 
it had obvious political uses for the ruling groups - f
or the 
simple reason that the Christian universe was 'inhabited' by 
everyone in medieval society, by the serf
s just as much as by 
their lords. In the period f
ollowing the Industrial Revolution, 
however, there is a certain justification in calling Christianity 
a bourgeois ideology, because the bourgeoisie used the Chris­
tian tradition and its personnel in its struggle against the new 
industrial working class, which in most European countries 
could no longer be rega5ded as 'inhabiting' the Christian uni­
verse. 101 It also makes little sense to use the term if two 
different definitions of reality conf
ront each other in inter­
societal contact - for example, if one spoke of the 'Christian 
ideology' of the Crusaders and the 'Muslim ideology' of the 
Saracens. The distinctiveness of ideology is rather that the 
same overall universe is interpreted in different ways, depend­
ing upon concrete vested interests within the society in ques­
tion. 
Frequently an ideology is taken on by a group because of 
specific theoretical elements that are conducive to its interests. 
For example, when an impoverished peasant group struggles 
against an urban merchant group that has financially enslaved 
it, it may rally around a religious doctrine that upholds the 
virtues of agrarian lif
e, condemns the money economy and its 
credit system as immoral, and generally decries the luxuries of 
urban living. The ideological 'gain' of such a doctrine for the 
peasants is obvious. Good illustrations of this may be found in 
the history of ancient Israel. It would be erroneous, however, 
to imagine that the relationship between an interest group and 
its ideology is always so logical. Every group engaged in social 
conflict requires solidarity. 
Ideologies generate solidarity. 
The choice of a particular ideology is not necessarily based on 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
its intrinsic theoretical elements, but may stem from a chance 
encounter. It is far from clear, for example, that it was intrinsic 
elements in Christianity that made the latter politically 'inter­
esting' to certain groups in the age of Constantine. It seems 
rather that Christianity (originally a lower-middle-class ideo­
logy if anything) was harnessed by powerful interests for 
political purposes with little relationship to its religious con­
tents. Something else might have served equally well -
Christianity just happened to be around at some crucial 
moments of decision. Of course, once the ideology is adopted 
by the group in question (more accurately, once the particular 
doctrine becomes the ideology of the group in question) it is 
modified in accordance with the interests it must now legiti­
mate. Txi¸ entails a process of selection and addition in regard 
to the ongmal body of theoretical propositions. But there is no 
reason to assume that these modifications have to affect the 
totality of the adopted doctrine. There may be large elements 
in an ideology that bear no particular relationship to the 
legitimated interests, but that are vigorously affirmed by the 
'carrier' group simply because it has committed itself to the 
ide?lƄgy. In .practice thiƅ may lead power holders to support 
ºheir Ideological experts m theoretical squabbles that are quite 
Irrelevant to their interests. Constantine's involvement in the 
Christological controversies of the time is a good case in 
point. 
It is important to bear in mind that most modern societies 
are pluralistic. This means that they have a shared core uni­
verse taken for granted as such, and different partial universes 
coexisting in a state of mutual accommodation. The latter 
probably have some ideological functions, but outright conflict 
between ideologies has been replaced by varying degrees of 
tolerance or even cooperation. Such a situation, brought about 
by a constellation of non-theoretical factors, presents the 
traditional experts with severe theoretical problems. Adminis­
tering a tradition with age-old monopolistic pretensions they 
Ɔav to find ways of theoretically legitimating the de-monopo­
hzat10n. thƇt has tawen place. Sometimes they take the option 
of conunumg to voice the old totalitarian claims as if nothing 
had happened, but very few people are likely to take these 
claims seriously. Whatever the experts do, the pluralistic 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
situation changes not only the social position of the traditional 
definitions of reality, but also the way in which these are held 
in the consciousness of individuals.w2 
The pluralistic situation presupposes an urban society with 
a highly developed division of labour, a concomitant high 
differentiation in the social structure and high economic sur­
plus. These conditions, which obviously prevail in modern 
industrial society, existed in at least certain sectors of earlier 
societies. The cities of the later Graeco-Roman period may 
serve as an example here. The pluralistic situation goes with 
conditions of rapid social change, indeed pluralism itself is an 
accelerating factor precisely because it helps to undermine the 
change-resistant efficacy of 
the traditional definitions of 
reality. 
Pluralism encourages both scepticism and innovation and is 
thus inherently subversive of the taken-for-granted reality of 
the traditional status quo. One can readily sympathize with the 
experts in the traditional definitions of reality when they think 
back nostalgically to the times when these definitions had a 
monopoly in the field. 
One historically important type of expert, possible in prin­
ciple in any of the situations just discussed, is the intellectual, 
whom we may define as an expert whose expertise is not 
wanted by the society at large. 103 This implies a redefinition of 
knowledge vis-a-vis the 'official' lore, that is, it implies more 
than just a somewhat deviant interpretation of the latter. The 
intellectual is thus, by definition, a marginal type. Whether he 
was first marginal and then became an intellectual (as, for 
example, in the case of many Jewish intellectuals in the 
modern West), or whether his marginality was the direct result 
of his intellectual aberrations (the case of the ostracized 
heretic), need not concern us here.101 In either case, his social 
marginality expresses his lack of theoretical integration within 
the universe of his society. He appears as the counter-expert 
in the business of defining reality. Like the 'official' expert, he 
has a design for society at large. But while the former's design 
is in tune with the institutional programmes, serving as their 
theoretical legitimation, the intellectual's exists in an institu­
tional vacuum, socially objectivated at best in a sub-society of 
fellow-intellectuals. The extent to which such a sub-society is 
capable of surviving obviously depends on structural con-
143 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
figurations in the larger society. It is safe to say that a certain 
degree of pluralism is a necessary condition. 
The intellectual has a number of historically interesting 
options open to him in his situation. He may withdraw into an 
intellectual sub-society, which may then serve as an emotional 
refuge and (more importantly) as the social base for the objecti­
vation of his deviant definitions of reality. In other words, the 
intellectual may feel 'at home' in the sub-society as he does 
not in the larger society, and at the same time be able sub­
jectively to maintain his deviant conceptions, which the larger 
society nihilates, because in the sub-society there are others 
who regard these as reality. He will then develop various pro­
cedures to protect the precarious reality of the sub-society 
from the nihilating threats from the outside. On the theoretical 
level, these procedures will include the therapeutic defences 
we have discussed previously. Practically, the most important 
procedure will be the limitation of all significant relationships 
to fellow-members of the sub-society. The outsider is avoided 
because he always embodies the threat of nihilation. The 
religious sect may be taken as the prototype for sub-societies 
of this kind.105 Within the sheltering community of the sect 
even the most wildly deviant conceptions take on the character 
of objective reality. Conversely, sectarian withdrawƈ! is typical 
of situations in which previously objectivated definitions of 
reality disintegrate, that is, become de-objectivated in the 
larger society. The details of these processes belong to a his­
torical sociology of religion, though it must be added that 
various secularized forms of sectarianism are a key charac­
teristic of intellectuals in modern pluralistic society. 
A historically very important option, of course, is revolution. 
Here the intellectual sets out to realize his design for society in 
society. It is impossible to discuss here the various forms this 
option has taken historically, 
106 but one important theoretical 
point must be made. Just as the withdrawing intellectual needs 
others to assist him in maintaining his deviant definitions of 
reality as reality, so the revolutionary intellectual needs others 
to confirm his deviant conceptions. This requirement is much 
more basic than the obvious fact that no conspiracy can suc­
ceed without organization. The revolutionary intellectual 
must have others who maintain for him the realit
y (that is, the 
144 
SOCIETY AS OBJECTIVE REALITY 
subjective plausibility in his own consciousness) of 
the revolu­
tionary ideology. All socially meaningful definitions of reality 
must be objectivated by social processes. Consequently, sub­
universes require sub-societies as their objectivating base, and 
counter-definitions of reality require counter-societies. Need­
less to add, any practical success of the revolutionary ideology 
will fortify the reality it possesses within the sub-society and 
within the consciousness of the sub-society's members. Its 
reality takes on massive proportions when entire social strata 
become its 'carriers'. The history of modern revolutionary 
movements affords many illustrations of the transformation of 
revolutionary intellectuals into 'official' legitimators following 
the victory of such movements.107 This suggests not only that 
there is considerable historical variability in the social career 
of revolutionary intellectuals, but that different options and 
combinations may occur within the biography of individuals 
as well. 
In the foregoing discussion we have emphasized the struc­
tural aspects in the soCial existence of universe-maintaining 
personnel. No genuine sociological discussion could do other­
wise. Institutions and symbolic universes are legitimated by 
living individuals, who have concrete social locations and con­
crete social interests. The history of legitimating theories is 
always part of the history of the society as a whole. No 'history 
of ideas' takes place in isolation from the blood and sweat of 
general history. But we must once again stress that this does 
not mean that these theories are nothing but reflections of 
'underlying' institutional processes ; the relationship between 
'ideas' and their sustaining social processes is always a dia­
lectical one. It is correct to say that theories are-concocted in 
order to legitimate already existing social institutions. But it 
also happens that social institutions are changed in order to 
bring them into conformity with already existing theories, 
that is, to make them more 'legitimate'. The experts in legiti­
mation may operate ·as theoretical justifiers of the status quo; 
they may also appear as revolutionary ideologists. Definitions 
of reality have self-fulfilling potency. Theories can be realized 
in history, even theories that were highly abstruse when they 
were first conceived by their inventors. Karl Marx brooding in 
the British Museum Reading Room has become a proverbial 
145 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
example of this historical possibility. Consequently, social 
change must always be understood as standing in a dialectical 
relationship to the 'history of ideas'. Both 'idealistic' and 
'materialistic' understandings of the relationship overlook 
this dialectic, and thus distort history. The same dialectic 
prevails in the overall transformations of symbolic universes 
that we have had occasion to look at. What remains socio­
logically essential is the recognition that all symbolic universes 
and all legitimations are human products ; their existence has 
its base in the lives of concrete individuals, and has no empiri­
cal status apart from these lives. 
Part Three 
Society as 
Subjective Reality 


1 .  Internalization of Reality 
Primar
y Socialization 
Since society exists as both objective and subjective reality, 
any adequate theoretical understanding of it must comprehend 
both these aspects. As we have already argued, these aspects 
receive their proper recognition if society is understood in 
terms of an ongoing dialectical process composed of the three 
moments of externalization, objectivation and internalization. 
As far as the societal phenomenon is concerned, these moments 
are not to be thought of as occurring in a temporal sequence. 
Rather society and each part of it are simultaneously charac­
terized by these three moments, so that any analysis in terms 
of only one or two of them f
alls short. The same is true of the 
individual member of society, who simultaneously externalizes 
his own being into the social world and internalizes it as an 
objective reality. In other words, to be in society is to parti­
cipate in its dialectic. 
The individual, however, is not born a member of society. 
He is born with a predisposition towards sociality, and he 
becomes a member of society. In the lif
e of every individual, 
therefore, there is a temporal sequence, in the course of which 
he is inducted into participation in the societal dialectic. The 
beginning point of this process is internalization : the imme­
diate apprehension or interpretation of an objective event as 
expressing meaning, that is, as a manif
estation of another's 
subjective processes which thereby becomes subjectively 
meaningful to myself. This does not mean that I understand 
the other adequately. I may indeed misunderstand him : he is 
laughing in a fit of hysteria, but I understand his laughter as 
expressing mirth. But his subjectivity is nevertheless objec­
tively available to me and becomes meaningful to me, whether 
or not there is congruence between his and my subjective 
process. Full congruence between the two subjective mean-
149 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
ings, and reciprocal knowledge of the congruence, pre­
supposes signification, as previously discussed. However, 
internalization in the general sense used here underlies 
both signification and its own more complex f
orms. More 
precisely, internalization in this general sense is the basis, first, 
f
or an understanding of one's f
ellowmen and, second, for 
the apprehension of the world as a meaningf
ul and sooial 
reality.1 
This apprehension does not result from autonomous crea­
tions of meaning by isolated individuals, but begins with the 
individual 'taking over' the world in which others already live. 
To be sure, the 'taking over' is in itself, in a sense, an original 
process for every human organism, and the world, once 'taken 
over', may be creatively modified or (less likely) even re­
created. In any case, in the complex f
orm of internalization, I 
not only 'understand' the other's momentary subjective pro­
cesses, I 'understand' the world in which he lives, and that 
world becomes my own. This presupposes that he and I share 
time in a more than ephemeral way and a comprehensive per­
spective, which links sequences of situations together inter­
subjectively. We now not only understand each other's 
definitions of shared situations, we define them reciprocally. 
A nexus of motivations is established between us and extends 
into the f
uture. Most importantly, there is now an ongoing 
mutual identification between us. We not only live in the same 
world, we participate in each other's being. 
Only when he has achieved this degree of internalization is 
an individual a member of society. The ontogenetic process 
by which this is brought about is socialization, which may 
thus be defined as the comprehensive and consistent induction 
of an individual into the objective world of a society or a sector 
of it. Primary socialization is the first socialization an indivi­
dual undergoes in childhood, through which he becomes a 
member of society. Secondary socialization is any subsequent 
process that inducts an already socialized individual into new 
sectors of the objective world of his society. We may leave 
aside here the special question of 
the acquisition ofknowledge 
about the objective world of societies other than the one of 
which we first became a member, and the process of inter­
nalizing such a world as reality - a process that exhibits, at 
SociETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
least superficially, certain similarities with both primary and 
secondary socialization, yet is structurally identical with 
neither.2 
It is at once evident that primary socialization is usually the 
most important one for an individual, and that the basic struc­
ture of all secondary socialization has to resemble that of 
primary socialization. Every individual is born into an objec­
tive·social structure within which he encounters the significant 
others who are in charge of his socialization. 
3 These signi­
ficant others are imposed upon him. Their definitions of his 
situation are posited f
or him as objective reality. He is thus 
born into not only an objective social &tructure but also an 
objective social world. The significant others who mediate 
this world to him modify it in the course of mediating it. They 
select aspects of it in accordance with their own location in 
the social structure, and also by virtue of their individual, bio­
graphically rooted idiosyncrasies. The social world is 'filtered' 
to the individual through this double selectivity. Thus the 
lower-class child not only absorbs a lower-class perspective on 
the social world, he absorbs it in the idiosyncratic coloration 
given it by his parents (or whatever other individuals are in 
charge of his primary socialization). The same lower-class 
perspective may induce a mood of contentment, resignation, 
bitter resentment, or seething rebelliousness. Consequently, 
the lower-class child will not only come to inhabit a world 
greatly diff
erent f
rom that of an upper-class child, but may do 
so in a manner quite different from the lower-class child next 
door.4 
It should hardly be necessary to add that primary socializa­
tion involves more than purely cognitive learning. It takes 
place under circumstances that are highly charged emotiomilly. 
Indeed, there is good reason to believe that without such emo­
tional attachment to the significant others the learning process 
would be difficult if not impossible. 
5 The child identifies with 
the significant others in a variety of emotional ways. Whatever 
they may be, internalization occurs only as identification 
occurs. The child takes on the significant others' roles and 
attitudes, that is, internalizes tíem and makes them his own. 
And by this identification with significant others the child 
becomes capable of identif
ying himself
, of 
acquiring a subjec-


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
tively coherent and plausible identity. In other words, the self 
is a reflected entity, reflecting the attitudes first taken by 
significant others towards it ;6 the individual becomes what he 
is addressed as by his significant others. This is not a one­
sided, mechanistic process. It entails a dialectic between 
identification by others and self
-identification, between objec­
tively assigned and subjectively appropriated identity. The 
dialectic, which is present each moment the individual identi
fies 
with his significant others, is, as it were, the particularization 
in individual lif
e of the general dialectic of society that has 
already been discussed. 
Although the details of this dialectic are, of course, of great 
importance f
or social psychology, it would exceed our present 
purpose if we were to follow up its implications for social­
psychological theory. 7 What is most important f
or our con­
siderations here is the f
act that the individual not only takes on 
the roles and attitudes of 
others, but in the same process takes 
on their world. Indeed, identity is objectively defined as loca­
tion in a certain world and can be subjectively appropriated 
only along with that world. Put diff
erently, all identifications 
take place within horizons that imply a specific social world. 
The child learns that he is what he is called. Every name imp­
lies a nomenclature, which in turn implies a designated social 
location. 8 To be given an identity involves being assigned a 
specific place in the world. As this identity is subjectively 
appropriated by the child ('I am John Smith'), so is the world 
to which this identity points. Subjective appropriation of 
identity and subjective appropriation of the social world are 
merely diff
erent aspects of the same process of internalization, 
mediated by the same significant others. 
Primary socialization creates in the child's consciousness a 
progressive abstraction from the roles and attitude of specific 
others to roles and attitudes in general. For example, in the 
internalization of norms there is a progression f
rom, 'Mummy 
is angry with me now' to, 'Mummy is angry with me whenever 
I spill the soup'. As additional significant others (f
ather, 
grandmother, older sister, and so on) support the mother's 
negative attitude towards soup-spilling, the generality of the 
norm is subjectively extended. The decisive step comes when 
the child recognizes that ever
ybod
y is against soup-spilling, 
SociETY AS SuBJECTIVE REALITY 
and the norm is generalized to, 'One does not spill soup' -
'one' being himself as part of a generality that includes, in 
principle, all of society in so far as it is significant to the child. 
This abstraction from the roles and attitudes of concrete 
significant others is called the generalized other.9 Its f
ormation 
within consciousness means that the individual now identifies 
not only with concrete others but with a generality of others, 
that is, with a society. Only by virtue of this generalized 
identification does his own self
-identification attain stability 
and continuity. He now has not only an identity vis-a-vis this or 
that significant other, but an identity in general, which is sub­
jectively apprehended as remaining the same no matter what 
others, significant or not, are encountered. This newly 
coherent identity incorporates within itself all the various 
internalized roles and attitudes - including, among many 
other things, the self
-identification as a non-spiller of soups. 
The formation within consciousness of the generalized 
other marks a decisive phase in socialization. It implies the 
internalization of society as such and of the objective reality 
established therein, and, at the same time, the subjective 
establishment of a coherent and continuous identity. Society, 
identity and reality are subjectively crystallized in the same 
process of internalization. This crystallization is concurrent 
with the internalization of language. Indeed, for reasons evi­
dent f
rom the f
oregoing observations on language, language 
constitutes both the most important content and the most 
important instrument of socialization. 
When the generalized other has been crystallized in con­
sciousness, a symmetrical relationship is established between 
objective and subjective reality. What is real 'outside' corre­
sponds to what is real 'within'. Objective reality can readily be 
'translated' into subjective reality, and vice versa. Language, 
of course, is the principal vehicle of this ongoing translating 
process in both directions. It should, however, be stressed 
that the symmetry between objective and subjective reality 
cannot be complete. The two realities correspond to each 
other, but they are not coextensive. There is always more 
objective reality 'available' than is actually internalized in any 
individual consciousness, simply because the contents of 
socialization are determined by the social distribution of 
153 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
knowledge. No individual internalizes the totality of what is 
objectivated as reality in his society, not even if 
the society and 
its world are relatively simple ones. On the other hand, there 
are always elements of subjective reality that have not ori­
ginated in socialization, such as the awareness of one's own 
body prior to and apart from any socially learned apprehension 
of it. Subjective biography is not f
ully social. The individual 
apprehends himself as a being both inside and outside society 
. w  
This implies that the symmetry between objective and sub­
jective reality is never a static, once-for-all state of affairs. It 
must always be produced and reproduced in actu. In other 
words, the relationship between the individual and the objec­
tive social world is like an ongoing balancing act. The anthro­
pological roots of this are, of course, the same as those we 
discussed in connexion with the peculiar position of man in 
the animal kingdom. 
In primary socialization there is no problem of identification. 
There is no choice of significant others. Society presents the 
candidate for socialization with a predefined set of significant 
others, whom he must accept as such with no possibility of 
opting for another arrangement. Hie Rhodus, hie salta. One 
must make do with the parents that fate has regaled one with. 
This unf
air disadvantage inherent in the situation of being a 
child has the obvious consequence that, although the child is 
not simply passive in the process of his socialization, it is the 
adults who set the rules of the game. The child can play the 
game with enthusiasm or with sullen resistance. But, alas, 
there is no other game around. This has an important corol­
lary. Since the child has no choice in the selection of his 
significant others, his identification with them is quasi-auto­
matic. For the same reason, his internalization of their parti­
cular reality is quasi-inevitable. The child does not internalize 
the world of his significant others as one of many possible 
worlds. He internalizes it as tlze world, the only existent and 
only conceivable world, the world tout court. It is for this 
reason that the world internalized in primary socialization is so 
much more firmly entrenched in consciousness than worlds 
internalized in secondary socializations. However much the 
oHiginal sense of inevitability may be weakeried in subsequent 
dtsenchantments, the recollection of a never-to-be-repeated 
154 
SociETY AS SuBJ ECTIVE REALITY 
certainty - the certainty of 
the first dawn of 
reality - still ad­
heres to the first world of childhood. Primary socialization 
thus accomplishes what (in hindsight, of course) may be seen 
as the most important confidence trick that society plays on 
the individual - to make appear as necessity what is in fact a 
bundle of contingencies, and thus to make meaningful the 
accident of his birth. 
The specific contents that are internalized in primary 
socialization vary, of course, from society to society. Some are 
found everywhere. It is language that must be internalized 
above all. With language, and by means of it, various motiva­
tional and interpretative schemes are internalized as institu­
tionally defined - wanting to act like a brave little boy, for 
instance, and assuming little boys to be naturally divided into 
the brave and the cowardly. These schemes provide the child 
with institutionalized programmes for everyday lif
e, some 
immediately applicable to him, others anticipating conduct 
socially defined for later biographical stages - the bravery that 
will allow him to get through a day beset with tests of will 
from one's peers and from all sorts of others, and also the 
bravery that will be required of one later - when one is ini­
tiated as a warrior, say, or when one might be called by the 
god. These programmes, both the immediately applicable and 
the anticipatory, differentiate one's identity from that of others 
- such as girls, slave boys, or boys from another clan. Finally, 
there is internalization of at least the rudiments of the legiti­
mating apparatus; the child learns 'why' the programmes are 
what they are. One must be brave because one wants to be­
come a real man; one must perform the rituals because other­
wise the gods will be angry ; one must be loyal to the chief 
because only if one does will the gods support one in times of 
danger; and so on. 
In primary socialization, then, the individual's first world is 
constructed. Its peculiar quality of firmness is to be accounted 
for, at least in part, by the inevitability of the individual's 
relationship to his very first significant others. The world of 
childhood, in its luminous reality, is thus conducive to con­
fidence not only in the persons of the significant others but in 
their definitions of the situation. The worid of childhood is 
massively and indubitably real.11 Probably this could not be 
ISS 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
otherwise at this stage in the development of consciousness. 
Only later can the individual afford the luxury of at least a 
modicum of doubt. And probably this necessity of a proto­
realis¹ in the apprehension of the world pertains phylo­
genettcally as well as ontogenetically 
.12 Itl any case, the world 
of childhood is so constituted as to instil in the individual a 
nomic structure in which he may have confidence that 'every­
thing is all right' - to repeat what is possibly the most frequent 
sentence mothers say to their crying offspring. The later dis­
covery that some things are far from 'all right' may be more or 
less shocking, depending on biographical circumstances but 
. 
. 
' 
m etther case the world of childhood is likely to retain its 
peculiar reality in retrospection. It remains the 'home world', 
however far one may travel from it in later life into regions 
where one does not feel at home at all. 
Primary socialization involves learning sequences that are 
socially defined. At age A the child should learn X, at age B 
he should learn Y, and so on. Every such programme entails 
some social recognition of biological growth and differentia­
tion. Thus every programme, in any society, must recognize 
that a one-year-old child cannot be expected to learn what a 
three-year-old can. Also, most programmes are likely to define 
the matter differently for boys and girls. Such minimal recog­
nition is, of course, imposed on society by biological facts. 
veyond this, however, there is great socio-historical variability 
Ɖn tƊe definition of the stages in the learning sequence. What 
ts still defined as childhood in one society may be defined as 
well into adulthood in another. And the social implications of 
childhood may vary greatly from one society to another - for 
instance, in terms of 
emotional qualities, moral accountability, 
or intellectual capacities. Contemporary Western civilization 
(at least prior to the Freudian movement) tended to regard 
children as naturally 'innocent' and 'sweet'; other societies 
considered them 'by nature sinful and unclean', different from 
adults only in terms of their strength and understanding. 
There have been similar variations · in terms of children's 
availability, for sexual activity, criminal responsibility, divine 
inspiration, and so on. Such variations in the social definition 
of childhood and its stages will obviously affect the learning 
programme.13 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
The character of 
primary socialization is also affected by the 
requirements of the stock of knowledge to be transmitted. 
Certain legitimations may require a higher degree of 
linguistic 
complexity for their understanding than others. We might 
guess, for instance, that a child would need less words to 
understand that he must not masturbate because that makes 
his guardian angel angry than to understand the argument 
that masturbation will interfere with his later sexual adjust­
ment. The requirements of the overall institutional order will 
further affect primary socialization. Different skills are re­
quired at different ages in one society as against another, or 
indeed in varying sectors of 
the same society. The age at which, 
in one society, it may be deemed proper for a child to be able 
to drive an automobile may, in another, be the age at which he 
is expected to have killed his first enemy. An upper-class child 
may learn the 'facts of life' at an age when a lower-class child 
has mastered the rudiments of abortion te.chnique. Or, an 
upper-class child may experience his first stirrings of patriotic 
emotion about the time that his lower-class contemporary first 
experiences hatred of the police and everything they stand for. 
Primary socialization ends when the concept of 
the general­
ized other (and all that goes with it) has been established in the 
consciousness of the individual. At this point he is an effective 
member of society and in subjective possession of a self and a 
world. But this internalization of society, identity and reality 
is not a matter of once and for all. Socialization is never total 
and never finished. This presents us with two further prob­
lems: First, how the reality internalized in primary socializa­
tion is maintained in consciousness, and second, how further 
internalizations - or secondary socializations - in the later 
biography of the individual take place. We will take up these 
problems in reverse order. 
Secondar
y Socialization 
It is possible to conceive of a society in which no further 
socialization takes place after primary socialization. Such a 
157 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
society would, of course, be one with a very simple stock of 
knowledge. All knowledge would be generally relevant, with 
different individuals varying only in their perspectives on it. 
This conception is useful in positing a limiting case, but there 
is no society known to us that does not have some division of 
labour and, concomitantly, some social distribution of know­
ledge; and as soon as this is the case, secondary socialization 
becomes necessary. 
Secondary socialization is the internalization of institutional 
or institution-based 'sub-worlds'. Its extent and character are 
theref
ore determined by the complexity of the division of 
labour and the concomitant social distribution of knowledge. 
Of course, generally relevant knowledge, too, may be socially 
distributed - for example, in the f
orm of class-based 'versions' 
- but what we have in mind here is the social distribution of 
'special knowledge' - knowledge that arises as a result of the 
division of labour and whose 'carriers' are institutionally de­
fined. Forgetting for a moment its other dimensions, we may 
say that secondary socialization is the acquisition of role­
specific knowledge, the roles being directly or indirectly 
rooted in the division of labour. There is some justification for 
such a narrow definition, but this is by no means the whole 
story. Secondary socialization requires the acquisition of role­
specific vocabularies, which means, f
or one thing, the inter­
nalization of 
semantic fields structuring routine interpretations 
and conduct within an institutional area. At the same time 
'tacit understandings', evaluations and affective colorations of 
these semantic fields are also acquired. The 'sub-worlds' 
internalized in secondary socialization are generally partial 
realities in contrast to the 'base-world' acquired in primary 
socialization. Yet they, too, are more or less cohesive realities, 
characterized by normative and affective as well as cognitive 
components. 
Furthermore, they, too, require at least the rudiments of a 
legitimating apparatus, of
ten accompanied by ritual or material 
symbols. For example, a differentiation may arise between 
foot soldiers and cavalry. The latter will have to have special 
training, which will probably involve more than learning the 
purely physical skills necessary to handle military horses. The 
language of the cavalry will become quite diff
erent from that 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
of the infantry. A terminology will be built up ref
erring to 
horses, their qualities and uses, and to situations arising as a 
result of cavalry life, which will be quite irrelevant to the foot 
soldier. The cavalry will also use a different language in more 
than an instrumental sense. An angry inf
antryman swears by 
making ref
erence to his aching f
eet, while the cavalryman may 
mention his horse's backside. In other words, a body of 
images 
and allegories is built up on the instrumental basis of cavalry 
language. This role-specific language is internalized in toto by 
the individual as he is trained for mounted combat. He be­
comes a cavalryman not only by acquiring the requisite skills 
but by becoming capable of understanding and using this 
language. He can then communicate with his fellow-horsemen 
in allusions rich in meaning to them but quite obtuse to men 
in the inf
antry. It goes without saying that this process of 
internalization entails subjective identification with the role 
and its appropriate norms - 'I am a horseman', 'A h0rseman 
never lets the enemy see the tail of his mount', 'Never let a 
woman f
orget the f
eel of the spurs', 'A fast rider in war, a fast 
rider in gambling', and so f
orth. As the need arises, this body 
of meanings will be sustained by legitimations, ranging f
rom 
simple maxims like the f
oregoing to elaborate mythological 
constructions. Finally, there may be a variety of representative 
ceremonies and physical objects - say, the annual celebration 
of the feast of the horse-god at which all meals are taken on 
horseback and the newly initiated horsemen receive the horse­
tail fetishes they will hencef
orth carry around their necks. 
The character of such secondary socialization depends upon 
the status of the body of knowledge concerned within the 
symbolic universe as a whole. Training is necessary to learn to 
make a horse pull a manure cart or to fight on it in battle. But 
a society that limits its use of horses to the pulling of manure 
carts is unlikely to embellish this activity with elaborate rituals 
or fetishism, and the personnel to whom this task has been 
assigned is unlikely to identify with the role in any prof
ound 
manner ; the legitimations, such as they are, are likely to be of a 
compensatory kind. Thus there is a great deal of socio-historical 
variability in the representations involved in secondary 
socialization. In most societies, however, some rituals accom­
pany the transition f
rom primary to secondary socialization. 
u 
159 


THE SociAL CoNSTRUCTION oF REALITY 
The f
ormal processes of secondary socialization are deter­
mined by its fundamental problem : it always presupposes a 
preceding process of primary socialization ; that is, that it 
must deal with an already formed self and an already inter­
nalized world. It cannot construct subjective reality ex nihilo. 
This presents a problem because the already internalized 
reality has a tendency to persist. Whatever new contents are 
now to be internalized must somehow be superimposed upon 
this already present reality. There is, theref
ore, a problem of 
consistency between the original and the new internalizations. 
The problem may be more or less difficult of solution in 
different cases. Having learned that cleanliness is a virtue in 
one's own person, it is not difficult to transf
er the same virtue 
to one's horse. But having learned that certain obscenities are 
reprehensible as a pedestrian child, it may need some explana­
tion that they are now de ri
gueur as a member of the cavalry. 
To establish and maintain consistency, secondary socialization 
presupposes conceptual procedures to integrate different 
bodies of knowledge. 
In secondary socialization, biological limitations become 
decreasingly important to the learning sequences, which now 
come to be established in terms of intrinsic properties of the 
knowledge to be acquired ; that is, in terms of the foundational 
structure of that knowledge. For example, in order to Jearn 
certain hunting techniques one must first Jearn mountain­
climbing ; or in order to learn calculus one must first learn 
algebra. The learning sequences can also be manipulated in 
terms of the vested interests of the personnel administering 
the body of knowledge. For example, it can be established 
that one must learn divination from animal entrails before one 
can learn divination f
rom the flight of birds, or that one must 
have a high-school diploma before one can enrol in an em­
balming school, or that one must pass an examination in 
Gaelic bef
ore being eligible for a position in the Irish civil 
service. Such stipulations are extrinsic to the knowledge prag­
matically required f
or the perf
ormance of the roles of diviner, 
embalmer or Irish civil servant. They are established institu­
tionally to enhance the prestige of the roles in question or to 
meet other ideological interests. A grade-school education 
may be perf
ectly sufficient to grasp the curriculum of an 
I6o 
SociETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
embalming school, and Irish civil servants carry on their nor­
mal business in the English language. It may even happen that 
the learning sequences thus manipulated are pragmatically 
disf
unctional. For instance, it may be stipulated that a college 
background in 'general culture' should precede the prof
es­
sional training of research sociologists, while their actual acti­
vities might in f
act be more efficiently carried on if they were 
unburdened with 'culture' of this sort. 
While primary socialization cannot take place without an 
emotionally charged identification of the child with his signi­
ficant others, most secondary socialization can dispense with 
this kind of identification and proceed effectively with only 
the amount of mutual identification that enters into any com­
munication between human beings. Put crudely, it is necessary 
to love one's mother, but not one's teacher. Socialization in 
later lif
e typically begins to take on an affectivity reminiscent 
of childhood when it seeks radically to transform the subjective 
reality of the individual. This posits special problems that we 
shall analyse a little f
urther on. 
In primary socialization the child does not apprehend his 
significant others as institutional f
unctionaries, but as mediators 
of reality tout court; the child internalizes the world of his 
parents as the world, and not as the world appertaining to a 
specific institutional context. Some of the crises that occur 
af
ter primary socialization are indeed caused by the recogni­
tion that the world of one's parents is not the only world there 
is, but has a very specific social location, perhaps even one 
with a pejorative connotation. For example, the older child 
comes to recognize that the world represented by his parents, 
the same world that he had previously taken f
or granted as 
inevitable reality, is actually the world of uneducated, lower­
class, rural Southerners. In secondary socialization, the insti­
tutional context is usually apprehended. Needless to say, this 
need not involve a sophisticated understanding of all the 
implications of the institutional context. Yet the Southern 
child, to stay within the same example, does apprehend his 
school teacher as an institutional functionary in a way he never 
did his parents, and he understands the teacher's role as rep­
resenting institutionally specific meanings - such as those of 
the nation as against the region, of the national middle-class 
161 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
world as against the lower-class ambience of his home, of the 
city as against the countryside. Hence the social interaction 
between teachers and learners can be formalized. The teachers 
need not be significant others in any sense of the word. They 
are institutional functionaries with the formal assignment of 
transmitting specific knowledge. 
The roles of secondary 
socialization carry a high degree of anonymity; that is, they 
are readily detached f
rom their individual perf
ormers. The 
same knowledge taught by one teacher could also be taught by 
another. Any functionary of this type could teach this type of 
knowledge. The individual functionaries may, of course, be 
subjectively diff
erentiated in various ways (as more or less 
congenial, better or worse teachers of arithmetic, and so on), 
but they are in principle interchangeable. 
This f
ormality and anonymity are, of course, linked with 
the aff
ective character of 
social relations in secondary socializa­
tion. Their most important consequence, however, is to bestow 
on the contents of what is learned in secondary socialization 
much less subjective inevitability than the contents of primary 
socialization possess. Therefore, the reality accent of know­
ledge internalized in secondary socialization is more easily 
bracketed (that is, the subjective sense that these internaliza­
tions are real is more f
ugitive). It takes severe biographical 
shocks to disintegrate the massive reality internalized in early 
childhood; much less to destroy the realities internalized 
later. Beyond this, it is relatively easy to set aside the reality of 
the secondary internalizations. The child lives willy-nilly in 
the world as defined by his parents, but he can cheerf
ully 
leave the world of arithmetic behind him as soon as he leaves 
the classroom. 
This makes it possible to detach a part of the self and its 
concomitant reality as relevant only to the role-specific situa­
tion in question. The individual then establishes distance be­
tween his total self and its reality on the one hand, and the 
role-specific partial self and its reality on the other. 15 This 
important f
eat is possible only after primary socialization has 
taken place. Put crudely once more, it is easier for the child 
'to hide' from his teacher than from his mother. Conversely, it 
is possible to say that the development of this capacity 'to hide' 
is an important spectofthe process of 
growing into adulthood. 
162 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
The reality accent of knowledge internalized in primary 
socialization is given quasi-automatically. In secondary sociali­
zation it must be reinf
orced by specific pedagogic techniques, 
'brought home' to the individual. The phrase is suggestive. 
The original reality of childhood is 'home'. It posits itself as 
such, inevitably and, as it were, 'naturally'. By comparison 
with it, all later realities are 'artificial'. Thus the school teacher 
tries to 'bring home' the contents he is imparting by making 
them vivid (that is, making them seem as alive as the 'home 
world' of the child), relevant (that is, linking them to the rele­
vance structures already present in the 'home world') and 
interesting (that is, inducing the attentiveness of the child to 
detach itself f
rom its 'natural' objects to these more 'artificial' 
ones). These manoeuvres are necessary because an internalized 
reality is already there, persistently 'in the way' of new inter­
nalizations. The degree and precise character of these peda­
gogic techniques will vary with the motivations the individual 
has for the acquisition of the new knowledge. 
The more these techniques make subjectively plausible a 
continuity between the original and the new elements of 
knowledge, the more readily they acquire the accent of reality. 
One learns a second language by building on the taken-f
or­
granted reality of one's 'mother tongue'. For a long time, one 
continually retranslates into the original language whatever 
elements of the new language one is acquiring. Only in this 
way can the new language begin to have any reality. As this 
reality comes to be established in its own right, it slowly 
becomes possible to f
orego retranslation. One becomes cap­
able of 'thinking in' the new language. Nevertheless, it is rare 
that a language learned in later lif
e attains the inevitable, self
­
evident reality of the first language learned in childhood. 
Hence derives, of course, the aff
ective quality of the 'mother 
tongue'. Mutatis mutandis, the same characteristics of building 
from the 'home' reality, linking up with it as learning proceeds 
and only slowly breaking this linkage, appertain to other learn­
ing sequences in secondary socialization. 
The f
acts that the processes of secondary socialization do 
not presuppose a high degree of identification and its contents 
do not possess the quality of 
inevitability can be pragmatically 
usef
ul because they permit learning sequences that are rational 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
and emotionally controlled. But because the contents of this 
type of internalization have a brittle and unreliable subjective 
reality compared to the internalizations of primary socializa­
tion, in some cases special techniques must be developed to 
produce whatever identification and inevitability are deemed 
necessary. The need for such techniques may be intrinsic in 
terms of 
learning and applying the contents of 
internalization, 
or it may be posited f
or the sake of the vested interests of the 
personnel administering the socialization process in question. 
For example, an individual who wants to become an accom­
plished musician must immerse himself in his subject to a 
degree quite unnecessary for an individual learning to be an 
engineer. Engineering education can take place eff
ectively 
through f
ormal, highly rational, emotionally neutral processes. 
Musical education, on the other hand, typically involves much 
higher identification with a maestro and a much more pro­
f
ound immersion in musical reality. This diff
erence comes 
f
rom the intrinsic diff
erences between engineering and musical 
knowledge, and between the ways of lif
e in which these two 
bodies of knowledge are practically applied. A prof
essional 
revolutionary, too, needs an immeasurably higher degree of 
identification and inevitability than an engineer. But here the 
necessity comes not f
rom intrinsic properties of the knowledge 
itself, which may be quite simple and sparse in content, but 
f
rom the personal commitment required of a revolutionary in 
terms of the vested interests of the revolutionary movement. 
Sometimes the necessity f
or the intensifying techniques may 
come f
rom both intrinsic and extrinsic f
actors. The socializa­
tion of religious personnel is one example. 
The techniques applied in such cases are designed to inten­
sif
y the aff
ective charge of the socialization process. Typically, 
they involve the institutionalization of an elaborate initiation 
process, a novitiate, in the course of which the individual 
comes to commit himself f
ully to the reality that is being 
internalized. When the process requires an actual transf
orma­
tion of the individual's 'home' reality, it comes to replicate as 
closely as possible the character of 
primary socialization, as we 
shall see a little later. But even short of such transf
ormation, 
secondary socialization becomes affectively charged to the 
degree to which immersion in and commitment to the new 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
reality are institutionally defined as necessary. The relation­
ship of the individual to the socializing personnel becomes 
correspondingly charged with 'significance', that is, the 
socializing personnel take on the character of significant 
others vis-a-vis the individual being socialized. The individual 
then commits himself in a comprehensive way to the new 
r'!ality. He 'gives himself' to music, to the revolution, to the 
f
aith, not just partially but with what is subjectively the whole 
of his lif
e. The readiness to sacrifice oneself is, of course, the 
final consequence of this type of socialization. 
An important circumstance that may posit a need f
or such 
intensification is competition between the reality-defining 
personnel of various institutions. In the case of revolutionary 
training the intrinsic problem is the socialization of the indivi­
dual in a counter-definition of reality - counter, that is, to the 
definitions of the 'official' legitimators of the society. But there 
will also have to be intensification in the socialization of the 
musician in a society that offers sharp competition to the 
aesthetic values of the musical community. For example, it 
may be assumed that a musician in the making in contem­
porary America must commit himself to music with an emo­
tional intensity that was unnecessary in nineteenth-century 
Vienna, precisely because in the American situation there is 
powerf
ul competition f
rom what will subjectively appear as 
the 'materialistic' and 'mass culture' world of the 'rat race'. 
Similarly, religious training in a pluralistic situation posits the 
need f
or 'artificial' techniques of reality-accentuation that are 
unnecessary in a situation dominated by a religious monopoly. 
It is still 'natural' to become a Catholic priest in Rome in a 
way that it is not in America. Consequently, American theo­
logical seminaries must cope with the problem of 'reality­
slipping' and devise techniques f
or 'making stick' the same 
reality. Not surprisingly, they have hit upon the obvious ex­
pedient of sending their most promising students to Rome 
f
or a while. 
Similar variations may exist within the same institutional 
context, depending upon the tasks assigned to diff
erent cate­
gories of personnel. Thus the degree of commitment to the 
military required of career officers is quite diff
erent f
rom that 
required of draf
tees, a f
act clearly reflected in the respective 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
training processes. Similarly, diff
erent commitments to the 
institutional reality are demanded f
rom an executive and f
rom 
lower-echelon white-collar personnel, f
rom a psycho-analyst 
and from a psychiatric social worker, and so f
orth. An execu­
tive must be 'politically sound' in a way not incumbent on the 
supervisor of the typing pool, and a 'didactic analysis' is im­
posed upon the psycho-analyst but only suggested to the 
social worker, and so on. There are, then, highly diff
erentiated 
systeGs of secondary socialization in complex institutions, 
sometimes geared very sensitively to the diff
erential require­
ments of the various categories of institutional personnel. 
Is 
The institutionalized distribution of tasks between primary 
and secondary socialization varies with the complexity of the 
social distribution of knowledge. As long as it is relatively 
uncomplicated, the same institutional agency can proceed 
from primary to secondary socialization and carry on the latter 
to a . cÔnsiderable extent. In cases of very high complexity, 
specialized agencies for secondary socialization may have to be 
developed, with full-time personnel specially trained for the 
educational tasks in question. Short of this degree of speciali­
zation, there may be a sequence of socializing agencies com­
bining this task with others. In the latter case, for example, it 
may be established that at a certain age a boy is transf
erred 
from his mother's hut to the warriors' barracks, where he will 
be trained to become a horseman. This need not entail full­
time educational personnel. The older horsemen may teach 
the younger ones. The development of modern education is, 
of 
course, the best illustration of secondary socialization taking 
place under the auspices of 
specialized agencies. The resultant 
decline in the position of the family with regard to secondary 
socialization is too well known to require f
urther elaboration 
hereY 
Maintmance and Transformation o
f
 Sub
jective Reality 
Since socialization is never complete and the contents it inter­
nalizes face continuing threats to their subjective reality, every 
166 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
viable society must develop procedures of reality-maintenance 
to safeguard a measure of symmetry between objective and 
subjective reality. We have already discussed this problem in 
connexion with legitimation. Our f
ocus here is on the def
ence 
of subjective rather than objective reality ; reality as appre­
hended in individual consciousness rather than on reality as 
institutionally defined. 
Primary socialization internalizes a reality apprehended as 
inevitable. This internalization may be deemed successf
ul if 
the sense of inevitability is present most of the time, at least 
while the individual is active in the world of everyday lif
e. But 
even when the world of everyday lif
e retains its massive and 
taken-f
or-granted re;tlity in actu, it is threatened by the mar­
ginal situations of human experience that cannot be com­
pletely bracketed in everyday activity. There is always the 
haunting presence of metamorphoses, those actually remem­
bered and those only sensed as sinister possibilities. There are 
also the more directly threatening competing definitions of 
reality that may be encountered socially. It is one thing f
or 
a well-behaved man to dream of unspeakable orgies in 
nocturnal solitude. It is quite another to see these dreams 
empirically enacted by a libertarian colony next door. Dreams 
can more easily be quarantined within consciousness as 'non­
sense' to be shrugged aside or as mental aberrations to be 
silently repented ; they retain the character of phar.tasms 
vis-a-vis the reality of everyday life. An actual acting-out 
f
orces itself upon consciousness much more clamorously. It 
may have to be destroyed in f
act before it can be coped with 
in the mind. In any case, it cannot be denied as one can at 
least try to deny the metamorphoses of marginal situations. 
The more 'artificial' character of secondary socialization 
makes the subjective reality of its internalizations even more 
vulnerable to challenging definitions of reality, not because 
they are not taken f
or granted or are apprehended as less than 
real in everyday life, but because their reality is less deeply 
rooted in consciousness and thus more susceptible to displace­
ment. For example, both the prohibition on nudity, which is 
related to one's sense of shame and internalized in primary 
socialization, and the canons of proper dress f
or diff
erent 
social occasions, which are acquired as secondary internaliza-


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
tions, are taken for granted in everyday lif
e. As long as they 
are not socially challenged, neither constitutes a problem for 
the individual. However, the challenge would have to be much 
stronger in the former case than in the latter to crystallize as 
a threat to the taken-for-granted reality of the routines in 
question. A relatively minor shift in the subjective definition 
of reality would suffice for an individual to take for granted 
that one may go to the office without a tie. A much more 
drastic shift would be necessary to have him go, as a matter of 
course, without any clothes at all. The former shift could be 
socially mediated by nothing more than a change of job - say, 
from a rural to a metropolitan college campus. The latter 
would entail a social revolution in the individual's milieu ; it 
would be subjectively apprehended as a profound conversion, 
probably after an initially intense resistance. 
The reality of secondary internalizations is less threatened 
by marginal situations, because it is usually irrelevant to them. 
What may happen is that such reality is apprehended as trivial 
precisely because its irrelevance to the marginal situation is 
revealed. Thus it may be said that the imminence of death 
prof
oundly threatens the reality of one's previous self-identi­
fications as a- man, a moral being, or a Christian. One's self
­
identification as an assistant manager in the ladies' hosiery 
department is not so much threatened as trivialized in the 
same situation. Conversely, it may be said that the maintenance 
of primary internalizations in the face of marginal situations 
is a fair measure of their subjective reality. The same test 
would be quite irrelevant when applied to most secondary 
socializations. It makes sense to die as a man, hardly to die as 
an assistant manager in the ladies' hosiery department. Again, 
where secondary internalizations are socially expected to have 
this degree of reality-persistence in the f
ace of marginal situa­
tions, the concomitant socialization procedures will have to be 
intensified and reinf
orced in the manner discussed before. 
Religious and military processes of secondary socialization 
could again be cited in illustration. 
It is convenient to distinguish between two general types of 
reality-maintenance - routine maintenance and crisis main­
tenance. The former is designed to maintain the internalized 
reality in everyday life, the latter in situations of crises. Both 
168 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
entail fundamentally the same social processes, though some 
differences must be noted. 
As we have seen, the reality of everyday life maintains itself 
by being embodied in routines, which is the essence of 
institu­
tionalization. Beyond this, however, the reality of everyday 
life is ongoingly reaffirmed in the individual's interaction with 
others. Just as reality is originally internalized by a social 
process, so it is maintained in consciousness by social pro­
cesses. These latter processes are not drastically different from 
those of the earlier internalization. They also reflect the basic 
fact that subjective reality must stand in a relationship with an 
objective reality that is socially defined. 
In the social process of reality-maintenance it is possible to 
distinguish between significant others and less important 
others. 18 In an important way all, or at least most, of the others 
encountered by the individual in everyday life serve to reaffirm 
his subjective reality. This occurs even in a situation as 'non­
significant' as riding on a commuter train. The individual may 
not know anyone on the train and may speak to no one. All the 
same, the crowd of fellow-commuters reaffirms the basic 
structure of 
everyday life. By their overall conduct the fellow­
commuters extract the individual from the tenuous reality of 
early-morning grogginess and proclaim to him in no uncertain 
terms that the world consists of earnest men going to work, of 
responsibility and schedules, of the New Haven Railroad and 
the New York Times. The last, of course, reaffirms the widest 
coordinates of the individual's reality. From the weather re­
port to the help-wanted ads it assures him that he is, indeed, 
in the most real world possible. Concomitantly, it affirms the 
less-than-real status of the sinister ecstasies experienced before 
breakf
ast - the alien shape of allegedly familiar objects upon 
waking from a disturbing dream, the shock of non-recognition 
of one's own face in the bathroom mirror, the unspeakable 
suspicion a little later that one's wif
e and children are myster­
ious strangers. Most individuals susceptible to such meta­
physical terrors manage to exorcize them to a degree in the 
course of their rigidly perf
ormed morning rituals, so that the 
reality of everyday life is at least gingerly established by the 
time they step out of 
their front door. But the reality begins to 
be f
airly reliable only in the anonymous community of the 
169 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION O F  REALITY 
commuter train. It attains massivity as the train pulls into 
Grand Central Station. Ergo sum, the individual can now 
murmur to himself
, and proceed to the office wide-awake and 
self
-assured. 
It would, therefore, be a mistake to assume that only signifi­
cant others serve to maintain subjective reality. But significant 
others occupy a central position in the economy of reality­
maintenance. They are particularly important f
or the ongoing 
confirmation of that crucial element of reality we call identity. 
To retain confidence that he is indeed who he thinks he is, the 
individual requires not only the implicit confirmation of this 
identity that even casual everyday contacts will supply, but 
the explicit and emotionally charged confirmation that his 
significant others bestow on him. In the previous illustration, 
our suburbanite is likely to look to his f
amily and other private 
associates 
within 
the 
f
amily 
ambience 
(neighbourhood, 
church, club, and the like) f
or such confirmation, though 
close business associates may also fulfil this function. If he 
moreover sleeps with his secretary, his identity is both con­
firmed and amplified. This assumes that the individual likes 
the identity being confirmed. The same process pertains to 
the confirmation of identities that the individual may not like. 
Even casual acquaintances may confirm his self
-identification 
as a hopeless f
ailure, but wife, children and secretary ratif
y 
this with undeniable finality. The process f
rom objective 
reality-definition to subjective reality-maintenance is the 
same in both cases. 
The significant others in the individual's lif
e are the prin­
cipal agents f
or the maintenance of his subjective reality. Less 
significant others f
unction as a sort of chorus. Wife, children 
and secretary solemnly reaffirm each day that one is a man of 
importance, or a hopeless f
ailure; maiden aunts, cooks and 
elevator operators lend varying degrees of support to this. It 
is, of course, quite possible that there is some disagreement 
between these people. The individual then f
aces a problem of 
consistency, which he can, typicaHy, solve either by modif
ying 
his reality or his reality-maintaining relationships. He may 
have the alternative of accepting his identity as a failure on the 
one hand, or of firing his secretary or divorcing his wif
e on 
the other. He also has the option of downgrading some of 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
these people f
rom their status of 
significant others and turning 
instead to others f
or his significant reality-confirmations - his 
psycho-analyst, say, or his old cronies at the club. There are 
many possible complexities in this organization of reality­
maintaining relationships, especially in a highly mobile and 
role-diff
erentiated society .19 
The relation between the significant others and the 'chorus' 
in reality-maintenance is a dialectical one ; that is, they interact 
with each other as well as with the subjective reality they 
serve to confirm. A solidly negative identification on the part 
of the wider milieu may eventually affect the identification 
offered by the significant others - when even the elevator 
operator f
ails to say 'sir', the wif
e may give up her identifica­
tion of her husband as a man of importance. Conversely, the 
significant others may eventually have an effect on the wider 
milieu - a 'loyal' wif
e can be an asset in several ways as the 
individual seeks to get across a certain identity to his business 
associates. Reality-maintenance and reality-confirmation thus 
involve the totality of the individual's social situation, though 
the significant others occupy a privileged position in these 
processes. 
The relative importance of the significant others and the 
'chorus' can be seen most easily if one looks at instances of dis­
confirmation of subjective reality. A reality-disconfirming act 
by the wife, taken by itself
, has far greater potency than a 
similar act by a casual acquaintance. Acts by the latter have to 
acquire a certain density to equal the potency of the f
ormer. 
The reiterated opinion of 
one's best friend that the newspapers 
are not reporting substantial developments going on beneath 
the surface may carry more weight than the same opinion ex­
pressed by one's barber. However, the same opinion expressed 
in succession by ten casual acquaintances may begin to out­
weigh a contrary 
opinion of 
one's best f
riend. The crystallization 
subjectively arrived at as a result of these various definitions 
of reality will then determine how one is likely to react to 
the appearance of a solid phalanx of grim, silent, brief
case­
carrying Chinese on the commuter train one morning ;  that is, 
will determine the weight one gives the phenomenon in one's 
own definition of reality. To take another illustration, if one 
is a believing Catholic the reality of one's f
aith need not be 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
threatened by non-believing business associates. It is very 
likely to be threatened, however, by a non-believing wife. In 
a pluralistic society, therefore, it is logical f
or the Catholic 
Church to tolerate a broad variety of inter-f
aith associations in 
economic and political life, but to continue to f
rown on inter­
faith marriage. Generally speaking, in situations where there 
is competition between diff
erent reality-defining agencies, all 
sorts of secondary-group relationships with the competitors 
may be tolerated, as long as there are firmly established 
primary-group relationships within which one reality is on­
goingly reaffirmed against the competitors. 
20 The manner in 
which the Catholic Church has adapted itself to the pluralistic 
situation in America is an excellent illustration. 
The most important vehicle of reality-maintenance is con­
versation. One may view the individual's everyday life in 
terms of the working away of a conversational apparatus that 
ongoingly maintains, modifies and reconstructs his subjective 
reality. 21 Conversation means mainly, of course, that people 
speak with one another. This does not deny the rich aura of 
non-verbal communication that surrounds speech. Neverthe­
less speech retains a privileged position in the total conversa­
tional apparatus. It is important to stress, however, that the 
greater part of reality-maintenance in conversation is implicit, 
not explicit. Most conversation does not in so many words 
define the nature of the world. Rather, it takes place against 
the background of a world that is silently taken for granted. 
Thus an exchange such as, 'Well, it's time f
or me to get to the 
station', and 'Fine, darling, have a good day at the office', 
implies an entire world within which these apparently simple 
propositions make sense. By virtue of this implication the 
exchange confirms the subjective reality of this world. 
If 
this is understood, one will readily see that the great part, 
if not all, of 
everyday conversation maintains subjective reality. 
Indeed, its massivity is achieved by the accumulation and 
consistency of casual conversation - conversation that can 
afford to be casual precisely because it ref
ers to the routines of 
a taken-for-granted world. The loss of casualness signals a 
break in the routines and, at least potentially, a threat to the 
taken-f
or-granted reality. Thus one may imagine the effect on 
casualness of an exchange like this : 'Well, it's time for me to 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
get to the station', 'Fine, darling, don't forget to take along 
your gun.' 
At the same time that the conversational apparatus on­
goingly maintains reality, it ongoingly modifies it. Items are 
dropped and added, weakening some sectors of what is still 
being taken for granted and reinforcing others. Thus the sub­
jective reality of something that is never talked about comes to 
be shaky. It is one thing to engage in an embarrassing sexual 
act. It is quite another to talk about it bef
orehand or af
ter­
wards. Conversely, conversation gives firm contours to items 
prevĔously apprehended in a fleeting and unclear manner. One 
may have doubts about one's religion ; these doubts become 
real in a quite diff
erent way as one discusses them. One then 
'talks oneself into' these doubts ; they are objectified as reality 
within one's own consciousness. Generally speaking, the con­
versational apparatus maintains reality by 'talking through' 
various elements of experience and allocating them a definite 
place in the real world. 
This reality-generating potency of conversation is already 
given in the fact of linguistic objectification. We have seen 
how language objectifies the world, transf
orming the panta 
rhei of experience into a cohesive order. In the establishment 
of this order language realizes a world, in the double sense of 
apprehending and producing it. Conversation is the actualiz­
ing of this realizing efficacy of language in the face-to-face 
situations of individual existence. In conversation the objecti­
fications of language become objects of individual conscious­
ness. Thus the fundamental reality-maintaining fact is the 
continuing use of the same language to objectif
y unf
olding 
biographical experience. In the widest sense, all who employ 
this same language are reality-maintaining others. The signi­
ficance of this can be f
urther diff
erentiated in terms of what is 
meant by a 'common language' - from the group-idiosyncratic 
language of primary groups to regional or class dialects to the 
national community that defines itself in terms of language. 
There are corresponding 'returns to reality' for the individual 
who goes back to the f
ew individuals who understand his in­
group allusions, to the section to which his accent belongs, or 
to the large collectivity that has identified itself with a parti­
cular linguistic tradition - in reverse order, say, a return to the 
173 


THE SociAL CoNSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
United States, to Brooklyn, and to the people who went to the 
same public school. 
In order to maintain subjective reality effectively, the con­
versational apparatus must be continual and consistent. Dis­
ruptions of continuity or consistency ipso facto posit a threat 
to the subjective reality in question. We have already discussed 
the expedients that the individual may adopt to meet the threat 
of inconsistency. Various techniques to cope with the threat 
of discontinuity are also available. The use of correspondence 
to continue significant conversation despite physical separation 
may serve as an illustration.22 Different conversations can be 
compared in terms of the density of the reality they produce 
or maintain. On the whole, f
requency of 
conversation enhances 
its reality-generating potency, but lack of f
requency can 
sometimes be compensated f
or by the intensity of the con­
versation when it does take place. One may see one's lover 
only once a month, but the conversation then engaged in is of 
sufficient intensity to make up f
or its relative inf
requency. 
Certain conversations may also be explicitly defined and legiti­
mated as having a privileged status - such as conversations 
with one's conf
essor, one's psycho-analyst, or a similar 
'authority' figure. The 'authority' here lies in the cognitively 
and normatively superior status that is assigned to these 
conversations. 
Subjective reality is thus always dependent upon specific 
plausibility structures, that is, the specific social base and 
social processes required f
or its maintenance. One can main­
tain one's self
-identification as a man of importance only in a 
milieu that confirms this identity; one can maintain one's 
Catholic f
aith only if one retains one's significant relationship 
with the Catholic community ; and so f
orth. Disruption of 
significant conversation with the mediators of the respective 
plausibility structures threatens the subjective realities in 
question. As the example of correspondence indicates, the 
individual may resort to various techniques of reality-main­
tenance even in the absence of actual conversation, but the 
reality-generating potency of these techniques is greatly in­
f
erior to the f
ace-to-face conversations they are designed to 
replicate. The longer these techniques are isolated f
rom f
ace­
to-face confirmations, the less likely they will be to retain the 
174 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
accent of 
reality. The individual living f
or many years among 
people of a different faith and cut off f
rom the community of 
those sharing his own may continue to identif
y himself as, say, 
a Catholic. Through prayer, religious exercises, and similar 
techniques his old Catholic reality may continue to be sub­
jectively relevant to him. At the very least the techniques may 
sustain his continued self
-identification as a Catholic. They 
will, however, become subjectively empty of 'living' reality 
unless they are 'revitalized' by social contact with other 
Catholics. To be sure, an individual usually remembers the 
realities of his past. But the way to 'ref
resh' these memories is 
to converse with those who share their relevance. 
23 
The plausibility structure is also the social base f
or the parti­
cular suspension of doubt without which the definition of 
reality in question cannot be maintained in consciousness. 
Here specific social sanctions against such reality-disintegrat­
ing doubts have been internalized and are ongoingly re­
affirmed. Ridicule is one such sanction. As long as he remains 
within the plausibility structure, the individual f
eels himself 
to be ridiculous whenever doubts about the reality concerned 
arise subjectively. He knows that others would smile at him if 
he voiced them. He can silently smile at himself, mentally 
shrug his shoulders - and continue to exist within the world 
thus sanctioned. Needless to say, this procedure of auto­
therapy will be much more difficult if 
the plausibility structure 
is no longer available as its social matrix. The smile will 
become f
orced, and eventually is likely to be replaced by a 
pensive f
rown. 
In crisis situations the procedures are essentiaUy the same as 
in routine maintenance, except that the reality-confirmations 
have to be explicit and intensive. Frequently, ritual techniques 
are brought into play. While the individual may improvise 
reality-maintaining procedures in the f
ace of crisis, the society 
itself sets up specific procedures f
or situations recognized as 
involving the risk of a breakdown in reality. Included in these 
predefined situations are certain marginal situations, of which 
death is by far the most important. Crises in reality, however, 
may occur in a considerably wider number of cases than are 
posited by marginal situations. They may be either collective 
oi individual, depending upon the character of the challenge 
175 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
to the socially defined reality. For example, collective rituals of 
reality-maintenance may be institutionalized for times of 
natural catastrophe, individual ones for times of 
personal mis­
fortune. Or, to take another example, specific reality-maintain­
ing procedures may be established to cope with f
oreigners and 
· 
their potentia! threat to the 'official' reality. The individual 
may have to go through an elaborate ritual purification af
ter 
contact with a f
oreigner. The ablution is internalized as a sub­
jective nihilation of the alternative reality represented by the 
foreigner. Taboos, exorcisms and curses against f
oreigners, 
heretics or madmen similarly serve the purpose of individual 
'mental hygiene'. The violence of these def
ensive procedures 
will be proportional to the seriousness with which the threat 
is viewed. If contacts with the alternative reality and its rep­
resentatives become f
requent, the defensive procedures may, 
of course, lose their crisis character and become routinized. 
Every time one meets a f
oreigner, say, one must spit three 
times - without giving much further thought to the matter. 
Everything that has been said so far on socialization implies 
the possibility that subjective reality can be transf
ormed. To 
be in society already entails an ongoing process of 
modification 
of subjective reality. To talk about transf
ormation, then, 
involves a discussion of diff
erent degrees of modification. We 
will concentrate here on the extreme case, in which there is a 
near-total transf
ormation; that is, in which the individual 
'switches worlds'. If the processes involved in the extreme 
case are clarified, those ofless extreme cases will be understood 
more easily. 
Typically, the transformation is subjectively apprehended 
as total. This, of course, is something of a misapprehension. 
Since subjective reality is never totally socialized, it cannot be 
totally transf
ormed by social processes. At the very least the 
transf
ormed individual will have the same body and live in the 
same physical universe. Nevertheless, there are instances of 
transf
ormation that appear total if compared with lesser modi­
fications. Such transf
ormations we will call alternations. 
21 
Alternation requires processes of re-socialization. These 
processes resemble primary socialization, because they have 
radicall
y to re-assign reality accents and, consequently, must 
replicate to a considerable degree the strongly aff
ective identi-
SociETY AS SuBJECTIVE REALITY 
fication with the socializing personnel that was characteristic 
of childhood. They are diff
erent from primary socialization 
because they do not start ex nihilo, and as a result must cope 
with a problem of dismantling, disintegrating the preceding 
nomic structure of subjective reality. How can this be done? 
A 'recipe' for successful alternation has to include both 
social and conceptual conditions, the social, of course, serving 
as the matrix of the conceptual. The most important social 
condition is the availability of an eff
ective plausibility struc­
ture, that is, a social base serving as the 'laboratory' of trans­
f
ormation. This plausibility structure will be mediated to the 
individual by means of significant others, with whom he must 
establish strongly affective identification. No radical trans­
formation of subjective reality (including, of course, identity) 
is possible without such identification, which inevitably rep­
licates childhood experiences of emotional dependency on 
significant others. 
2·; These significant others are the guides 
into the new reality. They represent the plausibility structure 
in the roles they play vis-a-vis the individual (roles that are 
typically defined explicitly in terms of their re-socializing 
f
unction), and they mediate the new world to the individual. 
The individual's world now finds its cognitive and aff
ective 
focus in the plausibility structure in question. Socially, tČs 
means an intense concentration of all significant interaction 
within the group that embodies the plausibility structure and 
particularly upon the personnel assigned the task of re­
socialization. 
The historical prototype of alternation is religious conver­
sion. The above considerations can be applied to this by saying, 
extra ecclesiam nulla sa/us. By sa/us we mean here (with due 
apologies to the theologians who had other things in mind 
when they coined the phrase) the empirically successful 
accomplishment of conversion. It is only within the religious 
community, the ecclesia, that the conversion can be eff
ectively 
maintained as plausible. This is not to deny that conversion 
may antedate affiliation with the community - Saul of Tarsus 
sought out the Christian community a
fter his 'Damascus čx­
perience'. But this is not the point. To have a convers1on 
experience is nothing much. The real thing is to be able to 
keep on taking it seriously ; to retain a sense of its plausibility. 
177 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
This is where the religious community comes in. It provides 
the indispensable plausibility structure f
or the new reality. In 
other words, Saul may have become Paul in the aloneness of 
religious ecstasy, but he could remain Paul only in the context 
of the Christian community that recognized him as such and 
confirmed the 'new being' in which he now located this iden­
tity. This relationship of conversion and community is not a 
peculiarly Christian phenomenon (despite the historically 
peculiar f
eatures of the Christian ecclesia). One cannot remain 
a Muslim outside the 'umma of Islam, a Buddhist outside the 
sangha, and probably not a Hindu anywhere outside India. 
Religion requires a religious community, and to live in a reli­
gious world requires affiliation with that community. 26 The 
plausibility structures of religious conversion have been imi­
tated by secular agencies of alternation. The best examples are 
in the areas of political indoctrination and psychotherapy. 
27 
The plausibility structure must become the individual's 
world, displacing all other worlds, especially the world the 
individual 'inhabited' before his alternation. This requires 
segregation of the individual f
rom the 'inhabitants' of other 
worlds, especially his 'cohabitants' in the world he has lef
t 
behind. Ideally this will be physical segregation. If that is not 
possible for whatever reasons, the segregation is posited by 
definition; that is, by a definition of 
those others that nihil"ates 
them. The alternating individual disaffiliates himself f
rom his 
previous world and the plausibility structure that sustained it, 
bodily if possible, mentally if not. In either case he is no 
longer 'yoked together with unbelievers', and thus is protected 
f
rom their potential reality-disrupting influence. Such segre­
gation is particularly important in the early stages of alterna­
tion (the 'novitiate' phase). Once the new reality has con­
gealed, circumspect relations with outsiders may again be 
entered into, although those outsiders who used to be bio­
graphically significant are still dangerous. They are the ones 
who will say, 'Come off 
it, Saul', and there may be times when 
the old reality they invoke takes the f
orm of temptation. 
Alternation thus involves a reorganization of the conversa­
tional apparatus. The partners in significant conversation 
change. And in conversation with the new significant others 
subjective reality is transf
ormed. It is maintained by con-
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
tinuing conversation with them, or within the community 
they represent. Put simply, this means that one must now be 
very careful with whom one talks. People and ideas that are 
discrepant with the new definitions of reality are systematically 
avoided. 
28 Since this can rarely be done with total success, if 
only because of the memory of past reality, the new plausi­
bility structure will typically provide various therapeutic 
procedures to take care of 'backsliding' tendencies. These 
procedures f
ollow the general pattern of therapy, as discussed 
earlier. 
The most important conceptual requirement for alternation 
is the availability of a legitimating apparatus for the whole 
sequence of transf
ormation. What must be legitimated is not 
only the new reality, but the stages by which it is appropriated 
and maintained, and the abandonment or repudiation of all 
alternative realities. The nihilating side of the conceptual 
machinery is particularly important in view of the dismantling 
problem that must be solved. The old realuty, as well. as th
.
e 
collectivities and significant others that prev10usly mediated 1t 
to the individual, must be reinterpreted within the legitimating 
apparatus of the new reality. This reinterpretation brings 
about a rupture in the subjective biography of the individual 
in terms of 'B.c.' and 'A.D.', 'pre-Damascus' and 'post­
Damascus'. Everything preceding the alternation is now appre­
hended as leading towards it (as an 'Old Testament', so to 
speak, of as praeparatio evangelii), everything f
ollowing it as 
flowing f
rom its new reality. This involves a reinterpretation 
of past biography in toto, f
ollowing the f
ormula, 'Then I 
thought . . .  
now I know'. Frequently this includes the retro­
jection into the past of present interpretative schemas
. (the 
f
ormula f
or this being, 'I already knew then, though m an 
unclear manner . . . ') and motives that were not subjectively 
present in the past but that are now necessary for the reinter­
pretation of what took place then (the f
ormula being, 'I reall
y 
did this because . .  
.'). Pre-alternation biography is typically 
nihilated in toto by subsuming it under a negative category 
occupying a strategic position in the new legitimating apr­
tus : 'When I was still living a lif
e of sin', 'When I was snll 
caught in bourgeois consciousness', 'When I was still mFti­
vated by these unconscious neurotic needs'. The biographical 
179 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
rupture is thus identified with a cognitive separation of dark­
ness and light. 
In addition to this reinterpretation in toto there must be 
particular reinterpretations of past events and persons with 
past significance. The alternating individual would, of course, 
be best off if he could completely forget some of these. But to 
forget completely is notoriously difficult. What is necessary, 
then, is a radical reinterpretation of the meaning of these past 
events or persons in one's biography. Since it is relatively 
easier to invent things that never happened than to forget 
those that actually did, the individual may fabricate and insert 
events wherever they are needed to harmonize the remem­
bered with the reinterpreted past. Since it is the new reality 
rather than the old that now appears dominatingly plausible 
to him, he may be perfectly 'sincere' in such a procedure - sub­
jectively, he is not telling lies about the past but bringing it in 
line with the truth that, necessarily, embraces both present and 
past. This point, incidentally, is very important if one wishes 
to understand adequattly the motives behind the historically 
recurrent falsifications and forgeries of religious documents. 
Persons, too, particularly significant others, are reinterpreted 
in this fashion. The latter now become unwilling actors in a 
drama whose meaning is necessarily opaque to them; and, not 
surprisingly, they typically reject such an assignment. This is 
the reason prophets typically fare badly in their home towns, 
and it is in this context that one may understand Jesus's state­
ment that his followers must leave behind them their fathers 
and mothei:s. 
It is not difficult now to propose a specific 'prescription' for 
alternation into any conceivable reality, however implausible 
from the standpoint of the outsider. It is possible to prescribe 
specific procedures for, say, convincing individuals that they 
can communicate with beings from outer space provided that 
and as long as they stay on a steady diet of raw fish. We can 
leave it to the imagination of the reader, if he is so inclined, to 
work out the details of such a sect of lchthyosophists. The 
'prescription' would entail the construction of an Ichthyo­
sophist plausibility structure, properly segregated from the 
outside world and equipped with the necessary socializing and 
therapeutic personnel; the elaboration of an Ichthyosophist 
180 
SociETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
body of knowledge, sufficiently sophisticated to explain why 
the self-evident nexus between raw fish and galactic telepathy 
had not been discovered before; and the necessary legitima­
tions and nihilations to make sense of the individual's journey 
towards this great truth. If these procedures are followed care­
fully, there will be a high probability of success once an indivi­
dual has been lured or kidnapped into the Ichthyosophist 
brainwashing institute. 
There are in practice, of course, many intermediate types 
between re-socialization as just discussed and secondary 
socialization that continues to build on the primary inter­
nalizations. In these there are partial transformations of sub­
jective reality or of designated sectors of it. Such partial trans­
formations are common in contemporary society in connexion 
with the individual's social mobility and occupational train­
ing. 
29 Here the transformation of subjective reality can be 
considerable, as the individual is made into an acceptable 
upper-middle-class type or an acceptable physician, and as he 
internalizes the appropriate reality-appendages. But these 
transformations typically fall far short of re-socialization. They 
build on the basis of primary internalizations and generally 
avoid abrupt discontinuities within the subjective biography 
of the individual. As a result, they face the problem of main­
taining consistency between the earlier and later elements of 
subjective reality. This problem, not present in this form in 
re-socialization, which ruptures the subjective biography and 
reinterprets the past rather than correlating the present with 
it, becomes more acute the closer secondary socialization gets 
to re-socialization without actually becoming it. Re-socializa­
tion is a cutting of the Gordian knot of the consistency prob­
lem - by giving up the quest for consistency and reconstruct­
ing reality de novo. 
The procedures for maintaining consistency also involve a 
tinkering with the past, but in a less radical manner - an 
approach dictated by the fact that in such cases there is usually 
a continuing association with persons and groups who were 
significant before. They continue to be around, are likely to 
protest too fanciful reinterpretations, and must themselves be 
convinced that such transf
ormations as have taken place are 
plausible. For example, in the case of transformations occur-
181 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
ring in conjunction with social mobility, there are ready-made 
interpretative schemes that explain what has happened to all 
concerned without positing a total metamorphosis of the 
individual concerned. Thus the parents of such an upwardly 
mobile individual will accept certain changes in the latter's 
demeanour and attitudes as a necessary, possibly even desir­
able, accompaniment of his new station in life. 'Of course', 
they will agree, Irving has had to de-emphasize his Jewishness 
now that he has become a successful doctor in suburbia ; 'of 
course' he dresses and speaks differently; 'of course' he now 
votes Republican; 'of course' he married a Vassar girl - and 
perhaps it will also become a matter of course Ņhat he only 
rarely comes to visit his parents. Such interpretative schemes, 
which are ready-made in a society with high upward mobility 
and already internalized by the individual before he himself 
is actually mobile, guarantee biographical continuity and 
smooth inconsistencies as they arise. 
30 
Similar procedures take place in situations where trans­
formations are fairly radical but defined as temporary in dura­
tion - for example, in training for. short-term military service 
or in cases of short-term hospitalization. 31 Here the difference 
from full re-socialization is particulai:Iy easy to see - by com­
paring what happens with training for career military service 
or with the socialization of chronic patients. In the former 
instances, consistency with the previous reality and icentity 
(existence as a civilian or as a healthy person) is already posited 
by the assumption that one will eventually return to these. 
Broadly speaking, one may say that the procedures involved 
are of opposite character. In re-socialization the past is re­
interpreted to conf
orm to the present reality, with the tendency 
to retroject into the past various elements that were subjec­
tively unavailable at the time. In secondary socialization the 
present is interpreted so as to stand in a continuous relation­
ship with the past, with the tendency to minimize such trans­
formations as have actually taken place. Put diff
erently, the 
reality-base for re-socialization is the present, for secondary 
socialization the past. 
182 
2. Internalization and Social Structure 
Socialization always takes place in the context of a specific 
social structure. Not only its contents but also its measure of 
'success' have social-structural conditions and social-structural 
consequences. In other words, the micro-s.ociologi.cal ?r social­
psychological analysis of phenomena of mteņnahŇauon must 
always have as its background a macro-soc10logtcal under­
standing of their structural aspects. 32 
On the level of 
theoretical analysis attempted here we cannot 
enter into a detailed discussion of the different empirical 
relationships between the contents of socialization a.nd social­
structural configurations.33 Some general observatiOns may, 
however, be made on the social-structural aspects of the 'suc­
cess' of socialization. By 'successful socialization' we mean the 
establishment of a high degree of symmetry between objective 
and subjective reality (as well as identity, of course). Coň­
versely 'unsuccessful socialization' is to be understood tn 
terms tf asymmetry between objective and subjective reality. 
As we have seen, totally successful socialization is anthropo­
logically impossible. Totally unsuccessful socializŉtio.n. is, at 
the very least, extremely rare, limited to cases of mdtvtduals 
with whom even minimal socialization fails because of 
extreme 
organic pathology. Our analysis must, therefore, be concerned 
with gradations on a continuum whose extreme poles aŊe 
empirically unavailable. Such analysis is useful ?ŋcause tt 
permits some general statements about the condtttons and 
consequences of successful socialization. 
. 
. 
. 
Maximal success in socialization is likely to occur tn soctettes 
with very simple division of labour and miniŌōŎ distribution 
of knowledge. Socialization under such condtttons produŏes 
identities that are socially predefined and profiled to a htgh 
degree. Since every individual is confronted with essentially 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
the same institutional programme for his lif
e in the society, 
the total f
orce of the institutional order is brought to bear 
with more or less equal weight on each individual, producing 
a compelling massivity f
or the objective reality to be inter­
nalized. Identity then is highly profiled in the sense of rep­
resenting fully the objective reality within which it is located. 
Put simply, everyone pretty much is what he is supposed to be. 
In such a society identities are easily recognizable, objectively 
and subjectively. Everybody knows who everybody else is and 
who he is himself. A knight is a knight and a peasant is a 
peasant, to others as well as to themselves. There is, therefore, 
no problem of identity. The question, 'Who am I ?' is unlikely 
to arise in consciousness, since the socially predefined answer 
is massively real subjectively and consistently confirmed in 
all significant social interaction. This by no means implies 
that the individual is happy with his identity. It was probably 
never very agreeable to be a peasant, for instance. To be a 
peasant entailed problems of all sorts, subjectively real, press­
ing and far f
rom happiness-producing. It did not entail the 
problem of identity. One was a miserable, perhaps even a 
rebellious peasant. But one was a peasant. Persons formed 
under such conditions are unlikely to conceive of themselves 
in terms of 'hidden depths', in a psychological sense. 'Surf
ace' 
and 'under-the-surf
ace' selves are differentiated only in terms 
of the range of subjective reality present to consciousness in 
any given moment, not in terms of a permanent diff
erentiation 
of 'layers' of the self. For example, the peasant apprehends 
himself in one role as he is beating his wif
e and in another as 
he cringes before his lord. In each case, the other role is 
'under the surf
ace', that is, not attended to in the peasant's 
consciousness. But neither role is posited as a 'deeper' or 
'more real' self. In other words, the individual in such a 
society not only is what he is supposed to be, but he is that in 
a unified, 'unstratified' way. 
a-t 
Under such conditions unsuccessf
ul socialization occurs 
only as a result of biographical accidents, either biological or 
social. For example, a child's primary socialization may be 
impaired because of a physical deformity that is socially stig­
matized or because of a stigma based on social definitions.35 
The cripple and the bastard are prototypes of these two cases. 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
There is also the possibility of 
socialization being intrinsically 
prevented by biological handicaps, as in the case of extreme 
mental deficiency. All these cases have the character of indivi­
dual misf
ortune. They do not provide the ground for the ins­
titutionalization of counter-identities and counter-reality. 
Indeed, this f
act provides the measure of misf
ortune present 
in such biographies. In a society of this kind, the individual 
cripple or bastard has virtually no subjective def
ence against 
the stigmatic identity assigned to him. He is what he is sup­
posed to be, to himself as to his significant others and to the 
community as a whole. To be sure, he may react to this f
ate 
with resentment or rage, but it is qua inf
erior being that he is 
resentf
ul or enraged. His resentment and rage may even serve 
as decisive ratifications of his socially defined identity as an 
inf
erior being, since his betters, by definition, are above these 
brutish emotions. He is imprisoned in the objective reality of 
his society, although that reality is subjectively present to him 
in an alien and truncated manner. Such an individual will be 
unsuccessfully socialized, that is, there will be a high degree 
of asymmetry between the socially defined reality in which he 
is de 
facto caught, as in an alien world, and his own subjective 
reality, which reflects that world only very poorly, The asym­
metry will, however, have no cumulative structural conse­
quences because it lacks a social base within which it could 
crystallize into a counter-world, with its own institutionalized 
cluster of counter-identities. The unsuccessfully socialized 
individual himself 
is socially predefin-ed as a profiled type - the 
cripple, the bastard, the idiot, and so on. Consequently, what­
ever contrary self
-identifications may at times arise in his own 
consciousness lack any plausibility structure that would 
transform them into something more than ephemeral f
antasies. 
Incipient counter-definitions of reality and identity are 
present as soon as any such individuals congregate in socially 
durable groups. This triggers a process of change that will 
introduce a more complex distribution of knowledge. A 
counter-reality may now begin to be objectivated in the mar­
ginal group of the unsuccessf
ully socialized. At this point, of 
course, the group will initiate its own socialization processes. 
For example, lepers and the off
spring of lepers may be stig­
matized in a society. Such stigmatization may be limited to 
185 


THE SociAL CoNSTRUCTION oF REALITY 
those physically afHicted with the disease, or it may include 
others by social definition - say, anyone born in an earthquake. 
Thus individuals may be defined as lepers f
rom birth, and this 
definition may sEverely aff
ect their primary socialization - say, 
under the ausptces of a crazy old woman, who keeps them 
physically alive beyond the confines of the community and 
transmits to them a bare minimum of the community's 
institutional traditions. As long as such individuals, even 
if they number more than a handf
ul, do. not f
orm a counter­
community of their own, both their objective and subjective 
identities will be predefined in accordance with the com­
munity's institutional programme f
or them. They will be 
lepers, and nothing else. 
The situation begins to change when there is a leper colony 
sufficiently large and durable to serve as a plausibility struc­
ture f
or counter-definitions of reality - and of the f
ate of being 
a leper. To be a leper, be it in terms of biological or social 
assignment, may now be known as the special mark of divine 
election. The individuals prevented f
rom f
ully internalizing 
the reality of the community may now be socialized into the 
counter-reality of the lepers' colony ; that is, unsuccessf
ul 
socialization into one social world may be accompanied by 
successful socialization into another. At any early stage of 
such a process of change the crystallization of counter-reality 
and counter-identity may be hidden f
rom the knowledge of 
the larger community, which still predefines and ongoingly 
identifies these individuals as lepers, and nothing else. It does 
not know that, 'really', they are the special sons of the gods. 
At this point an individual assigned to the leper category may 
discover 'hidden depths' within himself. The question 'Who 
am I?' becomes possible simply because two conflicting 
answers are socially available - the crazy old woman's ('You 
are a leper') and that of the colony's own socializing personnel 
('You are a son of god'). As the individual accords a privileged 
status within his consciousness to the colony's definitions of 
reality and of himself
, a rupture occurs between his 'visible' 
conduct in the larger community and his 'invisible' self
­
identification as someone quite diff
erent. In other words, a 
cleavage appears between 'appearance' and 'reality' in the ih­
dividual's self
-apprehension. He no longer is what he is sup-
186 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
posed to be. He acts the leper - he is a son of 
god. If 
we are to 
push the example one step f
urther, to the point when this 
cleavage becomes known to the non-leprous community, it is 
not difficult to see that the community's reality, too, will be 
affected by this change. Minimally, it will no longer be so easy 
to recognize the identity of those defined as lepers - one will 
no longer be sure whether an individual so defined identifies 
himself in the same way or not. Maximally, it will no longer 
be an easy matter to recognize anybody's identity - for iflepers 
can refuse to be what they are supposed to be, so can others ; 
perhaps, so can oneself. If this process appears f
anciful at first, 
it is beautif
ully illustrated by Gandhi's designation of hari
jans, 
that is, 'children of God', f
or the outcastes of Hinduism. 
Once there is a more complex distribution of knowledge in a 
society, unsuccessf
ul socialization may be the result of diff
erent 
significant others mediating diff
erent objective realities to the 
individual. Put diff
erently, unsuccessful socialization may be 
the result of heterogeneity in the socializing personnel. This 
may occur in a number of ways. There may be situations in 
which all the significant others of primary socialization mediate 
a common reality, but f
rom considerably diff
erent perspectives. 
To a degree, of course, every significant other has a diff
erent 
perspective on the common reality simply by virtue of being a 
specific individual with a specific biography. But the conse­
quences we have in mind here occur only when the diff
erences 
between the significant others pertain to their social types 
rather than their individual idiosyncrasies. For example, men 
and women may 'inhabit' considerably different social worlds 
in a society. If both men and women f
unction as significant 
others in primary socialization, they mediate these discrepant 
realities to the child. This by itself does not raise the threat of 
unsuccessful socialization. The male and f
emale versions of 
reality are socially recognized, and this recognition, too, is 
transmitted in primary socialization. Thus there is a predefined 
dominance of the male version f
or the male child and of the 
f
emale version f
or the f
emale. The child will know the version 
appertaining to the other sex, to the extent that it has been 
mediatvd to him by the significant others of the other sex, but 
he will not identif
y with this version. Even minimal distribu­
tion of knowledge posits specific jurisdictions f
or the diff
erent 


THE SociAL CoNSTRUCTION OF. REALITY 
versions of the common reality. In the above case the femal¼ 
version is socially defined as having no jurisdiction over the 
male child. Normally, this definition of the 'proper place' of 
the reality of the other sex is internalized by the child, who 
'properly' identifies with the reality to which he has been 
assigned. 
However, 'abnormality' becomes a biographical possibility 
if a certain competition exists between reality-definitions, 
raising the possibility of choosing between them. For a variety 
of biographical reasons the child may make the 'wrong 
choice'. For example, a male child may internalize 'improper' 
elements of the female world because his f
ather is absent dur­
ing the crucial period of primary socialization and it is ad­
ministered exclusively by his mother and three older sisters. 
They may mediate the 'proper' jurisdictional definitions to the 
little boy so that he knows he is not supposed to live in the 
women's world. But he may nevertheless identif
y with it. His 
resulting 'effeminacy' may be either 'visible' or 'invisible'. In 
either case, there will be asymmetry between his social identity­
assignment and his subjectively real identity.36 
Obviously ·a society will supply therapeutic mechanisms to 
take care of such 'abnormal' cases. We need not reiterate here 
what has been said about therapy, except to stress that the 
need for therapeutic mechanisms increases in proportion to 
the structurally given potentiality for unsuccessf
ul socializa­
tion. In the example just discussed, at the very least the suc­
cessf
ully socialized children will put pressure on the 'wrong' 
ones. As long as there is no f
undamental conflict between the 
mediated definitions of reality, but only differences between 
versions of the same common reality, the chances for success­
ful therapy are good. 
Unsuccessf
ul socialization may also result f
rom the media­
tion of acutely discrepant worlds by significant others during 
primary socialization. As the distribution of knowledge be­
comes more complex, discrepant worlds become available and 
may be mediated by diff
erent significant others in primary 
socialization. This happens less frequently than the situation 
just discussed, in which versions of the same common world 
are distributed among the socializing personnel, because 
individuals (say, a married couple) sufficiently cohesive as a 
188 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
group to take on the task of primary socialization are likely to 
have concocted some sort of common world between them. It 
does occur, however, and is of 
considerable theoretical interest. 
For example, a child may be raised not only by his parents 
but also by a nurse recruited f
rom an ethnic or class sub­
society. The parents mediate to the child the world of, say, 
a conquering aristocracy of one race ; the nurse mediates the 
world of a subjugated peasantry of another race. It is even pos­
sible that the two mediations employ completely different 
languages, which the child learns simultaneously but which 
the parents and the nurse find mutually unintelligible. In such 
a case, of course, the parental world will have dominance by 
predefinition. The child will be recognized by all concerned 
and by himself as belonging to his parents' group and not his 
nurse's. All the same, the predefinition of the respective juris­
dictions of the two realities may be upset by various bio­
graphical accidents, just as it may in the first situation dis­
cussed, except that now unsuccessf
ul socialization entails the 
possibility of alternation internalized as a permanent f
eature 
of the individual's subjective self
-apprehension. The choice 
potentially available to the child now is more profiled, involv­
ing diff
erent worlds rather than different versions of the same 
world. Needless to say, in practice there will be many grada­
tions between the first and second situations. 
When acutely discrepant worlds are mediated in primary 
socialization, the individual is presented with a choice of pro­
filed identities apprehended by him as genuine biographical 
possibilities. He may become a man as understood by race A 
or as understood by race B. This is when the possibility of a 
truly hidden identity, not readily recognizable in accordance 
with the objectively available typifications, appears. In other 
words, there may be a socially concealed asymmetry between 
'public' and 'private' biography. As f
ar as the parents are 
concerned, the child is now ready f
or the preparatory phase 
of knighthood. Unknown to them, but sustained by the plausi­
bility structure supplied by his nurse's sub-society, the child 
himself is 'only playing at' this process, while 'really' prepar­
ing himself f
or initiation into the higher religious mysteries of 
the subjugated group. Similar discrepancies occur in con­
temporary society between the socialization processes in the 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
family and in the peer group. As f
ar as the f
amily is concerned 
the child is ready for graduation f
rom junior high school. A 
far as the peer group is concerned, he is ready f
or his first 
serious test of courage by stealing an automobile. It goes with­
out saying that such situations are f
raught with possibilities 
of internal conflict and guilt. 
Presumably all men, once socialized, are potential 'traitors 
to themselves'. The internal problem of such 'treason', how­
ever, becomes much more complicated if it entails the further 
problem of which 'self' is being betrayed at any particular 
moment, a problem posited as soon as identification with 
diff
erent significant others includes diff
erent generalized 
others. The child is betraying his parents as he prepares f
or 
the mysteries and his nurse as he trains f
or knighthood, just as 
he betrays his peer group by being a 'square' young scholar 
and his parents by stealing an automobile, with each betrayal 
concomitant with 'treason to himself' in so far as he has identi­
fied with the two discrepant worlds. We have discussed the 
various options open to him in our previous analysis of alterna­
tion, although it will be clear that these options have a diff
erent 
subje:tiv  reality
_
when they are already internalized in primary 
soc1ahzat10n. It 1s safe to assume that alternation remains a 
lif
elong threat to whatever subjective reality emerges from 
such conflict as the result of whatever options, a threat posited 
once and for all with the introduction of the alternating possi­
bility into primary socialization itself. 
The possibility of 'individualism' (that is, of individual 
¡boice between ¢s:£epant realities and identities) is directly 
hnked to the poss1bil1ty of unsuccessful socialization. We have 
argued that unsuccessful socialization opens up the question 
of 'Who am I?' In the social-structural context in which un­
s¤cces¥f
ul socialization becomes so recognized, the same ques­
tl?n anses ¦
or the success
full
y
 socialized individual by virtue of 
h1s reflectiOn about the unsuccessf
ully socialized. He will 
sooner or later encounter those with 'hidden selves' 
the 
'traitors', those who have alternated or are alternating bet§een 
discrepant worlds. By a kind of mirror eff
ect the question 
may come to apply to himself, first according to the f
ormula 
'There, but for the grace of God, go I', eventually perhaps by 
the formula 'If they, why not I?' This opens a Pandora's box 
190 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
of 'individualistic' choices, which eventually become generali­
ized regardless of whether one's biographical course was 
determined by the 'right' or the 'wrong' choices. The 'indivi­
dualist' emerges as a specific social type who has at least the 
potential to migrate between a number of available worlds and 
who has deliberately and awarely constructed a self out of the 
'material' provided by a number of available identities. 
A third important situation leading to unsuccessful socializa­
tion arises when there are discrepancies between primary and 
secondary socialization. The unity of primary socialization is 
maintained, but in secondary socialization, alternative realities 
and identities appear as subjective options. The options are, 
of course, limited by the social-structural context of the indivi­
dual. For example, he may want to become a knight, but his 
social position makes this a f
oolish ambition. When secondary 
socialization has been diff
erentiated to the point where sub­
jective disidentification f
rom one's 'proper place' in society 
becomes possible, and when at the same time the social struc­
ture does not permit the realization of the subjectively chosen 
identity, an interesting development occurs. The subjectively 
chosen identity becomes a fantasy identity, objectified within 
the individual's consciousness as his 'real self'. It may be 
assumed that people always have dreams of impossible wish­
f
ulfilment, and the like. The peculiarity of this particular fan­
tasy lies in the objectification, on the level of imagination, of 
an identity other than the one objectively assigned and pre­
viously internalized in primary socialization. It is obvious that 
any wider distribution of this phenomenon will introduce 
tensions and unrest into the social structure, threatening the 
institutional programmes and their taken-f
or-granted reality. 
Another very important consequence when there is discre­
pancy between primary and secondary socialization is the 
possibility that the individual may have a relationship to dis­
crepant worlds qualitatively different f
rom the relationships in 
the previously discussed situations. If 
discrepant worlds appear 
in primary socialization, the individual has the option of 
identi­
f
ying with one of them as against the others, a process that, 
because it occurs in primary socialization, will be aff
ectively 
charged to a high degree. Identification, disidentification and 
alternation will all be accompanied by affective crises, since 
191 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
they will invariably depend upon the mediation of significant 
others. The appresentation of discrepant worlds in secondary 
socialization produces an entirely diff
erent configuration. In 
secondary socialization, internalization need not be accom­
panied by aff
ectively charged identification with significant 
· 
others ; the individual may internalize different realities without 
identifying with them. Therefore, if an alternative world 
appears in secondary socialization, the individual may opt for 
it in a manipulative manner. One could speak here of 'cool' 
alternation. The individual internalizes the new reality, but 
instead of its being his reality, it is a reality to be used by him 
for specific purposes. In so far as this involves the perf
ormance 
of certain roles, he retains subjective detachment vis-a-vis 
them - he 'puts them on' deliberately and purposefully. If this 
phenomenon becomes widely distributed, the institutional 
order as a whole begins to take on the character of a network 
of reciprocal manipulations. 
37 
A society in which discrepant worlds are generally available 
on a market basis entails specific constellations of subjective 
reality and identity. There will be an increasingly general con­
sciousness of the relativity of all worlds, including one's own, 
which is now subjectively apprehended as 'a world', rather 
than 'the world'. It follows that one's own institutionalized 
conduct may be apprehended as 'a role' f
rom which one may 
detach oneself in one's own consciousness, and which one may 
'act out' with manipulative control. For example, the aristocrat 
no longer simply is an aristocrat, but he plays at being an 
aristocrat, and so f
orth. The situation, then, has a much more 
far-reaching consequence than the possibility of individuals 
playing at being what they are not supposed to be. They also 
play :tt being what they are supposed to be - a quite different 
matter. This situation is increasingly typical of contemporary 
industrial society, but it would obviously transcend the scope 
of our present considerations to enter further into a sociology­
of
-knowledge and social-psychological analysis of this con­
stellation. 38 What should be stressed is that such a situation 
cannot be understood unless it is ongoingly related to its 
social-structural context, which follows logically from the 
necessary relationship between the social division of labour 
(with its consequences for social structure) and the social dis-
192 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
tribution of knowledge (with its consequences for the social 
objectivation of reality). In the contemporary situation this 
entails the analysis of both reality and identity pluralism with 
ref
erence to the structural dynamics of industrialism, parti­
cu!arly the dynamics of the social stratification patterns pro­
duced by industrialism. 
39 
193 


3· Theories about Identity 
Identity is, of course, a key element of subjective reality and, 
like all subjective reality, stands in a dialectical relationship 
with society. Identity is f
ormed by social processes. Once 
crystallized, it is maintained, modified, or even reshaped by 
social relations. The social processes involved in both the 
f
ormation and the maintenance of identity are determined by 
the social structute. Conversely, the identities produced by 
the interplay of organism, individual consciousness and social 
structure react upon the given social structure, maintaining it, 
modifying it, or even reshaping it. Societies have histories in 
the course of which specific identities emerge ; these histories 
are, however, made by men with specific identities. 
If one is mindful of this dialectic one can avoid the mis­
leading notion of'collective identities' without having recourse 
to the uniqueness, sub specie aeternitatis, of individual exis­
tence.40 Specific historical social structures engender identity 
t
ypes, which are recognizable in individual cases. In this sense 
one may assert that an American has a different identity than 
a Frenchman, a New Yorker than a Midwesterner, an execu­
tive than a hobo, and so forth. As we have seen, orientation 
and conduct in everyday lif
e depend upon such typifications. 
This means that identity types can be observed in everyday 
lif
e and that assertions like the ones above can be verified - or 
ref
uted - by ordinary men endowed with common sense. The 
American who doubts that the French are diff
erent can go to 
France and find out f
or himself. Clearly the status of such 
typifications is not comparable to that of the constructs of the 
social sciences, nor do the verification and ref
utation follow 
the canons of scientific method. We must leave aside the 
methodological problem of what the precise relationship is 
between everyday-lif
e typifications and scientific constructs 
194 
SociETY AS SuBJECTIVE REALITY 
----------
(a Puritan knew himself to be a Puritan and was recognized as 
one by, say, Anglicans without much deliberation ; the social 
scientist, however, who wishes to check Max Weber's thesis 
about the Puritan ethic must follow somewhat diff
erent and 
more complex procedures in order to 'recognize' the empirical 
ref
erents of the Weberian ideal type). The point of interest in 
the present context is that identity types are 'observable' and 
'verifiable' in pre-theoretical, and thus pre-scientific experience. 
Identity is a phenomenon that emerges from the dialectic 
between individual and society. Identity types, on the other 
hand, are social products tout court, relatively stable elements 
of objective social reality (the degree of stability being, of 
course, socially determined in its turn). As such, they are the 
topic of some f
orm of theorizing in any society, even if they 
are stable and the f
ormation of 
individual identities is relatively 
unproblematic. Theories about identity are always embedded 
in a more general interpretation of reality; they are 'built into' 
the symbolic universe and its theoretical legitimations, and 
vary with the character of the latter. Identity remains un­
intelligible unless it is located in a world. Any theorizing about 
identity - and about specific identity types - must therefore 
occur within the f
ramework of the theoretical interpretations 
within which it and they are locate:d. We will return to this 
point presently. 
It should be stressed again that we are here ref
erring to 
theories about identity as a social phenomenon; that is, with­
out prejudice as to their acceptability to modern science. In­
deed, we will refer to such theories as 'psychologies' and will 
include any theory about identity that claims to explain the 
empirical phenomenon in a comprehensive f
ashion, whether 
or not such an explanation is 'valid' f
or the contemporary 
scientific discipline of that name. 
If theories about identity are always embedded in the more 
comprehensive theories about reality, this must be understood 
in terms of the logic underlying the latter. For example, a 
psychology interpreting certain empir{al phenomena as pos­
session by demoniacal beings has as its matrix a mythological 
theory of the cosmos, and it is inappropriate to interpret it in 
a non-mythological framework. Similarly, a psychology inter­
preting the same phenomena in terms of 
electrical disturbances 
195 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
of the brain has as its background an overall scientific theory 
of reality, both human and non-human, and derives its con­
sistency f
rom the logic underlying this theory. Put simply, 
psychology always presupposes cosmology. 
This point can be well illustrated by ref
erence to the much · 
used psychiatric term 'reality-oriented'.41 A psychiatrist trying 
to diagnose an individual whose psychological status is in 
doubt asks him questions to determine the degree of his 
'reality-orientedness'. This is quite logical ; f
rom a psychiatric 
viewpoint there is obviously something problematic about an 
individual who does not know what day of the week it is or 
who readily admits he has talked with departed spirits: Indeed, 
the term 'reality-oriented' itself can be useful in such a con­
text. The sociologist, however, has to ask the additional ques­
tion 'Which reality?' Incidentally, this addition is not irre­
levant psychiatrically. The psychiatrist will c"'rtainly take it 
into account, when an individual does not know the day of the 
week, if he has just arrived by jet plane f
rom another conti­
nent. He may not know the day of the week simply because he 
is still 'on another time' - Calcutta time, say, instead of 
Eastern Standard Time. If 
the psychiatrist has any sensitivity 
to the socio-cultural context of psychological conditions he 
will also arrive at different diagnoses of the individual who 
converses with the dead, depending on whether such an in­
dividual comes f
rom, say, New York City or f
rom rural Haiti. 
The individual could be 'on another reality' in the same 
socially objective sense that the previous one was 'on another 
time'. In other words, questions of 
psychological status cannot 
be decided without recognizing the reality-definitions that are 
taken f
or granted in the social situation of t.
1.e individual. To 
put it more sharply, psychological status is relative to the 
social definitions of reality in general and is itself socially 
defined.42 
The emergence of psychologies introduces a f
urther dialec­
tical relationship between identity and society - the relationship 
between psychological theory and those elements of 
subjective 
reality it purports to define and explain. The level of such 
theorizing may, of course, vary greatly, as in the case of all 
theoretical legitimations. What has been said previously about 
the origins and phases of legitimating theories applies here 
I9() 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
with equal validity, but with one not unimportant diff
erence. 
Psychologies pertain to a dimension of reality that is of the 
greatest and most continuous subjective relevance f
or all indi­
viduals. Theref
ore the dialectic between theory and reality 
aff
ects the individual in a palpably direct and intensive manner. 
When psychological theories attain a high degree of 
intellec­
tual complexity they are likely to be administered by personnel 
specially trained in this body of knowledge. Whatever the 
social organization of these specialists may be, psychological 
theories re-enter everyday lif
e by providing the interpretative 
schemes f
or disposing of probleatic cases. Problems arising 
out of the dialectic between either subjective identity and 
social identity-assignments, or identity and its biological sub­
stratum (of which more later), can be classified according to 
theoretical categories - which is, of course, the presupposit
ion 
f
or any therapy. The psychological theories then serve to 
legitimate the identity-maintenance and identity-repair pro­
cedures established in the society, providing the theoretical 
linkage between identity and world, as these are both socially 
defined and subjectively appropriated. 
Psychological theories may be empirically adequate or in­
adequate, by which we do not mean their adequacy in terms of 
the procedural canons of empirical science, but rather, as 
interpretative schemes applicable by the expert or the layman 
to empirical phenomena in everyday lif
e. For example, a 
psychological theory positing demoniacal possession is un­
likely to be adequate in interpreting the identity problems of 
middle-class, Jewish intellectuals in New York City. These 
people simply do not have an identity capable of producing 
phenomena that could be so interpreted. The demons, if such 
there are, seem to avoid them. On the other hand, psycho­
analysis is unlikely to be adequate f
or the interpretation of 
identity problems in rural Haiti, while some sort of Voudun 
psychology might supply interpretative schemes with a high 
degree of empirical accuracy. The two psychologies demon­
strate their empirical adequacy by their applicability in therapy, 
but neither thereby demonstrates the ontological status of its 
categories. Neither the Voudun gods nor libidinal energy may 
exist outside the world defined in the respective social con­
texts. But in these contexts they do exist by virtue of social 
197 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
definition and are internalized as realities in the course of 
socialization. Rural Haitians are possessed and New York 
intellectuals are neurotic. Possession and neurosis are thus 
constituents of both objective and subjective reality in these 
contexts. This reality is empirically available in everyday lif
e. 
The respective psychological theories are empirically adequate 
in precisely the same sense. The problem of whether or how 
psychological theories could be developed to transcend this 
socio-historical relativity need not concern us here. 
In so far as psychological theories are adequate in this sense, 
they are capable of empirical verification. Again, what is at 
issue is not verification in the scientific sense, but testing in the 
experience of everyday social life. For example, it may be 
proposed that individuals born on certain days of the month 
are likely to be possessed, or that individuals with domineering 
mothers are likely to be neurotic. Such propositions are em­
pirically verifiable to the extent that they belong to adequate 
theories, in the afore-mentioned sense. Such verification may 
be undertaken by participants as well as by outside observers 
of the social situations in question. A Haitian ethnologist can 
empirically discover New York neurosis, just as an American 
ethnologist can empirically discover Voudun possession. The 
presupposition for such discoveries is simply that the outside 
observer is willing to employ the conceptual machinery of the 
indigenous psychology for the inquiry at hand. Whether he is 
also willing to accord that psychology a more general episte­
mological validity is irrelevant to the immediate empirical 
investigation. 
Another way of saying that psychological theories are ade­
quate is to say that they reflect the psychological reality they 
purport to explain. But if this were the whole story, the 
relationship between theory and reality here would not be a 
dialectical one. A genuine dialectic is involved because of the 
realizing potency of psychological theories. In so far as psy­
chological theories are elements of the social definition of 
reality, their reality-generating capacity is a characteristic they 
share with other legitimating theories ; however, their realizing 
potency is particularly great because it is actualized by emo­
tionally charged processes of identity-formation. If a psycho­
logy becomes socially established (that is, becomes generally 
198 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
recognized as an adequate interpretation of objective reality), 
it tends to realize itselfforcefully in the phenomena it purports 
to interpret. Its internalization is accelerated by the fact that 
it pertains to internal reality, so that the individual realizes it 
in the very act of internalizing it. Again, since a psychology by 
definition pertains to identity, its internalization is likely to be 
accompanied by identification, hence is ipso facto likely to be 
identity-forming. In this close nexus between internalization 
and identification, psychological theories differ considerably 
from other types of theory. Not surprisingly, since problems 
of 
unsuccessful socialization are most conducive to this kind of 
theorizing, psychological theories are more apt to have 
socializing effects. This is not the same thing as saying that 
psychologies are self-verifying. As we have indicated, verifica­
tion comes by confronting psychological theories and psycho­
logical reality as empirically available. Psychologies produce a 
reality, which in turn serves as the basis for their verification. 
In other words, we are dealing here with dialectics, not tauto­
logy. 
The rural Haitian who internalizes Voudun psychology will 
become possessed as soon as he discovers certain well-defined 
signs. Similarly, the New York intellectual who internalizes 
Freudian psychology will become neurotic as soon as he diag­
noses certain well-known symptoms. Indeed, it is possible 
that, given a certain biographical context, signs or symptoms 
will be produced by the individual himself. The Haitian will, 
in that case, produce not symptoms of neurosis but signs of 
possession, while the New Yorker will construct his neurosis in 
conformity with the recognized symptomatology. This has 
nothing to do with 'mass hysteria', much less with malinger­
ing, but with the imprint of societal identity types upon the 
individual subjective reality of ordinary people with common 
sense. The degree of 
identification will vary with the conditions 
of internalization, as previously discussed, depending, for 
instance, on whether' it takes place in primary or secondary 
socialization. The social establishment of a psychology, which 
also entails the accordnce of certain social roles to the per­
sonnel administering the theory and its therapeutic application, 
will naturally depend upon a variety of socio-historical cir­
cumstances. 
43 But the more socially established it becomes, 
199 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
the more abundant will be the phenomena it serves to inter­
pret. 
If we posit the possibility that certain psychologies come to 
be adequate in the course of a realizing process, we imply the 
question of why as-yet-inadequate theories (as they would 
have to be in the earlier stages of this process) arise in the first 
place. Put more simply, why should one psychology replace 
another in history? The general answer is that such change 
occurs when identity appears as a problem, for whatever 
reasons. The problem may arise out of the dialectic of psycho­
logical reality and social structure. Radical changes in the 
social structure (such as, f
or instance, the changes brought 
about by the Industrial Revolution) may result in concomitant 
changes in the psychological reality. In that case, new psycho­
logical theories may arise because the old ones no longer ade­
quately explain the empirical phenomena at hand. Theorizing 
about identity will then seek to take cognizance of the trans­
f
ormations of identity that have actually occurred, and will be 
itself transf
ormed in the process. On the other hand, identity 
may become problematic on the level of theory itself
, that is, 
as a result of intrinsic theoretical developments. In that case, 
psychological theories will be concocted 'bef
ore the f
act', so to 
speak. Their subsequent social establishment, and concomitant 
reality-generating potency, may be brought about by any 
number of affinities between the theorizing personnel and 
various social interests. Deliberate ideological manipulation 
by politically interested groups is one historical possibility. 
200 
4· Organism and Identity 
We discussed much earlier the organismic presuppositions and 
limitations of the social construction of reality. It is important 
to stress now that the organism continues to affect each phase 
of man's reality-constructing activity and that the organism, 
in turn, is itself affected by this activity. Put crudely, man's 
animality is transf
ormed in socialization, but it is not abolished. 
Thus man's stomach keeps grumbling away even as he is about 
his business of world-building. Conversely, events in this, his 
product, may make his stomach grumble more, or less, or 
diff
erently. Man is even capable of eating and theorizing at the 
same time. The continuing coexistence of man's animality and 
his sociality may be profitably observed at any conversation 
over dinner. 
It is possible to speak of a dialectic between nature and 
society." This dialectic is given in the human condition .an
d 
manif
ests itself anew in each human individual. For the 
individual, of course, it unf
olds itself in an already structured 
socio-historical situation. There is an ongoing dialectic, which 
comes into being with the very first phases of socialization and 
continues to unf
old throughout the individual's existence in 
society, between each human animal and its socio-historical 
situation. Externally, it is a dialectic between the individual 
animal and the social world. Internally, it is a dialectic be­
tween the individual's biological substratum and his socially 
produced identity. 
In the external aspect, it is still possible to say that the 
organism posits liffiits to what is socially possible. As English 
constitutional lawyers have said, Parliament can do anything 
except make men bear children. If Parliament tried, its project 
would f
ounder on the hard f
acts of human biology. Biological 
f
actors limit the range of social possibilities open to any 
201 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
individual, but the social world, which is pre-existent to each 
individual, in its turn imposes limits on what is biologically 
possible to the organism. The dialectic manif
ests itself in the 
mutua/ limitation of organism and society. 
A pointed illustration of 
society's limitation of the organism's 
biological possibilities is longevity. Lif
e expectancy varies 
with social location. Even in contemporary American society 
there is considerable discrepancy between the life expectancies 
of lower-class and upper-class individuals. Furthermore, both 
the incidence and the character of pathology vary with social 
location. Lower-class individuals are ill more f
requently than 
upper-class individuals; in addition they have diff
erent ill­
nesses. In other words, society determines how long and in 
what manner the individual organism shall live. This deter­
mination may be institutionally programmed in the operation 
of social controls, as in the institution of law. Society can 
maim and kill. Indeed, it is in its power over lif
e and death 
that it manif
ests its ultimate control over the individual. 
Society also directly penetrates the organism in its f
unction­
ing, most importantly in respect to sexuality and nutrition. 
While both sexuality and nutrition are grounded in biological 
drives, these drives are extremely plastic in the human animal. 
Man is driven by his biological constitution to seek sexual 
release and nourishment. But his biological constitution does 
not tell him where he should seek sexual release and what he 
should eat. Lef
t to himself, man may attach himself 
sexually to 
just about any object and is perf
ectly capable of eating things 
that will
 kill
 him. Sexuality and nutrition are channelled in 
specific directions socially rather than biologically, a channel­
ling that not only imposes limits upon these activities, but 
directly 
ects organismic f
unctions. Thus the successf
ully 
socialized individual is incapable of f
unctioning sexually with 
the 'wrong' sexual object and may vomit when conf
ronted 
with the 'wrong' f
ood. As we have seen, the social channelling 
of activity is the essence of institutionalization, which is the 
f
oundation for the social construction of 
reality. It may be said 
then that social reality determines not only activity and con­
sciousness but, to a considerable degree, organismic f
unction­
ing. Thus such intrinsically biological functions as orgasm 
and digestion are socially structured. Society also determines 
202 
SOCIETY AS SUBJECTIVE REALITY 
the manner in which the organism is used in activity; expressi­
vity, gait and gesture are socially structured. The possibility of 
a sociology of the body that this raises need not concern us 
here. 45 The point is that society sets limits to the organism, as 
the organism sets limits to society. 
In the internal aspect, the dialectic manif
ests itself as the 
resistance of the biological substratum to its social moulding. 
48 
This is, of course, most obvious in the process of primary 
socialization. The difficulties in first socializing a child cannot 
be accounted f
or simply in terms of intrinsic problems of 
learning. The little animal fights back, so to speak. The fact 
that it is f
ated to lose the battle does not eliminate its ani­
mality's resistance to the ever more penetrating influence of 
the social world. For example, the child resists the imposition 
of the temporal structure of society on the natural temporality 
of his organism. 47 He resists eating and sleeping by the clock 
rather than by the biologically given demands of the organism. 
The resistance is progressively broken in the course of sociali­
zation, but perpetuates itself as f
rustration on every occasion 
when society f
orbids the hungry individual to eat and the 
sleepy individual to go to bed. Socialization inevitably involves 
this sort of biological f
rustration. Social existence depends 
upon the continuing subjugation of biologically grounded 
resistance in the individual, which entails legitimation as well 
as institutionalization. Thus society provides the individual 
with various explanations as to why he should eat three times 
a day, and not whenever he'is hungry, and with even stronger 
explanations as to why he should not sleep with his sister. 
Similar problems of fitting the organism into the socially 
constructed world exist in secondary socialization, although, 
of course, the degree of biological f
rustration is likely to be 
less acute. 
In the f
ully socialized individual there is a continuing inter­
nal dialectic between identity and its biological substratum. 48 
The individual continues to experience himself as an organism, 
apart f
rom and sometimes set against the socially derived 
objectifications of himself. Of
ten this dialectic is apprehended 
as a struggle between a 'higher' and a 'lower' self
, respectively 
equated with social identity and pre-social, possibly nti­
social animality. The 'higher' self must repeatedly assert Itself 
203 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
over the 'lower', sometimes in critical tests of strength. For 
example, a man must overcome his instinctive f
ear of death by 
courage in battle. The 'lower' self here is whipped into sub­
Mission by the 'higher', an assertion of dominance over the 
biological substratum that is necessary if the social identity of 
warrior is to be maintained, both objectively and subjectively. 
Similarly, a man may f
orce himself 
to perform sexually against 
the inert resistance of 
physiological satiety in order to maintain 
his identity as a paragon of virility. Again, the 'lower' self is 
pressed into service for the sake of the 'higher'. The victory 
over f
ear and the victory over sexual prostration both illustrate 
the manner in which the biological substratum resists and is 
overcome by the social self within man. It goes without saying 
that there are many lesser victories routinely undertaken in 
the course of everyday lif
e, as indeed there are both lesser and 
greater def
eats. 
Man is biologically predestined to construct and to inhabit 
a world with others. This world becomes f
or him the dominant 
and definite reality. Its limits are set by nature, but, once con­
structed, this world acts back upon nature. In the dialectic 
between nature and the socially constructed world the human 
organism itself is transf
ormed. In this same dialectic man 
produces reality and thereby produces himself. 
Conclusion 


The Sociology of Knowledge 
and Sociological Theory 
In the foregoing we-have tried to present a general and syste­
matic account of the role of 
knowledge in society. It is obvious 
that our analyses are not exhaustive. But we hope that our 
attempt to develop a systematic theory for the sociology of 
knowledge will stimulate both critical discussion and empirical 
investigations. Of one thing we are confident. A redefinition of 
the problems and tasks of the sociology ofknowledge was long 
overdue. We hope that our analysis indicates the way along 
which further work might f
ruitf
ully proceed. 
However, our conception of the sociology of knowledge also 
contains some general implications f
or sociological theory and 
the sociological enterprise at large, and furnishes a different 
perspective on a number of 
specific areas of 
sociological interest. 
The analyses of objectivation, institutionalization and legiti­
mation are directly applicable to the problems of the sociology 
of language, the theory of social action and institutions, and 
the sociology of religion. Our understanding of the sociology 
of knowledge leads to the conclusion that the sociologies of 
language and religion cannot be considered peripheral speciali­
ties of little interest to sociological theory as such, but have 
essential contributions to make to it. This insight is not new. 
Durkheim and his school had it, but it was lost for a variety of 
theoretically irrelevant reasons. We hope we have made it 
clear that the sociology of knowledge presupposes a sociology 
oflanguage, and that a sociology of knowledge without a socio­
logy of religion is impossible (and vice versa). Furthermore, 
we believe that we have shown how the theoretical positions 
of Weber and Durkheim can be combined in a comprehensive 
theory of social action that does not lose the inner logic of 
either. Finally, we would contend that the linkage we have 
been led to make here between the sociology of knowledge and 
207 


THE SoCIAL CONSTRUCTION OP REALITY 
the theoretical core of 
the thought of 
Mead and his school sug­
gests an interesting possibility for what might be called a 
sociological psychology, that is, a psychology that derives its 
fundamental perspectives f
rom a sociological understanding 
of the human condition. The observations made here point to 
a programme that seems to carry theoretical promise. 
More generally, we would contend that the analysis of the 
role of knowledge in the dialectic of individual and society, of 
personal identity and social structure, provides a crucial com­
plementary perspective f
or all areas of sociology. This is cer­
tainly not to deny that purely structural analyses of social 
phenomena are f
ully adequate f
or wide areas of sociological 
inquiry, ranging f
rom the study of 
small groups to that oflarge 
institutional complexes, such as the economy or politics. 
Nothing is further f
rom our intentions than the suggestion that 
a sociology-of
-knowledge 'angle' ought somehow to be injected 
into all such analyses. In many cases this would be un­
necessary f
or the cognitive goal at which these studies aim. We 
are suggesting, however, that the integration of the findings of 
such analyses into the body of sociological theory requires 
more than the casual obeisance that might be paid to the 
'human f
actor' behind the uncovered structural data. Such 
integration requires a systematic accounting of the dialectical 
relation between the structural realities and the human enter­
prise of constructing reality - in history. 
We have no polemic interest in writing this book. It would 
be f
oolish to deny, however, that our enthusiasm f
or the pre­
sent state of sociological theory is markedly restrained. For 
one thing, we have tried to show, by our analysis of the inter­
relations between institutional processes and the legitimating 
symbolic universes, why we must consider the standard ver­
sions of functionalist explanations in the social sciences a 
theoretical legerdemain. Furthermore, we hope we have 
shown cause f
or our conviction that a purely structural socio­
logy is endemically in danger of reifying social phenomena. 
Even if 
it begins by modestly assigning to its constructs merely 
heuristic status, it all too f
requently ends by confusing its own 
conceptualizations with the laws of the universe. 
In contrast to some of the dominant f
ashions of theorizing 
in contemporary sociology, the ideas we have tried to develop 
2o8 
CONCLUSION 
posit neither an ahistorical 'social system' nor an ahistorical 
'human nature'. The approach we have employed here is both 
non-sociologistic and non-psychologistic. We cann
ot agree 
that sociology has as its object the alleged 'dynamics' of social 
and psychological 'systems', placed post hoc into a dubious 
relationship (incidentally, the intellectual itinerary of these 
two terms is worthy of a case study in the empirical sociology 
of knowledge). 
The insight into the dialectic between social reality and 
individual existence in history is by no means new. It was, of 
course, most powerfully introduced into modem social 
thought by Marx. What is needed, however, is to bring to bear 
a dialectical perspective upon the theoretical orientation of 
the social sciences. Needless to say, we do not have in mind 
some doctrinaire introduction of Marxian ideas into sociologi­
cal theory. Nor is there any point in the mere assertion that 
the af
ore-mentioned dialectic, in f
act and generally, does exist. 
What is needed is to proceed f
rom such an assertion to a speci­
fication of the dialectical processes in a conceptual f
ramewo1·k 
that is congruent with the great traditions of sociological 
thought. Mere rhetoric about dialectics, such as is commonly 
engaged in by doctrinaire Marxists, must appear to the socio­
logist as just another f
orm of obscurantism. And yet we are 
convinced that only an understanding of what Marcel Mauss 
called the 'total social f
act' will
 protect the sociologist against 
the distortive reifications of both sociologism and psycho­
logism. It is against the background of an intellectual situation 
in which this double danger is very real that we wish our 
treatise to be understood. ·  
Our undertaking has been theoretical. Yet theory, in any 
empirical discipline, must be relevant in a double f
ashion to 
the 'data' defined as pertinent to that discipline. It must be 
congruent with them, and it must be geared to f
urther empiri­
cal inquiry. There is a vast area of empirical problems that 
opens up f
or the sociology of knowledge. This is not the place 
to provide a catalogue of what we consider to be the most 
interesting of these problems, even less to propound specific 
hypotheses. We have given some indications of what we have 
in mind in some of the illustrations of our theoretical argu­
ment. We would add here only that, in our view, empirical 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
research in the relation of 
institutions to legitimating symbolic 
universes will greatly enhance the sociological understanding 
of contemporary society. The problems here are numerous. 
They are more obscured than clarified by speaking about con­
temporary society in terms of 'secularization', of a 'scientific 
· 
age', of 'mass society', or, conversely, of the 'autonomous 
individual', of the 'discovery of the unconscious', and so f
orth. 
These terms indicate only the immensity of the problem re­
quiring scientific clarification. It may readily be conceded that 
contemporary Western men, by and large, live in a world 
vastly diff
erent f
rom any preceding one. Yet just what this 
means in terms of the reality, objective and subjective, in 
which these men conduct their everyday lives and in which 
their crises occur is very far f
rom clear. Empirical research 
into these problems, as distinct f
rom more or less intelligent 
speculation, has barely begun. We would hope that the clari­
fication of the theoretical perspective of the sociology of 
knowledge we have attempted here points to problems f
or 
such research that are easily ignored in other theoretical per­
spectives. To give but one example, the present interest on the 
part of social scientists in theories derived f
rom psycho­
analysis would take on a very diff
erent coloration as soon as 
these theories were not regarded, positively or negatively, as 
propositions of 'science', but analysed as legitimations of a 
very peculiar and probably highly significant construction of 
reality in modern society. Such analysis, of course, would 
bracket the question of the 'scientific validity' of these theories 
and simply look upon them as data for an understanding of 
the subjective and objective reality f
rom which they emerged 
and which, in turn, they influence. 
We have expressly ref
rained from f
ollowing up the methodo­
logical implications of our conception of the society of know­
ledge. It should be clear, however, that our approach is 
non-positivistic, if positivism is understood as a philosophical 
position defining the object of 
the social sciences in such a way 
as to legislate away their most important problems. All the 
same, we do not underestimate the merit of 'positivism', 
broadly understood, in redefining the canons of empirical 
investigation f
or the social sciences. 
The sociology of knowledge understands human reality as 
210 
CONCLUSION 
socially constructed reality. Since the constitution of reality 
has traditionally been a central problem of philosophy, this 
understanding has certain philosophical implications. In so far 
as there has been a strong tendency f
or this problem, with all 
the questions it involves, to become trivialized in contem­
porary philosophy, the sociologist may find himself, to his 
surprise perhaps, the inheritor of philosophical questions that 
the prof
essional philosophers are no longer interested in con­
sidering. In various sections of this treatiS"e, especially in the 
analysis of the f
oundations of knowledge in everyday lif
e and 
in the discussion of objectivation and institutionalization in 
relation to the biological presuppositions of human exi¨tence, 
we have given some indication of the contributions socio­
logically oriented thought may make to philosophical anthro­
pology. 
In sum, our conception of the sociology of knowledge 
implies a specific conception of sociology in general. It does not 
imply that sociology is not a science, that its methods should 
be other than empirical, or that it cannot be 'value-f
ree'. It 
does imply that sociology takes its place in the company of the 
sciences that deal with man as man ; that it is, in that specific 
sense, a humanistic discipline. An important consequence of 
this conception is that sociology must be carried on in a con­
tinuous conversation with both history and philosophy or lose 
its proper object of inquiry. This object is society as part of a 
human world, made by men, inhabited by men, and, in turn, 
making men, in an ongoing historical process. It is not the 
least fruit of a humanistic sociology that it rewakens our 
wonder at this astonishing phenomenon. 
2II 


Notes 


Notes 
Introduction: The Problem o
f
 the Sociology o
f
 K1Wfl)/ed
ge 
1. cf. Max Scheler, Die Wissens
f
ormen und die Gesellscha
ft (Bern : 
Francke, 196o). This volume of essays, first published in 1925, 
contains the basic f
ormulation of the sociology of knowledge in an 
essay entided 'Probleme einer Soziologie des Wissens', which was 
originall
y published a year earlier. 
2. cf. Wilhelm Windelband and Heinz Heimsoeth, Lehrbuch der 
Geschichte der Philosophie (Tiibingen : Mohr, 1950), pp. 6o5 ff. 
3· cf. Albert Salomon, In Praise of Enlightenment (New York: 
Meridian Books, 1963); Hans Barth, Wahrheit und /deologie 
(Zurich: Manesse, 1945); Werner Stark, The Socrology of K110'1JJ­
ledge (Chicago : Free Press of Glencoe, 1958; London: Roudedge 
& Kegan Paul), pp. 46 ff.; Kurt Lenk, ed., Ideologie (Neuwied/ 
Rhein : Luchterhand, 1961), pp. 13 ff. 
4· Pensees v. ĥ94· 
5· cf. Karl Marx, Die Frilhschriften (Stuttgart : Kroner, 1953). 
The Economic and Philosophical Manuscri
pts o
f
 1844 will be f
ound 
on pp. 225 ff. 
6. On Marx's UnterbaufUeberbau scheme, cf. Karl Kautsky, 
' V  
erhiiltnis von Unterbau und Ueberbau', in Iring Fetscher, ed., 
Der Marxismus (Munich : Piper, 1962), pp. 16o ff
. ; Antonio 
Labriola, 'Die Vermittlung Z'lDischen Basis und Ueberbau', ibid., pp. 
167 
ff. ;  
Jean-Yves Calvez, La Pensee de Karl 
Marx (Paris : Editions 
du Seuil, 1956), pp. 424 ff. The most important twentieth-century 
reformulation of the problem is that by Gyorgy Lukacs, in his 
Geschichte und Klassenbervusstsein (Berlin, 1923), 
today more readily 
accessible in the French translation, Histoire et conscience de classe 
(Paris : Editions de Minuit, 196o). Lukacs's understanding of 
Marx's concept of dialectics is all
 the more remarkable as it ante­
dated by almost a decade the rediscovery of the Economic and 
Philosophical Manuscripts o
f
 1844. 
7· The most important works of Nietzsche's f
or the sociology of 
knowledge are The Genealo
gy
 o
f
 Morals and The Will to Pcn»er. For 
secondary discussions, cf. Walter A. Kauf
mann
, Nietzsche (New 
215 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
York : Meridian Books, 1956); Karl Lowith, From He
gel to 
Nietzsche (New York : Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1964). 
8. One of the earliest and most interesting applications of 
Nietzsche's thought to a sociology of knowledge is Alf
red Seidel's 
in BnDUsstseinals Verhiingnis (Bonn : Cohen, 1927). Seidel, who had . 
bee
n a student of Weber's, tried to combine both Nietzsche and 
Freud with a radical sociological critique of consciousness. 
9· One of the most suggestive discussions of the relationship 
between historicism and sociology is Carlo Antoni's in Dallo 
storicismo alia sociologia (Florence, 1940). Also, cf. H. Stuart 
Hughes, Consciousness and Societ
y (New York: Knopf
, 1958; 
London : Macgibbon & Kee), pp. 183 ff. The most important work 
of Wilhelm Dilthey's for our present considerations is Der Au
fbau 
der geschichtlichen Welt in den Geisteswissenscha
ften (Stuttgart : 
Teubner, 1958). 
10. For an excellent discussion of Scheler's conception of the 
sociology of knowledge, cf. Hans-Joachim Lieber, Wissen und 
Gesellscha
ft (Tiibingen : Niemeyer, 1952), pp. 55 ff. See also Stark, 
op. cit., passim. 
11. For the general development of German sociology during 
this period, cf. Raymond Aron, La Sociologie allemande contem­
poraine (Paris : Presses Universitaires de France, 1950 
). For impor­
tant contributions f
rom this period concerning the sociology of 
knowledge, cf. Siegf
ried Landshut, Kritik der Soziologie (Munich, 
1929); Hans Freyer, Soziologie als Wirklichkeitswissenschaft (Leip­
zig, 1930); Ernst Griinwald, Das Problem der Soziologie des Wissens 
(Vienna, 1934); Alexander von Schelting, Max Webers Wissen­
scha
ftslehre (Tiibingen, 1934). The last-named work, still the most 
important discussion of Weber's methodology, must be understood 
against the background of the debate on the sociology of know­
ledge, then centring on both Scheler's and Mannheim's f
ormula­
tions. 
12. Karl Mannheim, Ideolog
y
 and Utopia (London : Routledge 
& Kegan Paul, 1936); Essays on the Sociology o
f
 Knowledge (New 
York: O.U.P., 1952); Essays on Sociology and Social Psychology 
(New York : O.U.P., 1953); Essays on the Sociology of Culture 
(New York : O.U.P., 1956). A compendium of Mannheim's most 
important writings in the sociology of knowledge, compiled and 
with a usef
ul introduction by Kurt Wolff, is Karl Mannheim, 
Wissenssoziologie 
(Neuwied/Rhein : 
Luchterhand, 
1964). 
For 
secondary discussions of Mannheim's conception of the sociology 
of knowledge, cf. Jacques J. Maquet, Sociologie de Ia connaissance 
(Louvain : Nauwelaerts, 1949); Aron, op. cit. ; Robert K. Merton, 
Social Theory and Social Structure (Chicago : Free Press of Glencoe, 
.u6 
NOTES 
1957; London : Collier-Macmillan), pp. 489 ff. ; Stark, op. cit. ; 
Lieber, op. cit. 
13. This characterization of the two original f
ormulations of the 
discipline was made by Lieber, op. cit. 
14. cf. Merton, op. cit., pp. 439 ff. 
15. cf. Talcott Parsons, 'An Approach to the Sociology of 
Knowledge', Transactions o
f
 the Fourth World Congress o
f
 Socio­
logy (Louvain : International Sociological Association, 1959), vol. 
IV, pp. 25 ff
. ; 'Culture and the Social System', in Par10ons et al., 
eds., Theories o
f
 Societ
y (New York : Free Press, 1961 ; London : 
Collier-Macmillan), vol. II, pp. 963 ff
.
 
16. cf. Talcott Parsons, The Social S
ystem (Glencoe, Ill. : Free 
Press, 1951; London : Tavistock), pp. 326 ff. 
- 17. cf. C. Wright Mills, Power, Politics and People (New York : 
Ballantine Books, 1963), pp. 453 ff. 
18. cf. Theodor Geiger, Ideologie und Wahrheit (Stuttgart : Hum­
boldt, 1953); Arbeiten zur Soziologie (Neuwied/Rhein: Luchter­
band, 1962), pp. 412 ff. 
19. cf. Ernst Topitsch, Vom Ursprung und Ende der Metaphysik 
(Vienna: Springer, 1958); Sozialphilosophie zwischen Ideologie und 
Wissenscha
ft (Neuwied/Rhein : Luchterhand, 1961). An important 
inftuence on Topitsch is the Kelsen school oflegal positivism. For 
the implications of the latter f
or the sociology of knowledge, cf. 
Hans 
Kelsen, Au
fsatze zur Ideologiekritik 
(Neuwied/Rhein : 
Luchterhand, 1964). 
20. cf. Daniel Bell, The End o
f
 Ideology (New York : Free Press 
of Glencoe, 196o; London : Collier-Macmillan); Kurt Lenk, ed., 
Ideologie; Norman Birnbaum, ed., The Sociological Stud
y o
f
 Ideo­
logy (Oxf
ord : Blackwell, 1962). 
21. cf. Stark, op. cit. 
22. Alfred Schutz, Collected Papers, vol. I (The Hague: Nijhoff
, 
1962), p. 149. Italics ours. 
23. Ibid., vol. II (1964), p. 121. 
24. For discussions of 
the implications ofDurkheimian sociology 
for the sociology of knowledge, cf. Gerard L. DeGre, Societ
y and 
Ideology (New York: Columbia University Bookstore, 1943), pp. 
54 ff.; Merton, op. cit. ; Georges Gurvitch, 'Problbnes de Ia socio­
logie de Ia amnaissance', Trait/ de sociologie (Paris : Presses Universi­
taires de France, 196<>), vol. II, pp. 103 ff. 
25. The closest approach, to our knowledge, of symboli©­
interactionism to the problems of the sociology of knowledge may 
be f
ound in Tamotsu Shibutani, 'Re
ference Groups and Social Con­
trol', in Arnold Rose, ed., Human Behavior and Social Processes 
(Boston : Houghton Mifftin
, 1962; London : Routledge & Kegan 
217 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
Paul), pp. 128 1£. The failure to make the connexion between 
Meadian social psychology and the sociology of knowledge, on the 
part of the symbolic-interactionists, is of course related to the 
limited 'diffus
ion' of the sociology of knowledge in America but 
its more important theoretical f
oundation is to be sought u; the 
fact that both Mead himself and his later f
ollowers did not develoP' 
an adequate concept of social structure. Precisely for this reason 
we think, is the integration of the Meadian and Durkhë 
apprìcíî so very important. It may be observed here that, just as 
the mdiff
erence to the sociology of knowledge on the part of 
American social psychologists has prevented the latter f
rom rela­
ting ïeir perspectives to a macro-sociological theory, so is the 
total 1gnorance of Mead a severe theoretical def
ect of neo-Marxist 
social thought in Europe today. There is considerable irony in the 
ð
añ that, 
.
of late, nòo-Marxist theoreticians have been
 seeking a 
liaison Wlth Freudian psychology (which is fundamentally in­
compatible wit? óe anthropological presuppositions of Marxism), 
ômplõely obliv1ous of the existence of a Meadian theory of the 
dialectic between society and the individual that would be im­
measurably more congenial to their own approach. For a recent 
eumple of this ironic phenomenon, cf. Georges Lapassade, 
L' 
Entree dans Ia me (Paris: Editions de Minuit, I963), an otherwise 
highly suggestive book that, as it were, cries out f
or Mead on every 
page. The same irony, albeit in a different context of intellectual 
segregation, pertains to the recent American eff
orts f
or a rapproche­
ment between Marxism and Freudianism. One European sociologist 
who has drawn heavily and successfully upon Mead and the 
Mö÷ tradition in the . 
construction of sociological theory is 
Fr1ednch Tenbruck. Cf. his Geschichu r.md GeseUscha
ft (Habilita­
tionssshri
/t, Unive
.
rsity o
.
f Freiburg, to be published shortly), 
especiall
y the sectJoo entitled 'Realitdt'. In a different systematic 
context f
rom ours, but in a manner quite congenial to our own 
approach to the Meadian problematic, Tenbruclt discusses the 
social origin of reality and the social-structural bases for the 
maintenance of reality. 
26. Talcott Parsons, The Structure o
f
 Social Action (Chicago: 
Free Press, 1949; London: Allen & Unwin), p. v. 
27. Emile Durkheim, The Ruhs o
f
 Sociological Method (Chicago: 
Free Press, 1950; London : Collier-Maanillan
), p. 14. 
. 
28. Max Weber, The Theory o
f
 Social and Economic Organiza­
tiOn (New York: O.U.P., I947), p. IOI. 
.us 
NOTES 
One. The Foundation of KtiOfl)/edge in Ewryday Li
f
e
 
* 
I. This entire section of our treatise is based on Alfred Schutz 
and Thomas Lucltmann
, Die Strukturen der LebensrDel
t, now being 
prepared f
or publication. In view of this, we have ref
rained from 
providing individual ref
erences to the places in Schutz's published 
work where the same problems are discussed. Our argument here 
is based on Schutz, as developed by Luckmann
 in the af
ore­
mentioned work, in toto. The reader wishing to acquaint himself 
with Schutz's work published to date may consult Alfred Schutz 
Der sinnha
fte Au
fbau der sozialen Welt (Vienna: Springer, IC)6o)s 
Colkcted Papers, vols. I and II. The reader interested in Schutz's 
adaptation of the phenomenological method to the analysis of the 
social world maø consult especiall
y his Colkcted Pa
pers, vol. I, pp. 
99 1£., and Maunce Natanson, ed., Plrilosophy o
f
 the Social Scienus 
(New York: Random House, IC)63), pp. 183 1£. 
TfDO. Society as Objectiw Realit
y 
* 
I. On recent biological work concerning the peculiar position of 
man in the animal kingdom, cf. Jakob von UexkUll, Bedeunmgskhre 
(Hamburg: Rowohlt, 1958); F. J. J. Buytendijlt, Mensch und Tier 
(Hamburg: Rowohlt, I958); AdolfPortmann
, Zoologie r.md das neue 
Bild fJOm Menschen (Hamburg: Rowohlt, I956). The most im­
. portant evaluations of these biological perspectives in terms of a 
philosophical anthropology are those by Helmuth Plessner (Die 
Stu
/
en
 des Organischen r.md der Mensch, I928 and 1965) and Arnold 
Gehlen (Der Mensch, seine Natur r.md seilu Stelhmg in der Welt, 
I940 and 1950). It was Gehlen who further developed these per­
ùúves in terms of a sociological theory of 
institutions (especiall
y 
1n his Urmensch r.md Spdtkultur, I956). For an introduction to the 
latter, cf. Peter L. Berger and Hansfried Kellner, 'Arnold Gehlen 
and the Theory of Institutions', Social Research 32: I, pp. IIO 1£. 
(I¢j) 
. 
2. The term 'species-specific environment' is taken from von 
UexkUll. 
3· The anthropological implications 
of the term 'world­
openness' were developed by both Plessner and Gehlen. 
4· The peculiarity of the human organism as ontogenetically 
219 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
grounded was shown particularly in the investigations of Port­
mann
. 
S· The suggestion that the f
oetal period in man extends through 
the first year oflife was made by Portmann, who called this year the 
'extrauterine Friihjahr'. 
6. The term 'significant others' is taken f
rom Mead. For Mead's 
theory of the ontogenesis of the self
, cf. hip Mind, Self and Societ
y 
{Chicago : University of Chicago Press, 1934). A usef
ul com­
pendium of Mead's writings is Anselm Strauss, ed., George Herbert 
Mead on Social Psychology (Chicago : University of Chicago Press, 
1964). For a suggestive secondary discussion, cf. Maurice Natan­
son, The Social Dynamics o
f
 Geor
ge H. Mead (Washington : Public 
Aff
airs Press, I956). 
1· There is a f
undamental dichotomy between the conception of 
man as a self
-producing being and a conception of 'human nature'. 
This constitutes a decisive anthropological difference between 
Marx and any properly sociological perspective on the one hand 
{especially one that is grounded in Meadian social psychology), and 
Freud and most non-Freudian psychological perspectives on the 
other. A clarification of this diff
erence is very important if there is 
to be any meaningf
ul conversation between the fields of sociology 
and psychology today. Within sociological theory itself 
it is possibl; 
to distinguish between positions in terms of their closeness to tt.e 
'sociological' and the 'psychological' poles. Vilf
redo Pareto prob­
ably expresses the most elaborate approach to the 'psychological' 
pole within sociology itself. Incidentally, acceptance or rejection of 
the 'human nature' presupposition also has interesting implications 
in terms of political ideologies, but this point cannot be developed 
here. 
8. The work of Bronislaw Malinowski, Ruth Benedict, Margaret 
Mead, Oyde Kluckhohn and George Murdock may be cited in 
this connexion. 
9· The view here presented on the sexual plasticity of man has 
an affinity with Freud's conception of the originally unf
ormed 
character of the libido. 
10. This point is explicated in Mead's theory of 
the social genesis 
of the self
. 
II. The term 'eccentricity· is taken f
rom Plessner. Similar per­
spectives can be f
ound in Scheler's later work on philosophical 
anthropology. Cf. Max Scheler, Die Stellung des Menschen im 
Kosmos (Munich : Nymphenburger Verlagshandlung, I947). 
12. The social character of man's self
-production was f
ormu­
lated most sharply by Marx in his critique of Stirner, in The 
German Ideology. Jean-Paul Sartre's development f
rom his earlier 
220 
NOTES 
existentialism to its later Marxist modification, that is, f
rom L' 
Etre 
et le neant to the Critique de Ia raison dialectique, is the most impres­
sive example in contemporary philosophical anthropology of the 
achievement of this sociologically crucial insight. Sartre's own 
interest in the 'mediations' between the macroscopic socio-histori­
cal processes and individual biography would be greatly served, 
once more, through a consideration of Meadian social psychology. 
13. The inextricable connexion between man's humanity and 
his sociality was most sharply f
ormulated by Durkheim, especially 
in the concluding section of the Formes elbnentaires de Ia vie 
reli
gieuse. 
14. In insisting that social order is not based on any 'laws of 
nature' we are not ipso facto taking a position on a metaphysical 
conception of 'natural law'. Our statement is limited to such f
acts 
of nature as are empirically available. 
15. It was Durkheim who Insisted most strongly on the character 
sui generis of social order, especially in his Regles de Ia methode 
sociologique. The anthropological necessity of externalization was 
developed by both Hegel and Marx. 
x6. The biological f
oundation of externalization and its relation­
ship to the emergence of institutions was developed by Gehlen. 
17. The term 'stock of knowledge' is taken f
rom Schutz. 
18. Gehlen ref
ers to this point in his concepts of TriebUberschuss 
and Entlastung. 
19. Gehlen ref
ers to this point in his concept of Hintergrundser­
fiillung. 
_ 20. The concept of the definition of the situation was f
ormed by 
W. I. Thomas and developed throughout his sociological work. 
21. We are aware of the f
act that this concept of institution is 
broader than the prevailing one in contemporary sociology. We 
think that such a broader concept is useful f
or a comprehensive 
analysis of basic social processes. ,On. social control, cf. Friedrich 
Tenbruck, 'Soziale Kontrolle', Shuztslexikon der Goerr
es-Gesell­
scha
ft (1962), and Heinrich Popitz, 'Soziale Normen', European 
Journal o
f
 Sociology. 
22. The term 'taking the role of the other' is taken f
rom Mead. 
We are here taking Mead's paradigm of socialization and applying 
it to the broader problem of institutionalization. The argument 
combines key f
eatures of both Mead's and Gehlen's approaches. 
23. Simmel's analysis of the expansion from the dyad to the 
triad is important in this connexion. The f
ollowing argument com­
bines Simmel's and Durkheim's conceptions of the objectivity of 
social reality. 
24· In Durkheim's terms this means that, with the expansion of 
221 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
the dyad into a triad and beyond, the original f
ormations become 
geniune 'social f
acts', that is, they attain choseite. 
25. Jean Piaget's concept of inf
antile 'realism' may be compared 
here. 
26. For an analysis of this process in the contemporary f
amily, 
cf. Peter L. Berger and Hansf
ried Kellner, 'Marriage and the Con­
struction of Reality', Diogenes 46 (1964), pp. I ff. 
27. The preceding description closely f
ollows Durkheim's 
analysis of social reality. This does not contradict the Weberian 
conception of the meaningful character of society. Since social 
reality always originates in meaningful human actions, it continues 
to carry meaning even if it is opaque to the individual at a given 
time. The original may be reconstructed, precisely by means of 
what Weber called Verstehen. 
28. The term 'objectivation' is derived f
rom the Hegelian/ 
Marxian Versachlichung. 
29. Contemporary American sociology tends towards leaving 
out the first moment. Its perspective on society thus tends to be 
what Marx called a reification ( V 
erdinglichung), that is, an undia­
lectical distortion of 
social reality that obscures the latter's character 
as an ongoing human production, viewing it instead in thing-like 
categories appropriate only to the world of nature. That the de­
humanization implicit il" Ćhis is mitigated by values deriving f
rom 
the larger tradition of the society is, presumably, morally f
ortunate, 
but is irrelevant theoretically. 
30. Pareto's analysis of the 'logic' of 
institutions is relevant here. 
A point similar to ours is made by Friedrich Tenbruck, op. cit. He 
too insists that the 'strain towards consistency' is rooted in the 
meaningful character of human action. 
31. This, of course, is the f
undamental weakness of any func­
tionalistically oriented sociology. For an excellent critique of this, 
cf. the discussion of 
Bororo society in Claude Levi-Strauss, Tristes 
Tropiques (New York : Atheneum, 1964), pp. 183 ff
.
 
32. The term 'recipe knowledge' is taken f
rom Schutz. 
33· The term 'objectification' is derived f
rom the Hegelian 
V 
ergegenstiindlichung. 
34· The term 'sedimentation' is derivt:d f
rom Edmund Husserl. 
It was first used by Schutz in a sociological context. 
35· This is meant by the term 'monothetic acquisition' of 
Husserl's. It was also used extensively by Schutz. 
36. On the 'social self' conf
ronting the self in its totality, cf. 
Mead's concept of the 'me' with Durkheim's concept of homo 
duplex. 
37· Although our argument uses terms f
oreign to Mead, our 
222 
NOTES 
conception of the role is very close to his and intends to be an ex­
pansion of Meadian role theory in a broader f
rame of ref
erence, 
namely one that includes a theory of institutions. 
38. The term 'representation' is closely related here to the 
Durkheimian usage, but broader in scope. 
. 39· This process of 'binding together' is one of the central con­
cerns of Durkheimian sociology - the integration of 
society through 
the f
ostering of solidarity. 
40. The symbolic representations of 
integration are what Durk­
heim called 'religion'. 
41. The concept of the social distribution of knowledge is de­
rived from Schutz. 
42· The term 'mediation' has been used by Sartre, but without 
the concrete meaning that role theory is capable of giving to it. The 
term serves well to indicate the general nexus between role theory 
and the sociology of knowledge. 
43· This question could be designated as concerning the 'density' 
of the institutional order. However, we have been trying to avoid 
introducing new terms and have decided not to use this term. al­
though it is suggestive. 
44· This is what Durkheim ref
erred to as 'organic solidarity'. 
Lucien Uvy-Bruhl gives f
urther psychological content to this 
Durkheimian concept when he speaks of 'mystic participation' in 
primitive societies. 
45· Eric Voegelin's concepts of 'compactness' and 'diff
erentia­
tion' may be compared here. See his Order and History, vol. I 
(Baton Rouge, La :  Louisiana State University Press, 1956; Ox­
f
ord : 0. 
U.l'. 
). Talcott Parsons has spoken of institutional diff
eren­
tiation in various parts of his work. 
46. The relationship between the division of labour and institu­
tional diff
erentiation has been analysed by Marx, Durkheim, 
Weber, Ferdinand Tonnies and Talcott Parsons. 
47· It may be said that, despite diff
erent interpretations in 
detail, there is a high degree of 
consensus on this point throughout 
the history of sociological theory. 
48. The relationship between 'pure theory' and economic sur­
plus was first pointed out by Marx. 
49· The tendency of institutions to persist was analysed by 
Georg Simmel in terms of his concept of 'f
aithfulness'. Cf. his 
Soziologie (Berlin: Duncker und Humblot, 1958), pp. 438 ff. 
so. This concept of de-institutionalization is derived from 
Gehlen. 
. 5 I. The analysis of de-institutionalization in the private sphere 
1S a central problem of Gehlen's social psychology of modern 
223 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
society. Cf. his Die Seele im technischen Zeit 
alter (Hamburg : 
Rowohlt, 1957). 
52. If one were willing to put up with f
urther neologisms, one 
could call this the question about the degree of 'f
usion' or 'seg­
mentation' of the institutional order. On the f
ace ofit, this question 
would seem to be identical with the structural-f
unctional concern 
about the 'f
unctional integration' of societies. The latter term, 
however, presupposes that the 'integration' of a society can be 
determined by an outside observer who investigates the external 
f
unctioning of the society's institutions. We would contend, on the 
contrary, that both 'functions' and 'disf
unctions' can only be 
analysed by way ofthe level of meaning. Consequently, 'f
unctional 
integration', if one wants to use this term at all, means the inte­
gration of the institutional order by way of various legitimating 
processes. In other words, the integration lies not in the institutions 
but in their legitimation. This implies, as against the structural­
f
unctionalists, that an institutional order cannot adequately be 
understood as a 'system'. 
53· This problem is related to that of 
'ideology', which we dis­
cuss later in a more narrowly defined context. 
54· Weber repeatec· •Y .·ef
ers to various collectivities as 'carriers' 
(Trager) of what we have called here sub-universes of meaning, 
especially in his comparative sociology of religion. The analysis of 
this phenomenon is, of course, related to Marx's Unterbauf 
Ueberbau scheme. 
55· The pluralistic competition between sub-universes of 
mean­
ing is one of 
the most important problems f
or an empirical 
sociology 
of knowledge of contemporary society. We have dealt with this 
problem elsewhere in our work in the sociology of religion, but see 
no point in developing an analysis of this in the present treatise. 
56. This proposition can be put into Marxian terms by saying 
that there is a dialectical relationship between substructure ( 
Unter­
bau) and superstructure (Ueberbau) 
- a Marxian insight that has 
been widely lost in main-line Marxism until very recently. The 
problem of the possibility of socially detached knowledge has, of 
course, been a central one f
or the sociology of knowledge as defined 
by Scheler and Mannheim. We are not giving it such a central 
place f
or reasons inherent in our general theoretical approach. The 
important point f
or a theoretical sociology of knowledge is the 
dialectic between knowledge and its social base. Questions such as 
Mannheim's concerning the 'unattached intelligentsia' are appli­
cations of the sociology of knowledge to concrete historical and 
empirical phenomena. Propositions about these will have to be 
made on a level of much lesser theoretical generality than interests 
NOTES 
us here. Questions concerning the autonomy of social-scientific 
knowledge, on the other hand, should be negotiated in the context 
of the methodology of the social sciences. This area we have ex­
cluded in our definition of the scope of the sociology of knowledge, 
f
or theoretical reasons stated in our introduction. 
51· This is the phenomenon commonly called 'cultural lag' in 
American sociology since Ogburn. We have avoided this term 
because of its evolutionistic and implicitly evaluative connotation. 
58. Reification ( Verdinglichung) is an important Marxian con­
cept, particularly in the anthropological considerations of the 
FI'Uhschri
ften, then developed in terms of the 'f
etishism of commo­
dities' in Das Kapital. For more recent developments of the con­
cept in Marxist theory, cf. Gyorgy Lukacs, Histoire et conscience de 
classe, pp. 109 ff.; Lucien Goldmann, Recherches dialectiques 
(Paris : Gallimard, 1959), pp. 64 ff. ; Joseph Gabel, La Fausse Con­
science (Paris : Editions de Minuit, 1962), and Formen der Entfrem­
dung (Frankfurt : Fischer, 1964). For an extensive discussion of the 
applicability of the concept within a non-doctrinaire sociology of 
knowledge, cf. Peter L. Berger and Stanley Pullberg, 'Reification 
and the Sociological Critique of Consciousness', History and 
Theory IV: 2, pp. 198 ff. (1965). In the Marxian f
rame of ref
erence 
the concept of reification is closely related to that of 
alienation (Ent­
fremdung). The latter concept has been confused in recent socio­
logical writing with phenomena ranging f
rom anomie to neurosis, 
almost beyond the point of terminological retrieval. In any case, 
we have f
elt that this is not the place to attempt such a retrieval and 
have, theref
ore, avoided the use of the concept. 
59. Recent French critics of Durkheimian sociology, such as 
Jules Monnerot (Les Faits sociaux ne sont pas des choses, 1946) and 
Armand Cuvillier (' 
Durkheim et Marx', Cahiers internationaux de 
sociologie, 1948), have accused it of a reified view of social reality. In 
other words, they have argued that Durkheim's choseite is ipso 
facto 
a reification. Whatever one may say about this in terms of Durk­
heim exegesis, it is possible in principle to assert that 'social facts 
are things', and to intend thereby no more than the objectivity of 
social f
acts as human products. The theoretical key to the question 
is the distinction between objectivation and reification. 
6o. Compare here Sartre's concept of the 'practico-inert', in 
Critique de Ia raison dialectique. 
61. For this reason Marx called reif
ying consciousness a false 
consciousness. This concept may be related to Sartre's 'bad f
aith' 
(mauvaise f
oi). 
62. The work of Lucien Levy-Bruhl and Jean Piaget may be 
taken as basic f
or an understanding of protoreification, both phylo-


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
and ontogenetically. Also, cf. Oaude Levi-Strauss, La Pmsle 
saUf1age (Paris : Pion, 1962). 
63. On the parallelism between 'here below' and 'up above', cf. 
Mircea Eliade, Cosmos and History (New York : Harper, 1959). A 
similar point is made by Voegelin, op. cit., in his discussion of 
'cosmological civilizations'. 
64. On the reification of identity, compare Sartre's analysis of 
anti-Semitism. 
65. On conditions f
or dereification, cf. Berger and Pullberg, Joe. 
cit. 
66. The term 'legitimation' is derived from Weber, where it is 
developed particularly in the context of his political sociology. We 
have given it a much broader use here. 
67. On 
legitimations 
as 
'explanations', 
compare 
Pareto's 
analysis of 'derivations'. 
68. Both Marx and Pareto were aware of 
the possible autonomy 
of what we have called legitimations ('ideology' in Marx, 'deriva­
tions' in Pareto). 
69. Our concept of 'symbolic universe' is very close to Durk­
heim's 'religion'. Schutz's analysis of 'finite provinces of meaning' 
and their relationship to each other, and Sartre's concept of 
'totalization', have been very relevant f
or our argument at this 
point. 
70. The term 'marginal situation' (GTmzsituation) was coined by 
Karl Jaspers. We are using the term in a manner quite diff
erent 
f
rom Jaspers's. 
71. Our argument here is influenced by Durkheim's analysis of 
anomie. We are more interested, though, in the nomic rather than 
the anomie processes in society. 
72. The paramount status of everyday reality was analysed by 
Schutz. Cf. especially the article 'On Multiple Realities', Collected 
Papers, vol. I, pp. 207 tf. 
73· The precariousness of subjective identity is already implied 
in Mead's analysis of the genesis of the self. For developments of 
this analysis, cf. Anselm Strauss, Mirrors and Masks (New York: 
Free Press of Glencoe, 1959; London : Collier-Macmillan); 
Erving Gotf
mann, The Presentation o
f
 Self in E
veryday Li
f
e
 
{Garden City, N.Y. : Doubleday-Anchor, 1959). 
74· Heidegger gives the most elaborate analysis in recent philo­
sophy of death as the marginal situation par excellence. Schutz's 
concept of the 'f
undamental anxiety' ref
ers to the same pheno­
menon. Malinowski's analysis of the social f
unction of f
unerary 
ceremonialism is also relevant at this point. 
15· The use of certain perspectives on 'anxiety' (Antst) de-
226 
NOTES 
vclopcd by existential philosophy makes it possible to place Durk­
heim's analysis of anomie in a broader anthropological frame of 
ref
erence. 
76. cf. Levi-Strauss, op. cit. 
77· On collective memory, cf. Maurice Halbwachs, Les Cadres 
sociaux de Ia mlmoire (Paris : Presses Universitaires de France, 
1952). Halbwachs also developed his sociological theory of 
memory 
in La Mlmoire collective (1950) and in La Topographie U
gmdaire des 
EfJangilu en Terr
e Sainte (1941). 
]8. The concepts of 'predecessors' and 'successo
rs' are derived 
from Schutz. 
79· The conception of the transcending character of society was 
especiall
y developed by Durkheim. 
So. The conception of 'projection' was first developed by 
Feuerbach, then, albeit in greatly different directions, by .Marx, 
Nietzsche and Freud. 
81. Compare again Weber's concept of 'carrier' (Trager). 
82. The analyses of •culture contact' in contemporary American 
cultural anthropology are relevant here. 
83. Compare the concept of 'culture shock' in contemporary 
American cultural anthropology. 
84. Marx developed in considerable detai
l the r
-elationship Ⱦ 
tween material power and 'conceptual success'. Cf
.
 the well­
known f
ormulation of this in The German Ideology: 'Die Gedanken 
der herrschenden Klasse sind in jeder Epoche die herr
sclrenden
 
Gedanken' (FriJhschri
ften, Kroner edition, p. 373). 
8 
5. Pareto comes closest to the writing of a history of 
thought in 
sociological terms, which makes Pareto important for the sociology 
of knowledge regardless of reservations one may have about his 
theoretical frame of ref
erence. Cf. Brigitte Berger, Vilfredo Pareto 
and the Sociology o
f
 Knowledge (unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
New School f
or Social Research, 1964). 
86. This may be reminiscent of Auguste Comte's 'law of the 
three stages'. We cannot accept this, of course, but it may still
 be 
useful in suggesting that consciousness develops in historiall
y 
recognizable stages, though 
they cannot be conceived of in Comte's 
mann
er. Our own understanding of this is closer to the Hegelian/ 
Marxian approach to the historicity of human thought. 
87. Both Uvy-Bruhl and Piaget suggest that mythology con­
stitutes a necessary stage in the development of thought. For a 
suggestive discussion of the biological roots of mythological/ 
magical thought, cf. Arnold Gehlen, Studien zur Anthropologie II1Ul 
Soziologie (Neuwied/Rhein: Luchterhand, 1963), pp. 79 tf
.
 
88. Our conception of mythology here is influenced by the wotk 
227 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
of Gerard 
us van der Leeuw, Mircea Eliade and Rudolf Bultmann. 
89. On the continuity between social and cosmic orders in 
mythological consciouîness, compare again the work of Eliade and 
Voegelin. 
90. It will be clear f
rom our theoretical presuppositions that we 
ïnnot here go in any detail into the questions of the 'sociology of 
mtellectuals'. In addition to Mannheim's important work in this 
area (to be f
ound especially in Ideology and Utopia and Essays on the 
Sociology o
f
 Culture), cf. Florian Znaniecki, The Social Role o
f
 the 
Man o
f
 Knou:ledge (New York : Columbia University Press, 1940); 
Theodor Geiger, Au
f
gaben und Stellung der Intelli
genz in der Gesell­
scha
ft (Stuttgart, 1949) ; Raymond Aron, L'Opium des intellectuals 
(Paris, 1955) ; George B. de Huszar, ed., The Intellectuals (New 
York : Free Press of Glencoe, 196o; London : Allen & Unwin). 
91. On ultimate legitimations strengthening institutional 'iner­
tia' (Simmel's 'f
aithf
ulness'), compare both Durkheim and Pareto. 
92. It is precisely at this point that any functionalist interpreta­
tion of institutions is weakest, tending to look f
or practicalities that 
are not in f
act existing. 
93· On the Brahman/Kshatriya conflict, compare Weber's 
work on the sociology of religion in India. 
94· On the social validation of propositions that are hard to 
validate empirically, cf
. Leon Festinger, A Theory o
f
 Cognitive 
Dissonance (Evanston, Ill. : Row, Peterson and Co., 1957; London : 
Tavistock). 
95· The term 'affinity' (Wahlverwandscha
ft) is derived f
rom 
Scheler and Weber. 
96. On monopolistic definitions of reality in primitive and 
archaic societies, compare both Durkheim and Voegelin. 
97· The work of Paul Radin suggests that scepticism is possible 
even in such monopolistic situations. 
98. The term 'guest peoples' (Gastv6/ker) is derived f
rom 
Weber. 
99. On the affinity between politically conservative f
orces and 
religious monopolies ('churches'), compare Weber's analysis of 
hierocracy. 
100. The term 'ideology' has been used in so many different 
senses that one might despair of using it in any precise manner at 
all. We have decided to retain it, in a narrowly defined sense, be­
cause it is usef
ul in the latter and pref
erable to a neologism. There 
is no point here in discussing the transf
ormations of the term in the 
history of both Marxism and of the sociology of knowledge. For a 
usef
ul overview, cf. Kurt Lenk, ed., Ideolo
gie. 
101. On the relationship of Christianity to bourgeois ideology, 
228 
NOTES 
see both Marx and Veblen. A useful overview of the f
ormer's 
treatment of religion may be obtained f
rom the anthology Marx 
and Engels on Religion (Moscow : Foreign Languages Publishing 
House, 1957). 
102. cf. Thomas Luckmann, Das Problem der Reli
gion in der 
modernen Gesellscha
ft (Freiburg : Rombach, 1963). 
103. Our conception of the intellectual as the 'unwanted expert' 
is not very diff
erent f
rom Mannheim's insistence on the marginality 
of the intellectual. In a definition of the intellectual that will be 
sociologically useful it is important, we think, to set off this type 
clearly f
rom the 'man of knowledge' in general. 
104. On the marginality of intellectuals, compare Simmel's 
analysis of the 'objectivity' of the stranger and Veblen's of the 
intellectual role of the Jews. 
105. cf. Peter L. Berger, 'The Sociological Study of Sec­
tarianism', Social Research, Winter 1954, pp. 467 ff. 
Io6. Compare Mannheim's analysis of revolutionary intellec­
tuals. For the Russian prototype of the latter, cf. E. Lampert, 
Studies in Rebellion (New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1957; 
London : Routledge & Kegan Paul). 
107. The transf
ormation of revolutionary intellectuals into 
legitimators of the status quo can be studied in practically 'pure' 
f
orm in the development of Russian Communism. For a sharp 
critique of this process f
rom a Marxist viewpoint, cf. Leszek 
Kolakowski, Der Mensch ohne Alternative (Munich, 1960). 
Three. Societ
y as Subjective Reality 
* 
1. Our conception of 'understanding the other' is derived f
rom 
both Weber and Schutz. 
2. Our definitions of socialization and its two sub-types closely 
f
ollow current usage in the social sciences. We have only adapted 
the wording to conf
orm to our overall theoretical framework. 
3· Our description here, of course, leans heavily on the Meadian 
theory of socialization. 
4· The concept of 'mediation' is derived f
rom Sartre, who lacks, 
however, an adequate theory of socialization. 
S· The aff
ective dimension of early learning has been
 especially 
emphasized by Freudian child psychology, although there are 
various findings of behaviouristic learning theory that would tend 
2.2.9 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
to confirm this. We do not imply acceptance of the theoretical 
presuppositions of either psychological school in our argument 
here. 
6. Our conception of the reflected character of the self is derived 
f
rom both Cooley and Mead. Its roots may be f
ound in the analysis 
of the 'social self' by William James (Princi
ples o
f
 Psychology). 
1· Although this could not be developed here, enough may have 
been said to indicate the possibility of a genuinely dialectical social 
psychology. The latter would be equally important f
or philo­
sophical anthropology as f
or society. As f
ar as the latter is con­
cerned, such a social psychology (f
undamentally Meadian in 
orientation, but with the addition of important elements f
rom 
other streams of social-scientific thought) would make it unn
eces­
sary to seek theoretically untenable alliances with either Freudian 
or behaviouristic psychologism. 
8. On nomenclature, cf. Claude Levi-Strauss, La Pensee saUfJage, 
pp. 253 ff. 
9. The concept of the 'generalized other' is used here in a f
ully 
Meadian sense. 
10. Compare Georg Simmel on the self
-apprehension of man as 
both inside and outside society. Plessner's concept of 'eccentricity' 
is again relevant here. 
n. Compare Piaget on the massive reality of the child's world. 
12. Compare Uvy-Bruhl on the phylogenetic analogue to 
Piaget's inf
antile 'realism'. 
13. cf. Philippe Aries, Centuries o
f
 ChildJwod (New York: 
Knopf, 1962; London: Jonathan Cape). 
14. Compare here the cultural-anthropological analyses of 'rites 
of passage' connected with puberty. 
15. The concept of 'role distance' is developed by Erving Goff­
man, particularly in Asylums (Garden City, N.Y. : Doubleday­
Anchor, 1961). Our analysis suggests that such distance is onl
y 
possible with regard to realities internalized in secondary socializa­
tion. If it extends to the realities internalized in primary sociali­
zation, we are in the domain of what American psychiatry calls 
'psychopathy', which implies a deficient f
ormation of identity. A 
very interesting f
urther point suggested by our analysis concerns 
the structural limits within which a 'Goffmanian model' of social 
interaction may be viable - to wit, societies so structured that 
decisive elements of objectivated 
reality are internalized in 
secondary socialization processes. This consideration, incidentall
y, 
should make us careful not to equate Goffman's 'model' (which is 
very useful, let it be added, for the analysis of important f
eatures of 
modern industrial society) with a 'dramatic model' tout COUTt. There 
230 
NOTES 
have been
 other dramas, after all, than that of the contemporary 
organization man bent on 'impression management'. 
16. The studies in the sociology of occupations, as developed 
particularly by Everett Hughes, offer interesting material on this 
point. 
17. cf. Talcott Parsons, Essays in Sociological T'!eory, Pur_e and 
Applied (Chicago : Free Press, 1949; London ā Colher-Macmillan
), 
pp. 233 ff. 
18. Hans H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, in Character and 
Social Structure (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1953; London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul), suggest the term 'intimate othĂrs' for 
significant others engaged in reality-mainăenĄce
. in 
_
later lif
e. We 
pref
er not to use this term because of 1ts są
ll
ll'lty to that of 
Intimsphiire, which has been employed a lot m recent German­
speaking sociology and which has a considerably diff
erent connota­
tion. 
19. Compare Goffman again on this point, as well as David 
Riesman. 
· 
, 
20. The concepts of 'primary group' and 'secondary group 
. 
are 
derived f
rom Cooley. We are f
ollowing current usage in Amer1can 
sociology here. 
21. On the concept of the 'conversational apparatus', cf. PĆter 
L. Berger and Hansfried Kellner, 'Marriage and the Construebon 
of Reality', Diogenes 46 (1964), pp. I ff. Friedrich TećbĈck (op. 
cit.) discusses in some detail the fun<..
tion of commurucanve net­
works in maintaining £ommon realities. 
22. On correspondence, cf. Georg Simmel, Soziologie, pp. 287 
ȼ 
. 
23. The concept of'ref
erence group' is relevant in this connextoĉ. 
Compare Merton's analysis of this, in his. Social Theory and Social 
Structure. 
. 
24. cf. Peter L. Berger, Imntation to Sociology (Garden Cil?', 
N.Y. : 
Doubleday-Anchor, 
1963; 
Harmondsworth: 
Pengum 
Books), pp. 54 ff. 
. 
25. The psycho-analytic concept of'transf
erence' ref
ers precisely 
to this phenomenon. What the psycho-analysts who use It ro not 
understand of course, is that the phenomenon can be f
ound m any 
process of ;e-socialization with its resultant identification Ċith the 
significant others who are !n 
charge of qt? so ċt Čo conclpčoĎs CU: 
be drawn f
rom it concemm
g the cogrunve valid1ty of the msďghts 
occurring in the psychoanalytic situation. . 
. 
. 
. 
26. This is what Durkheim ref
erred to m his analys1S of the m­
evitably social character of religion. We would not use, however, 
his term 'church' f
or the 'moral community' of religion, becau.
Ƚ it 
231 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
is appropriate only to a historically specific case in the institu­
tionalization of religion. 
27. The studies of Chinese Communist 'brainwashing' tech­
niques are highly revealing of the basic patterns of alternation. Cf., 
f
or instance, Edward Hunter, Brainwashing in Red China (New 
York : Vanguard Press, 1951). Goffman, in his As
ylums, comes 
close to showing the procedural parallel to group psychotherapy in 
America. 
28. Again, compare Fcstinger f
or the avoidance of discrepant 
definitions of reality. 
29. cf. Thomas Luckmann and Peter L. Berger, 'Social Mobility 
and Personal Identity', EuropeanJourr.al of Sociology V, pp. 331 ff. 
(1964). 
30. Riesman's concept of 'other-direction' and Merton's of 
'anticipatory socialization' are relevant at this point. 
31. cf. the essays on medical sociology by Eliot Freidson, 
Theodor J. Litman and Julius A. Roth in Arnold Rose, ed., 
Human Behavior and Social Processes. 
32. Our argument implies the necessity of a macro-sociological 
background f
or analyses of internalization, that is, of an under­
standing of the social structure within which internalization occurs. 
American social psychology today is greatly weakened by the f
act 
that such a background is widely lacking. 
33· cf
. Gerth and Mills, op. cit. Also cf. Tenbruck, op. cit., who 
assigns a prominent place to the structural bases of personality in 
his typology of primitive, traditional and modern societies. 
34· This has the important implication that most psychological 
models, including those of contemporary scientific psychology, 
have limited socio-historical applicability. It f
urther implies that a 
sociological psychology will at the same time have to be a historical 
psychology. 
35· cf. Erving Goffman, Stigma (Englewood Cliffs, N. J. : 
Prentice-Hall, 1963). Also, cf. A. Kardiner and L. Ovesey, The 
Mark of Oppression (New York : Norton, 1951). 
36. cf
.
 Donald W. Cory, The Homosexual in America (New 
York : Greenberg, 1951). 
37· We would stress here once more the social-structural condi­
tions f
or the applicability of a 'Goffmanian model' of analysis. 
38. Helmut Schelsky has coined the suggestive term 'per­
manent reflectiveness' (Dauerre
flektion) for 
the psychological 
cognate of the coctemporary 'market of wo:lds' ('1st die Dauer­
re
ftektion institutionalisierbar?', Zeitschri
ft fiir evangelische Ethik, 
1957). The theoretical background of Schelsky's argument is 
Gehlen's general theory of 'subjectivization' in modern society. It 
232 
NOTES 
was developed f
urther in terms of the sociology of contemporary 
r
eligion by Luckmann, op. cit. 
39· cf. Luckmann and Berger, loc. cit. 
40. It is inadvisable to speak of 'collective identity' because of 
the danger of f
alse (and reif
ying) hypostatization. The exemplum 
horri
bi/e of such hypostatization is the German 'Hegelian' sociology 
of the 192os and 19305 (such as the work of Othmar Spann). The 
danger is present in greater or lesser degree in various works of the 
Durkheim school and the 'culture and personality' school in 
American cultural anthropology. 
41. What is implied here, of course, is a sociological critique of 
the Freudian 'reality principle'. 
42. cf. Peter L. Berger, 'Towards a Sociological Understanding 
of Psychoanalysis', Social Research, Spring 1965, pp. 26 ff. 
43· cf. ibid. 
44· The dialectic between nature and society here discussed is in 
no way to be equated with the 'dialectic of nature', as developed by 
Engels and later Marxism. The f
ormer underlines that man's 
relationship to his own body (as to nature in general) is itself a 
specifically human one. The latter, on the contrary, projects speci­
fically human phenomena into non-human nature and then pro­
ceeds to theoretically dehumanize man by looking upon him as but 
the object of natural f
orces or laws of nature. 
45· For this possibility of a discipline of 'sociosomatics', cf. 
Georg Simmel, op. cit., pp. 483 ff. (the essay on the 'sociology of 
the senses'); Marcel Mauss, Sociologie et anthropologie (Paris : 
Presses Universitaires de France, 1950), pp. 365 ff. (the essay on 
the 'techniques of the body'); Edward T. Hall, The Silent Lan­
guage (Garden City, N.Y. : Doubleday, 1959). The sociological 
analysis of sexuality would probably provide the richest empirical 
material f
or such a discipline. 
46. This was understood very well in Freud's conception of 
socialization. It was greatly underestimated in the f
unctionalist 
adaptations of Freud, f
rom Malinowski on. 
47· Compare here Henri Bergson (especially his theory of duree), 
Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Alf
red Schutz and Jean Piaget. 
48. Compare here both Durkheim and Plessner, as well as 
Freud. 
233 


Indexes 


Subject Index 
Abnormality. See Deviance 
Activity, 18, 30, 202-3, (see also 
Biography; 
Everyday 
lif
e; 
Habitualization; Institution­
alization; 
Labour; 
Roles; 
specific activities); and or­
ganism, 65-70, 202 
Adolescents, rites f
or. See Initia­
tion 
Aesthetic experience, 39· See 
also Art 
Age, 157, 166 
Alienation, 225 
Aloneness. See Solitariness 
Alternation, 176-81, 1 89-90 ff
.
 
Anger, 49, 51 
Angst, 226 
Animals, 65 ff., 120 
Anomie terror, I I9, 121 
Anonyntity, 46-8, 53-4, 85, 162 
'Anticipatory socialization', 232 
'Anxiety', 226 
Apologetics, 133 
Archaic civilizations, 98, 121, 
139 
Art, 39. 55 
'Art of 
mistrust', 19 
'Authority', 174 
Background, -;:ammon, 75· See 
also Relevances 
'Bad f
aith', 225 
'Base-world'. See Primary socia­
lization 
Biography, individual, 77, 78, 
81 ff., 85 ff., 99 ff., 145 (see 
also Activity; History; Roles; 
Self
, the; Subjective reality; 
specific experiences, types of 
experiences); and 
symbolic 
·iverses, 1 10, I I4, I I5 ff. 
Biology, 28, 65-70, 156, 16o, 
201-4 
Body, the, 5 1, 154. See also 
Biology 
Brain, the, 196 
'Brainwashing', 181, 232 
'Carriers', 138 ff., 158 
Casualness, 172-3 
Chaos, 121 
Children, 75 ff., 79, So, 89, 1 12, 
1 87 ff. (see also Initiation; 
New 
generation; 
Primary 
socialization); 
inf
ants, 
66; 
play of
, 39 
Choices, 71 
Civilized societies, 120. See also 
Industrial societies; Urban 
societies ; 
Western 
civiliza­
tion; specific aspects 
Cans. See Kinship 
Classes. See Social classes 
'Collective identities', 194 
237 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OP REALITY 
Collectivities. See Institutionali-
zation; specific collectivities 
'Common language', 173 
Common sense, 33-4 ff., 199 
Communication, 37, 75. See also 
Language 
Competition, 136 ff. See also 
Specialists and specialization 
Conceptualization, 122-34 ff. 
See also Legitimation 
Consciousness, 34-5 ff., 85 ff., 
91, 96, 100, (see also Marginal 
situations; Subjective reality); 
and reification, 1o6-7 ff. 
Contemporaries, 46-7, 48. See 
also Peer groups 
Control, social, 72-3, 79-80, 
202-4. See also Institutiona­
lization; specific areas, types 
of control 
Conversation, 172-4, 178--9. See 
also Language 
Correspondence, 44, 174 
Cosmology, 127-30, 195-6. See 
also Mythology; Universes 
Crises, 168, 175-6 
'Cultural lag', 225 
'Culture contact', 227 
'Culture shock', 227 
'Cure of souls', 13I 
Dasein, 2o 
Dauerr
e
jlektion, 232 
Death, 41, 168, 175, 204; and 
legitimation, 
u8-19, 
121 ; 
social control of, 202 
Decisions, 71 
Dehumanization. See Reifica­
tion 
Demonic possession, I31, I95, 
197--9 
238 
Despotism, 59 
'Detachability', 5 
I 
Deviance, So, 83, ns, 124-5 ff., 
I3I, I36-46 passim, 185-6 ff
.
 
See also Control; Habituali­
zation; 
Institutionalization; 
Tradition; specific types of 
deviance 
Diagnosis, 131, 132 
Dialectic, 78--9, 104, 145-6, I49, 
152 1f., 171, 194 ft'., 208 ft'. See 
also specific participants 
'Dialectic of nature', 233 
Digestion, 202 
'Disorientation', 42 
Divinity, 12o-24. See also Gods; 
Mythology 
Division of labour, 75, 84, 95, 
98, 134 183, 192 (see also 
Experts; Roles); and plural­
ism, 
143; and 
secondary 
socialization, 158 
Doubt, suspension of, 37 
Drama, 92. See also Theatre 
Dreams, 37, 39, 40, 54, 169, 191 ; 
acting-out of, 167; as margi­
nal situations, n4, us, uS 
Dress, proper, 167-8 
Eating, 201 ff. 
Economic surplus, 98--9, I03, 
I34 
Education, 
86 ff. 
See also 
Socialization 
Effeminacy, 188. See also Homo­
sexuality 
'Emigrating', 130. See also De-
viance 
Emotions, 151 ff., ISs, I98 
Ent
fremdung, 225 
Environment, 65 ff. 
SUBJBCT INDBX 
Epistemology, 25-6 
Everyday lif
e, 33-61, I30 (see
 
also Habitualization; Inte­
gration; Marginal situations; 
Routines; Types, typifica­
tions); language and, 49-6I; 
reality of
, 33-42; social inter­
action in, 43-8 
Exorcisms, 176 
Experience. See Biography 
Experts, 113, I 
34 ff. See also 
Specialists and specializa
tion; 
specific fields 
Express
ivity, facial, 43, 203 
Ķernalization, 70,78-9, I21-2, 
I49 See also Theories; Uni-
verses 
'Extrauterine Frii.hj
ahr', 220 
Face-to-f
ace situations, 43-8 ff., 
I74-S 
'False consciousness', 18, 19, 21 
Familiarity, 57. See also 
Intimacy 
Families, 167, 190. See also 
Children; Kinship 
Fantasies, n4, 118, I9I 
Fate. See Reification 
Fetishes, f
etishism, 88, IS9 
Finite provinces of meaning, 
39 
'First things first', 41 
Folk tales, 112 
Food. See Eating 
Foreigners, 139-40, I76 
'Formulae', institutional, 87-8 
'Freedom of the will
', 14 
FreischrDeberuk lntelligenz, 22 
Friends, I71-2. See also Fami-
liarity; Intimacy 
'Functional integration', 224 
Func:tionality
, 89 
Future, the, I20. See also New 
generation; Successo
rs 
Gait, 203 
Generalized other, the, I 
53, IS7 
Geography, 6s 
Gesture, SI-2, 203 
Gods, I07, 118, I26 ff., I86. 
See also Mythology 
Grammar
, SS-6 
'Guest peoples'. See Foreigners 
Guilt, I3I, I90 
Habitualization, 70 ff., 92, III, 
I3S· See also Institutionaliza­
tion; Roles; Routines 
'Here and now', 37, SI, 52. See 
also Face-to-face situations 
Heresy, heretics, I24-S, I33• 
I39· I44, I76 
Hierarchy, 1 18, I20 
History, historicity, I7 ff., 4I-2, 
I94• 200
 ff
., 208 ff. (see also 
Biography; Theories; Tradi­
tion; specific areas); and 
legitimation 
of universes, 
III 
ff
., I21, I2S1f
.;andorigins 
of institutionalizatio
n, 72-3, 
76 ff. {see
 also Institutionali­
zation) 
'Home world'. 
See Primary 
socializa
tion 
Homosexuality, I3I-3, 188. See 
also Sexuality 
Human nature, 66 ff. See also 
specific traits 
'Hypocrisy', 4S 
'Ideal f
actors', 20 
ldealj
aktorm, 20 
239 


THE S OCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
'Ideas'. See 
Theories ; 
Uni­
verses; Weltanschauung 
Identity, identification, S4, I50 
ff., 2oS (see also Roles ; Self, 
the; Socialization ;  Subjective 
reality); and marginal situa­
tions, nS-I9; organism and, 
20I-4; reification of, IOS-9; 
theories about, I94-200 
Ideology, IS, 2I-2, 24, 26, I4I-
2, I45· 200 
Idiosyncrasies, I24, I5I, 1S7 
Illness. See Medicine; Patho-
logy; Therapy 
Incest, 73, I I  
I, I I  
5, 203 
Individualism, I9I 
Individualization, 46. See also 
Anonymity 
Industrial Revolution, I4I, 200 
Industrial societies, 102, 143, 
192-3 
Inertia, I35· See also Tradition 
Inf
ants, 66. See also Children 
Initiation, SS, 94, I I3, 12S, I64. 
See also Rites of passage 
Innovations, 75, I43 
Insanity. See Madness 
'Insight', I32 
Instincts, 65, 66; 7I 
Institutionalization, 
65-I09, 
207 (see also Roles; Sociali­
zation ; Tradition) ; and iden­
tity (see Identity); legitima­
tion of(see Legitimation) 
Integration, 3S, 54, SI-3, 92-3, 
99, I02. See 
also Institutionali­
zation ; Legitimation; Roles 
Intellectuals, 143-5, I97 ff
. ; 
'socially unattached 
intelli­
gentsia', 22 
Internalization, 78-9, 131, I49-
93 ff. (see also Socialization); 
and identity (see Identity) ; 
and psychology 
199; and 
social structure, 183-93 
Intimacy, 47-S, 55· See also 
Friends 
Isolation. See Solitariness 
Kings 
(see also 
Despotism; 
Monarchs); divine kingship, 
121 
Kinship, 90, no-I3 ff., I22. See 
also 
Families; 
specific 
re­
lationships 
'Knowledge', I3 ff. 
Labour, 1 S, 75. See also Division 
of labour; 
Roles ; 
specific 
activities 
Language, 36, 39-40, 49-61, 
82, 92-3, 207 (see also Con­
versation; Vocabulary); chil­
dren (primary socialization) 
and, 77, 153, 155, 157, 189; 
and secondary socialization, 
I5S-9, I6I 
; and sedimentation 
and tradition, 8 
5-7; and social 
classification, 120 
'Latent' f
unctions, 23 
Law, the, 93, 94, 202 
'Law of the three stages', 227 
'Leaping', 39 
Learning. See Education; Socia­
lization 
Legends, 1 12. See also Mytho­
logy 
Legitimation, 79, S2-3, 87 ff., 
102, I Io-46, 195 tf., 207 ff
.
 
(see also Theories); and alter­
nation, 
179; 
and primary 
SUBJECT INDEX 
Legitimation-cont. 
socialization, 15 
5 ; and sub­
universes, I05, Io6 
Life expectancy, 202 
Logic, 82, xoo, I95-6 
Longevity, 202 
Macroscopic societies, 9S 
Madness, madmen (insanity), 
39, I I6, I76 
Magic, 51, 95 
'Making present', language and, 
54-5 
'Manif
est' f
unctions, 23 
Man in the street, the, 13 
ff., 107 
Marginal situations, n4, n6, 
I IS-19, 167, I6S, 175 
'Market of worlds', 232 
Marriage, 107-S (see also Chil­
dren ; Families) ; interf
aith, 
I72 
Maxims, I I2 
Mediators, 94 
Medicine, 103, 105; 
hospitaliza-
tion, IS2 
Medieval society, I29, 139-40 
Mediterranean 
societies, 126 
Memory. See History; Recollec-
tion 
Mental deficiency, 1S5 
Methodology, 25-6 
Middle 
Ages. See 
Medieval 
society 
Minority groups. See Deviance 
Monarchs, 94; divine kingship, 
121 
Monopolism, 138-42 
Motivations, 
150, 179-So 
Mysticism. See Religion 
Mythology, 101, I I7 ff., 122, 
t26, 127-9, 
195· See also 
Cosmology; Divinity; Gods ; 
Symbolic universes 
Names, 152 
'Negotiation', f
ace-to-f
ace, 45-6 
Neurosis, 19S ff. 
New generation, 76, 77, 79, 
I I  
1, 124. See also Children; 
Successors ; Tradition ; Night­
mare, I I9. See also Dreams ; 
Marginal situations 
Nihilation, 
130, 132-3, 144, 
I76, 179 
Nomenclature, 152 
Norms, I52-3 
Nudity, 167-8 
Nutrition. See Eating 
Objectivation, 34, 49 ff., 7S ff. 
See also Legitimation ; speci­
fic areas, types of objectiva­
tion 
Objective reality, 65-146, 153, 
I83, 184. See also Secondary 
socialization 
Occupations, 56, ISI, 1S2. See 
also Division oflabour; Roles; 
Specialists and specialization ; 
specific activities 
Organism, 65-70, 201-4 See also 
Biology 
Orgasm, 202 
'Other-direction', 232 
Outsiders, 104-5. See also De-
viance; Foreigners 
Parents, I6I, I62, 1S2 (see also 
Children; Primary socializa­
tion; Significant others); and 
unsuccessf
ul 
socialization, 
IS7 ff. 


THI! SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF RI!ALITY 
Past, the. See Biography; His-
tory; Tradition 
Paternity, 76 
'Pathology', 131, 1S3, 202 
Peer groups, 190 
'Permanent reflectiveness', 232 
Personality development, 117. 
See also Identity 
Phenomenological analysis, 34 
Philosophers, philosophy, 13 ff., 
25, 55, 2II. See also Theories 
Plausibility. See Legitimation 
Play, 39 
Pluralistic societies, 142 ff., 165, 
172, 193 
Politics, political institutions, 
94. 121, 140, 142, 17S, 200 
Possession. See Demonic pos-
session 
Power, 127, 133, 137, 139 ff. 
'Practico-inert', 225 
Pragmatism, 53, 56-7, 136 ff. 
Predecessors, 4S. See also His-
tory; Tradition 
Predictability, 74-5 
Prestige, 105, I6o 
Priests, 102-3, 165 
Primary socialization, 149-57 
ff., 167 ff., 199, 203; and un­
successful socialization, 1S4 
ff. 
Primitive societies, 9S, 117, 120, 
139. See also Subsistence 
economies 
Programmes, institutional. See 
Institutionalization 
'Projection', 227 
Propaganda, 101, 105 
Pseudo-pragmatism, 137 
Psychiatry, uS, 196 
Psychoanalysis, 166, 210 
242 
Psychologies, 
psychological 
phenomena, 69, 71, 75, S2, 
I I4, II7, 195-200, 208 ff. 
'Psychopathy', 230 
Psychotherapy, .178 
Puberty rites. See Initiation 
'Real f
actors', 20 
Real
f
aktoren, 20 
'Reality', 13 ff. 
'Reality-oriented', 196 
'Reality principle', 233 
'Reality sui generis', 30 
Recipe knowledge, 57, S3. See 
also Routines 
Recollection, S5, III, 175· See 
also Tradition 
Ref
erence-group theory, 23 
Reification, 1o6-9, 208, 209 
'Relationism', 22 
'Relative-natural world view', 
20 
'Relativism', 22, 2S 
Relativnatiirliche Weltanschau­
ung, 2o 
Relevances, 59-00
, 75, So, S1, 
94, 95, 97, 99· See also 
Institutionalization 
Religion, 37, 39, 55, 88, 91, 164, 
16S, 179, 18o, 207 (see also 
Mythology; 
specific 
reli­
gions); and conversation, I 
73; 
conversion 177-8o; and mon­
opolies, 140; nihilation and, 
133 
'Reorientation', 42 
'Resentment', 19 
'Responsibility', 14 
Revolution, 
revolutionaries, 
144-s. 164, 165 
SUBJI!CT INDEX 
Rites of passage, 117. See also 
Initiation 
Rituals, 159, 176. See also 
Initiation 
Roles, 74 ff., S3, S9-96 ff., 
110 ff., 192 (see also Alter· 
nation; Identity; Significant 
others; Specialists and spe­
cialization; 
specific 
roles); 
reification of, 10S 
Routines, 38, 56-7, 76, 16S-75, 
176. See also Institutionaliza­
tion; Roles 
Sanctions, So, 175 
Science, 55, 104, 1o6, II3, 114, 
130, 194 ff. See also specific 
disciplines 
'Seat in lif
e', 19 
Secondary socialization, 157-
66 ff., 191-2, 199, 203 
Sectet societies, I02. See also 
Specialists and specialization 
Sects, religious, 144 
Sedhnentation, S5-9 
Segmentation, institutional, 99-
IOO, I02 ff. 
Segregation, I02 ff., I39-40, I7S 
Seins
gebundenheit, r6 
Self
, the, 6S, 73, 90-91 (see also 
Biography; Identity; Roles; 
Socialization; Subjective rea­
lity); reification of
, xoS 
Semantic zones of 
meaning, 55-6 
Sexuality, sex, 67, ƒ3, 75, So-SI 
94-5, Ioi, 13I ff., 202; and 
conversation, 173; masturba­
tion and, I57; overcoming 
satiety, 204; programme f
or 
boys and girls, 156; and un­
successful socialization, ISS 
Significant others, 151 ff., I69-
72, ISo; conversation and, 
I7S; and discrepancies be­
tween primary and secondary 
socialization, IS7 ff. 
Signs, sign systems, so-sx ff., 
55, Ss ff. See also Language 
'Situational determination', I9 
Sitz im Leben, 19 
Sleeping, 203 
Snarling, 51 
Social classes, 120, 13S ff., 151, 
157, 158, ISI, 182, 1S4 ff., 202. 
See also Experts 
Socialization, 149-82 ff. (see also 
Identity; Primary socializa­
tion; 
Secondary 
socializa­
tion); success, lack of success 
in, IS3-93 
'Socially 
unattached 
intel-
ligentsia', 22 
Social sciences, 25, 101, 104, 
20S ff. 
Sociology, 207 ff. 
'Sociology of knowledge', 15 ff. 
'Sociosomatics', 233 
Solidarity, 141 
Solitariness, 
69 
ff. ; 
anomie 
terror, r 19, 121 
Sosein, 20 
Spatial structure of lif
e, 40 
Specialists and specialization, 
95 ff., 1 12-13, u8 ff. See also 
Division of labour; Secondary 
socialization; Theories; speci­
fic activities 
Species, 65 
Speech. See Conversation; Lan­
guage 
Standortsgebundenheit, 19 
Stigmatization, 1S4-7 
243 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
Stock ofknowledge, 56-60, 135, 
I 
57. See also Roles; Socializa­
tion; Theories; Tradition 
Sttangers. See Foreigners 
Stream of consciousness, 40 
Structural-f
unctional theory, 23 
Stupidity, 87. See also Mental 
deficiency 
Subjective reality, 147-204 (see 
also Biography); identity theo­
ries, 194-204 ; maintenance 
and transf
ormĊtion of
, 166-
82 ; and social structure, 183-
93 
Subsistence economy, 99, 102. 
See also Primitive societies 
Subsocieties, 
143-5, 
189 
'Substructure' 
/superstructure, 
18, 20, 224 
Subuniverses, 102-6, 145 
Subworlrls, 158 
Successors, 48. See also Chil­
dren; New generation; Tradi­
tion 
Surplus. See Economic surplus 
Symbolic-interactionist school, 
29 
Symbolic 
universes, 
1 1o-46, 
159, 195, 208; maintenance 
of, 122-46 
Symbols, symbolism, 55, 88, 
93-4, 105. See also Symbolic 
universes; specific symbols, 
types of symbols 
Symptomatology, 131 
Syntax, 55 
Taboos, 1 76. See also Incest 
'Tacit understandings', 158 
'Taking over' the social world, 
150 
244
 
Talking. 
See 
Conversation; 
Language 
Temporality (and time), 4o-42, 
149. 150, 196, 203 
Territoriality, 75 
Terror, 1 16, 1 19, 121. See also 
Marginal situations 
Theatre, 39. See also Drama 
Theology. See Religion 
Theories, theorizing, 38, 39, 40, 
83, 99, 103-4, I 12 ff
., 208. 
See also Legitimation; Specia­
lists; 
Symbolic 
universes; 
Weltanschauung 
Therapy, 13o-34, 144, 179, 188, 
197 
Time. See Temporality 
'Total social fact', 209 
Tradition, 85-9, I I I, 125, 128, 
135 ff. See also History; New 
generation; Stock of know­
ledge; specific traditions 
Transcendence, language and, 
54-5 
Transf
ormations, 176-82, 200. 
See also Alternation 
'Treason', self
-, 190 
Types, typifications, 45-8, 53-4, 
58, 81, 87, 88, 120, 138 ff. (see 
also Roles; specific roles); and 
identity, 194-5, 199, recipro­
cal, 72-6 
'Understanding', 150 
Universes, 
1 1o-46. 
See also 
Cosmology; Symbolic uni­
verses; Weltanschauung 
Unterbauf Ueberbau. See 'Sub-
structure/superstructure' 
Urban societies, 141, 143· See 
SUBJECT INDEX 
Urban-cont. 
also Industrial societies; Plur­
alistic societies 
'Utopian' thought, 22 
'Values', I I  
1. See also Legitima-
tion 
Verdinglichung. See Reification 
Violence, 121 
Virility, 204. See also Sexuality 
Vocabulary, 36, 51, 84, 90, 1 12, 
158 
Vocal expressions, 51-3 
Vomiting, 202 
Waiting, 4o-41 
Weltanschauung, 20, 26-7, 103, 
1 1 7, 1 19 
Western civilization, 156, 210 
Wissenssoziologie, 15 
Women, 1 87-8 (see also Sexua­
lity), as mothers (see Chil­
dren; Significant others) 
World-openness, 65, 67, 69, 121 
World views, 96. See also Wel­
tanschauung 
245 


Name Index for Introduction and Notes 
Antoni, Carlo 2I6 n. 9 
Aries, Philippe, 230 n. I3 
Aron, Raymond, 216 n. r r, 
n. 12, 228 n. 90 
Banb, Hans, 215 n. 3 
Bell, Daniel, 2I7 n. 20 
Benedict, Ruth, 220 n. 8 
Berger, Brigitte, 227 n. 85 
Berger, Peter L., 2I9 n. I, 222 
n. 26, 225 n. 58, 226 n. 65, 
229 n. IOS, 231 n. 2I, n. 24, 
232 n. 29, 233 n. 39, n. 42 
Bergson, Henri, 233 n. 47 
Birnbaum, Norman, 2I7 n. 20 
Bultmann, Rudolf
, 228 n. 88 
Buytendijk, F. J. J., 2I9 n. I 
Calvez, Jean-Yves, 215 n. 6 
Coo
ley, Charles Horton, 230 
n. 6, 23I n. 20 
Cory, Donald W., 232 n. 36 
Cuvillier, Armand, 225 n. 59 
DeGre, Gerard L., 2I7 n. 24 
Diltbey, Wilhelm, I9, 22, 216 
n. 9 
Durkbeim, Emile, 18, 28, 30, 
218 n. 27, 221 n.13, n. IS, 
n. 23, n. 24, 222 n. 27, 223 
D. 38, D. 39, n. 40, n. 44, n. 46, 
225 n. 59, 226 n. 69, n. 71, 
227 n. 75, n. 79, 228 n. 9I, 
n. 96, 23I n. 26, 233 n. 48 
Eliade, Mircea, 226 n. 63, 228 
n. 88, n.89 
Engels, Friedrich, 233 n. 44 
Festinger, Leon, 228 n. 94, 232 
n. 28 
Fetscher, Iring, .215 n. 6 
Feuerbach, Ludwig, 227 n. 8o 
Freidson, Eliot, 232 n. 31 
Freud, Sigmund, 216 n. 8, 220 
n. 9, 227 n. So, 233 n. 46, n. 48 
Freyer, Hans, 2I6 n. 1 1  
GaČl, Joseph, 225 n. 58 
Gehlen, Arnold, 28, 219 n. r, 
n. 3, 221 n. 16, n. 18, n. 19, 
n. 22, 223 n. so, n. SI, 227 
n. 87, 232 n. 38 
Geiger, Theodor, 23-4, 217 n. 
r8, 228 n. 90 
Gerth, Hans H., 231 n. r8, 
232 n. 33 
Goffman, Erving, 226 n. 73, 
230 n. IS, 231 n. I9, 232 
n. 27, n. 35 
Goldmann, Lucien, 225 n. 58 
GrUnwald, Ernst, 216 n.n 
Gurvitch, Georges, 217 n. 24 
247 


THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY 
Halbwachs, Maurice, 227 n. 77 
Hall, Edward T., 233 n. 45 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Fried-
rich, 22I n. 15, 222 n. 33 
Heidegger, Martin, 226 n. 74 
Heimsoeth, Heinz, 215 n. 2 
Hughes, Everett, 231 n. 16 
Hughes, H. Stuart, 216 n. 9 
Hunter, Edward, 232 n. 27 
Husser!, Edmund, 222 n. 34, 
0. 35 
Huszar, George B. de, 228 n. 90 
Kardiner, A., 232 n. 35 
Kauf
mann, Walter A., 2I5 n. 7 
Kautsky, Karl, 2I5 n. 6 
Kellner, Hansf
ried, 219 n. I, 
222 n. 26, 23I n. 2I 
Kelsen, Hans, 2I7 n. I9 
Kluckhohn, Clyde, 220 n. 8 
Kolakowski, Leszek, 229 n. I07 
Labriola, Antonio, 215 n. 6 
Lampert, Evgenil, 229 n. I06 
Landshut, Siegf
ried, 216 n. 1 1  
Lapassade, Georges, 218 n. 25 
Leeuw, Gerardus van der, 228 
n. 88 
Lenk, Kurt, 2I5 n. 3, 217 n. 20, 
228 n. 100 
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 222 n. 3I, 
226 n. 62, 227 n. 76, 230 n. 8 
Levy-Bruhl, Lucien, 223 n. 44, 
225 n. 62, 227 n. 87, 230 n. 12 
Lieber, Hans-Joachim, 2I6 n. 
ro, 217 n. 12, n. 13 
Litman, Theodor J., 232 n. 3I 
Lowith, Karl, 2I6 n. 7 
Luckmann, Thomas, 2I9 n. I, 
229 n. I02, 232 n. 29, 233 
n. 38, n. 39 
248 
Lukacs, Gyorgy, 2I5 n. 6, 225 
n. 58 
Malinowski, Bronislaw, 220 n. 
8, 226 n. 74 
Mannheim, Karl,20-24, 26, 216 
n. 12, 224 n. 56, 228 n. 90, 
229 n. 103, n. 106 
Maquet, Jacques J., 216 n.12 
Marx, Karl, 17-19, 20, 2I, 22, 
28-9, 215 n. 5, n. 6, 220 n. 7, 
221 n. 12, 222 n. 15, n. 29, 
223 n. 46, n. 48, 224 n. 54, 
n. 56, 225 n. 58, n. 61, 226 
n. 68, 227 n. So, n. 84, 229 
n. 101, 233 n. 44 
Mauss, Marcel, 233 n. 45 
Mead, George Herbert, 29, 220 
n. 6, n. to, 221 n. 22, 222 
n. 36, n. 37, 226 n. 73, 229 
n. 3, 230 n.6 
Mead, Margaret, 220 n. 8 
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 233 
n. 47 
Merton, Robert, 23, 216 n. 12, 
2I7 n. 14, n. 24, 231 n. 23, 
232 n. 30 
Mills, C. Wright, 23, 217 n. I7, 
23I n. I8, 232 n. 33 
Monncrot, Jules, 225 n. 59 
Murdock, George, 220 n. 8 
Natanson, Maurice, 219 n. r, 
220 n. 6 
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, 
I9, 2I5-I6 n. 7, n. 8, 227 n. So 
Ovesey, L., 232 n. 35 
Pareto, Vilf
redo, IS, 220 n.7, 
222 n. 30, 226 n. 67, n. 68, 
227 n. 85, 228 n. 9I 
NAME INDEX 
Parsons, Talcott, 23, 29, 2I7 
n. I5, n. I6, 218 n. 26, 223 
n. 45, n. 46, 23I n. I7 
Pascal, Blaise, I7 
Piaget, Jean, 222 n. 25, 226 
n. 62, 227 n. 87, 230 n. 1 I, 
n. 12, 233 n. 47 
Plessner, Helmuth, 28, 219 n. I, 
n. 3, 220 D. I I, 230 n. IO, 233 
n. 48 
Popitz, Heinrich, 221 n. 21 
Portmann
, Adolf
, 2I9 n. I, 220 
n. 4• n. 5 
Pullberg, Stanley, 225 n. 58, 226 
n. 65 
Radin, Paul, 228 n. 97 
Riesman, David, 231 n. I9, 232 
n. 30 
Rose, Arnold, 217 n. 25, 232 
n. 31 
Roth, Julius A., 232 n. 31 
Salomon, Albert, 215 n. 3 
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 22o-21 n. u, 
223 n. 42, 225 n. 6o, n. 61,226 
n. 64, n. 69, 229 n. 4 
Scheler, Max, I6, 19-20, 21 tf
., 
26, 2I5 n. I, 2I6 n. IO, 220 
n. I I, 228 n. 95 
Schelsky, Helmut, 232 n. 38 
Schelting, Alexander von, 216 
n. I I  
Schutz, Alfred, 27-8, 217 n. 22, 
n. 2j, 219 n. I, 221 n. 17, 
222 n. 32, n. 34, n. 35, 223 
n. 4I, 226 n. 69, n. 72, n. 74, 
227 n. 78, 229 n. x, 233 n. 47 
Seidel, Alf
red, 2I6 n. 8 
Shibutani, Tamotsu, 2I7 n. 25 
Simmel, Georg, 221 n. 23, 223 
n. 49, 229 n. I04, 230 n. xo, 
23I n. 22, 233 n. 45 
Sorokin, Pitirim, 23 
Spann, Othmar, 233 n. 40 
Stark, Werner, 24, 2I5 n. 3, 
216 n. IO, 2I7 n. 12, n. 2I 
Strauss, Anselm, 220 n. 6, 226 
n. 73 
Tenbruck, Friedrich, 218 n. 25, 
221 n. 21, 222 n. 30, 231 n. 
21, 232 n. 33 
Thomas, W. 1., 22I n. 20 
Tonnies, Ferdinand, 223 n. 46 
Topitsch, Ernst, 24, 2I7 n. I9 
Uexkilll, Jakob von, 2I9 n. I, 
n. 2 
Veblen, Thorstein, 229 n. IOI, 
n.I04 
Voegelin, Eric, 223 n. 45, 226 
n. 63, 228 n. 89, n. 96 
Weber Alf
red, 22 
Weber, Max, IS, 29, 30, 216 
n. II, 2I8 n. 28, 222 n. 27, 
223 n. 46, 224 n. 54, 226 n. 
66, 227 n. 8I, 228 n. 93, n. 95, 
n. 98, n. 99, 229 n. I 
Windelband, Wilhelm, 2I5 n. 2 
Wolff
, Kurt, 216 n. 12 
Znaniecki, Florian, 228 n. 90 
249 


The Elementary Forms 
of Relisious Life 
a? 
41 I 


The Elementary Forms of 
PELIGIOUS JJFE 


The Elementary Forms of 
EMILE DÜRKHEIM 
Translated and with an Introduction by 
Karen E. Fields 
I 
T H E 
F R E E PRESS 
N E W Y O R K 
L O N D O N 
T O R O N T O 
S Y D N E Y 
T O K Y O 
S I N G A P O R E 


Translation and Introduction copyright © 1995 by Karen E. Fields 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any 
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the Pub-
lisher. 
The Free Press 
A Division of Simon & Schuster Inc. 
1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, N.Y. 10020 
Printed in the United States of America 
printing number 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 
10 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Dürkheim, Emile, 1858-1917. 
[Formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse. English] 
The elementary forms of religious life/ Emile Dürkheim; 
translated and with an introduction by Karen E. Fields, 
p. cm. 
Translation of: Les formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse. 
Includes index. 
ISBN 0-02-907936-5 (hbk.).—ISBN 0-02-907937-3 (pbk.) 
II. Title. 
GN470.D813 
1995 
306.6—dc20 
94-41128 
CIP 
This book was originally published as Les Formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse: Le système 
totémique en Australie, Paris, F. Alcan, 1912. 
The endpaper art in this volume is based on a map that appeared in the French edition. 


CONTENTS 
Acknowledgments 
x i i i 
Abbreviations 
x v 
Translator's Introduction: R e l i g i o n as an E m i n e n d y Social T h i n g 
x v i i 
INTRODUCTION 
Subject of the Study: 
Religious Sociology and the Theory of Knowledge 
1 
I . • M a i n subject o f the book: analysis o f the simplest k n o w n religion, to 
determine the elementary forms o f religious life. • W h y they are easier to 
arrive at and explain through primitive religions. 
1 
I I . • Secondary subject: o r i g i n o f the fundamental notions or categories o f 
thought. • Reasons for believing their o r i g i n to be religious and conse-
quently social. • H o w a means o f regenerating the theory o f knowledge can 
be seen from this point o f view. 
8 
BOOK ONE: PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
Chapter One: Definition of Religious Phenomena 
and of Religion 
21 
The usefulness o f a preliminary definition o f religion; method to be followed 
in arriving at that definition. • W h y the usual definitions should be examined 
first. 
21 
I . • R e l i g i o n defined by the supernatural and the mysterious. • Criticism. 
The idea o f mystery was n o t present at the beginning. 
22 
I I . • R e l i g i o n defined i n relation to the idea o f G o d or a spiritual being. 
Religions w i t h o u t gods. • Rites i n deistic religions that i m p l y no idea o f de-
ity. 
27 
I I I . • Search for a positive definition. • Distinction between beliefs and rites. 
Definition o f beliefs. • First characteristic: bipartite division o f things into 
sacred and profane. • Distinguishing traits o f that division. • Definition o f 
rites i n relation to beliefs. • Definition o f religion. 
33 
111 


I V 
Contents 
I V • Necessity o f another characteristic to distinguish magic from religion. • 
T h e idea o f C h u r c h . • D o individual religions exclude the idea o f Church? 
39 
Chapter Two: The Leading Conceptions of 
the Elementary Religion: Animism 
45 
Distinction between animism and naturism 
I . • The three theses o f animism: (1) genesis o f the idea o f soul; (2) formation 
o f the idea o f spirit; (3) transformation o f the cult o f spirits into the cult o f 
nature. 
4 5
v 
I I . • Criticism o f the first thesis: Distinction between the ideas o f soul and o f 
double. • Dreams do not account for the idea o f soul. 
52 
I I I . • Criticism o f the second thesis. Death does not explain the transforma-
t i o n o f the soul into a spirit. • T h e cult o f the souls o f the dead is not p r i m -
itive. 
59 
IV. • Criticism o f the third thesis. T h e anthropomorphic instinct. Spencer's 
criticism o f it; reservations o n this subject. Examination o f the facts by w h i c h 
the existence o f that instinct is said to be proved. • Difference between the 
soul and the spirits o f nature. Religious anthropomorphism is not primitive. 
61 
V. • Conclusion: A n i m i s m reduces religion to nothing more than a system o f 
hallucinations. 
65 
Chapter Three: T h e Leading Conceptions of the 
Elementary Religion (Continuation): Naturism 
68 
R e v i e w o f the theory 
68 
I . • Exposition o f naturism according to M a x Muller. 
70 
I I . • I f the object o f religion is to express natural forces, then h o w it could 
have survived is hard to see, for it expresses them mistakenly. T h e alleged dis-
tinction between religion and mythology. 
76 
I I I . • Naturism does not explain the division o f things into sacred and p r o -
fane. 
81 


Contents 
v 
Chapter Four: Totemism as Elementary Religion: 
Review of the Question. Method of Treating It 
84 
I . • B r i e f history o f the question o f totemism. 
85 
I I . • Methodological reasons for w h i c h the study w i l l be based mainly o n 
Australian totemism. • Concerning the place to be given to American ex-
amples. 
90 
BOOK TWO: T H E ELEMENTARY 
BELIEFS 
Chapter One: The Principal Totemic Beliefs: 
The Totem as Name and as Emblem 
99 
I . • Definition o f the clan. • T h e totem as name o f the clan. • Nature o f the 
things that serve as totems. • Ways i n w h i c h the totem is acquired. • T h e 
totems o f phratries and o f marriage classes. 
I I . • T h e totem as emblem. • Totemic designs engraved or sculpted on o b -
jects, and tattooed or painted o n bodies. 
I I I . • Sacredness o f the totemic emblem. • T h e churingas. • T h e nurtunja. • 
The waninga. • Conventional nature o f totemic emblems. 
Chapter Two: The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued): 
The Totemic Animal and Man 
127 
I . • Sacredness o f the totemic animals. • Prohibition against eating and killing 
them and against picking totemic plants. • Various mitigations o f those p r o -
hibitions. • Prohibitions o f contact. • T h e sacredness o f the animal is less p r o -
nounced than that o f the emblem. 
I I . • M a n . • His kinship w i t h the totemic plant or animal. • Various myths ex-
plaining that kinship. • T h e sacredness o f the man is more apparent i n certain 
parts o f the body: the blood, the hair, etc. • H o w this quality varies w i t h sex 
and age. • Totemism is neither animal nor plant worship. 
Chapter Three: The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued): 
The Cosmological System of Totemism and the Notion of Kind 
141 
I . • Classifications o f things by clan, phratry, and class. 
141 


V I 
Contents 
I I . • O r i g i n o f the idea o f genus: T h e first classifications o f things take their 
schemes from society. • Differences between the feeling o f resemblance and 
the idea o f genus. • W h y that idea is o f social origin. 
145 
I I I . • Religious meaning o f these classifications: A l l things classified w i t h i n a 
clan participate i n the nature o f the totem and i n its sacredness. T h e cosmo-
logical system o f totemism. • Totemism as tribal religion. 
149 
Chapter Four: The Principal Totemic Beliefs (End): 
The Individual Totem and the Sexual Totem 
158 
I . • T h e individual t o t e m as first name; its sacredness. • The individual totem 
as personal emblem. • Bonds between man and his individual totem. • Links 
w i t h the collective totem. 
158 
I I . • Totems o f sexual groups. • Resemblances and differences between c o l -
lective and individual totems. • T h e i r tribal character. 
166 
Chapter Five: Origins of These Beliefs 
Critical Examination of the Theories 
169 
I . • Theories that derive totemism from an earlier religion: from the ancestor 
cult ( W i l k e n and Tylor); from the cult o f nature (Jevons). • Criticism o f these 
theories. 
170 
I I . • Theories that derive collective totemism from individual totemism. • 
Origins ascribed by these theories to the individual totem (Frazer, Boas, H i l l 
Tout) • Improbability o f these hypotheses. • Arguments for the p r i o r i t y o f 
the collective totem. 
174 
I I I . • Recent theory o f Frazer: conceptional and local totemism. • T h e ques-
t i o n begging o n w h i c h i t rests. • T h e religious character o f the totem is de-
nied. • Local totemism is not primitive. 
182 
IV. • T h e o r y o f Lang: the totem is merely a name. • Difficulties i n explain-
i n g the religious character o f totemic practices from this point o f view. 
186 
V • A l l these theories explain totemism only by postulating earlier religious 
notions. 
188 


Contents 
vn 
Chapter Six: Origins of These Beliefs (Continued): 
The Notion qfTotemic Principle, or Mana, and the Idea of Force 
190 
I . • T h e n o t i o n o f force or totemic principle. • Its ubiquity. • Its simultane-
ously physical and moral character. 
190 
I I . • Similar conceptions i n other lower societies. • Gods i n Samoa. • Wakan 
o f the Sioux, orenda o f the Iroquois, mana i n Melanesia. • Relationships o f 
these notions w i t h totemism. • A r u n k u l t a o f the Arunta. 
193 
I I I . • T h e logical p r i o r i t y o f the n o t i o n o f impersonal force over the various 
mythical personalities. • Recent theories that tend to accept this priority. 
201 
IV. • The n o t i o n o f religious force is the prototype o f the n o t i o n o f force i n 
general. 
205 
Chapter Seven: Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion): 
Origin of the Notion of Totemic Principle, or Mana 
207 
I . • T h e totemic principle is the clan, but the clan thought o f i n tangible 
form. 
207 
I I . • General reasons society is capable o f arousing the sensation o f the sacred 
and the divine. • Society as an imperative moral power; the n o t i o n o f moral 
authority. • Society as a force that raises the individual above himself. • Facts 
proving that society creates the sacred. 
208 
I I I . • Reasons peculiar to the Australian societies. • T h e t w o phases through 
w h i c h the life o f these societies alternately passes: dispersal and concentra-
tion. • Great collective effervescence d u r i n g the periods o f concentration. 
Examples. • H o w the religious idea is b o r n from that effervescence. W h y the 
collective force was conceived o f i n totemic forms: T h e totem is the emblem 
o f the clan. • Explanation o f the principal totemic beliefs. 
216 
IV. • R e l i g i o n is not a product o f fear. • I t expresses something real. • Its f u n -
damental idealism. • That idealism is a general trait o f collective mentality. • 
W h y religious forces are external to their substrates. • O n the principle the 
part equals the whole. 
225 
V. • O r i g i n o f the n o t i o n o f emblem: use o f emblems, a necessary condition 
o f collective representations. • W h y the clan has taken its emblems from the 
animal and plant kingdoms. 
231 


V l l l 
Contents 
V I . • O n the tendency o f the primitive to merge realms and classes that we 
distinguish. • Origins o f those fusions. • H o w they paved the way for scien-
tific explanations. • T h e y do not preclude the tendency to create distinctions 
and oppositions. 
236 
Chapter Eight: The Notion of Soul 
I . • Analysis o f the n o t i o n o f soul i n the Australian societies. 
242 
I I . • Genesis o f that notion. • T h e doctrine o f reincarnation according to 
Spencer and Gillen: I t implies that the soul is a p o r t i o n o f the totemic p r i n -
ciple. • Examination o f the facts reported by Strehlow; they c o n f i r m the 
totemic nature o f the soul. 
249 
I I I . • Generality o f the n o t i o n o f reincarnation. • Evidence to support the 
o r i g i n proposed. 
259 
IV. • T h e antithesis between soul and body: what is objective about it. Rela-
tionships between the individual soul and the collective soul. • T h e n o t i o n o f 
soul is not chronologically after that o f mana. 
265 
V • Hypothesis to explain the belief i n life after death. 
270 
V I . • T h e idea o f soul and the idea o f person; impersonal elements o f per-
sonality. 
272 
Chapter Nine: The Notion of Spirits and Gods 
276 
I . • Difference between soul and spirit. • T h e souls o f the mythical ancestors 
are spirits w i t h set functions. • Relations between the ancestral spirit, the i n -
dividual soul, and the individual totem. • Explanation o f the last. • Its socio-
logical significance. 
276 
I I . • Spirits and magic. 
284 
I I I . • Civilizing heroes. 
286 
IV. • H i g h gods. • T h e i r origin. • T h e i r relationship w i t h the totemic system 
as a whole. • T h e i r tribal and international character. 
288 
V. • U n i t y o f the totemic system. 
298 


Contents 
I X 
BOOK III: T H E PRINCIPAL MODES 
OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
Chapter One: The Negative Cult and Its Functions: 
The Ascetic Rites 
303 
I . • The system o f prohibitions • Magic and religious prohibitions. Prohibi-
tions between sacred things o f different kinds. Prohibitions between sacred 
and profane. • These last are the basis o f the negative cult. • Principal types 
o f these prohibitions; their reduction to t w o basic types. 
303 
I I . • Observance o f the prohibitions modifies the religious states o f i n d i v i d u -
als. Cases i n w h i c h that efficacy is especially apparent: ascetic practices. • R e -
ligious efficacy o f pain. • Social function o f asceticism. 
313 
I I I . • Explanation o f the system o f prohibitions: antagonism o f the sacred and 
the profane; contagiousness o f the sacred. 
321 
IV. • Causes o f this contagiousness. • I t cannot be explained by the laws o f 
the association o f ideas. • I t arises because religious forces are external to their 
substrates. Logical interest o f this property o f the religious forces. 
325 
Chapter Two: The Positive Cult: The Elements of the Sacrifice 
330 
The Intichiuma ceremony i n the tribes o f central Australia. • Various forms 
it exhibits. 
330 
I . • The A r u n t a f o r m . • T h e t w o phases. • Analysis o f the first: visiting sacred 
places, spreading sacred dust, shedding blood, etc., to b r i n g about the repro-
duction o f the totemic species. 
331 
I I . • Second phase: ritual eating o f the totemic plant or animal. 
338 
I I I . • Interpretation o f the ceremony as a whole. • T h e second rite consists o f 
a c o m m u n i o n meal. • Reason for that c o m m u n i o n . 
340 
IV. • T h e rites o f the first phase consist o f offerings. • Analogies w i t h sacrifi-
cial offerings. • Hence the Intichiuma contains the t w o elements o f sacrifice. 
• Interest o f these facts for the theory o f sacrifice. 
344 
V • O n the alleged absurdity o f the sacrificial offerings. • H o w they are ex-
plained: dependence o f sacred beings o n their worshippers. • Explanation o f 


X 
Contents 
the circle i n w h i c h sacrifice seems to move. • O r i g i n o f the periodicity o f 
positive rites. 
348 
Chapter Three: The Positive Cult (Continuation): 
Mimetic Rites and the Principle of Causality 
355 
I . • Nature o f the mimetic rites. • Examples o f ceremonies i n w h i c h they are 
used to ensure the fertility o f the species. 
355 
I I . • They rest o n this principle: Like produces like. • T h e explanation p r o -
posed by the anthropological school examined. • W h y an animal or plant is 
imitated. • W h y physical efficacy is ascribed to these movements. • Faith. • 
I n what sense faith is founded u p o n experience. • T h e principles o f magic 
were b o r n i n religion. 
360 
I I I . • T h e foregoing principle considered as being among the first statements 
o f the principle o f causality. • Social conditions o n w h i c h the principle o f 
causality depends. • T h e idea o f impersonal force or power is o f social origin. 
• T h e necessity o f the causal j u d g m e n t explained by the authority inherent 
i n social imperatives. 
367 
Chapter Four: T h e Positive Cult (Continuation): 
Representative or Commemorative Rites 
374 
I . • Representative rites that have physical efficacy. • T h e i r relationships w i t h 
the ceremonies described previously. • T h e i r influence is w h o l l y moral. 
375 
I I . • Representative rites w i t h o u t physical efficacy. • T h e y c o n f i r m the pre-
ceding results. • T h e recreational aspect o f religion: its importance and raisons 
d'être. • T h e idea o f the feast. 
380 
I I I . • A m b i g u i t y o f function i n the various ceremonies studied; they are sub-
stitutes for one another. • H o w this ambiguity confirms the proposed theory. 
387 
Chapter Five: The Piacular Rites and the Ambiguity 
of the Notion of the Sacred 
392 
Definition o f the piacular rite. 
392 
I . • T h e positive rites o f m o u r n i n g . Description o f these rites. 
393 
I I . • H o w they are explained. • T h e y are not a display o f private feelings. • 
Neither can the malice ascribed to the soul o f the deceased account for them. 


Contents 
X I 
• T h e y arise from the spiritual state i n w h i c h the group finds itself. • Analy-
sis o f that state. H o w it comes to an end through m o u r n i n g . • Parallel 
changes i n the manner i n w h i c h the soul o f the deceased is conceived. 
400 
I I I . • Other piacular rites: following public m o u r n i n g , an insufficient harvest, 
a drought, or the southern lights. • R a r i t y o f these rites i n Australia. • H o w 
they are explained. 
406 
I V • T h e t w o forms o f the sacred: pure and impure. • T h e i r antagonism. • 
Their kinship. • A m b i g u i t y o f the n o t i o n o f the sacred. • Explanation o f that 
ambiguity. • A l l the rites have this character. 
412 
CONCLUSION 
To what extent the results obtained can be generalized. 
418 
I . • R e l i g i o n rests o n an experience that is well-founded but not privileged. 
• Necessity o f a science to get at the reality that is the foundation o f this ex-
perience. • W h a t that reality is: human groupings. • H u m a n meaning o f re-
ligion. • O n the objection that opposes the ideal society to the real one. • 
H o w the individualism and the cosmopolitanism o f religion are explained i n 
this theory. 
419 
I I . • W h a t is eternal about religion. • O n the conflict between religion and 
science; i t affects only the speculative function o f religion. • W h a t the des-
tiny o f that function seems to be. 
429 
I I I . • H o w can society be a source o f logical—that is to say, conceptual— 
thought? D e f i n i t i o n o f the concept: n o t the same as the general idea; char-
acterized by its impersonality and its communicability. • It has a collective 
origin. • Analysis o f its content testifies i n the same way. • Collective repre-
sentations as type-notions i n w h i c h individuals share. • O n the objection that 
they w o u l d be impersonal only i f they were true. • Conceptual thought is 
contemporaneous w i t h humanity. 
433 
IV. • H o w the categories express social things. • T h e category par excellence 
is the concept o f totality, w h i c h can be suggested only by society. • W h y the 
relationships expressed by the categories could become conscious only i n so-
ciety. • Society is not an alogical being. • H o w the categories tend to become 
detached from geographically defined groupings. • T h e unity o f science, o n 
the one hand, and o f religion and morality, o n the other. • H o w society ac-


X l l 
Contents 
counts for that unity. • Explanation o f the role ascribed to society: its creative 
power. • Impact o f sociology u p o n the science o f man. 
440 
Index 
449 


ACKNOWLED GMENTS 
In preparing this translation I have incurred many debts: to the W b o d r o w 
W i l s o n International Center for a semester-long fellowship, the congenial 
effervescence o f its staff and c o m m u n i t y o f scholars, and for the quiet o f m y 
turret office i n the Smithsonian Institution; to the University o f Rochester 
for research support, b o t h i n dollars and i n the k i n d sharing by specialists i n 
many fields that is the heart o f organic solidarity—classicist K a t h r y n Ar¬
getsinger, 
German 
Studies 
scholar 
Patricia 
Herminghouse, 
historians 
W i l l i a m J. M c G r a t h and M o r r i s A . Pierce, Indologist Douglas R . Brooks, 
philosophers 
Lewis W. Beck, Deborah M o d r a k , and 
George 
Dennis 
O ' B r i e n , psychologist Craig R . Barclay, and most o f all French scholar A n -
drée D o u c h i n , w h o read m y text alongside Durkheim's line by line and pro-
vided detailed critique; to colleagues elsewhere—Karen M c C a r t h y B r o w n , 
Jay Demerath, Alexandre Derczansky, Barbara J. Fields, Terry F. Godlove, 
Gila H a y i m , W i n s t o n A.James, R o b e r t Jay, R o b e r t A l u n Jones, Edward Kap-
lan, Douglas A . Kibbee, Valentin Y. M u d i m b e , James T. Richardson, Jan 
Vansina, Loi'e Wacquant, and R o b e r t Paul Wolff, for clarifying correspon-
dence; to librarians Zdenek D a v i d and Ursula H e i n e n and to research assis-
tants Nafiz 
Aksehirioglu, A n t o n i a Balosz, Chad Birely, L l o y d 
B r o w n , 
Stephen M o n t o , and Samuel Tylor, for help w i t h notes and references at the 
various stages o f a l o n g project; to Charlette W. H e n r y and Lela Sims-
Gissendaner, staff o f the Frederick Douglass Institute for African 
and 
African-American Studies, for practical solutions to the practical problems o f 
preparing a manuscript; to Bruce Nichols, Celia K n i g h t , and others o f the 
Free Press editorial staff for their painstaking attention to the text's several 
languages. 
I owe especially large debts to Ayala Gabriel, m y colleague and friend, 
w i t h w h o m I spent many hours o f clarifying conversation about religion and 
much else; and to Moussa Bagate, m y husband, w h o shared his general and 
scientifically specialized knowledge o f French, and w h o shared, period. 
X l l l 


ABBREVIATIONS 
A A 
American Anthropologist 
A A A S 
Australasian Association for the Advancement o f Science 
A M N H 
Memoirs of the American Museum of Natural History 
APS 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 
A r A 
Archaeologia Americana 
AS 
Année sociologique 
B A A S 
British Association for the Advancement o f Science 
(Reports) 
B A E 
Reports of the Bureau of American Ethnology 
CJ 
Cambrian Journal 
C N A E 
Contributions to North American Ethnology 
F R 
Fortnightly Review 
H L C A P S 
Transactions of the Historical and Literary Committee of the 
American Philosophical Society 
J A 
Journal asiatique 
J A I 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and 
Ireland 
Q G J 
Queensland Geographical Journal 
R A M 
Records of the Australian Museum 
R C I 
Revue coloniale internationale 
R H R 
Revue de l'histoire des religions 
R I S 
Revista italiana di sociologia 
R M M 
Revue de morale et de 
métaphysique 
R N M 
Report of the U.S. National Museum 
R P 
Revue philosophique 
R S C 
Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada 
R S I 
Report of the Smithsonian Institution 
R S N S W 
Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New South Wales 
X V 


X V I 
Abbreviations 
R S S A 
Transactions of the Royal Society of South Australia 
R S V 
Transactions and Proceedings of the Royal Society of Victoria 
T I C H R 
Transactions of the Third International Congress for the History of 
Religions 
VGJ 
Victorian Geographical Journal 
Z E 
Zeitschrift für Ethnologie 
Z V 
Zeitschrift für 
Völkerpsychologie 
Z D P 
Zeitschrift für Deutsche Philologie 


T R A N S L A T O R ' S I N T R O D U C T I O N : 
RELIGION AS AN EMINENTLY 
SOCIAL THING 
[W]hat I ask o f the free thinker is that he should confront 
religion i n the same mental state as the believer. . . . [ H ] e 
w h o does not b r i n g to the study o f religion a sort o f reli-
gious sentiment cannot speak about it! H e is like a blind 
man t r y i n g to talk about colour. 
N o w I shall address the free believer. . . . W i t h o u t going so 
far as to disbelieve the formula we believe i n , w e must for-
get it provisionally, reserving the right to return to i t later. 
H a v i n g once escaped from this tyranny, we are no longer i n 
danger o f perpetrating the error and injustice into w h i c h 
certain believers have fallen w h o have called m y way o f i n -
terpreting religion basically irreligious. There cannot be a 
rational interpretation o f religion w h i c h is fundamentally i r -
religious; an irreligious interpretation o f religion w o u l d be 
an interpretation w h i c h denied the phenomenon i t was t r y -
i n g to explain.
1 
Emile Durkheim (1858-1917) 
Easily the most striking feature o f Emile Durkheim's 1912 masterpiece, Les 
Formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse, is his insistence that religions are founded 
on and express "the real." T h e most casual skim through the book's very first 
pages—even through the C o n t e n t s — w i l l reveal that insistence. A n d it is 
continually present, like a heartbeat. A t the same time, however, as a reader 
might w e l l mutter, the most striking feature o f religions is that they are full to 
overflowing w i t h spectacular improbabilities. As i f anticipating that thought, 
D u r k h e i m challenges i t from the start: "There are n o religions that are false." 
M o r e than that: " I f [religion] had not been grounded i n the nature o f things, 
in those very things i t w o u l d have met resistance that it could not have over-
xvu 


XV111 
Translator's Introduction 
come."
2 A hostile reviewer w r i t i n g i n the American Anthropologist said 
flady 
that D ü r k h e i m s "search for a reality underlying religion does not seem to 
rest o n a firm logical basis."
3 Judgment about the logic o f that search belongs 
to readers o f Durkheim's greatest book, w h i c h I offer i n its first full retrans-
lation since Joseph Ward Swain's, i n 1915.
4 
To gauge Durkheim's claim about the roots o f religion i n "the real," it 
w i l l be necessary to follow an argument that is provocative through and 
through. Pressing that claim to its very l i m i t , D ü r k h e i m announces that his 
case i n point w i l l be the totemic religions o f Australia, w i t h totemism's jar-
r i n g identification o f human beings and animals or plants—on its face, to 
readers i n 1912, anything but a religious milieu w i t h anything like credible 
roots i n the real and, to some o f them, not even a religious milieu. Au con-
traire, cautions D ü r k h e i m . Totemism qualifies as a religion; furthermore, all 
religions are "true after their o w n fashion," and all, including totemism, meet 
"needs" (besoins) that are part and parcel o f human life.
5 T h e n or now, any-
one encountering the first pages o f Formes for the first time must wonder 
straightaway what he intends by "the real," or by "needs" built into the h u -
man makeup that religion fulfills. Here are claims likely to draw the reli-
giously committed and the religiously u n c o m m i t t e d to the edge o f their 
seats. F r o m the start, it is clear that the questions D ü r k h e i m has set himself 
about religion concern the nature o f human life and the nature o f "the real." 
(From n o w o n I drop the quotation marks around the phrase, n o t i n g that 
part o f Durkheim's agenda i n Formes is to apply his conception o f the real to 
all social forms o f existence. Philosophers i n Durkheim's milieu were re-
w o r k i n g the old polarity o f appearance versus essence, as handled by I m -
manuel Kant. W e can flash forward to E d m u n d Husserl, and again, regarding 
the social w o r l d specifically, from Husserl to Alfred Schutz.) 
It is equally clear from the start that received ideas offer D ü r k h e i m few 
intellectual park benches along the route toward the answers. T h e opening 
chapters (Book One) define religion and totemism. T h e y then demolish t w o 
earlier families o f theory, animism and naturism, certain o f whose received 
ideas about what is fundamental to religion still have a certain currency—for 
example, naturism's thesis that religion arises from human awe before the 
grandeur o f the natural w o r l d . Gone there and then (to many, maddeningly) 
is religion as "ultimate concern" and as encounter w i t h a power transcend-
ing the human, or w i t h "the holy."
6 T h e middle chapters (Book Two) sys-
tematically examine what D ü r k h e i m calls représentations 
collectives: shared 
mental constructs w i t h the help o f w h i c h , he argues, human beings collec-
tively v i e w themselves, each other, and the natural w o r l d . H a v i n g adopted 
totemism as an especially challenging system o f collective representations, 


Translator's Introduction 
X I X 
D ü r k h e i m develops a theory o f h o w society constitutes itself, one that is si-
multaneously (and i n his view, necessarily) a theory o f h o w human mental-
ity constitutes itself. That theory, i n turn, encloses another, about those 
"unified systems" o f représentations 
concerning nature and humanity that re-
ligions always contain. 
T h e final chapters (Book Three) deal w i t h forms o f collective conduct 
that can be thought o f as collective representations i n action and, at the same 
time, as action that makes collective representations real i n individual minds. 
Here are echoes o f M a r x , i n The German Ideology, where reality is above all 
done: "Consciousness can never be anything else than conscious existence." 
As though hearing that echo, D ü r k h e i m cautions against understanding his 
thought as "merely a refurnishment o f historical materialism."
7 I n fact, his 
c o m m o n ground w i t h M a r x o n the subject o f religion is far from negligible 
and yet far from total. For D ü r k h e i m , religions exist because human beings 
exist only as social beings and i n a humanly shaped w o r l d . R e l i g i o n is "an 
eminently social thing."
8 
I n the Australians' w o r l d , as we come to k n o w it through Formes, to have 
the clan name Kangaroo is not merely to postulate an amazing inner b o n d o f 
shared essence w i t h animals, whose inherent distinctness from humans is o b -
vious. I t is also to postulate a just as amazing inner b o n d o f shared essence 
w i t h other humans, by sharing a name. H u m a n individuals are inherently 
distinct from one another, and so the potential for mutually recognized iden-
tity is far from obvious. O n this subject, the early critical voice is unamazed, 
setding for w e l l - w o r n park benches o f thought: " T h e experience o f all times 
and places teaches that the rapport o f the individual, as such, w i t h the religious 
object is o f p r i m e importance i n religious situations."
9 B u t D ü r k h e i m s chal-
lenge i n Formes is to detect questions, not self-evidences, i n phrases like 
"individual, as such," "religious object," and "religious situation." His expe-
dition goes to a place where "[t]he kangaroo is only an animal like any other; 
but, for the Kangaroo people, i t has w i t h i n itself a principle that sets i t apart 
from other beings, and this principle only exists i n and through the minds o f 
those w h o t h i n k o f it." O n that expedition, " i n a philosophical sense, the 
same is true o f any thing; for things exist only through representation."
1 0 
B y many, usually benchless, routes through Australian ethnography, 
D ü r k h e i m brings us to what he intends by the real that human beings i n gen-
eral come to k n o w through the distinctively h u m a n means o f k n o w i n g . 
Those means begin, he argues, w i t h human sociability. Society is the f o r m i n 
w h i c h nature produced humankind, and religion is reason's first harbor. I n 
Formes, w e meet the m i n d as a collective product and science as an offspring 
o f religion. I n those very processes o f abstraction that enabled the Australian 


X X 
Translator's Introduction 
to imagine w h o he was by imagining his relationship w i t h other Australians 
and w i t h the natural w o r l d , w e meet the beginning o f abstract thought. A n d 
w e meet the concept, ours via the social treasury o f language, defined as "a 
beam that lights, penetrates, and transforms" sensation.
1 1 D ü r k h e i m s query-
i n g o f the Australians and their totems is thus the point o f departure for his 
investigation into distinctive traits o f humankind: reason, identity, and c o m -
munity—three subjects that w e tend neither to place under the heading "re-
l i g i o n " nor to treat together. Few people today w o u l d end a sentence that 
begins, " R e l i g i o n is . . ." i n the way he does: " . . . above all, a system o f ideas 
by w h i c h m e n imagine the society o f w h i c h they are members and the o b -
scure yet intimate relations they have w i t h i t . "
1 2 
I f D ü r k h e i m s sustained insistence o n religions' basis i n the real is the 
most striking feature of Formes, his provocative, sharp-witted mode o f expo-
sition comes a close second.
1 3 A n d i f the b o o k has a heartbeat about the na-
ture o f the real, it has a rhetorical body built to subvert received notions. As 
he admits i n the Introduction, some readers were b o u n d to find his approach 
"unorthodox."
1 4 H e chose to explore huge questions about h u m a n k i n d i n 
general via the stone-tool-using specificity o f Aboriginal Australia, and his 
argument moves i n ways that could not fail to scandalize many readers, o n 
various grounds. W e can begin to feel the specific texture o f scandale i f we 
consider another hostile reviewer's observation about the academically or-
thodox v i e w o f totemism, i n a long article tided "Dogmatic Atheism i n the 
Sociology o f Religion." There we learn that totemism, "[a]s currently taught 
i n Anglican universities, . . . appeared to fit w i t h the providential mission o f 
the Jews and the possibility o f Christian revelation."
1 5 I n other words, some 
scholars dealt w i t h totemism by making it into a "Christianity i n embryo." 
Being b o r n and reared a Jew and the son o f a rabbi, D ü r k h e i m lacked the 
nearsightedness that made totemism as embryonic Christianity seem a nec-
essary lens. W h a t is more, he doubtless had no investment i n preserving high 
evolutionary rank for any religion at all. As a y o u n g man, he had rejected re-
ligious c o m m i t m e n t outright, a fact to w h i c h the article's neon title alludes. 
For the scholars referred to and addressed i n that article, i n any case, 
totemism was anything but w e l l adapted to showing religion's roots i n the 
real. I t could be relegated to the category o f magic, as the critic points out 
that Herbert Spencer d i d (which D ü r k h e i m disputed, since that amounted to 
disconnecting it from the real).
1 6 O r it could be adapted to that role i f imag-
ined w i t h an arrow o n i t , pointing forward i n an evolutionist sense to reli-
gions whose connections w i t h the real seemed a p r i o r i more credible than 
totemism's. B u t there stood D ü r k h e i m , firing argument i n t w o directions: 
claiming that religion w o u l d not have survived i f it had not been grounded 


Translator's Introduction 
X X I 
in the real and claiming to study religion i n general by juxtaposing the al-
legedly lowest and highest. For many reasons, i n that unself-consciously self-
satisfied era, Formes must have been a shocker. L o o k i n g back, the French 
sociologist R a y m o n d A r o n described the immediate reaction to i t i n France 
as violent. Being highly sophisticated, D ü r k h e i m no doubt expected that. 
Notice the rhetorical sandpits i n the quotations I used as an epigraph, 
taken from extemporaneous remarks he made i n 1914 to the U n i o n o f Free 
Thinkers and Free Believers. N o w picture the sinuous road to be traveled i n 
any attempt to represent h i m i n a comprehensive portrait as the great c o n -
tributor to empirical science that he was. 
D ü r k h e i m s 
commentators 
have often expressed dismay about 
the 
rhetorical mode i n w h i c h Formes is w r i t t e n . D o m i n i c k LaCapra spoke o f an 
"oceanic f o r m o f discourse" i n a text " w h i c h has had the power to allure and 
repel at the same t i m e . "
1 7 Steven Lukes wrote o f D ü r k h e i m s style that i t "of-
ten tends to caricature his thought: he often expressed his ideas i n an extreme 
or figurative manner."
1 81 imagine that Talcott Parsons was reacting i n part to 
some o f those very qualities w h e n he claimed, essentially, that i n Formes 
D ü r k h e i m was feeling his way uneasily between the naivete o f positivism and 
something far smarter.
1 9 R a y m o n d A r o n disliked the book, said so i n no u n -
certain terms (including the t e r m "impiety"), and professed to be so unsure 
in his understanding o f it that he deliberately included l o n g sections o f ver-
batim quotation, to enable more sympathetic readers to do better than he.
2 0 
I w i l l not tarry over those w h o , finding the posture o f Formes enigmatic, re-
spond by characterizing the b o o k as mystical, metaphysical, and even theo-
logical, charges that must make D ü r k h e i m ' s soul shake its head. I f i t is true 
that he rejected not only religion but also his family's intention for h i m to 
become a rabbi, i n his father's and grandfather's footsteps, he must have paid 
full fare for a secular voyage through the mysteries and commonplaces o f 
life.
2 1 As far as I am concerned, i t is sufficient to say that D ü r k h e i m was ex-
perimenting w i t h ideas that deeply mattered to h i m , and there is every rea-
son to imagine that he often ran up against the expressive limits o f his 
medium. U p against those same limits, no less a sociological theorist than 
Talcott Parsons used the unsettling t e r m "nonempirical reality."
2 2 
D ü r k h e i m s rhetoric is often remarked u p o n but generally not built into 
the systematic commentary about h i m .
2 3 Traditional accounts usually stop at 
saying sociology was a n e w science at the t u r n o f the century, D ü r k h e i m one 
of those battling to define a tenable version o f its subject matter and method, 
and his mode (alas) polemical. B u t i f polemic i n the midst o f developing 
something n e w is stigmatized as antithetical to systematic thought, then the 
very n o t i o n o f systematic thought is impoverished. Left unimagined is the 


X X I I 
Translator's Introduction 
sense o f absorbing puzzles to be solved and a living sense o f inspiration be-
fore it becomes "system." I t is easy to see a calculated polemical edge i n D u r -
kheim's Suicide, where he tackles as a sociological puzzle an act that received 
notions even today h o l d to be quintessentially individual. Often noticed as 
w e l l is the sinewy argument to be expected o f a philosophically trained p r o d -
uct o f the Ecole n ó r m a l e supérieure, France's crime de la crime i n higher edu-
cation. B u t seldom imagined is what must have been the high h u m o r o f 
w o r k i n g against received ideas and toward fundamental truth. To miss those 
features is to miss the freshness o f the w o r k he did, at the time he was doing 
it: gone is the sense o f experiment and excitement he shared w i t h the many 
talented students he taught at the Sorbonne, and w i t h the scholars w h o 
j o i n e d h i m i n creating the celebrated j o u r n a l Annie sociologique; gone too is 
his w i t o n the page. I f those elements are missed, Formes is by the same stroke 
uplifted as a classic and downgraded to a tome. 
D u r k h e i m breathed the air o f turn-of-the-century Paris, a place that 
fizzed w i t h experiments i n artistic representation, and a time w h e n philoso-
phy, science, and art existed i n nothing like today's isolation from one an-
other.
2 4 Picasso painted his Demoiselles d Avignon i n 1907, launching cubism 
and, therewith, a n e w vocabulary for the art o f the n e w century. I t may t u r n 
out that illuminating connections can be drawn between Durkheim's trans-
gressing the boundaries between " p r i m i t i v e " and "civilized" i n the search for 
a vocabulary suited to comprehending, and then representing, the real, and 
Picasso's o w n encounters w i t h those same boundaries as he reconceived per-
spective. To give attention to Durkheim's rhetorical leaps is not to show 
where he fell short as a systematic thinker; i t is to amplify his voice and hear 
h i m better. I n Formes, one o f his tasks is to show h o w a kangaroo can be, at 
one and the same time, a powerful sacred being, a man or w o m a n , and just a 
kangaroo—all i n the real. His rhetorical tactics i n representing these barely 
representable things are i n themselves interesting to observe. That they have 
succeeded i n some way accounts for the book's capacity over the years to 
motivate fruitful empirical w o r k i n a range o f fields. 
ANATOMY OF A CLASSIC 
As a classic i n the sociology and anthropology o f religion, Formes is widely 
mentioned and characterized, i f not so widely read. M y purpose i n under-
taking a n e w translation is to re-present Durkheim's ideas about what he 
called the "religious nature o f m a n " i n the English o f our o w n day w h i l e ren-
dering Durkheim's French as faithfully as I can. I have undertaken this new 


Translator's Introduction 
X X l l l 
translation at a time w h e n the serious study o f religion has finally begun to 
return to center stage i n our culture, after an unfortunate hiatus o f many 
decades. M y hope is that this b o o k w i l l be more widely read and studied, and 
not only by sociologists and anthropologists or scholars o f religion. A m e r i -
can postmodernist theorizers o f discursive practices and representations 
w i l l 
recognize through Formes the D u r k h e i m i a n pedigree o f M i c h e l Foucault.
2 5 
Psychologists w i l l repeatedly glimpse o l d and not-so-old ways o f thinking 
about phenomena that the scientific study o f memory, identity, language, and 
intelligence must be able to account for. Philosophers w i l l find old problems 
interestingly tackled, i f not necessarily solved.
2 6 
M y 
hope for a broadened readership raises a larger question, about 
Formes i n particular and the genus "classic" to w h i c h i t belongs: W h y read 
classics? O f late, that question and sundry answers to i t have framed a some-
times poisonous debate over w h i c h ancestors should be so honored i n m e m -
ory. This conversation is largely impersonal, as short o n "I's" as i t is l o n g o n 
impersonal, puritanical "shoulds"; i t is outspoken about discipline but inar-
ticulate about individual pleasure, and mute as the grave about excitement. 
Like broccoli, classics are said to be good for one, even i f swallowed u n w i l l -
ingly. M y v i e w is that dead ancestors should stay dead to us unless pleasure 
and excitement come from getting to k n o w them. W h i l e i n the midst o f this 
project, I heard W y n t o n Marsalis, the virtuoso classical and jazz trumpeter, 
tell a cautionary tale o f honesty about the point o f classics and about the 
w o r k involved i n translating t h e m for new audiences. His introduction to 
some new settings o f o l d w o r k by D u k e Ellington brought out problems that 
both bedevil such w o r k and inspire its product. 
To begin w i t h , Marsalis said, he was unenthusiastic about Ellington. His 
friend, the choreographer Garth Fagan, invited h i m to see a rehearsal per-
formance set to an old piece by Ellington. A period piece, Marsalis thought. 
"That's just some b o r i n g o l d ballroom music. I k n o w I should want to hear i t 
but I don't." B u t Fagan pressed, sure about his rendering. Marsalis went, and 
then reconsidered: "Everybody said Ellington was great. B u t w h a t made h i m 
so great? N o b o d y said. Well, that night, I understood." He, i n t u r n , t r u m -
peted some " o l d ballroom music" to us, his audience. As Fagan had inter-
preted to Marsalis, so Marsalis interpreted to his o w n audience, w h o were 
invited to discover Ellington's greatness, partly through the original w o r k i t -
self but also w i t h Marsalis present as a "translator," w i t h all the complexities 
that implies. It was Marsalis's "translation" that gave us access to the greatness 
o f some out-of-style music, and irremediably so, for we had no access to the 
music except by hearing someone render it i n sound (unless w e decided to 
experience the music by sight, from Ellington's page). N o t w o renderings 


X X I V 
Translator's Introduction 
could be the same. N o n e could be exactly what Ellington meant. W e cannot 
k n o w exactly what he meant. T h e only certainty was that rendering the m u -
sic freed i t to w i n the audience over, or not to. 
B u t what is true about music that begins its public life w i t h popular au-
diences is not true about the high culture o f old books. W h e n that seems at 
stake, the answer to the question, " W h y read classics?" too often hides be-
h i n d the busy b o r e d o m o f Ecclesiastes: "That w h i c h has been done is that 
w h i c h shall be done." I think otherwise. Every classic should be free to w i n 
the right to be read again w i t h pleasure, not just to be set to labor as a cap-
tive servant o f tradition, trapped i n the highbrowed storage o f a museum dis-
play. T h e case for studying o l d works n o w needs to be made now, partly 
through the manner o f their presentation. I f the classics really are good 
enough to keep reading, i n spite o f their age and flaws, then they are due the 
respect o f being allowed to w i n their audience over. "Because they are clas-
sics" amounts to saying, "Because they are there." A n d that is the unhappy 
fate o f captives i n those Smithsonians o f the m i n d that college reading lists 
can be, o n permanent exhibition to pedants, connoisseurs, and cranky tourists, 
indiscriminately. Every schoolchild learns that M o u n t Everest was scaled 
"because it was there" and can understand from a distance what makes it 
"great." B u t the superlatives about great books are not the same. To k n o w 
there, as a character o f Z o r a Neale H u r s t o n says, y o u have to go there. I have 
taken it to be m y task, i n retranslating this classic, not only to make the way 
straight to go there but to say w h y go there at all. 
I recommend this classic i n sociology for reading today, even though the 
ethnography is outdated, and the outlook u p o n gender quaint, because it pre-
sents the opportunity to encounter a dazzlingly complex soul whose burden 
o f life animates the w o r k . I t is this same burden that animates great art. Formes 
has not only the steady brilliance o f a classic but also a certain incandescence. 
It is like a virtuoso performance that is built u p o n but leaps beyond the tech-
nical limits o f the artist's discipline, beyond the safe striving merely to hit the 
correct notes, into a felt reality o f elemental truth. To read it is to witness such 
a performance. T h e illuminations are public, the performance personal. 
D u r k h e i m is usually remembered as the no-nonsense advocate o f science 
positive—"positive
27 
science"—in the study o f social life, as a man w h o set 
out to rescue social science from undisciplined subjectivity, from philosoph-
ical argument that delicately minuetted w i t h facts or touched t h e m not at all, 
from parochial sentimentality, and from the naive individualisms o f his time. 
B u t the argument of Formes is markedly personal i n b o t h rhetorical style and 
scientific substance, revealing a man w h o was far more than the hard-nosed 
opponent o f the second-rate and the sentimental i n social science (although 


Translator's Introduction 
xxv 
he was that too). W e hear the heartbeat o f Formes i n Durkheim's stunning 
theme throughout: that religious life (la vie religieuse) b o t h expresses and c o n -
structs the logical life (la vie logique) o f humankind. W e hear i t i n the auda-
cious claim he makes, ostensibly as a secondary issue but i n fact throughout 
the book, that the elemental categories i n w h i c h we t h i n k — t i m e , space, 
number, cause, class, person, totality—have their origins i n religious life. 
It is g r i p p i n g drama to see h o w a man o f science positive could possibly 
make such claims, h o w he could go about arguing t h e m i n an era w h e n sci-
ence seemed to be dismembering religion, and most o f all, w h y such a m a n 
w o u l d ever choose to. This drama is gripping for us still: T h e dispute be-
tween science and religion is at least as l o u d n o w as i t was i n his time. I n the 
book, Durkheim's feet seem at one m o m e n t to be o n the solid ground o f i m -
mensely detailed scientific observation and at the next o n the high wire o f 
faith. B u t whose? His Aboriginal Australian subjects'? His contemporaries'? 
His own? Ours? We keep listening i n order to find out w h i c h i t is, w h e n , i n 
what, and i n what capacity. People sleepwalk even i n the company o f the 
powerful, i f they are uninteresting m e n and w o m e n o f shallow dilemmas. 
D ü r k h e i m was an interesting man, because he had the capacity to sustain the 
manifold internal tension o f his o w n ideas, and because he had a dilemma 
and a subject capable o f earning prolonged attention. 
R e l i g i o n still arouses passionate interest, and passion too. I f it is an o p i u m 
o f the oppressed, it is not only the o p i u m that puts people to sleep but also 
the one that makes legions o f people go to great lengths to get their o w n 
dose o f it. I f religion is incompatible w i t h scientific rationality and secular 
political life, those conflicts are public and active ones, not the passive w i t h -
ering away into self-evident defeat that observers o f right and left l o n g i m a g -
ined. D o o m has not followed 
from 
religion's demonstrated setbacks i n 
describing nature. Indeed, one cannot describe today's w o r l d w i t h o u t the 
collective identities that religions sustain: quiedy worshipping churches i n 
some places, churches militant i n others. R e l i g i o n is the steady, day-in-day-
out reality o f millions, their routine 
framework 
o f everyday activity, their 
calm certainty o f life and its steady, but sometimes racing, pulse. 
I n 1979, w e watched as crowds shouting "Allahu Akbar!"—"God 
is 
great!"—destroyed the Iranian monarchy and consecrated R u h o l l a h K h o -
meini as I m a m . I n 1989, we saw the reconsecration o f the People's House o f 
Culture i n Vilnius as the Cathedral o f Vilnius, the replacement there o f St. 
Casimirs bones after some forty years, and then the dignified filing past o f 
Lithuanians reconstituting themselves as a religiously and ethnically defined 
nation-state. A n d w h o w o u l d have thought i n 1912 that, three generations 
later i n America, religion w o u l d be a h o t b u t t o n political topic, the object o f 


X X V I 
Translator's Introduction 
undignified excitement, the locus o f dispute over where the authoritative 
designation o f where right conduct lies and must lie?
2 8 As a scholar and 
teacher, I advocate the dignified excitement o f studying religion w i t h disci-
pline—and D ü r k h e i m s shuttling between science positive and the high wire o f 
faith exemplifies a sort o f discipline that w e can cultivate. 
Yet discipline cannot be the whole point. Works o f genius ultimately are 
disrespected by being touted as mere calisthenics for the m i n d . T h e y are d i -
minished to the extent that, like aids to physical exercise, they become tools 
fitted to k n o w n tasks, captive servants o f mental "training" i n the school years. 
T h e improvisational high-wire mode o f the unexpected is lost thereby and, 
w i t h it, the special w o r k and w o r t h o f genius. I n the end, Formes w o u l d not 
be w o r t h reading again and again i f all it d i d was help us cultivate intellectual 
discipline i n our attempts to understand what we call "religion." I n fact it does 
much more. I n this sometimes sober, sometimes high-wire, exploration o f 
what he calls "the religious nature o f man," D ü r k h e i m carries his readers be-
yond ordinary ideas about what religion is and does. W e meet the man w h o 
could say, to the sober assent o f believers d o w n the ages, that "the man w h o 
has communed w i t h his god . . . 15 stronger"
29 but w h o could also say, to the 
boisterous dissent o f true believers d o w n the ages, "There are no religions that 
are false." W e meet the man w h o said both—and i n a w o r k of science positive. 
AN ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE SOUL 
Little is k n o w n about D ü r k h e i m s personal life. I w i l l not repeat the tidbits 
here but instead refer readers to W. S. F. Pickering's and Steven Lukes's c o m -
pilations o f what is k n o w n , and portray the man as we meet h i m i n B o o k 
One, Chapter 2, i n his mode o f virtuoso play—and display. There, i n the 
posture o f demolishing mistaken theory, he takes up one o f religions' ele-
mental représentations collectives. I propose that we make our acquaintance w i t h 
h i m by observing h o w he acquaints us w i t h the great nineteenth-century 
scholar o f religion, Edward Burnett Tylor. 
Tylor put forward a very influential theory about the o r i g i n o f an idea 
that a great many peoples have developed and variously conceived o f as a sin-
gular thing (the or a soul), or yet as a generic substance (soul, p e r i o d ) ,
3 0 i m -
mortal yet sometimes susceptible to annihilation, attached to persons yet 
migratory despite such attachments, intimately k n o w n yet almost impossible 
to describe, personal yet transmissible to objects and animals, ethereal yet 
powerful, and m u c h else, but above all conceived as mysterious, contradic-
tory, and hard to conceive. Introducing us to Tylor, the man o f science positive 
introduces us to the idea o f soul. I n Chapter 8, D ü r k h e i m returns to soul at 


Translator's Introduction 
xxvn 
length, i n a hauntingly beautiful construction o f h o w human beings i n the 
full dignity o f reason m i g h t have come to postulate the idea o f soul i n order 
to theorize aspects o f the real. I n his view, those human beings were not, like 
St. Augustine, able to "believe precisely because it was absurd." H e trained 
his heavy rhetorical guns against scholars whose logic entailed that they must 
have been able to do so. 
B y D ü r k h e i m ' s day, comparative studies o n religion had long since re-
vealed that soul, as a concept, is to be found virtually wherever religion is 
found. T h e question scholars asked themselves was w h y such an inherendy 
confusing idea came to be such a widespread idea, even i n societies nothing 
like those o f the Australians. T h e existence o f individual souls had to be ac-
commodated even i n the society inhabited by Descartes. A n d everywhere, ac-
commodating their existence led to questions about where they might reside 
and about their relationship to those residences. Readers w h o remember their 
Descartes (who, o f course, was at D ü r k h e i m s intellectual fingertips and those 
o f his readers) w i l l remember that, via his Cogito, ergo sum, the m i n d / b o d y d u -
alism, hence the soul/body dualism, was rooted i n his search for that w h i c h 
cannot be doubted. Bear i n m i n d , too, that Descartes conceived o f a m e -
chanics that held for all things that possessed "extension"—but not for G o d 
or soul, whose existence i n the real included neither extension nor subordi-
nation to the laws o f mechanics. Speculating about the soul's localization, 
Descartes postulated that it resides i n the (still mysterious) pineal gland. 
D ü r k h e i m addressed the matter o f localization differently. Free from the 
hot breath o f the Inquisition, as Descartes (1596—1650) was not, and freed 
also by his interpretive use o f exotic materials, D ü r k h e i m repeated the solu-
tions his Australian subjects gave the same empirical problem—for example, 
in many rituals, notably those conducted i n the midst and aftermath o f 
m o u r n i n g . T h e practicalities o f ritual d o i n g localized the soul i n certain or-
gans and i n the blood, w h i c h were thereby revealed, i n his phrase, as "the 
soul itself seen from outside"
3 1 (a formulation that may have suggested to 
D ü r k h e i m s audience certain philosophers o f antiquity).
3 2 T h e Australians' 
urge to localize the soul set t h e m beside not only the Catholic Descartes but 
also the pagan Empedocles
3 3 
and the Jewish writers o f Leviticus and 
Deuteronomy ( w h o m D ü r k h e i m cites), all solving it rather more like the 
Australians than like Descartes. B y Tylor's more secularized day, the question 
was not merely where the soul m i g h t be but a more radical one that w o u l d 
surely have provoked the Inquisition into action: w h y people ever imagined 
any such thing. Tylor held that the idea arose from the universal but i n d i v i d -
ual experience o f dreaming. For Tylor, dreaming posed a theoretical problem 
that nagged nightly at earliest humanity's consciousness until i t was solved 


XXV111 
Translator's Introduction 
w i t h the invention o f a double, or a soul. Demolishing this argument was the 
D ü r k h e i m w h o had already pronounced religious ideas to be grounded i n 
and to express the real. T h e solution Tylor i m p u t e d to "primitives" failed 
that test. 
After reviewing the merits o f Tylor s enterprise, D ü r k h e i m proceeded to 
carry out an intellectual death o f a thousand cuts. According to Tylor, the idea 
o f the soul, or double, explained ecstasy, catalepsy, apoplexy, and fainting; i l l -
nesses and health, good fortune, bad fortune, special abilities, or anything else 
that departed slightly from the ordinary; and o n d o w n an expanding list ap-
plied to an expanding population o f souls. Thus did an idea o f great i m p o r t 
for religions everywhere come to explain everything. Thus did the power o f 
souls increase. A n d thus d i d Tylor s primitive man, having come up w i t h the 
concept o f soul to solve a merely speculative problem, finally end up as "a cap-
tive i n this imaginary w o r l d , even though he is its creator and model."
3 4 Here 
is D ü r k h e i m s coup de grace: "Even i f the hypothesis o f the double could satis-
factorily explain all dreaming, and all dreaming could be explained i n no other 
way, one w o u l d still have to say w h y man tried to explain i t at all. . . . [HJabit 
easily puts curiosity to sleep."
3 5 Indeed, even i f curiosity had been awake, 
dreaming w o u l d n o t by any stretch have posed the most obvious problem: 
"There was something incomprehensible i n the fact that a luminous disc o f 
such small diameter could be adequate to light the Earth—and yet, centuries 
went by before humanity thought o f resolving that contradiction." So, w h y 
should humanity, especially Tylor s materially hard-pressed primitive human-
ity, have invented an idea fundamental to virtually all religions, i n order to solve 
the nighttime puzzle o f dreaming, a trivial puzzle by comparison w i t h the one 
they bypassed i n the light o f day? D ü r k h e i m then moves o n to stiletto Herbert 
Spencer's amendments to Tylor s theory. H e ends o n his point about the real: 
In the end, religion is only a dream, systematized and lived but without 
foundation in the real. . . . Indeed, whether, in such conditions, the term 
"science of religions" can be used without impropriety is questionable. . . . 
What sort of a science is it whose principal discovery is to make the very 
object it treats disappear?
36 
R e t u r n i n g i n Chapter 8 to treat the idea o f soul according to his o w n 
principle about the roots o f religion i n the real, D u r k h e i m gives his argu-
ment a striking end and then a still more striking coda. T h e idea o f soul, he 
concludes, actually was needed to solve a problem that the daytime course o f 
social life forced h u m a n reason to confront: the indisputable reality that there 


Translator's Introduction 
xxix 
is death, yet communities live on, and there is birth: " I n sum, belief i n the 
immortality o f souls is the only way m a n is able to comprehend a fact that 
cannot fail to attract his attention: the perpetuity o f the group's life."
3 7 So-
cially, he argued, i t stood for that collective life; individualized, i t stood for 
the social part o f every human being, the h u m a n (as distinct from the animal) 
part. I t is at once a discrete being and an ethereal substance, at once i n d i v i d -
ual par excellence and yet social.
3 8 
I n the coda, D ü r k h e i m ' s evocations o f Leibniz and Kant begin far from 
ethnography, but close to us. Using their ideas, he reminds us that soul, h o w -
ever slippery as a concept, is something h u m a n k i n d has come to k n o w very 
well from our experience o f the real: " T h e idea o f soul l o n g was, and i n part 
still is, the most universally held f o r m o f the idea o f personality."
3 9 A t the 
very end, therefore, we arrive at the n o t i o n o f soul as an utterly indispensable 
daytime concept by w h i c h h u m a n k i n d has expressed a v i v i d sense o f "per-
son" characterized by discreteness and yet by continuity through time. D e -
spite the analytical prickliness for science positive o f this reality, to call its reality 
"nonempirical" w o u l d be o d d .
4 0 After all, we do not ordinarily have some-
thing nonempirical i n m i n d w h e n we think o f "person" as a physical body 
plus something more. A t the same time, however, to tackle the soul as an e m -
pirical matter is alive w i t h difficulties. Perhaps for this reason, D ü r k h e i m s at-
tempt to set study o f i t into the frame o f empirical scholarship has been 
almost completely ignored. So far as I a m aware, the only recent scholarship 
that puts to use D ü r k h e i m s elegant reconstruction o f soul o n secular terrain 
o f the real is M i c h e l Foucault's, i n Discipline and Punish.
4^ 
I suspect that this reconstruction o f the soul from the raw material o f real 
experience takes us close to the intuitional sources o f D ü r k h e i m s w o r k o n re-
ligion. I suddenly felt those sources nearby me one hot August afternoon as I 
contended w i t h the chapter o n m o u r n i n g rites (Book Three, Chapter 5), 
w h i c h is full o f evidence from Australia about sin, the soul, and the things that 
happen to or are done about both. A t one point, the Book of Common Prayer 
phrase "remission o f sin" suddenly came unbidden from depths o f the heard 
but dimly understood formulas o f m y o w n churchgoing childhood. It came to 
me i n a flash that D ü r k h e i m ' s m i n d must have had strata o f the same sort. C o n -
sider the Modeh, a prayer o f thanks said from early childhood every m o r n i n g , 
even before washing, by means o f w h i c h Jews thank G o d for the return o f the 
soul after its departure each n i g h t .
4 2 I suspect that, o n an inherendy elusive 
topic like soul, D ü r k h e i m s o w n personal archaeology, available consciously 
and unconsciously, enabled h i m to encounter religious notions other than as 
"a blind man trying to talk about colour." Consider this from D ü r k h e i m : 


X X X 
Translator's Introduction 
The soul is not merely distinct from its physical envelope, as the inside is 
from the outside. . . . [Ijt elicits in some degree those feelings that are 
everywhere reserved for that which is divine. If it is not made into a god, it 
is seen at least as a spark of the divinity. This fundamental characteristic 
would be inexplicable if the idea of the soul was no more than a prescien-
tific solution to the problem of dreams. Since there is nothing in dreaming 
that can awaken religious emotion, the same must be true of the cause that 
accounts for dreaming. However, if the soul is a bit of divine substance, it 
represents something within us that is other than ourselves.
43 
N o w consider this passage by a Jewish authority o f our o w n day: 
To be sure, the world as a whole may be viewed as a divine manifestation, 
but the world remains as something else than God, while the soul of man, 
in its depths, may be considered a part of God. . . . [W]e speak of only an 
aspect of God, or of a divine spark, as constituting the essence of the inner 
life of man. . . . Every soul is thus a fragment of the divine light.
4 4 
N o t to belabor a point that cannot be developed here, let me invite fur-
ther study by n o t i n g that D u r k h e i m analyzes Australian notions such as 
transmigration and an original fund o f souls and that the passage just quoted 
from goes o n to talk about Knesset Israel, "the p o o l i n w h i c h all the souls i n 
the w o r l d are contained as a single essence." I f Durkheim's personal experi-
ence is part o f Formes i n this way and i f religion's roots i n the real preoccupy 
h i m , as I have shown they do, then w e must take very seriously his remarks 
addressed to "free believers" about the injustice o f anathematizing Formes as 
"irreligión." To make this point, however, is not to launch a silly search for 
correspondences between Durkheim's religious u p b r i n g i n g and his theoriz-
i n g .
4 5 Rather, just as m y o w n understandings o f religion could unpredictably 
mediate m y attempt to understand D u r k h e i m , so too must his o w n early re-
ligious experience have given h i m an unavoidable—and yet invaluable— 
door into the subject o f this w o r k . 
I n justifying his methodological choice o f studying totemism as a useful 
lens through w h i c h to study religion i n general, D u r k h e i m observes that 
sometimes "nature spontaneously makes simplifications."
4 6 Analogously, I 
suggest, Durkheim's o w n experience provided a "spontaneous simplifica-
t i o n " that enabled h i m to move the topic o f religion away from its capacity 
(or its confused and confusing incapacity) to give an account o f the natural 
w o r l d , but instead to explore, and explore profoundly, its capacity to deliver 
a humanly shaped w o r l d to that very world's human shapers. As he says i n the 
Conclusion, "[DJebates o n the topic o f religion most often t u r n around and 


Translator's Introduction 
X X X I 
about o n the question o f whether religion can or cannot be reconciled w i t h 
science. . . . B u t the believers—the m e n w h o , living a religious life, have a 
direct sense o f what religion is made of-—object that, i n terms o f their day-
to-day experience, this way o f seeing does not r i n g true. . . . Its true function 
is to make us act and to help us live."
4 7 
This once-practicing member o f a tightly k n i t religious c o m m u n i t y w h o 
abandoned religion, but whose scientific w o r k was enriched by the fact that 
certain core intuitions o f religion did not abandon h i m , k n e w an off-the-
mark theory o f religion w h e n he saw one. It is no surprise to find h i m scorn-
ful o f writers w h o think they have undone religion merely by debunking its 
account o f nature. To m i x a metaphor, the h u m a n Kangaroo clan members 
we view through his lens had bigger theoretical fish to fry than the kangaroos 
leaping around them. A n d so it w i l l not be D ü r k h e i m w h o discovers among 
the Australians "the thoroughgoing idiocy" that some authors ascribed to 
"primitives."
4 8 I t w i l l be D ü r k h e i m w h o again and again refutes that discov-
ery, out o f those same authors' o w n evidence. 
But 
for m y o w n chance encounter w i t h a problem o f translation, I 
w o u l d not have guessed the complex strata that underlie Formes. M o s t c o m -
mentators walk back and forth o n the ground directly above them. W. S. F. 
Pickering and Lewis A . Coser at least point out that those layers are d o w n 
there and are i m p o r t a n t .
4 9 B u t consider A l v i n Gouldner s stunning charac-
terization o f D ü r k h e i m s thought as "Catholic organicism."
5 0 A n d A r o n , i n 
his magisterial comparative portraiture o f nineteenth-century masters, paints 
D ü r k h e i m first, ignoring the question o f religious background altogether 
until he arrives at his second portrait, o f M a x Weber, a great sociologist o f re-
ligion w h o , he observes, "belong[ed] to a profoundly religious family (al-
though probably a nonbeliever himself)."
5 1 B u t it is Weber w h o called 
himself religiously "unmusical," while D ü r k h e i m told an audience that he 
was not blind to religions' color. I n general, I found little confirmation for 
my o w n sense that Durkheim's religious background mattered i n what he 
said and w r o t e .
5 2 Some writers apparently believe that truth can be arrived at 
from nowhere i n particular, or from everywhere at once, and that the person 
is irrelevant. I n the case o f testing hypotheses, that v i e w is doubdess correct. 
In the case o f genius, however, i t is self-contradictory. Creative genius is by 
its nature individual, and its sources are quintessentially personal. 


XXX11 
Translator's Introduction 
INDIVIDUAL MINDS AND YET COLLECTIVE 
CONSCIOUSNESS: SOME KEY ARGUMENTS 
IN 
FORMES 
Ordinarily m y task w o u l d n o w be to render an account o f D ü r k h e i m s intel-
lectual w o r l d : the influences he inherited and passed on, the debates he 
waged w i t h his contemporaries, the understandings he took for granted but 
that we cannot—in short, a w o r l d o f texts into w h i c h Formes fits. There is, 
o f course, such a w o r l d , but understanding it can be left for later w i t h o u t i m -
mediate loss to understanding the central arguments o f Formes. O n e set o f 
questions to be delved into elsewhere w o u l d certainly be Durkheim's c o n -
versations w i t h Kant, about the problem o f knowledge and about moral 
obligation, w h i c h merits a k i n d o f attention that his traditional audience o f 
sociologists and anthropologists has i n general not given it; and so does his 
dialogue w i t h Auguste Comte, a philosopher n o w remembered by most o f 
us only via t w o or three canned characterizations—academic sound bites, so 
to speak.
5 3 A n o t h e r w o u l d be the book's relation to the versions o f psychol-
ogy that represented the state o f the art i n Europe at the t u r n o f this cen-
tury.
5 4 Finally, there is a whole set o f questions that are perennial and that 
have the same rewards as playing scales: whether Formes (like Durkheim's 
w o r k generally) is or is not ahistorical
5 5—and, i n connection w i t h that, does 
or does not belong to the miscellany o f theoretical notions that came to be 
called functionalism.
5 6 I leave all those questions aside for now. 
I note but leave aside controversies about the use D ü r k h e i m made o f the 
Australian ethnography available i n his time (and, to a lesser extent, Native 
American and others), o n the grounds that even furious and emotional aca-
demic debates o f the past are not always riveting, or especially enlightening, 
i n the present. This is not to say that the ethnographic details can safely be 
skipped. As we learn right from the introduction, D ü r k h e i m intends that his 
o w n route through the Australian ethnography should lead to "man i n gen-
eral"—and "more especially," he says, "present-day man, for there is none 
other that we have a greater interest i n k n o w i n g well." Totemism seemed to 
h i m a usefully simplifying case that w o u l d reveal "the religious nature o f 
man . . . a fundamental and permanent aspect o f humanity."
5 7 So although 
Formes displays his grasp o f the ethnographies o n totemism that were avail-
able to h i m , i t is far less an investigation o f h o w or w h y h u m a n beings come 
to imagine themselves as plants or animals than an investigation o f h o w they 
come to imagine themselves as h u m a n beings. Since the fact j u m p s o f f the 
page that totemic communities must be imagined, their study enables us to 


Translator's Introduction 
xxxin 
grasp the same fact i n relation to our o w n : To exist at all, all communities 
must be imagined. W h a t his intellectual descendant Benedict Anderson has 
so well shown for large-scale twentieth-century anticolonial nationalism is 
also true o f any face-to-face c o m m u n i t y and o f the smallest Australian clan.
5 8 
But clearly, no one today should read Formes i f he or she is only interested i n 
the religions o f Australia.
5 9 
Finally, I w i l l not repeat here what nearly three generations o f critique 
have by n o w shown i n great detail about where He the shortcomings of Formes 
and o f Durkheim's w o r k more generally. I cannot do better than Steven Lukes s 
intellectual biography o f D u r k h e i m ,
6 0 R o b e r t Nisbet's analysis o f his thought 
in its intellectual context,
6 1 or W S. F. Pickering's close study o f his sociology 
o f religion,
6 2 to name only three quite different studies out o f a long and often 
distinguished list. I make no attempt here to review the vast and growing liter-
ature. I n addition, since I have made it m y task to show w h y the b o o k can still 
be read w i t h excitement, I bypass many difficulties and legitimate qualifica-
tions. Instead, I focus o n key bits and pieces o f Durkheim's argument that are 
still immediately provocative, and that move through the w o r l d as canned char-
acterizations o f the book, part o f an intellectual w o r l d about Durkheim's soci-
ology o f religion. After briefly considering the elements o f his famous but 
contested definition o f religion, let us t u r n to three such traditional academic 
sound bites, each o f w h i c h has always implied potentially hostile queries: D u r -
kheim's "equation" o f religion and society, or G o d and society,
6 3 his use o f col-
lective concepts, and, foremost among those, his sacred/profane dichotomy. 
This w o r l d about D u r k h e i m contains a good deal o f distortion, i n part 
the legacy o f Joseph Ward Swain's monumental 1915 translation. Distortions 
arise not only from inaccuracies i n Swain's translating, but also from the chal-
lenges o f an English text that discourages readers from tackling Formes under 
their o w n intellectual steam. Its difficult English invites reliance o n interpre-
tational clues f r o m various "trots." I f we follow the out-of-context bites to 
their intellectual places i n Formes itself, however, w e gain keys to the b o o k as 
a whole. Some o f the most persistendy troublesome o f those bites are found 
in B o o k Two, Chapter 7. There, the ideas o f totemic principle and force are 
derived as outputs o f collective life, that is, as outputs o f the mechanisms by 
w h i c h collective life is produced. I f those ideas did not exist, they or some-
thing quite like t h e m w o u l d have to be invented. I w i l l t u r n to this centrally 
important chapter o f Formes after examining Durkheim's manner o f defining 
his overall subject. 


X X X I V 
Translator's Introduction 
Religion Denned 
D ü r k h e i m defines religion i n B o o k One, Chapter 1: 
A religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred 
things, that is to say, things set apart and forbidden—beliefs and practices 
which unite into one single moral community called a Church, all those 
who adhere to them.
6 4 
Bear three points i n m i n d . First, religion is not defined i n terms o f anything 
that w o u l d turn a man of science positive away from observable phenomena, or 
the real—not divinity, the otherworldly, the miraculous, or the supernatural. 
Second, the phrase "unified system" postulates that religious beliefs and rites 
are not hodgepodges but are internally ordered. Third, the objects o f those 
rites and beliefs acquire their religious status as sacred, or "set apart and for-
bidden," as a result o f j o i n t action by people w h o set them apart and w h o , by 
the same stroke, constitute themselves a "moral c o m m u n i t y " or "a Church." 
Once again, then, religion is social, social, social. I n addition, the "moral" i n 
the term "moral c o m m u n i t y " specifies that the groups are not hodgepodges 
either but are made up o f individuals w h o have mutually recognized and rec-
ognizable identities that set them, cognitively and normatively, o n shared 
human terrain. Hence, the quality o f sacredness exists i n the real, and its cre-
ation is the observable product o f collective doing. Here is one reason that 
D ü r k h e i m found i t attractive to handle rites analytically as being prior to be-
liefs.
6 5 
This definition foreshadows the organization of Formes as a whole. B o o k 
T w o examines totemic beliefs insofar as they seem to h i m j o i n t l y to consti-
tute a "unified system" o f core beliefs; at the same time i t associates those be-
liefs w i t h one k i n d o f moral community, w h i c h D ü r k h e i m calls "social 
organization based o n clans."
6 6 B o o k Three examines those beliefs as they are 
being collectively done, entering the real through the performance o f rites. It 
makes an analytical distinction between t w o moments o f ritual doing that 
typically occur simultaneously o n the ground: differentiation, or doing that 
creates the sacredness o f people or things (negative rites, characterized by set-
ting apart people and things, through the various procedures described), and 
integration, or doing that takes place amid already sanctified people or things 
(positive rites, characterized by the b r i n g i n g together o f sanctified things and 
people, again by various procedures).
6 7 


Translator's Introduction 
xxxv 
The God/Society Equation 
Virtually everyone w h o has encountered Formes is stopped dead w h e n D ü r k -
heim says, "Is it not that the god and the society are one and the same?" From 
this passage has fallen the nugget that by "equating" the god w i t h the society, 
D ü r k h e i m "reduces" the god to the society (sometimes revealingly short-
handed as God, capital " G , " and society). M a n y discussions about the inter-
pretation o f Formes converge here, at his famous "equation." N o w , i f we go to 
the actual statement i n the actual argument, we recover a fact that is sometimes 
lost sight of: D ü r k h e i m s question i n that chapter is h o w it comes about that 
rationally constituted Australians ascribe power to totemic beings and indeed 
to symbolic representations o f them. As usual, he seeks to find the basis o f that 
in the real. His problem is not w h o , what, or h o w great the god is but h o w a 
science o f religion can turn its beam o f light o n the religious object w i t h o u t 
"making i t disappear." T h e argument surrounding the nugget w i l l clarify: 
[The totem] expresses and symbolizes two different kinds of things. From 
one point of view, it is the outward and visible form of what I have called 
the totemic principle or god; and from another, it is also the symbol of a 
particular society that is called the clan. It is the flag of the clan, the sign by 
which each clan is distinguished from the others, the visible mark of its dis-
tinctiveness, and a mark that is borne by everything that in any way belongs 
to the clan: men, animals, and things. Thus if the totem is the symbol of both 
the god and the society, is this not because the god and the society are one and the 
same? How could the emblem of the group have taken the form of that 
quasi-divinity if the group and the divinity were two distinct realities? Thus 
the god of the clan, the totemic principle, can be none other than the clan 
itself, but the clan transfigured and imagined in the physical form of the 
plant or animal that serves as totem.
6 8 
Durkheim's question and his answer have tended to b r i n g out curiously the-
ological anxieties and reticences. 
Suppose he had c o m m i t t e d a "reduction."
6 9 W o u l d i t mean that some 
necessary thing is lost? I f so, what? For certain believers, the answer obviously 
is that G o d , capital " G , " is lost (and so is "the god," i f we have i n m i n d be-
lievers ecumenical enough to battle for the pagan Greeks' Zeus, say, or for 
those aspects o f the emperor o f mid-twentieth-century Japanese that went 
beyond the ordinarily human). B u t w h o is G o d that secular social scientists 
should take note o f h i m ?
7 0 For secular social scientists, or for m e n and 
w o m e n o f science positive, religion cannot be altered by subtracting a super-
natural being f r o m it. T h e i r methods begin from unbelief (professionally, 


X X X V I 
Translator's Introduction 
not necessarily i n terms o f personal conviction) i n anything that cannot i n 
principle be observed by anyone w h o uses those methods. T h r o u g h those 
methods o f observation, people w i t h G o d look exactly the same as people 
w i t h o u t G o d .
7 1 N o supernatural realm or being is available to a (method-
ologically) unbelieving social scientist, w h o can claim access only to nature, 
not to supernature. To a believer, o n the other hand, i t is unclear that anyone 
else's supernatural realm is available. So unless sociology must be made con-
sonant w i t h theology, n o t h i n g necessary is lost. A reader n o w w o n d e r i n g 
whether the integrity o f theology is thereby compromised has arrived o n the 
fascinating and ambiguous spiritual territory promised by the quotations 
from D u r k h e i m w i t h w h i c h I began this Introduction. There is no need to 
resolve the question. To keep i t open is to keep pace w i t h an agile guide to 
this territory. 
If, alternatively, we asked what necessary thing must be kept or added, 
some w o u l d argue that not G o d or gods but belief oriented to h i m or her, or 
to them, must be included.
7 2 For D u r k h e i m , however, religion was "a fun-
damental and permanent aspect o f humanity," though gods were not a fun-
damental and permanent aspect o f religion. I t thus followed that neither gods 
themselves nor beliefs about gods could be essential. W h a t i f we disagreed, 
insisting that observed believing was essential, contending something like this: 
I f gods and the supernatural cannot be observed by scientific means, action 
oriented to t h e m or presupposing belief i n t h e m can be. B u t i f only belief 
i n supernatural beings is the v i c t i m , then D u r k h e i m has a powerful reply: 
N o t h i n g durable is lost, for what is more fleeting or hard to observe than 
subjective belief? W h a t is more open to derailment, from one m o m e n t to the 
next, whimsically or i n the cold light o f observable fact (recall those very 
things whose "resistance" religions "could not have overcome")? A n d be-
sides, from the standpoint o f the social scientist, believers i n gods look ex-
actly the same as unbelievers i n gods—and exactly the same as people w i t h 
beliefs i n or about other things. T h e subjective is no handier than the super-
natural, and but slightly more accessible. I n those terms, we can begin to see 
the advantage i n Durkheim's choice o f observing religious ideas 
(représenta-
tions, the subject o f B o o k Two) as being (observably) done (as attitudes rituelles, 
the subject o f B o o k Three) and, hence, w h y even his exposition o f the ideas 
(Book Two) resorts to slow-motion, set-piece depictions o f totemic rites, 
giving t h e m an almost you-are-there vividness. 
As a way out o f the predicament o f evaporating tools, i t might be tempt-
i n g to accept belief as given, taking up the W. I . Thomases' famous socio-
logical crutch: Whatever is believed i n as real is real i n its consequences. B u t 
to regard belief as a simple given is also to skirt the obvious question o f h o w 


Translator's Introduction 
xxxvn 
people come to treat something as real that to the unbelieving onlooker can-
not be. T h e w o r l d o f religion is full o f improbable things: Christians' I m -
maculate Conception or their life from death; Aztecs' sunrises caused by 
human sacrifices; Lithuanians' gaining well-being from the bones o f St. 
Casimir; Australians' black m e n w h o are also w h i t e cockatoos. A n d as D ü r k -
h e i m himself points out, deadpan, people l o o k most like relatives and friends, 
not like plants or animals.
7 3 "Real i n its consequences" quickly wears thin. 
W h i c h consequences? W h a t reality? I f the faithful are thought o f as rationally 
constituted h u m a n beings, what w o u l d cause t h e m to fly i n the face o f what 
they can observe from m o m e n t to m o m e n t and year after year? A n d is our 
understanding advanced i f w e assume the religious faithful o f all ages merely 
to be people w h o can be sold the B r o o k l y n Bridge, not just once but over 
and over again? Ultimately, then, to leave belief unexamined is to gain a 
mentally incompetent human. 
Hence, once again, D ü r k h e i m s point about the real holds importance: A 
human institution that endures must necessarily be founded o n something that 
anyone, not just those certifiably afflicted w i t h "thoroughgoing idiocy," can 
accept as being really real—not just "believed i n " as real and not just patron-
ized as "believed in." T h e whole o f B o o k O n e spectacularly demolishes theo-
ries o f religion that want to be scientific but whose logic implies that religion's 
objects are unreal, and its subjects eternally open to being sold the B r o o k l y n 
Bridge.
7 4 H o w the objects o f religion can be real for a secular social scientist is 
the question D ü r k h e i m asks his reader to explore w i t h h i m . His point is not to 
diminish G o d but to lift into view the reality o f G o d worshipped, the reality 
o f the experience o f God, and the rationality o f those w h o experience God. 
T h e Chapter 7 academic sound bite just picked apart belongs to an ex-
tended argument establishing that "religious forces are real forces," not mere 
figments o f mythic or mystic belief. I f w e begin again, not at that memorable 
show-stopping line about the god and the society as being one but i n its i n -
tellectual context w i t h i n Formes, w e need not hop around to avoid treading 
on the theological and metaphysical feet o f social researchers and their sub-
jects. To start, all we have to do is concede that sometimes the objects o f re-
ligion strain the sense o f what is real but do not necessarily lose the adherent 
for that reason. (Besides, for D ü r k h e i m , the very warp and w o o f o f religions 
is something other than reality "as the senses show i t to h i m . "
7 5 A n d yet 
w i t h o u t this human imagining beyond reality as the senses show it, science 
w o u l d be impossible.) Religious conceptions that do strain credulity pose the 
question D ü r k h e i m tries to answer. His religious human is capable o f notic-
ing religion's empirical discrepancies. Even i f it was true, as LaCapra has (I 
think, mistakenly) suggested, that D ü r k h e i m is o n a " T h o m i s t " mission o f 


X X X V U 1 
Translator's Introduction 
reconciling faith w i t h reason, he w o u l d be doing so precisely because it is be-
lieving that is inherently problematic for the faithful.
7 6 D o i n g , o n the other 
hand, is not; hence, yet another route to the p r i o r i t y D ü r k h e i m gives to rites 
over beliefs and its usefulness as a way o f t h i n k i n g about the persistence o f 
beliefs that are nonsensical o n their face.
7 7 B u t not only that: Since we speak 
o f " T h o m i s m , " let us remember that Thomas Aquinas came centuries after 
Jesus's personal friend Thomas, w h o m the sophisticated faithful o f antiquity 
passed d o w n the ages as an eternal figment o f religious life: d o u b t .
7 8 I f reli-
g i o n could exist only o n condition o f being believed or even believable, its 
life w o u l d have had numbered days, speedily exhausted. 
T h e line about the god and the society as one and the same can be 
thought about i n yet another way. Consider the religious w o r l d into w h i c h 
G o d , or "the god," sent the Ten Commandments (Exodus 20). N o t e that the 
first five concern the relationship o f humans to G o d , and the second five, 
that o f humans to one another. Furthermore, the passage contains no invita-
t i o n to regard either set as having a different or higher status than the other, 
as being obligatory i n a way that the other is not—or, for that matter, as be-
ing separately conceived. I n terms ofthat theological w o r l d , the conceptions 
o f the god and o f the society are inseparable. To say that "the god and the so-
ciety are one and the same" is not necessarily to say any more than G o d did, 
speaking through Moses. I t seems to me that Formes throughout has that 
w o r l d i n view. I f the point just made is at all contentious, and I have no 
doubt it is, then the contentiousness itself gives a point to D ü r k h e i m s strat-
egy i n choosing an exotic case. 
The Case for a Simplifying Case 
Let us n o w notice h o w D ü r k h e i m prepares the tool o f using an exotic case 
to simplify. First, he assumes the Australians to be rationally constituted h u -
mans, as are their Parisian contemporaries. There is no question o f one's be-
ing civilized and the other not, or o f the t w o groups' having different mental 
constitutions. H e presumes the Australians to h o l d the same tide o f " m a n " as 
Parisians do, and i n the same right. " M a n is man only because he is civilized," 
he says.
7 9 Therefore Australia is as good a place as any other for studying "the 
religious nature o f man," and it has an advantage: Small-scale, stone-tool-
using societies were "simple" and thus permitted a degree o f clarity and 
distinctness i n t h i n k i n g that France did not. Formes exemplifies a single 
well-conducted experiment whose results may be put forward as holding for 
all cases that can be shown to be o f the same k i n d . Furthermore, as C o m t e 


Translator's Introduction 
xxxix 
had said, " T h e simplest phenomena are the most general."
8 0 Boiled d o w n 
to its constituent elements, religion i n Australia is religion anywhere else. 
Second, i n using ethnography to study religion, D u r k h e i m follows ex-
actly a procedure others had used i n attacking religion: taking exotic facts to 
expose religion universally as delusion, fabrication, and the like. W h a t is 
delusion and so o n i n religion among the naked " X ' s " is also delusion and 
so o n i n religion among the well-covered consumers o f haute couture. B u t 
he then stands that procedure o n its head, m a k i n g Australia serve as a sim-
ple and, by the same stroke, a tough case for religion's roots i n the real. 
Demonstrating the tough case w i l l carry the easier one: W h a t is true for the 
turn-of-the-century Australian w i l l then be true for the turn-of-the-century 
Parisian.
8 1 
D u r k h e i m uses the same rhetorical tactic i n arguing the reality o f " r e l i -
gious forces": taking the idea of tnana or totemic principle as the truly tough 
case. W h a t is shown to be true o f the less credible real w i l l be established for 
the more credible one. Before showing h o w this tough case also simplifies, 
however, I briefly digress, for there is one criticism against Durkheim's use o f 
ethnography that can derail us i f bypassed. D u r k h e i m was w r o n g , i t is said, 
to imagine that the societies and religions o f Australia were "simple." T h e i r 
ideas were as elaborate or sophisticated as anyone else's, and since those ideas 
were as m u c h subject to historical development and change as anyone else's, 
he had a mistaken fantasy (shared w i t h others i n his time) that Australia's 
stone-tool users preserved i n primitive f o r m what must have existed at the 
dawn o f humanity. A l t h o u g h he did not i n fact think that,
8 2 such criticisms 
are nevertheless partly valid. Yet simplicity is not only a way o f characteriz-
ing (or stigmatizing) things but also a way o f setting problems w i t h clarity— 
for example, physicists' calculating gravitational force under the (never true) 
assumption o f a perfect vacuum. Since we easily understand w h y i t is useful 
to simplify by assuming away the atmosphere, we can easily set aside as irrel-
evant someone's insistence that it is really there.
8 3 Similarly, rather than settle 
for the generous discovery that litde about the Australians was simple, we do 
better to imagine what m i g h t have been complicating about the French.
8 4 
W h a t m i g h t D u r k h e i m have thought simplifying about l o o k i n g as far 
afield from France as he d i d to investigate "the religious nature o f man"? 
One answer surely was the uncontrollably vague, half-formulated notions 
that are characteristic o f the familiar. ( T h i n k back to m y contentious state-
ment about the Ten Commandments.) I f the discipline o f ethnographic 
study is to uncover what is familiar i n the strange, i t is also to uncover w h a t 
is strange about the familiar. F r o m that angle, things Europeans vaguely 
" k n o w " about the "power o f G o d " l o o k strange enough to make the exotic 


xl 
Translator's Introduction 
case of mana a usefully simplifying place to begin. W h y is it, for example, that 
from w i t h i n the Judeo-Christian tradition, even for thoroughly secular peo-
ple, it is somehow less troublesome to speak about "the power o f G o d " and 
mean a transcendental deity than to use the same phrase i n respect to a phys-
ical object? To b o r r o w Parsons's phrase again, b o t h deity and mana should 
probably be classified together, as "nonempirical reality." Yet somehow, for 
no logical reason, kfeeb like a different matter to speak o f a transcendent de-
ity than to speak o f mana, the totemic principle, or someplace i n the real 
where objects speak w i t h lips o f w o o d and smite from painted pedestals (and 
inversely, where lips and smiting hands o f flesh are alleged to be only human 
i n appearance but superhuman i n essence). 
T h i n k o f h o w w e read the encounter between the ancient Israelites and 
their enemies, the people o f Ashdod, w h o built a towering god w i t h feet o f 
clay. That phrase "feet o f clay" contains i n itself, and takes as given, a c o m -
plicated and complicating discourse about obviously misplaced (as opposed 
to well-placed) faith. A n d consider this: I t is a transcendent G o d whose ex-
istence a long tradition i n Western philosophy attempts to prove rationally, 
w h i l e living w i t h the culturally given safety net that the failure o f p r o o f need 
not impose the conclusion that that G o d does not i n fact exist.
8 5 I f I am right 
about what we " k n o w " culturally about the "power o f God," even the most 
secular among us, i n contrast to the ideas D ü r k h e i m explores (mana, kwoth, 
orenda, etc.), I have just turned up the volume o f our o w n half-heard cultural 
Muzak, as it were, o f an especially troublesome case for the real. W h y should 
this be so? For the same reason that an "equation" o f society and G o d should 
be troublesome for social scientists supposedly operating nontheologically. A 
moral equivalent to the material perfect vacuum was called for. 
Conscience Collective 
Mana, D ü r k h e i m says, is the "quasi-divine principle" immanent i n things 
that gives power to certain plants or animals, and to representations of them. B e -
fore tackling it, he reminds his reader (in the last paragraph o f the preceding 
chapter) that Comte, i n calling the idea o f force metaphysical, and meta-
physics the direct descendant o f theology, had already implied that the idea 
o f force began i n religion, from w h i c h it was b o r r o w e d first by philosophy 
and later by science. B u t C o m t e mistakenly concluded that, because o f this 
ancestry, the idea o f force had no objective counterpart i n reality and thus 
w o u l d eventually disappear from science. To the contrary, however, the c o n -
cept o f force was alive and well i n the m o d e r n science o f D ü r k h e i m s day. 
I n fact, the English t e r m "vector" (which appeared i n English i n 1867) en-


Translator's Introduction 
xli 
tered French (vecteur) i n 1899, and D ü r k h e i m used the t e r m "resultant" (a 
vector sum) to mean a social sum o f individual forces. Therefore, i n contrast 
to Comte, D ü r k h e i m " w i l l show . . . that religious forces are real, no matter 
how imperfect the symbols w i t h whose help they were conceived of. F r o m 
this it w i l l follow that the same is true for the concept o f force i n general."
8 6 
T h e reality o f religious forces is to be found i n the real experience o f 
social life, according to D ü r k h e i m . Just as, i n the case o f soul, psychology 
sought a physical basis for what h u m a n k i n d had long since discovered i n so-
cial life, so too force. Contrary to what C o m t e anticipated, by the end o f the 
nineteenth century, the idea o f force had completed its transit from religion, 
to metaphysics, to science positive. To appreciate D ü r k h e i m ' s context, note that 
cutting-edge w o r k o n the fundamental forces was being done no farther 
away than the laboratories o f M a r i e and Pierre Curie. F r o m 1906 on, M m e . 
Curie continued her w o r k o n radioactivity as a professor at the Sorbonne. 
Durkheim's account o f rites is meant to seize the idea o f force at its "birth," 
as he says. H e f o u n d the b i r t h o f t h a t idea i n rites, at moments o f collective 
effervescence, w h e n h u m a n beings feel themselves transformed, and are i n fact 
transformed, through ritual doing. A force experienced as external to each 
individual is the agent ofthat transformation, but the force itself is created by 
the fact o f assembling and temporarily living a collective life that transports 
individuals beyond themselves. Those moments he conveys i n a set piece 
drawn from ethnographic description. 
Durkheim's set piece opens w i t h the practical occupations o f life sus-
pended, the vahdity o f ordinary rules adjourned, people dressed and painted to 
resemble one another and the animal or plant by w h i c h they name their shared 
identity, the objects around them " u n i f o r m e d " i n the same way, the whole 
taking place under a night sky, the scene dotted w i t h firelight, and frenzy—a 
collective effervescence. Swept away, the participants experience a force external 
to them, w h i c h seems to be m o v i n g them, and by w h i c h their very nature is 
transformed. T h e y experience themselves as grander than at ordinary times; 
they do things they w o u l d not do at other times; they feel, and at that m o m e n t 
really are, j o i n e d w i t h each other and w i t h the totemic being. T h e y come to 
experience themselves as sharing one and the same essence—with the totemic 
animal, w i t h its representation, and w i t h each other. I n addition, since a sym-
bolic representation o f the totemic being stands at the center o f things, the real 
power generated i n the assembly comes to be thought o f as residing i n the 
totemic object itself. Symbols o f the totemic object extend the effects o f the 
effervescence into life after the assembly is dispersed. Seen o n objects, and some-
times o n bodies, totemic representations o f various kinds w i l l fill the role o f 
what w o u l d be called today a secondary stimulus—a reminder that reactivates 


xlii 
Translator's Introduction 
the initial feelings, although more dimly.
8 7 Since the transformation cannot be 
done once and for all and fades despite the symbolic reminders, it must peri-
odically be redone—hence, the cyclically repetitive performance o f rites. 
T h r o u g h real experience, then, the participants come to ascribe power 
to sacred objects, that power having n o t h i n g to do w i t h the physical charac-
teristics o f those objects. I t is also through real experience that they arrive at 
the concept o f force, but the real experience they have is that o f human be-
ings assembled—or to use Durkheim's abstract formulation, that o f society's 
"concentrating" or "pulling itself together" and thus becoming a unity i n 
the real. This depiction w i l l no doubt seem contrived and mechanical at 
first glance and o n that account may tempt discounting, u n t i l the historical 
m e m o r y it activates i n us brings us to similar events that we ourselves k n o w 
operated mechanically—uniformed, 
firelit, 
nighttime effervescences o f the 
Nazis or the K u K l u x Klan, w i t h individuals led to impute to themselves 
shared i n b o r n essences and fabulous collective identities,
8 8 w i t h symbolic re-
minders shaping everyday life afterward, and w i t h individual doubt i n large 
part not requiring physical violence to be overcome. T h e mechanism itself is 
neither good nor evil. I f D u r k h e i m is right that it is universal, then we 
should expect to find it, and do find it, from tattooed street gangs to the Sal-
vation Army, from the habits o f the convent to those o f the exclusive club. 
I n all cases an outcome o f j o i n t doing, the real that comes into being i n 
the rite, as D u r k h e i m describes it, is independent o f (but not necessarily ex-
clusive o f ) individual belief. T h e power felt is real, and is felt not only i n the 
physical being o f h u m a n k i n d but also i n its mental being—humankind's con-
science collective, that is, i n b o t h "conscience" and "consciousness." Besides, its 
reality can be dramatically transforming. D u r i n g the exaltation o f the French 
Revolution, for example, " [ w ] e see the most mediocre or harmless bour-
geois transformed . . . into a hero or an executioner."
8 9 I n undramatic times, 
it is undramatically transforming, as D u r k h e i m says a few sentences later: 
There is virtually no instant o f our lives in which a certain rush o f energy 
fails to come to us from outside ourselves. In all kinds o f acts that express 
the understanding, esteem, and affection o f his neighbor, there is a lift that 
the man who does his duty feels, usually without being aware o f i t .
9 0 
W h a t creates the transformation is a product o f thought, but thought that 
cannot be accommodated by our usual vocabulary o f mere individuals' 
thinking. It exists only i n the m i n d ; but i f i t exists i n only one m i n d , i t does 
not belong to what can be experienced by any and everyone as the real. W e ar-
rive by this route at Durkheim's superficially troublesome t e r m pensée collec-


Translator's Introduction 
xliii 
five, "collective thought." It is i n collective thought, built into the experience 
o f social life, that the idea o f a divinity to w h i c h human beings are subordi-
nate gains its foothold i n the real. 
Yet—and this is a b i g "yet"—far from erasing the thought o f individuals, 
collective thought is found nowhere else. T h r o u g h o u t Chapter 7 and indeed 
the w h o l e o f Formes, we find statements such as this, periodically inserted 
w i t h teacherly repetition: 
[B]ecause society can exist only in and by means of individual minds, it 
must enter into us and become organized within us. That force thus be-
comes an integral part o f our being and, by the same stroke, uplifts it and 
brings it to maturity.
9 1 
[L]ike any other society, the clan can only live in and by means o f the indi-
vidual consciousnesses o f which it is made. Thus, insofar as religious force 
is conceived of as embodied in the totemic emblem, it seems to be exter-
nal to individuals and endowed with a kind o f transcendence; and yet from 
another standpoint, and like the clan it symbolizes, it can be made real only 
within and by them."
9 2 
D ü r k h e i m has not postulated some outside m i n d hovering i n the human 
midst. H e is striving conceptually to represent aspects o f the real that are 
readily observable but that cannot possibly be there to observe or represent at 
all, i f the lone individual is our conceptual unit. To see those aspects o f the 
real, let us t u r n n o w to sacredness, an extraordinary quality that ordinary 
objects acquire only w i t h i n moral communities. Sacredness is eminently a 
représentation collective, eminendy a feature of pensée and conscience collectives. As 
a quality o f things—or, rather, as D ü r k h e i m insists, a quality superadded to 
things—sacredness can come to be its real self only w i t h i n the domain o f c o l -
lective consciousness (that is, i n the domain o f conscience and o f conscious-
ness). Sacredness is an aspect o f the real that exists only i n the m i n d but cannot 
possibly exist as the real i n only one m i n d .
9 3 
The Sacred/Profane Dichotomy 
Over the years, it has proved easy to make heavier weather than need be o f 
both le sacré and la conscience collective. W. E. H . Stanner's careful and respect-
ful article o n Formes called the sacred/profane dichotomy "unusable except 
at the cost o f undue interference w i t h the facts o f observation."
9 4 T r y as he 
might i n his fieldwork, he said, he could not find it. I f there is i n fact n o t h -
ing about the idea that connects us w i t h our o w n sense o f the real i n a way 


xliv 
Translator's Introduction 
that illuminates it, then D ü r k h e i m w o u l d r i g h d y be patronized as the w r i t e r 
o f a classic freighted w i t h intractable concepts, to be suffered through and 
forgotten. B u t this classic suggests more interesting mental activity than the 
exercise involved i n logically dissecting the t e r m "sacred" itself. I n any case, 
Lukes has already shown i n detail its logical rough surfaces.
9 5 T h e sacred 
points to aspects o f the real that were doubdess amazing to D ü r k h e i m , and 
that are still there i n the social w o r l d to amaze us. 
Consider first the biblical example o f the H o l y A r k . Reading at Exodus 
25, we see it being made to exact specifications (two carved cherubim o n top, 
the tablets inside, etc.), using materials collected from the c o m m u n i t y and 
manufactured i n full v i e w o f all those present (and subsequendy, all readers o f 
the Bible). Thousands o f years and miles from that biblical scene, we find very 
powerful sacred objects called churingas i n the same state: "[E]ven among the 
Arunta, there are churingas that are made by the elders o f the group, w i t h the 
full knowledge o f and i n full v i e w o f everyone."
9 6 Whatever is added to make 
those objects' sacredness is, like soul, real but w i t h o u t extension. Jewish tra-
dition wonderfully presents that feature by saying o f the A r k that even though 
its dimensions were k n o w n , it "miraculously occupied no space i n the H o l y 
o f Holies."
9 7 T h e real, yet nonphysical, characteristic w e can observe i n b o t h 
cases cannot be the feature, or the creature, o f an individual m i n d . I n b o t h 
cases, the physical characteristics o f the things cannot possibly disclose what 
they are i n the real. I n D ü r k h e i m s words, " T h e sensations that the physical 
w o r l d evokes i n us cannot, by definition, contain anything that goes beyond 
that world. F r o m something tangible one can only make something tangible; 
from extended substance one cannot make unextended substance."
9 8 
A t the same time, b o t h objects' nonphysical reality is available to the i n -
dividual m i n d only as i t participates i n m i n d b o t h inside and outside itself. 
A n d because sacredness originates as i t does, i t is inherendy impermanent 
and so must be added to the object again and again, just as i t was originally: 
by collective human doing. Equally, because sacredness originates as it does, 
there necessarily is n o unifying characteristic that is shared by everything des-
ignated as sacré, no all-purpose key to preordain the outcome o f fieldwork. 
"Things so disparate cannot f o r m a class [the sacred] unless a class can be 
marked by a property, its absence, and its contrary,"
9 9 Stanner wrote. B y 
thinking i n such terms, he created for himself the u n - D u r k h e i m i a n night-
mare I w i l l n o w indicate by m o v i n g from the A r k to other examples: Aya-
tollah K h o m e i n i , the bones o f St. Casimir, the louse, and M t . Sinai. 
R e m e m b e r the tumultuous arrival i n 1979 o f R u h o l l a h K h o m e i n i at 
Tehran airport, w i t h a m i l l i o n people crowding to welcome h i m . D u r i n g the 
evening news, the effervescence ofthat m o m e n t could be felt w o r l d w i d e re-


Translator's Introduction 
xlv 
gardless o f language and i n every household o f secularized America. Despite 
the haze o f T V distance, the vocal flatness o f T V correspondents, dissonant 
shouting i n a language most Americans do not understand, and ritual ges-
tures specific to the moral c o m m u n i t y K h o m e i n i shared w i t h the crowd, 
every viewer witnessed the elevation o f K h o m e i n i to sacredness. Before our 
eyes, K h o m e i n i became something other than what he had been as he left 
Paris only hours before. That Khomeini's elevation was attached to a partic-
ular moral c o m m u n i t y was evidenced straightaway. H e had put o n sacredness 
there, but not everywhere—a moral distance marked i n America by c o n t i n u -
ing to call "Ayatollah" a m a n w h o had gained, there, a higher tide, " I m a m , " 
by acclamation. W h a t was done could only have been done w i t h i n a group 
o f assembled faithful and could not be undone by individual doubt or unbe-
lief. I t was the real to anyone going to Iran then, no matter where they were 
coming from. Like the A r k , Khomeini's human measurements were k n o w n 
and the same as before; the beard, the turban, and the robes looked exactly 
as before, but the man was not the same as before. W h a t was added belonged 
to the real, but i t took up no space. 
We have also witnessed the inverse process, i n w h i c h the other crucial 
term, moral community, is created. I n 1989, leaders o f a newly independent 
territory o f Lithuania returned relics said to be the bones o f St. Casimir to 
the People's House o f Culture, w h i c h they reconstituted and reconsecrated 
as the Cathedral o f Vilnius. Lithuanians filed through the new cathedral 
and past the bones, participants i n the b i r t h o f a nation. I n this example, 
the sanctification preceded, and was a t o o l i n , the construction o f a n e w 
moral community, n o w added to (or superadded to) the already existing 
physical territory, population, and apparatus o f statehood. To the possible 
objection that such c o m m u n i t y "always existed," the answer w e find i n the 
doing is the late-twentieth-century revival o f o l d bones; the answer we 
find 
i n Formes is that nothing that must be imagined "always exists," but must be 
continually re-imagined through h u m a n doing. This is just as true o f moral 
c o m m u n i t y as i t is o f sacred objects. B y the selfsame process, those dry bones 
were made to live again as the sacred objects they once had been.
1 0 0 T h e y 
were resurrected i n postcommunist Lithuania and rehabilitated f r o m their 
l o w l y state for forty years as the dusty trove o f the reactionary and the super-
stitious. T h e k n o w n physical characteristics and population o f Lithuania 
were the same as before, but the moral c o m m u n i t y was not. W h a t was added 
was objectively real, but i t t o o k up no space. Imagine the confusion many 
Americans w o u l d feel i f asked to pay their respects to the bones. 
Sacredness is not a quality inherent i n certain objects, nor is i t available 
to the unaided senses o f just any individual h u m a n observer. It is a quality 


xlvi 
Translator's Introduction 
that objects acquire w h e n they are, i n the phrase from Durkheim's definition, 
"set apart and forbidden." T h e y are made sacred by groups o f people w h o set 
t h e m apart and keep t h e m bounded by specific actions; they remain sacred 
only so long as groups continue to do this. Humans acting collectively make 
and remake this quality o f sacredness but then encounter it after the fact as i f 
it had always been built into objects and was ready-made. I n the religious v o -
cabulary used w i t h i n communities o f faith, those things that have been sanc-
tified, "set apart and forbidden," are intrinsically " h o l y " — a n d have always 
been. I n the technical vocabulary developed i n Formes, they are "sacred"— 
but made so by d o i n g .
1 0 1 T h e same process can make a man or w o m a n , a 
piece o f cloth, a lizard, a tree, an idea or principle (anything, including ex-
crement, w h i c h D ü r k h e i m slides into a footnote) into a sacred thing and the 
mandatory recipient o f elaborated deference. D ü r k h e i m makes this point 
over and over again, h a m m e r i n g it home one last time i n B o o k Three, Chap-
ter 2. There w e come u p o n ritual celebrations that center on, o f all things, 
the louse. 
Sacredness is n o t merely a set o f peculiar relationships between people 
and certain designated objects. T h e very act that constitutes those peculiar 
relationships also relates a designated group o f people to one another and sets 
t h e m apart from others to w h o m they are not b o u n d and w h o do not have 
the same relationship to designated physical objects. T u r n the Thomases' for-
mula around: Whatever is obviously real, given its obviously real conse-
quences, tends to be accepted as real. Whatever power they acquire, and it 
can be quite considerable, is real power. N o t i c e that there is no question o f 
debunking native beliefs about that power as imaginary. To do so w o u l d be 
the same as saying that social life itself is merely imaginary and society itself 
changeable merely by an impulse to change one's m i n d . So far as sacred o b -
jects are concerned, the question is h o w to describe and explicate the nature 
o f that power, w h i c h D ü r k h e i m posits as real. 
"Power" i n what sense and "real" i n what sense may be observed i n the 
following passage from Exodus (19), w h e n M o u n t Sinai" evolves by a set o f 
human actions into a place where the power o f G o d may "break forth u p o n " 
the people and destroy them: 
And the Lord said unto Moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify them to 
day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes. . . . And thou shalt set 
bounds unto the people round about saying, Take heed to yourselves, that 
ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it: whosoever toucheth 
the mount shall be surely put to death. There shall not an hand touch it, but 
he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall 


Translator's Introduction 
xlvii 
not live. . . . And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and 
sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes. (Exodus 19:10, 12, 13) 
Remember 
by what agency transgressors w o u l d be "stoned" or 
"shot 
through." As the people d i d their part, the m o u n t a i n did its o w n , and by the 
" t h i r d day" o f God's instructions to Moses, it had become enveloped i n 
smoke and i t quaked. 
And the Lord said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, lest they break 
through unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish. . . . And Moses 
said unto the Lord, The people cannot come up to mount Sinai: for thou 
chargedst us, saying, Set bounds about the mount and sanctify it. (Exodus 
19:21, 23) 
Notice that the biblical text explains natural power i n natural terms ( w h o -
ever violates the sacredness o f the mountain w i l l be "stoned," "shot through," 
or "surely put to death") but that the power o f the mountain is not thereby 
explained away. T h e Bible writers presumably could see what we do i n what 
they themselves wrote quite matter-of-facdy yet w i t h o u t diminishing the real 
power o f their G o d . I t came to be the case that whoever went up into the 
mountain, apart from Moses and Aaron, w o u l d surely die. I think this is what 
D u r k h e i m found remarkable about the natural means by w h i c h sacred objects 
move above and beyond—really above and really beyond—their natural o r d i -
nariness and about h o w the people w h o exert those natural means thereafter 
move i n and out o f awareness o f h o w what was done was done. I n other 
words, " M a n makes God," as M a r x wrote, but not i n any way he pleases. 
A n object such as that mountain moves above and beyond its natural 
ordinariness i n this way only w i t h i n the ambit o f a conscience collective—col-
lective conscience normatively, i n conduct, and collective consciousness cog-
nitively, i n thought. T h e t w o are not separate. Conscience collective is the 
achievement o f m i n d that transfigures the real w o r l d and makes it a shared 
w o r l d that is i n fact the real w o r l d as k n o w n and knowable by some group, 
some moral community. I t w o u l d not be obvious to an ignorant foreign 
passerby h o w M o u n t Sinai was different from other mountains. H e m i g h t 
well climb it w i t h his shoes on, travel its slopes at w i l l , and, caught i n this 
profanation, m i g h t be "shot through." Readers may recognize this ignorant 
passerby as the sort favored by old-fashioned movies o f colonization, i n 
w h i c h the colonial officer i n his p i t h helmet and shorts steps o n the sacred 
spot or shoots the sacred animal for a drawing-room trophy, and to w h o m 
knowledge about the real power o f the ordinary-seeming object arrives si-


xlviii 
Translator's Introduction 
multaneously w i t h a real native rising, u n w i t t i n g l y detonated. T h e c o m -
monsense approach that w o u l d be satisfied w i t h t h i n k i n g about the power o f 
the spot or the animal as merely imaginary, merely an amazing figment o f su-
perstition ablaze i n each individual native m i n d but i n no colonialist's, seems 
an unnecessarily roundabout route to grasping the real events that f o l l o w .
1 0 2 
Some years ago, as I was teaching Formes to an especially responsive 
group, m y students demanded that we see as a class Stephen Spielberg's (and 
Harrison Ford's) first-rate adventure movie, Raiders of the Lost Ark. T h e story 
turns o n ignorant passersby, good guys and bad guys, engaged i n archaeolog-
ical excavation i n a race to acquire the power o f the A r k as a k i n d o f ultimate 
weapon. W i t h a sophistication that thrilled their teacher, m y students pro-
nounced judgment o n Raiders's ark: T h e real A r k was a far more interesting 
object than the fantasy one because i t had a complex human nature. T h e Ark's 
power inhered i n its sacredness, and its sacredness was a feature o f its collective 
life. B u t what is true o f sacred objects is also true o f the transcendent beings 
that communicate w i t h humankind. Strip away the collectivity that makes sa-
credness real, and y o u are left w i t h what individuals can manage, acting alone: 
Freud's patients w i t h the oddball reverences for animals that occasioned their 
going to the doctor,
1 0 3 the bag lady out o f whose m o u t h Jehovah G o d speaks 
incessantly i n the u n k n o w n tongue, the innocuous bourgeois w h o secretes 
living and dead things i n a hideous private shrine. Strip away sacredness as a 
feature o f that maddening D u r k h e i m i a n reality pensée collective, and you have 
not a collectively knowable w o r l d at all but a w h o l e set o f problems about 
h o w this or that person could leap to believing this or that strange thing. Your 
hands are tied to do anything other than suspend disbelief about the ontolog-
ical claims for whatever i t is, incant the formula about things believed i n as real 
as real i n their consequences, h u m o r the believer, or just believe the claims. 
T h e real A r k was what it was by virtue o f what D u r k h e i m calls " m o r a l " 
or "ideal" forces, that is, collective human forces. Depending o n its life w i t h i n 
some given collectivity, anything can become the container o f such forces, 
not just a w o o d e n box made i n a certain way. B u t like the fantasizers o f the 
movie, some theorists have imagined the process to be otherwise, beginning 
somehow i n the inherent grandeur o f the object (the naturists' mistake) or i n 
the inherent confusion o f the believer's m i n d (the animists' mistake). Anyone 
w h o thinks either way w i l l miss Durkheim's point that the same human ca-
pacities that make society possible make what D u r k h e i m calls la vie religieuse 
inevitable. T h e t r u t h o f the m i n d is i n the fictions
1 0 4 that, via conscience collec-
tive, construct the real. I f there is ever to be a general theory o f the m i n d that 
can be reduced to specific capacities o f the brain, or an "artificial intelli-
gence" whose discriminations and combinations have anything like the 


Translator's Introduction 
xlix 
complexity o f what we observe i n even commonplace acts and facts o f h u -
man life, then the theory o f the brains perceptual capacity must include 
things like the collective representation that makes it possible for a man, a 
mountain, a b o x o f bones, or a louse to be perceived as themselves one m o -
ment and as themselves-plus, the next. 
Religious Life in Seemingly Nonreligious Life 
D ü r k h e i m sums up what makes la vie religieuse inevitable: 
[I]n all its aspects and at every moment of its history, social life is only pos-
sible thanks to a vast symbolism. The physical emblems and figurative rep-
resentations with which I have been especially concerned in the present 
study are one form of it, but there are a good many others."
1 0 5 
W i t h that s u m m i n g up, he suggests that we could apply the same analysis i n 
domains remote from anything w e could call "religious"—politics certainly, 
from w h i c h D ü r k h e i m draws some o f his o w n examples, and status orders o f 
various kinds (think o f the n o t i o n "blueblood," a racialized shorthand for the 
"set apart and forbidden" qualities o f West European aristocrats, and w h i t e 
bones for those o f Russia, as opposed to the black bones o f Russian serfs).
1 0 6 
A l l such phenomena seem the more outlandish, and the more distinct 
from 
reason, the further they seem to be from our o w n experience o f the real. B u t 
the burden o f Durkheim's argument is that they are not to be separated f r o m 
human reason, i n full operation—hence, from us. Toward the end o f Chap-
ter 7, he uncovers the roots o f scientific abstraction i n the same processes o f 
abstraction that make collective identities possible. Therefore, i t is no more 
remarkable that a man should i n totemic observances manage to affirm his 
kinship w i t h a white cockatoo (despite physical dissimilarities) than that 
he should manage to affirm his kinship w i t h m e n and w o m e n o f the 
W h i t e Cockatoo clan (for, again, it is physical dissimilarities that must be 
overcome).. B o t h involve abstraction, by w h i c h invisible qualities are added to 
what is visible, for there is no other route to unifying the discrete i n d i v i d u -
alities that our sensory experience gives us. That the manner i n w h i c h this is 
done may be crude is beside the point: 
The great service that religions have rendered to thought is to have con-
structed a first representation of what the relations of kinship between things 
might be. Given the conditions in which it was tried, that enterprise could 
obviously lead only to makeshift results. But then, are the results of any such 


1 
Translator's Introduction 
enterprise ever definitive, and must it not be taken up again and again? Fur-
thermore, it was less important to succeed than to dare. What was essential 
was not to let the mind be dominated by what appears to the senses, but in-
stead to teach the mind to dominate it and to join together what the senses 
put asunder. As soon as man became aware that internal connections exist 
between things, science and philosophy became possible.
107 
That w h i c h makes la vie religieuse inevitable also links our ways o f k n o w i n g 
community and identity w i t h our ways o f k n o w i n g the natural world. Soul 
was needed to account theoretically for aspects o f our human experience, and 
empirical needs localized it i n selected parts o f natural bodies. T h e experience 
o f force arose first i n human relations, but it was found again i n nature, i n re-
lations among things. B y so doing, D ü r k h e i m says, humankind made r o o m for 
nature i n society, imagining i t o n the model provided by schemes for ordering 
collective life. B u t by the same stroke, the way nature's order was imagined i n 
t u r n became consequential for human order. Like the Australians, all human 
beings acquire a w o r l d o f nature, as i f it was the w o r l d o f nature, knowledge o f 
w h i c h is mediated by relations w i t h human contemporaries. A l t h o u g h that real 
w o r l d varies from place to place and from one historical epoch to another, the 
fact that it is consequential for the way humans live i n c o m m o n does not vary. 
T h i n k i n g through what those connections still mean is one o f the intel-
lectual demands that D ü r k h e i m 's expedition i n Formes leads us to confront. It 
is not true that science is consequential only for those w h o do science. Early 
i n this century, the Russian philosopher Lev Shestov contrasted the way a 
child learned that ghosts do not exist but at the same time was "given reliable 
information, the implausibility o f w h i c h surpasses absolutely every fib ever 
told . . . that the earth is not motionless, as the evidence indicates, that the Sun 
does not revolve around the Earth, that the sky is not a solid, that the horizon 
is only an optical illusion and so o n . "
1 0 8 Once that child's view was the w o r l d 
o f nature, as adult h u m a n beings k n e w it. That knowledge, i n turn, was c o n -
sequential for their relations to one another. For the k i n d o f reason that Formes 
draws attention to, i t was obvious straightaway that Copernicus's discovery af-
fected not only ideas o f the relationships heavenly bodies have to one another 
but ideas o f relationships among earthly, human bodies, a connection that the 
Inquisition did not fail to notice. Cosmology was not imagined i n isolation 
from morality. N o t then, but also not now: O u r o w n recent debates i n A m e r -
ica today over creation science and evolution t u r n o n questions o f h o w citi-
zens should be taught morally (and legally) to regard and relate to one another. 
Creationism dresses itself i n the forms o f scientific discourse, i f not their spirit; 
evolutionism sheds the open-endedness o f scientific discourse and reclothes 


Translator's Introduction 
li 
itself as hard nuggets o f constitutionally correct scientific content for school-
children's unexperimental consumption. T h e heat o n b o t h sides points to the 
dual aspect o f conscience collective—normative 
and cognitive—to w h i c h D u r k -
heim's intellectually demanding expedition takes us. 
That expedition is morally demanding as well, i f we reflect o n further i m -
plications o f its discoveries. T h e passage I just quoted seems to ennoble reli-
gion as the source o f quintessentially human achievements. B u t like every 
other human achievement, its mechanism can t u r n i n more than one way. I f 
Durkheim's analysis is right, i t suggests that this century's monstrosities i n c o l -
lective life arise not from aberrations i n human reason but from what is fun-
damental to it. That analysis also leads to a disturbing suggestion: that the 
ordinary human agents w h o serve as raw material for extraordinary abusers o f 
human dignity are, i n vast majority, the normal and the socially responsible— 
not deviants, sociopaths, or the crazy. It suggests, finally, that the human na-
ture o n w h i c h we depend, our social nature, is our uplift and our downfall. 
T h e only exit from this dilemma appears to be individualism. B u t the i n c o m -
patibility o f individualist assumptions w i t h human nature as it can be observed in 
the real world was chief among Durkheim's discoveries i n Formes and through-
out his w o r k . W h a t we see, through his theoretical lens o f conscience collective, is 
present i n a social w o r l d o f the real that cannot be arrived at w i t h notions o f 
individual conscience, alone. W e see that Socrates' individualistic preference for 
the cup o f hemlock over intellectual conformity has appealed d o w n the ages 
precisely because, i n that respect, he was not human i n the sense we can o b -
serve day i n and day o u t — i n social life as empirically available to us. There, w e 
see individual doubt, inherendy present, and we see h o w doubt is overcome. 
Thus, i n the end, there is a deep and tragic tension i n Durkheim's discoveries. 
FORMES IN FRENCH AND IN ENGLISH 
A new translation need not be the occasion to deny the merit o f an old one. 
Joseph Ward Swain gave Formes monumental life i n English to generations o f 
scholars, and that life i n English has been richly productive. N o one w i t h a full 
understanding o f what translating Formes demands even n o w should do any-
thing but salute D r . Swain's achievement. I re-do that w o r k n o w w i t h the ben-
efit o f the use I have made o f the book, i n English and i n French. That use itself 
has benefited from almost ninety years o f critique, the availability o f specialized 
readings and field applications by some o f the great anthropologists (Claude 
Lévi-Strauss, E. E. Evans-Pritchard, and Bronislaw Malinowski, to name only 
three), various English translations o f Durkheim's other work, and good partial 
retranslations of Formes itself. These are aids that Swain d i d not have. A l t h o u g h 


Iii 
Translator's Introduction 
m y main purposes are b o t h to re-present Formes i n idiomatic English and cor-
rect Swain's inaccuracies, I differ w i t h Swain w i t h o u t immodesty. T h e accu-
racy o f many passages cannot be improved upon. Indeed, the very alienness o f 
Swain's English, to our ears, is i n a sense faithful to D ü r k h e i m , whose ideas are 
not idiomatic to English speakers—and ultimately, o f course, there is no sub-
stitute for reading a w o r k i n its native language. Whatever its aims, translation 
requires scholarly, interpretive, and stylistic judgments at many levels. 
Readable English has been m y goal throughout. To this end, I have cho-
sen resonant English equivalents whenever I could—for example, "outward 
and visible" for externel et visible, and "neighbor" for semblable, i n cases where 
religious resonance seems important. (Compare " T h o u shalt love thy neigh-
bor as thyself") To the same end, I have replaced French w i t h English w o r d 
order, dividing or m o v i n g Durkheim's frequent parenthetical insertions ac-
cordingly, and I have not hesitated to change the punctuation and division 
into paragraphs, i f such changes seemed to m e to improve the text's clarity i n 
English or its accessibility to a well-educated reader. I have, i n addition, re-
peated the subject i n those new, shortened, sentences—grammatical gender 
and verb endings are not signposts i n English for what goes w i t h what. Fur-
thermore, I have done whatever I had to i n the service o f good English style, 
avoiding double genitives and multiple uses o f " i t " w i t h multiple antecedents 
(besetting sins i n the older w o r k ) . 
In the service o f future scholarly w o r k , I have also checked, supple-
mented, and i n some instances corrected as many o f the original footnotes as 
I could, abbreviating the j o u r n a l tides differendy than D ü r k h e i m did and 
bracketing the new information i n Durkheim's footnotes. I n many cases, I did 
not change those very short paragraphs, sometimes only a sentence long, that 
D ü r k h e i m used more or less as section headings. Where I d i d make changes 
i n structure, they are not marked, to avoid riddling the text. I n any case, we 
still have Joseph Ward Swain's text, w h i c h makes few concessions to readable 
English and can serve as a rough-and-ready check for readers w h o do not 
wish to tackle the French. I n their high-quality partial retranslation of Formes, 
Pickering and R e d d i n g deliberately keep the original structure.
1 0 9 I have de-
cided differendy. M y o w n aim, besides accuracy, is removal o f structural and 
stylistic impediments to encountering the b o o k as the exciting read that I 
consider i t to be. 
A sample passage w i l l illustrate m y changes. I n the Introduction, D ü r -
k h e i m draws an analogy to make his point about studying the simplest case 
available, i n order to uncover the fundamental sources o f religious life. His 
o w n enterprise is like that o f a doctor seeking to uncover the cause o f a delu-


Translator's Introduction 
liii 
sion. T h e French passage seems reminiscent o f Freud; Swain's English passage 
does not; mine recovers the resemblance to Freud. Here is Swain's passage: 
In order to understand a hallucination perfectly, and give it its most appro-
priate treatment, a physician must know its original point o f departure. 
N o w this event is proportionately easier to find i f he can observe it near its 
beginnings. The longer the disease is allowed to develop, the more it evades 
observation [au contraire, plus on laisse à la maladie le temps de se développer, plus 
il se dérobe à l'observation]; that is because all sorts o f interpretations have i n -
tervened as it advanced, which tend to force the original state into the 
background [qui tendent a refouler dans l'inconscient l'état originel], and across 
which it is sometimes difficult to find the initial one.
1 1 0 
N o w consider the same passage as it appears i n the new translation: 
To understand a delusion properly and to be able to apply the most appro-
priate treatment, the doctor needs to know what its point of departure was. 
That event is more easily detected the nearer to its beginning the delusion 
can be observed. Conversely, the longer the sickness is left to develop, the 
more that original point o f departure slips out of view. This is so because all 
sorts o f interpretations have intervened along the way, and the tendency of 
those interpretations is to repress the original state into the unconscious and 
to replace it with other states through which the original one is sometimes 
not easy to detect. 
It is the point o f departure o f an illness (not the illness itself) that is screened 
from view. That, plus the terms "repress" and "unconscious," instead o f 
"force" and "background," allow the n e w passage to sound reminiscent o f 
Freud. I probably have not uncovered a missing l i n k between D ü r k h e i m and 
Freud; Steven Lukes's exhaustive research turned up "no evidence" 
that 
D ü r k h e i m k n e w o f Freud's w o r k .
1 1 1 O n the other hand, there is good reason 
to think D ü r k h e i m k n e w o f the celebrated w o r k being done i n the 1880s at 
the H ô p i t a l Salpêtrière i n Paris by Jean-Martin Charcot, Freud's predecessor 
in the study o f hysteria, and o f the huge controversy about that w o r k i n the 
mid-1890s.
1 1 2 So for now, w e can be tantalized. Present i n the passage is the 
notion that today we t e r m "screen memories," w h i c h is generally credited to 
Freud, not C h a r c o t .
1 1 3 T h e plot thickens w h e n w e realize that Freud cer-
tainly k n e w o f and cited D ü r k h e i m s w o r k (including Formes) i n his 1912 pa-
per, " T h e R e t u r n o f Totemism i n C h i l d h o o d . "
1 1 4 I n this way, correcting 
Swain's inaccuracies can add nuance to a scholarly question. 


liv 
Translator's Introduction 
M y goal, though, was not merely to correct Swain's w o r k . I tackled the 
French originals
1 1 5 w i t h an eye to the difficulties I have wrestled w i t h and to 
the characteristic problems I have found i n teaching this w o r k to American 
students. For those reasons, I d i d not settle for merely literal renderings. I f a 
literal translation conveyed nothing definite i n English, I sought a clearer al-
ternative. O f course, the search for expressive equivalents has its limits. R e -
garding the phrase solution de continuité, m y colleague A n d r é e D o u c h i n told 
me, "Let's face it. That phrase goes back to 1314."
1 1 6 She meant there are 
things about that phrase, literally "dissolution o f continuity," that cannot be 
naturalized. T r y naturalizing this illustration from the Petit Robert, quoting 
V i c t o r H u g o , "Between present and future, there is solution de 
continuité." 
Hence, although the translator's responsibility is to move Durkheim's text 
linguistically toward the reader, part o f the reader's o w n responsibility is to 
move intellectually toward D ü r k h e i m .
1 1 7 Still, it does not follow that the 
English itself must sound alien. Literal equivalents o f the words and most o f 
the syntax are to be found i n Swain. B u t as I have just shown, literalness is no 
guarantee against all mistakes. 
Moreover, to be literal is not necessarily to be faithful. Durkheim's lan-
guage was precise and scholarly, to be sure, but his text reads well i n French. 
As a rule, his sentences do not force a calisthenics o f decipherment u p o n the 
reader. N o r do they assail the reader's ear w i t h ugly rhythms, rhymes, and as-
sonances or w i t h images that clash. I have tried not to let Formes read less well 
i n English than it does i n French. I have also tried as m u c h as possible to ren-
der a feature o f Durkheim's personal style that can be lost i n translation that is 
not literal enough: the metaphorical content i n his w o r d choices. D ü r k h e i m , 
the workmanlike scientist, deliberately avoided literary nights i n scientific 
w r i t i n g , but he sometimes thought i n poetic ways. His w o r d choices push a 
w h o l e w o r l d o f images into the text, and I have tried to keep that w o r l d i n 
the new English Formes. Durkheim's images give us insight into his mode o f 
thinking and thus into some o f the intuitive leaps that mobilized his w o r k . 
Still, the notes i n the m i n d o f the creative genius are not available to be played 
by his interpreter. Even w h e n the translator's search for equivalents is well i n -
formed and resolute, the results stand at a distance from the original text. 
Every translation is a reconstruction. M a n y words and turns o f phrase 
have no exact equivalents between one language and another. Often the same 
is true even o f words that move bodily. Consider the French words opinion 
and attitude. Durkheim's opinion could have been rendered as "public o p i n -
ion," i f that t e r m had not come to mean discrete bits o f mental material to be 
drawn from individual minds by pollsters and measured as to their frequency 


Translator's Introduction 
lv 
o f occurrence. That meaning o f "public o p i n i o n " carries us to the diametri-
cal opposite o f w h a t D ü r k h e i m meant by représentation collective.
118 I n a simi-
lar vein, it is n o w hard to extract "attitude" from the m i n d — t h e senses o f 
" d o i n g " or "conduct" are no longer o n its surface. To dramatize the French 
term, as well as an older English sense, consider the painted attitudes o f Jesus's 
disciples i n The Last Supper. N o w consider "virtue," w h i c h no longer has 
some o f the meanings that are present i n D ü r k h e i m s vertu. Just as, i n the 
K i n g James Bible, the salt can lose its savor, so a medicine or magical object 
could lose its virtue (or virtues), meaning its material potency, as well as the 
moral meaning evident i n the phrase "a man o f virtue," or the curiously dif-
ferent one i f we shift gender. I n the text, vertu goes w i t h other words, efficace 
and efficacité, whose English equivalents are oldish but whose more m o d e r n -
sounding equivalents seem out o f place. Hence: T h e potency o f the chemical 
called fluoxetine hydrochloride makes Prozac effective, but the virtues i n blood 
sprinkled o n the sacred rock make the Intichiuma rites efficacious. 
I n some instances, Durkheim's meaning and our o w n everyday one inter-
sect but then diverge so far that our o w n familiar w o r d becomes strange to us. 
O n e such w o r d is "moral." I n Formes, moral is often synonymous w i t h "social," 
very nearly the inverse o f what w e usually mean by " m o r a l . "
1 1 9 Its most i m -
portant antonym is not "immoral," as we might think, but "material," "tangi-
ble," and "physical." Consequently, " m o r a l " is real but not material. " G o o d " 
is often not its synonym; together w i t h "social," "spiritual" and "mental" of-
ten are. "Individual" stands w i t h the antonyms o f "moral," because D u r k -
heim's "individual" denotes the body, its drives and appetites, its sensory 
apparatus—in short, our bodily being considered as distinct from our human 
being. T h e "social" is the source from w h i c h comes the humanizing discipline 
o f the "individual" that creates the "person." Hence, the following distinction 
between "individual" and "person": " O u r sensations are i n their essence i n -
dividual. B u t the more emancipated we are from the senses, and the more ca-
pable we are o f t h i n k i n g and acting conceptually, the more we are persons."
1 2 0 
N o t only is " m o r a l " not necessarily "good"; i t is often not even o n the 
same terrain as abstract judgments o f " g o o d " and "bad." For D ü r k h e i m , 
those judgments can be made only i n particular social settings.
1 2 1 W h a t is 
"moral" is "social"; b o t h vary w i t h time and place. Accordingly, the domain 
o f the " m o r a l " is not private, w i t h its origin i n some mysterious somewhere 
in the depths o f the physical individual, as our commonsense usage suggests. 
Clearly, by that point, we are o n ground quite alien to our o w n . O n D u r k -
heim's ground, there can be no full-fledged person standing apart from the 
"moral," as instituted i n some historically given social setting. Thus, whereas 


lvi 
Translator's Introduction 
i n our o w n habitual way o f thinking, that w h i c h is best i n us stands apart 
from the social, i n Durkheim's i t is that, precisely, w h i c h is at war w i t h our 
humanity.
1 2 2 For D u r k h e i m , w h a t stands apart is a being that is no more than 
the body, and all that the body tows along w i t h it: T h e brain is there but not 
what we recognize as thinking; movement is there but not what w e recog-
nize as human doing. T h e mere co-presence o f many such bodies is just that, 
a mere co-presence, as lacking i n mutually recognizable identity as so many 
potatoes i n a sack. W i t h n o t h i n g but the merely physical and material col-
lection o f "individuals," there is neither reason nor identity nor community. 
There is no language and no kinship; there are age differences but no gener-
ations; there are sex differences but no genders. 
Unlike morale, w h i c h can broaden along w i t h its place i n a distinctive sys-
tem o f thought, the t e r m culte narrows i n American English. A l t h o u g h "cult" 
once meant "a system o f religious worship, especially w i t h reference to its rites 
and ceremonies," it n o w has a pejorative connotation that gives an o d d r i n g to 
such sentences as these o f D u r k h e i m : " B u t feasts and rites—in a w o r d , the 
cult—are not the w h o l e o f religion."
1 2 3 Again: " A l t h o u g h i n principle derived 
from the beliefs, the cult nevertheless reacts u p o n them, and the m y t h is often 
modeled on the rite so as to account for it. . . . "
1 2 4 " C u l t " n o w connotes not 
just feasts and rites but excessive and perhaps obsessive ones, attached to be-
liefs assumed to be oudandish.
1 2 5 For that reason, used w i t h o u t warning today, 
it can plant i n the American reader's m i n d a different attitude toward the 
totemic cults than D u r k h e i m had. I decided nevertheless, to retain "cult" i n 
most contexts, for this reason: I f it is dropped i n favor o f terms like "worship" 
and "practice," w h i c h sometimes w i l l do, Durkheim's o w n use o f le culte 
decouples from the cognate t e r m "culture." B u t that w i l l not do at all. 
Durkheim's o w n formidable exploration o f religious beliefs and rites—of 
représentations collectives, and conscience collective, that is, o f shared ways o f thinking 
and acting—was seminal to the vast twentieth-century exploration o f "culture." 
Different problems arise w i t h the use o f "essential," w h i c h is nearly, but 
not entirely, synonymous i n English and French. I n both, it means "funda-
mental" and "necessary"; but i n America today, i f I quote D u r k h e i m as hav-
ing called religion "an essential and permanent aspect o f humanity," he may 
seem to be saying that religion is "indispensable" and, possibly, advocating it. 
Some readers m i g h t expect a case for prayer i n schools to follow or other re-
suscitations o f old-time religion i n the public realm. B u t w h e n D u r k h e i m 
calls religion an "essentiel et permanent" aspect o f humanity, he means no such 
thing. His use o f a similar phrase, "integral and permanent," to describe so-
ciety, brings out w h a t he does mean: Society "arouses i n us a w h o l e w o r l d o f 


Translator's Introduction 
lvii 
ideas and feelings that express it but at the same time are an integral and per-
manent part o f ourselves."
1 2 6 A third phrase, describing conscience collective, 
works similarly: " B e i n g outside and above individual and local contingen-
cies, collective consciousness sees things only i n their permanent and funda-
mental aspect."
1 2 7 Therefore, n o t i n g D ü r k h e i m s 
o w n substitutions o f 
"integral" and "fundamental" for "essential," treating the three synony-
mously, and taking into account subde differences o f shading i n different 
contexts o f use, I have sometimes rendered essentiel as "essential" but far more 
often as "fundamental" or "basic."
1 2 8 These are, unavoidably, choices. That 
virtually every one could have been made otherwise inserts the translator's 
o w n response to the text into what cannot help but appear to be what i t can-
not possibly be: the original text "itself," only put i n t o English. 
Now, 
finally, three smaller matters o f choice need to be noted here; o t h -
ers w i l l appear i n footnotes, as they come up i n the text. First, n o w that we 
have animated cartoons, the w o r d "animate," as a verb, has a certain i n c o n -
gruous humor. B u t i n Formes, "animate" goes w i t h the quite serious ideas o f 
"soul" and "spirit." For one reason or another, though, the alternatives are 
just as hard to naturalize—or they are humorous as well: "quicken" (as i n 
"the quick and the dead"), "enliven," "vivify," "vitalize." Since w e have T y -
lor and "animist" theory, I kept "animate." T h e next matter concerns senti-
ment, w h i c h i n today's American English strongly connotes a feeling that is 
said (as o n a Hallmark card) or at least formulated (sentiment against inter-
vening militarily). I n French, i t often means direct "feeling," or "awareness" 
rather than their formulized versions. I n English, we cannot say, " I have the 
sentiment that it w i l l rain." I dropped Swain's "sentiment" almost every-
where. Finally, se représenter means to "present to the m i n d " — i n other words, 
to "conceive" or "imagine." Translating literally, one can arrive at "represent 
to oneself," and that can mislead. I n m y first reading o f Swain's, " R e l i g i o n is, 
above all, a system o f ideas by w h i c h m e n represent to themselves the society o f 
w h i c h they are members," I pictured t h e m creating emblems. W r o n g . 
B u t left untouched are certain famous set phrases that after eighty-plus 
years I feel cannot be extricated from Durkheim's life i n English w i t h o u t d o -
ing violence to that life—for example, Swain's rendering o f Durkheim's cel-
ebrated definition o f religion and his marvelous phrase "thoroughgoing 
idiocy" for illogique 
foncière, a brilliandy nonliteral rendering that captures not 
only Durkheim's sense but also his attitude toward certain accounts o f a sup-
posed mentalité primitive to w h i c h logic is utterly alien. 
Sometimes the problem o f equivalents lies at a different level from terms 
and phrases or structure. There is no serviceable American equivalent 


Iviii 
Translator's Introduction 
for Durkheim's nineteenth-century French and academic mode o f expres-
sion, even i n most scholarly w r i t i n g . Therefore, paradoxically, the search for 
equivalence led me to one change that may at first seem radical. W h a t , for ex-
ample, could be our idiomatic equivalent to Durkheim's editorial "we"? 
Michael Gane recounts a parody by Maurice Roche that brings out part o f 
the p r o b l e m .
1 2 9 I n i t , a hapless lecturer, sleepwalking annually through D u r k -
heim's classic The Rules of Sociological Method, collides w i t h a wide-awake u n -
dergraduate. T h e student refuses to grant anything, not least Durkheim's 
"we," the very first w o r d i n that text, as it is i n Formes. T h e student brings the 
class to a halt by demanding to k n o w w h o precisely " w e " are. W h a t is more, 
he refuses to cooperate w h e n what he calls an authoritarian voice addresses 
h i m w i t h the " w e " that apparendy means " y o u and I " : It was unearned c o m -
m o n ground. 
I too stumble over the editorial " w e " i n the existing English translations. 
I n Durkheim's day, i t was the simply the modest, objective voice o f academic 
or scientific w r i t i n g (as it is still i n the preferred rhetoric o f some disciplines).
1 3 0 
As such, that modest, objective " w e " formally gestured toward a scientific col-
lectivity standing behind every published work, despite solo authorship.
1 3 1 
Nonetheless, it is merely a rhetorical device.
1 3 2 So to render the text i n an E n -
glish rhetoric that does not draw the w r o n g sort o f attention to itself, we have 
substituted " I " for "we," except w h e n " w e " seems i n context to mean "you 
and I , " including the reader. W e have, however, retained the first-person plural 
i n the many statements D ü r k h e i m makes about the behavior o f human beings 
generally, including b o t h himself and the reader, or in reference to himself as a 
member o f a group that excludes the reader. We have shifted to the editorial 
" w e " to illustrate our point about h o w the text sounds w i t h o u t our effort, i n 
retranslating, to reconstruct the plain-sounding neutrality o f the original. 
We have not changed the text i n one respect that may disconcert some 
readers: homme is translated as " m a n " or "mankind." " H u m a n being" renders 
être humain; and "person," personne. This translation does not try to reconstruct 
Durkheim's gender vocabulary or his oudook. Durkheim's homme, "man," i n -
cludes "woman," at least some o f the time; but nowadays we insist o n saying 
"human being" or "person" all o f the time. I n Formes, however, "person" (as 
used i n everyday speech) w i l l not work. W h y not? We quote D ü r k h e i m : "The 
t w o terms [person and individual] are by no means synonymous. I n a sense, 
they oppose more than they i m p l y one another."
1 3 3 Besides, while D ü r k h e i m 
is a theorist o f social conduct, considered globally and embracing all human 
beings, it w o u l d be an abuse to mark this by inserting a modern terminology 
that achieves this embrace by means o f linguistic affirmative action—in our 


Translator's Introduction 
lix 
o w n time, and for us (a pronoun w h i c h from n o w o n does not designate an 
editorial "we," but is meant to include me and the reader). Our o w n usage i m -
plies the (ideally) inclusive gender conventions that belong to our o w n day; 
D ü r k h e i m s implies the quite different gender conventions o f his o w n . 
These conventions are implicit i n all his w r i t i n g , and sometimes they are 
explicit. Like many o f his contemporaries, he believed woman's brain and 
mental capacity to be smaller than man's. M u c h to take issue w i t h followed 
from that belief. A l t h o u g h the temptation arises to improve u p o n the elegant 
old furniture that is Formes, I have resisted it. To give i n w o u l d amount to 
D ü r k h e i m s posthumous "reconstruction" by me, i n a different and unac-
ceptable sense. I cannot be i n the business o f rehabilitating D ü r k h e i m s u n -
enlightened attitudes about w o m e n . I f sufficient to sink h i m forever, they 
should be allowed to. Reconstruction o n this account is doubly unaccept-
able, because it w o u l d profoundly alter Durkheim's meaning as that meaning 
can be objectively k n o w n from the passage just cited, and at the same time 
introduce a deep illogic into the b o o k as a whole. T h e argument is c o n -
structed using evidence from rituals that D ü r k h e i m imagines as having had 
almost exclusively male participation. W h e n D ü r k h e i m says "he," referring 
to an Australian or to a deity, that is most often w h a t he literally means.
1 3 4 
Moreover, conducting repairs w o u l d displace certain possible critiques. 
For example, N a n c y Jay, a feminist sociologist o f religion, argued that inso-
far as exclusively male rituals provide the empirical foundation for D u r k -
heim's social account o f reason, i t commits h i m to one o f t w o anomalous 
conclusions: W o m e n cannot reason, w h i c h is false, or women's ability to rea-
son w o u l d require a separate theory.
1 3 5 Additionally, reconstructing D u r k -
heim's gender o u t l o o k w o u l d 
conceal the sense i n w h i c h 
his grand 
oppositions between sacred and profane, social and individual, m i n d and 
body, person and individual, moral and material, are latently an opposition 
between male and female.
1 3 6 Surely it must be the goal o f translation to leave 
intact the internal tensions o f the original t e x t — i n this case, the limits o f the 
boldly universalistic argument, stunning for its time, that the b o o k attempts. 
Reconstruction o f elegant o l d furniture must not mean sanding away char-
acteristic features o f its original design. 
Swain's o w n reconstruction o f Durkheim's French title as " T h e Elemen-
tary Forms o f the Religious Life" n o w carries the patina o f respectable age. 
This tide has become so m u c h part o f the book's life i n English that, except 
i n the deletion o f one "the," I have not changed it. B u t I w o u l d have pre-
ferred the t e r m "elemental," even though élémentaire 
expresses both. T h e 
question is not right or w r o n g translation but the scope each alternative 


lx 
Translator's Introduction 
leaves for right or w r o n g understanding. O n the one hand, "elementary" 
w i l l do i n some respects; think o f the concept "elementary particles," defined 
as being the smallest and most fundamental particles k n o w n . O n the other 
hand, i n day-to-day usage, "elementary" has a diminutive and vaguely dis-
missive connotation and sets up the same potential problem for some readers 
as "simple." Consider Sherlock Holmes's "Elementary, m y dear Watson," or 
consider the charge, " Y o u just don't seem to get the most elementary points," 
w h i c h means the easiest or simplest—addressed by a scold to a d i m w i t . 
D u r k h e i m means "simplest" as well, but (in addition to the other considera-
tions already referred to) he means it as particle physicists mean i t , scientists 
w h o assuredly mean things that challenge the intellect. H e seeks to explore 
building blocks o f h u m a n social life, as physicists explore building blocks o f 
matter. "Elementary" is suitable only i f used i n a restricted sense that is not 
altogether Sir A r t h u r Conan Doyle's and not at all the scold's. I n a sense, 
D u r k h e i m was attempting i n his study what the Curies were attempting i n 
their labs. 
D u r k h e i m s "simplest" forms are indispensably part o f the most c o m -
plex. Alternatively, they can be thought o f as atoms and compared to the 
chemical substances that make up the periodic chart, the elements. T h e 
formes that he discovers i n this particular study are the elements to be found 
i n the makeup o f the religions he thought o f as more complexes or as "higher" 
i n an evolutionary sense. D u r k h e i m is interested i n "a fundamental and per-
manent" aspect o f humanity and i n its "ever-present source," w h i c h can be 
discerned i f studied i n what he takes to be its elemental forms. Whatever those 
forms are (and I n o w paraphrase a physicist),
1 3 7 they have an underlying iden-
tity that persists despite unceasing change and limitless diversity. Moreover, as 
i n the physicist's search for elementary particles, the question o f chronologi-
cal origins is related and yet separable. So i f we understand the phrase formes 
élémentaires i n that way, w e need not get bogged d o w n , as some have, i n the 
n o t i o n that D u r k h e i m made the error o f t h i n k i n g totemism brought h i m to 
origins i n a chronological sense. Instead, we can take h i m at his w o r d . 
Whether he was right or w r o n g about thinking this or about t h i n k i n g 
that the study o f Australians could possibly yield up religion i n elemental f o r m 
are valid but separate questions. W h a t is important is to grasp the scientific 
exploration that D u r k h e i m attempted. T h e burden o f the b o o k as a w h o l e is 
that an aspect o f humanity's "fundamental and permanent" nature is to be 
found i n humanity's social nature. A n d that human, social nature is nothing 
other than its vie religieuse. To show us what is included i n this vie religieuse re-
quires the full length o f a long book. W e can already say that this n o t i o n goes 
far beyond what people do specifically as churchmen or - w o m e n . 


Translator's Introduction 
lxi 
Accordingly, the new title rejects Swain's rendering "the religious life." I f 
taken as an unfortunate artifact o f literal translation, the phrase "the religious 
life" furnishes D u r k h e i m w i t h a voice i n a heavily accented and game but 
clumsy use o f English. It is as i f he offered a Gallic shrug to an intellectually 
swamped A m e r i c a n undergraduate and said to h i m , "As we tell i n France, 
'c'est la vie'—that's the life'!" Well, Non. T h e definite article definitely does 
not belong there. B u t what about the English phrase "religious life," w h i c h 
suggests a life apart? F r o m the argument o f the preceding paragraph, i t is o b -
vious that the b o o k is not about monasteries or religious virtuosi, or about 
beliefs and practices sealed off w i t h i n a separate sphere o f human 
life 
uniquely their o w n . I n our o w n day, "religious life" connotes an exclusively 
inward and private sphere—but the seventeenth-century w o r l d that was hos-
tile to Pilgrims and Puritans d i d not, and the w o r l d o f Formes does not. 
T h i n k back to the way D u r k h e i m answered those w h o believe the function 
o f religion is to offer a theory o f the w o r l d : "Its true function is to make us 
act and to help us live." 
Finally, I t h i n k D u r k h e i m does mean "the elemental forms." H e offers 
his study based o n Australian ethnographies as a "single, well-conducted ex-
periment." It is very clear, from the first page, that although based u p o n o b -
servations i n A b o r i g i n a l Australian societies, he intends his findings to reveal 
the fundamental building blocks o f all religion, its ever-present source and 
natural resource i n the mentality, and i n the reality, o f humankind. Whatever 
is i n theirs is i n his and i n ours. 
Karen E. Fields 
Rochester, N e w York 
October 1994 
NOTES 
1. 
Emile Durkheim, "Contribution to discussion 'Religious Sentiment at the 
Present Time,' " reproduced in W. S. F. Pickering, Durkheim on Religion:A Se-
lection of Readings with Bibliographies, London, Roudedge, 1975, p. 184, which 
includes new translations by Pickering and Jacqueline Redding. 
2. 
Introduction, p. 2. 
3. 
A. A. Goldenweiser, "Emile Durkheim—Les Formes élémentaires de la vie re-
ligieuse:Le Système totémique en Australie, 1912," originally published in American 
Anthropologist 17, 1915, reproduced in Peter Hamilton, ed., Emile Durkheim: 
Critical Assessments, London and New York, Routledge, 1990, 3:240. 
4. 
Durkheim published three other major books during his lifetime: The Divi-
sion of Labor in Society (1893), The Rules of Sociological Method (1895), and Sui-


bcii 
Translator's Introduction 
cide (1897). For a comprehensive bibliography of his work, see W. S. F. Pick-
ering, Durkheim's Sociology of Religion: Themes and Theories, London, Routledge 
& Kegan Paul, 1984, pp. 535-543. 
5. 
Introduction, pp. 2-3. 
6. 
I refer to Paul Tillich's (1955) essay "Religion" in Mark Van Dören, ed., Man's 
Right to Knowledge and the Free UseThereof, New York, Columbia, 1955, and to 
Rudolf Otto s (1917) book Das Heilige, translated in 1923 as The Idea of the 
Holy: An Inquiry into the Non-rational Factor in the Idea of the Divine and Its Rela-
tion to the Rational, John W. Harvey, trans., London, Oxford, 1923. 
7. 
P. 426. 
8. 
P. 9. 
9. 
Goldenweiser, "Emile Dürkheim," p. 218. My italics. 
10. 
P. 349 and n. 55. 
11. 
P. 437. One of the many delights of Formes is to encounter the nineteenth-
century philologists, whose explorations of how language shapes reality (in 
the Vedas, twenty Sanskrit words for "sky") remain important even today. See 
p. 75. 
12. 
P. 227. 
13. 
Here I am talking about rhetorical features of the text. On its characteristic 
logical features, Steven Lukes has written a comprehensive analysis: Emile Dürk-
heim: His Life and Work, A Historical and Critical Study, London, Penguin, 1973. 
14. 
Dürkheim used the word paradoxale, which literally means "against doctrine," 
but the everyday meaning of its English counterpart waters down into mere 
strangeness. 
15. 
Gaston Richard, originally published in Revue d'histoire et de philosophie re¬
ligieuse (1923), reproduced in Pickering, Dürkheim on Religion. Pickering and 
Redding explain that they substituted "English" for Pochard's own term 
"Anglican." I imagine he said what he meant. 
16. 
Not being grounded in the real, magic did not survive, except as entertain-
ment. Here, briefly, is the threefold analytical distinction that Dürkheim 
makes: (1) religion is social, built on communities, whereas magical practices 
are individual, linking a practitioner and a client; (2) religion builds on altru-
ism, and magic on individual utility; and (3) given the previous two points, 
religion works in the real, whereas magic does not, because religion works 
morally rather than materially, that is, on human minds operating collectively 
rather than on things. See pp. 41—42, pp. 360, 363. My own example: It has 
turned out that gold cannot be made from baser metals, but paper money can 
be made to be as good as gold. 
17. 
Dominick LaCapra, Emile Dürkheim: Sociologist and Philosopher, Chicago, Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1972. 
18. 
Lukes, Emile Dürkheim, p. 4. 
19. 
Talcott Parsons, The Structure of Social Action, New York, Free Press, 1968 
[1937], 1:421-429. 


Translator's Introduction 
lxiii 
20. 
Raymond Aron, Main Currents of Sociological Thought, Middlesex, England, 
Penguin, 1967, 2:66-68. 
21. 
I say this in full awareness of Mordecai Kaplans embrace of Formes as an in-
tellectual foundation for Reconstructionist Judaism and even though Kaplan's 
student, 
the well-known popularizer Harold Kushner, uses somewhat 
Durkheimian formulations. See To Life! A Celebration of Jewish Being and 
Thinking, Boston, Little, Brown, 1993, esp. chap. 3. 
22. 
Parsons, Structure of Social Action, p. 421. 
23. 
But see a splendid article by Patricia Cormack, " The Rules of Sociological Method: 
The Paradox of Dürkheims Manifesto," Theory and Society, forthcoming. 
24. 
Judith Ryan provides an illuminating account of the links joining physics, psy-
chology, philosophy, painting, and literature in The Vanishing Subject: Early Psy-
chology and Literary Modernism, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1991. 
25. 
According to Frank Pearce, The Radical Dürkheim, London, Unwin, 1989, p. 
3, Foucault did not usually acknowledge his debt to Dürkheim. However, ac-
cording to Stuart Hall, he did indeed. Discussion following a paper, "Con-
structing the Black Subject." Presented at the conference Race Matters: U.S. 
Terrain, Princeton University, April 29, 1994. 
26. 
See Terry F. Godlove, Religion, Interpretation, and Diversity of Belief: The Frame-
work Model 
from Kant to Dürkheim to Davidson, Cambridge, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1989. 
27. 
In this context, "empirical science" will do, but I retain the French phrase, so 
that the dense tangle of meanings can be unraveled by the reader according to 
context. The following statement by Auguste Comte can serve as a guide: 
"Considered first in its oldest and commonest sense, the word 'positive' des-
ignates the real as opposed to the chimerical. In this respect, it well suits the new 
philosophical spirit, the mark of which is its constant dedication to research 
that is accessible to our intelligence, to the permanent exclusion of the impen-
etrable mysteries with which it was occupied in its infancy." See André L a -
lande, Vocabulaire technique et critique de la philosophie, Paris, F. Alcan, 1926, p. 597. 
28. 
On this point, see the papers collected in Said A. Arjomand, ed., The Political 
Dimensions of Religion, Albany, State University of New York Press, 1993. 
29. 
P. 419. 
30. 
Dürkheim titled his chapter on soul La Notion d'âme—"the idea of soul"— 
but he could have said La Notion de l'âme—"the idea of the soul." 
31. 
P. 262. 
32. 
An 1894 publication, a classic almost instantly, launched modern research on 
the early Greek idea of the soul: E . Rhode, Seelencult und Unsterblichkeitsglaube 
der Griechen, 2 vols., Freiburg, Leipzig, and Tübingen, which appeared in 
English as Psyche: The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks, 
W. B. Hillis, trans., London, 1925, cited by Jan Bremmer, The Early Greek 
Concept of the Soul, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 1983, p. 6. 
33. 
Empedocles was one of the early Greek philosophers who thought (like the 


lxiv 
Translator's Introduction 
Australians) that the soul resides in the blood. And consider this: In Homer, 
the soul leaves the body via wounds. See Bremmer, Early Greek Concept, pp. 
3, 15, which also brings out the multifariousness of that concept. For helpful 
conversation and references, I am indebted to my colleagues Lewis W. Beck, 
Deborah Modrak, and George Dennis O'Brien. 
34. 
P. 49. 
35. 
P. 54. 
36. 
Pp. 65, 66, 67. 
37. 
P. 271. 
38. 
This argument also lays the foundation for an argument (made in Bk. Ill, 
chap. 3, esp. p. 368) against the claim that the concept "cause" can be derived 
from the individual experience of willing. 
39. 
P. 368. 
40. 
To get a sense of what is involved, work through the intricate diagram in 
Craig Barclay, "Autobiographical Remembering: Creating Personal Culture," 
in M. A. Conway, D. C . Rubin, and W. Wagenaar, eds., Theoretical Perspectives 
on Autobiographical Memory, Netherlands, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1992, 
esp. p. 2. 
41. 
Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish:The Birth of the Prison, Alan Sheridan, 
trans., New York, Vintage, 1979, pp. 23ff. 
42. 
For conversation and references on this and many of the points that follow, I 
am indebted to my colleague Ayala Gabriel. 
43. 
P. 265. 
44. 
Adin Steinsaltz, The Thirteen Petalled Rose: A Discourse on the Essence of 
Jewish 
Existence and Belief, Yehuda Hanegbi, trans., New York, Basic Books, 1980, 
pp. 51-52. 
45. 
Nor does the fact that a powerful abstract notion is to be found in religious 
tradition by any means make its use suggest residual believerhood. 
46. 
P. 8. 
47. 
P. 419. 
48. 
P. 177. This chapter especially, including its footnotes, has many dry rejoinders. 
49. 
Pickering, Durkheim's Sociology of Religion, p. xxiv; Lewis A. Coser, Masters of 
Sociological Thought: Ideas in Historical and Social Context, New York, Harcourt, 
1971, pp. 162-163. 
50. 
Quoted from Gouldner's The Coming Crisis of Western Sociology in a valuable 
discussion of Durkheim by Peter Ekeh: Social Exchange Theory:The Two Tradi-
tions, Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1974, p. 12. 
51. 
Aron, Main Currents, pp. 13—14. 
52. 
Stjepan G. Mestrovic formulated the question properly in his Emile Durkheim 
and the Reformation of Sociology, Totowa, NJ, Rowman & Littlefield, 1987, p. 
19. There is also a speculative, Freudianized article by J. C. Filloux, "Il ne faut 
pas oublier que je suis fils de rabbin," Revue française de sociologie 17, no. 2, 
1976, pp. 259-266. 


Translator's Introduction 
Ixv 
53. 
For fascinating suggestions about the relationships between Comte s historical 
epistemology of science and modern writers, see Johan Heilbron, "Auguste 
Comte and Modern Epistemology," Sociological Theory 8, no. 2, Fall 1990, pp. 
152—162. Full-scale analysis of Dürkheims work by professional philosophers 
has been relatively rare. But see, in addition to Godlove, Religion, Interpretation, 
and Diversity, Warren Schmaus, Durkheim's Philosophy of Science and the Sociology 
of Knowledge: Creating an Intellectual Niche, Chicago, University of Chicago 
Press, 1994. 
54. 
Robert Bellah has disposed of the myths that Dürkheim was antipsychological 
and that he thought a sociology wholly independent of psychology was possi-
ble. Robert N. Bellah, Emile Dürkheim on Morality and Society, Chicago, Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1973, pp. xx—xxi. And see Ryan, Vanishing Subject, for 
an excellent introduction to early psychology and its entrance into the con-
sciousness of educated turn-of-the-century West European and American au-
diences. Ryan, however, excludes psychoanalysis. See also John Kerr, A Most 
Dangerous Method: The Story of 
Jung, Freud, and Sabina Spielrein, New York, Vin-
tage Books, 1993, pp. 27—29. Kerr's Introduction provides a sense of the milieu 
in which Dürkheim discussed phenomena such as transmigration of souls and 
metempsychosis. For a time, investigations into spiritualism were not sharply 
distinguished from what would later be designated specifically as scientific 
work. 
55. 
With his characteristic acuteness but without lasting effect on subsequent 
commentary, Talcott Parsons pointed out that the absence of a theory of so-
cial change does not render a theory ahistorical. Structure of Social Action, 1:450 
56. 
But see Parsons's brilliant 1937 synthesis, which revealed how ambiguous the 
relationship of Formes is to functionalism (Structure of Social Action, esp. 
1:441—450), and Pickering, Durkheim's Sociology of Religion, pp. 88—89, 
300—317—both of which read Formes rather differently than I have done here. 
57. 
P. 1. 
58. 
Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread 
of Nationalism, London, Verson, 1983. 
59. 
For a crisply made case of why not, see Lukes, Emile Dürkheim, pp. 477-479. 
For early ethnographers' criticisms of the work that emerged almost immedi-
ately, see A. A. Goldenweiser, "Review of Les Formes élémentaires de la vie re-
ligieux: Le Système totémique en Australie" (originally published in 1915), in 
Peter Hamilton, ed., Emile Dürkheim: Critical Assessments, London and New 
York, Routledge, 1990, 3:238-252; and another review (published in 1913), 
reproduced in Pickering, Dürkheim on Religion, pp. 205—208. 
60. 
Lukes, Emile Dürkheim. 
61. 
Robert Nisbet, The Sociology of Emile Dürkheim, New York, Oxford, 1974. 
62. 
Pickering, Durkheim's Sociology of Religion. 
63. 
Although many readers have arrived at this under their own steam, scholarly 
sources include Mary Douglas's view on "the Durkheimian premise that soci-


lxvi 
Translator's Introduction 
ety and God can be equated." Mary Douglas, Natural Symbols: Explorations in 
Cosmology, London, Barrie andRockliff, 1970, quoted by Pickering, Durkheim's 
Sociology of Religion (whose discussion, pp. 227—241, provides a learned analysis 
and many useful references). See also Aran's very strong statement in Main Cur-
rents: "It seems to me absolutely inconceivable to define the essence of religion 
in terms of the worship which the individual pledges to the group, for in my 
eyes the essence of impiety is precisely the worship of the social order. To sug-
gest that the object of the religious feelings is society transfigured is not to save 
but to degrade that human reality which sociology seeks to understand" (p. 68). 
64. 
P. 44. Le Petit Robert quotes this definition to illustrate the term système in the 
sense of "a structured set of abstract things." 
65. 
He is thought to have been influenced in this direction by his reading of 
Robertson Smith's Lectures on the Religion of the Semites (Pickering, Durkheim's 
Sociology of Religion, p. 63). But readers who hear echoes of historical materi-
alism in this movement from deed to idea are referred to, pp. 385ff. There 
Durkheim talks about the elaboration of rites in a way that brings to mind the 
later Marxist use of "relative autonomy," to discuss the elaboration of beliefs. 
66. 
A main argument of Bk. I, Chap. 4, esp. p. 93. It sometimes goes unnoticed 
that Durkheim points out precisely those traits of the clan that make its co-
herence improbable: no stable authority, not based on well-defined territory 
or common residence, not necessarily consanguineous, and virtually no util-
itarian functions. Cf., p. 234. 
67. 
This formulation is drawn from Nancy Jay, ThroughoutYour Generations Forever: 
Sacrifice, Religion, and Paternity, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1992, 
pp. 17-19. 
68. 
P. 208. My italics. The French reads as follows: [Le totem] exprime et symbolise 
deux sortes de choses différentes. D'une part, il est la 
forme extérieure et sensible de ce que 
nous avons appelé le principe ou le dieu totémique. Mais d'un autre côté, il est aussi le 
symbole de cette société déterminée qu 'on appelé le clan. C'en est le drapeau; c'est le signe 
par lequel chaque clan se distingue des autres, la marque visible de sa personnalité, mar-
que que porte tout ce qui 
fait partie du clan à un titre quelconque, hommes, bêtes et choses. 
Si donc il est, à la fois, le symbole du dieu et de la société, n'est-ce pas que le dieu et la 
société ne font qu'un? Comment l'emblème du groupe aurait-il pu devenir la figure de 
cette quasi divinité, si le groupe et la divinité étaient deux réalités distinctes? Le dieu dit 
clan, le principe totémique, ne peut donc être autre chose que le clan lui-même, mais hy-
postasié et représenté aux imaginations sous les espèces sensibles du végétal ou de l'ani-
mal qui sert de totem. 
69. 
The controverted "reduction" of God to society can be taken in at least two 
senses: simplifying something complex to the point of distorting it, or restat-
ing something in different but equivalent terms (e.g., 2/6 = 1/3). The fact that 
both in this context imply diminishment reveals the theological strata of the 
controversy. (A third sense, the theory of explanation, is not at issue.) If God is 


Translator's Introduction 
lxvii 
in the definition of religion, keeping theological and nontheological things 
aloft is like juggling rubber balls and wooden Indian clubs at the same time. 
70. 
The reader who is prepared to jump to conclusions about what the Dürkheim 
whom we saw addressing "free believers" was prepared to say about God 
should turn now to p. 15, and reflect on the nicety of this statement about 
man's social being, which "represents within us the highest reality in the in-
tellectual and moral realm that is knowable through observation: I mean society." 
My italics. 
71. 
In these terms, I miss the point of laboring to protect God's separateness, as in 
the following passage of Pickerings (Dürkheims Sociology of Religion, p. 235): 
"The danger is always to jump the parallel [society is to its members as God 
is to the faithful] and make the two concepts or realities identical, or at least 
to suggest that one is the other. Critics claim that Dürkheim makes such a 
step, but they disregard all caution. . . . Dürkheim is much more careful, and 
nowhere does he take the final and irrevocable step." 
72. 
For a carefully reasoned statement of this view, see Melford E . Spiro, "Reli-
gion: Problems of Definition and Explanation," in Michael Banton, ed., An-
thropological Approaches to the Study of Religion, London, Tavistock, 1966. 
73. 
P. 172. 
74. 
See, for example, p. 77, on naturism: "It is not by praying to them, celebrat-
ing them in feasts and sacrifices, and imposing fasts and privations on himself 
that he could have prevented them from harming him or obliged them to 
serve his purposes. Such procedures could have succeeded only on very rare 
occasions—miraculously, so to speak. If the point of religion was to give us a 
representation of the world that would guide us in our dealings with it, then 
religion was in no position to fulfill its function, and all peoples would not 
have been slow to notice that fact: Failures, infinitely more common than 
successes, would have notified them very quickly that they were on the 
wrong path; and religion, constantly shaken by these constant disappoint-
ments, would have been unable to last." 
75. 
P. 239. 
76. 
Dürkheim not only denies that reconciliation is possible but also dismisses 
that argument along those lines as beside the point. Pp. 419—43Iff. See L a -
Capra, Emile Dürkheim, p. 289. 
77. 
See Jay, Throughout Your Generations, pp. 30—40, where we encounter an in-
structive example of beliefs that could not exist if, to exist, they had to be 
merely believable—for example, male priests disguised as pregnant women and 
conducting blood sacrifices. Jay argues that unilineal descent through fathers is 
publicly done through blood sacrificial rites, in rites that are often explicitly 
formulated as transcending birth from mothers. It is precisely through partici-
pation in those rites that (a counterfactual) one-sided descent is collectively es-
tablished as real. 


lxviii 
Translator's Introduction 
78. 
To any reader who imagines doubt as the exclusive intellectual property of re-
cent times or of cultures near our own, I recommend a spectacular article by 
Claude Lévi-Strauss, Dürkheims direct intellectual descendant: "The Sor-
cerer and His Magic," in Structural Anthropology, Garden City, NY, Doubleday, 
1967 [1963]. 
79. 
P. 214. Dürkheim does not make the assumption that the rational capacity of 
man differs from race to race or from time to time. For him, humanity is one. 
For a statement of the opposite assumption, see Lucien Lévy-Bruhl, Les Fonc-
tions mentales dans les sociétés inférieures, Paris, Alcan, 1910, which Dürkheim 
disputes throughout Formes. 
80. 
This remark by Comte appears in the Petit Robert, to illustrate one sense of the 
word simple. 
81. 
Cormack, "Rules of Sociological Method," has pointed out that this strategy 
is akin to that used by the ancient Greek rhetoricians, especially the sophists. 
82. 
He repeats this point in criticizing concepts like "primitive" and "savage," and 
elsewhere. See his side criticism of Frazer, for example, p. 183, and the dis-
tinction between origins and elements that he takes for granted throughout, 
for example, p. 55. 
83. 
See Dürkheims rationale for simplifying in order to reduce differences and 
variations to a minimum (pp. 5-7). Note also that he opens the first chapter 
of Book One with the observation that even the simplest religions known are 
of very great complexity (p. 45). 
84. 
One sometimes hears the simplistic consideration that Dürkheim might have 
found exotic cases expedient at a time in France when religion was a hot but-
ton issue, and the anti-Semitism exposed in the Dreyfus Affair might have 
made it still hotter for Dürkheim. But then, what would we make of the fact 
that an international legion of scholars accorded totemism general theoretical 
interest? See Claude Lévi-Strauss, Totemism, Rodney Needham, trans., Bos-
ton, Beacon Press, 1963. 
85. 
Peter Berger drew out some of these implications of Formes by devising the 
concept of "plausibility structures," communities whose everyday life takes 
for granted religious definitions of reality. See The Sacred Canopy, Garden City, 
NY, Doubleday, 1967, pp. 16, 46, 156. 
86. 
P. 206. 
87. 
Psychologist Craig Barclay tells me that the scheme Dürkheim lays out is more 
or less the classical paradigm of conditioned response. Little has been written 
about how closely Dürkheim followed developments in psychology. Lukes's 
footnotes indicate that Dürkheim read Wilhelm Wundt through the 1880s and 
1890s, and it is clear in Formes that he closely read the work of William James, 
whose Principles of Psychology appeared in French translation in 1910. Besides, 
James (according to Ryan, Vanishing Subject, pp. 12, 17) disseminated and re-
ceived ideas, on and from both sides of the Atlantic, even as he developed his 


Translator's Introduction 
lxix 
own, and his earliest publications in France appeared in a journal edited by 
Dürkheims teacher, Charles Renouvier. 
88. 
See Trudier Harris, Exorcising Blackness: Historical and Literary Lynching and 
Burning Rituals, Bloomington, Indiana University Press, 1984, on the passage 
of such effervescences into American literary art; Albert Speer, Inside the Tliird 
Reich: Memoirs, New York, Macmillan, 1970, the self-aware artist of buildings 
and Nazi effervescences; and Marcel Mauss, Dürkheims younger collaborator 
who lived to see the Nazis' effervescences and then saw how "many large mod-
ern societies" could be "hypnotized like Australians are by their dances, and 
set in motion like a children's roundabout." Quoted in Lukes, Entile Dürk-
heim, p. 338n. 
89. 
P. 213. 
90. 
Ibid. 
91. 
P. 211. 
92. 
P. 223. 
93. 
Cf. the classically instructive but (I believe) mistaken view of Parsons, Struc-
ture of Social Action, pp. 442ff. Parsons objected to Dürkheims pensée and con-
science collectives as reified "group mind" concepts. But actually, I think, not 
only the mind but also the senses are not fully accounted for if conceived of 
in their individual aspects alone. Consider what the neurologist Oliver Sacks 
tells us about "Virgil," blind from early childhood, who through surgery 
forty-five years later regained the physical capacity to see. But, not having 
"spent a lifetime learning to see," he did not regain the seen world of his con-
temporaries—a condition for which neurologists have the interesting term 
"agnostic." See Oliver Sacks, An Anthropologist on Mars: Seven Paradoxical Tales, 
New York, Knopf, 1995, pp. 108-151, esp. pp. 114-115. 
94. 
Approvingly quoted by Lukes, Emile Dürkheim, p. 25. 
95. 
See ibid., pp. 25-26. 
96. 
P. 122. 
97. 
Alan Unterman, Dictionary of 
Jewish Lore and Legend, London, Thames and 
Hudson, 1991, p. 25. 
98. 
P. 226. Here is a glaring mistake by Joseph Ward Swain, who for l'étendu and 
l'inétendu wrote, respectively, "heard" and "not heard" (as if Dürkheim had 
written l'entendu and Vinentendu), thereby making the connection 
to 
Descartes disappear and also the logic that joins this chapter with the one im-
mediately following, on the idea of soul. The 1975 translation by Pickering 
and Redding (Dürkheim on Religion, p. 134) renders étendu and inétendu as if 
the difference was a matter of size: "The impressions made on us by the phys-
ical world cannot, by definition, embody anything which transcends this 
world. The tangible can only be made into the tangible; the vast cannot be 
made into the minute." My italics. 
99. 
Lukes, Emile Dürkheim, p. 26. 


lxx 
Translator's Introduction 
100. 
I have no access to the evolving representations, but even at this distance, stand-
ing only within the argument of Formes, I venture to predict that, by now, the 
bones were not preserved by human beings but preserved themselves, were 
not dusted off by human hands but resurrected themselves, that in so doing 
they towed upward with them on the rope of miracle the eternal Lithuanian 
nation-state, and that, for some among Lithuanians sons and daughters, they 
have acquired exceptional virtues. 
101. 
After defining sacre, Durkheim sometimes uses the term saint, without saying 
how the two are related. I speculate that the shifting has to do, at least in part, 
with the problem sacred objects posed for Durkheim's written representation. 
If "holy" is used to render saint, there is a risk of sliding over into religious ac-
tors' point of view, where religious objects are intrinsically holy. But at the 
same time, given in French was a fixed phrase incorporating the term saint: 
L'arche sainte specifically denotes the Holy Ark but is also equivalent to "sacred 
cow." The term saint is more frequent in Book III than elsewhere, four of 
whose five chapters are about ritual conduct regarding things that have already 
been sanctified (but are, from the actors' standpoint, intrinsically holy). As the 
context shifts, the same object comes into view as different at different mo-
ments, one during the process of sanctification, the other after the process of 
sanctification is complete. To be represented was not only changing time, and 
not only changing viewpoints, but also the changing fundamental nature of 
the object itself. I speculate that, for Durkheim, the two terms were some-
times synonymous and sometimes not. 
102. 
A serviceable concept of "believing" need imply no more than this. In three 
studies about colonial settings, I have shown how British rulers came to ac-
cept witchcraft and prophetic dreaming as real and how supernatural utter-
ance by millenarian prophets forced real-world colonial police into action. 
See "Political Contingencies of Witchcraft in Colonial Central Africa: Cul-
ture and the State in Marxist Theory," Canadian Journal of 
African Studies 16, 
no. 3, December 1982; Revival and Rebellion in Colonial Central Africa, Prince-
ton, Princeton University Press, 1985; "I Had a Dream: Dreams and Visions 
upon the Political Landscape of Waking Life," Etnofoor 4, no. 2, 1991. 
103. 
See the articles Freud published in 1913 as Totem and Taboo. Do not overlook 
his footnote references to Durkheim's work, including Formes. 
104. 
In one place, Durkheim uses the term "fiction" but spins it: There is a reality 
that gains religious expression only through imaginative transfiguration (p. 385). 
105. 
P. 223. 
106. 
See Peter Kolchin, Unfree Labor: American Slavery and Russian Serfdom, Cam-
bridge, Harvard University Press, 1987, pp. 170-191, quoted in Barbara 
Jeanne Fields, "Slavery, Race, and Ideology in the United States of America," 
New Left Review, no. 181, May-June 1990, pp. 95-118, an exploration of rea-
son, identity, and community deployed within the socially constructed frame-
work of quasi-biological race. 


Translator's Introduction 
lxxi 
107. 
P. 239. 
108. 
Quoted by Czeslaw Milosz, The Witness of Poetry, Cambridge, Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1983, p. 42. 
109. 
Pickering, Dürkheim on Religion, pp. ix, 102—166. 
110. 
P. 19 in Swain translation; pp. 6
—
7 in present one. 
111. 
Lukes, Emile Dürkheim, p. 433n. 
112. 
See Kerr, A Most Dangerous Method, pp. 27-29. 
113. 
O n this point I am indebted to my colleague William J. McGrath, author 
of Freud's Discovery of Psychoanalysis: The Politics of Hysteria, Ithaca, NY, 
Cornell University Press, 1986. Personal communication, February 20, 
1994. McGrath confirms the absence of correspondence between the two 
men. 
114. 
In Totem and Taboo: Some Points of Agreement Between the Mental Lives of Sav-
ages and Neurotics, New York, Norton, 1952, pp. 100—161. In addition, Mes-
trovic, Emile Dürkheim, p. 109, has pointed out a striking kinship of approach 
to magic as early as the 1907 paper, "Obsessive Acts and Religious Practices," 
in which Freud describes the obsessional neurosis as a "privatized religious 
system." 
115. 
My heart nearly stopped when, two years into the project and working from 
the first edition, I found something in the Bibliothèque nationale called a sec-
ond, "revised" edition of Formes, published in 1921. Why or under what in-
spiration (Dürkheim having been dead since 1917) proved impossible to 
discover. Comparison showed that this "revision" contains many typograph-
ical errors not present in the first. The current Presses Universitaires de 
France paperback is based on that second edition. 
116. 
Looking for something abstract, I queried various colleagues as to the possi-
bility of its having a technical meaning in some body of philosophical work 
but turned up nothing. What I found in the Petit Robert was horrifyingly lit-
eral: fourteenth-century surgeons coined the term. 
117. 
Robert Alun Jones and Douglas Kibbee have argued this point quite cogently 
in "Dürkheim in Translation: Dürkheim and Translation," a paper presented 
at the conference Humanistic Dilemmas: Translation in the Humanities and 
Social Sciences, State University of New York at Binghamton, September 
27-28, 1991. 
118. 
See his "Représentations individuelles et représentations collectives," RMM, 
6, 1898. 
119. 
O n this point, see Nisbet, Sociology of Emile Dürkheim, p. 187, and the clear 
discussion of Dürkheim on morality that follows. Note as well Dürkheim 's 
contrast of "moral" and "physical" at p. 192. 
120. 
P. 275. 
121. 
O n this point, see Dürkheims famous discussion of crime in The Rules of So-
ciological Method. 
122. 
Mestrovic, Emile Dürkheim, makes a good case that this view is common in-


lxxii 
Translator's Introduction 
tellectual ground between Dürkheim and Freud (in Civilization and Its Dis-
contents). Dürkheims "individual" would parallel Freud's "es," which entered 
English as "id." 
123. 
P. 430. My italics. 
124. 
P. 99. 
125. 
In fact, survey research has shown that the term "cult" in this pejorative sense 
has become sufficiently potent not only to color the response in America 
to those "new" religious movements that are called "cults," but indeed to in-
fluence legal proceedings—so much so that a strong case has been made 
for abandoning the term altogether in serious scholarship. See James T. 
Richardson, "Definitions of Cult: From Sociological-Technical to Popular-
Negative," Review of Religious Research 34, no. 4, June 1993, who also surveys 
the evolution of the term's scholarly usages in the twentieth century. I am 
indebted to Dr. Richardson for sharing with me various references on this 
terrain of contested words. 
126. 
P. 226. My italics. 
127. 
P. 445. 
128. 
Dürkheim brings out this nuance on p. 5. "Everything is boiled down to 
what is absolutely indispensable, to that without which there would be no 
religion. But the indispensable is also the fundamental [essentiel], in other 
words, that which it is above all important for us to know." 
129. 
Michael Gane, On Dürkheims 
Rules of Sociological Method, London, Rout-
ledge, 1989, p. 9. 
130. 
However, Claude Lévi-Strauss has given unsettling philosophical reasons for 
referring to himself in the third person or as "we": "Throughout these pages, 
the 'we' the author has deliberately adhered to has not been meant simply as 
an expression of diffidence. . . . If there is one conviction that has been inti-
mately borne upon the author of this work during twenty years devoted to 
the study of myths... it is that the solidity of the self, the major preoccupa-
tion of the whole of Western philosophy, does not withstand persistent appli-
cation to the same object, which comes to pervade it through and through 
and to imbue it with an experiential awareness of its own unreality" (p. 625). 
I am indebted to the philosopher V. Y. Mudimbe for this reference and for in-
structive correspondence on several issues. 
131. 
Dürkheims scientific collectivity included distinguished researchers in their 
own right, such as Marcel Mauss and Henri Hubert, whose works he contin-
ually cites. 
132. 
See the discussion on this issue by John and Doreen Weightman, translators of 
Claude Lévi-Strauss 's The Naked Man: Introduction to a Science of Mythology, vol. 
4, New York, Harper & Row, 1981 [1971], p. 625. 
133. 
P. 274-275. 
134. 
Women come up explicitly, however, in various contexts—for example, male 


Translator's Introduction 
lxxiii 
initiation rites (in which they are designated as profane), observances regard-
ing maternal totems, and, occasionally, female mythical messages. 
135. 
Nancy Jay, "Gender and Dichotomy," Feminist Studies 7, no. 1, pp. 38-56. 
136. 
Jay, ThroughoutYour Generations, p. 136. 
137. 
Leon Lederman, The God Particle: If the Universe Is the Answer, What Is the Ques-
tion?, Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1993, p. 34. 


The Elementary Forms of 
T^ELIGIOUS JJFE 


INTRODUCTION 
I 
I propose i n this b o o k to study the simplest and most primitive religion that 
is k n o w n at present, to discover its principles and attempt an explanation o f 
it. A religious system is said to be the most primitive that is available for o b -
servation w h e n i t meets the t w o following conditions: First, it must be found 
i n societies the simplicity o f whose organization is nowhere exceeded;
1 sec-
ond, it must be explainable w i t h o u t the introduction o f any element from a 
predecessor religion. 
I w i l l make every effort to describe the organization o f this system w i t h 
all the care and precision that an ethnographer or a historian w o u l d b r i n g to 
the task. B u t m y task w i l l not stop at description. Sociology sets itself differ-
ent problems from those o f history or ethnography. It does not seek to be-
come acquainted w i t h bygone forms o f civilization for the sole purpose o f 
being acquainted w i t h and reconstructing them. Instead, like any positive 
science, * its purpose above all is to explain a present reality that is near to us 
and thus capable o f affecting our ideas and actions. That reality is man. M o r e 
especially, it is present-day man, for there is none other that we have a greater 
interest i n k n o w i n g well. Therefore, m y study o f a very archaic religion w i l l 
not be for the sheer pleasure o f recounting the bizarre and the eccentric. I 
have made a very archaic religion the subject o f m y research because it seems 
better suited than any other to help us comprehend the religious nature o f 
man, that is, to reveal a fundamental and permanent aspect o f humanity. 
This proposition is b o u n d to provoke strong objections. I t may be 
thought strange that, to arrive at an understanding o f present-day humanity, 
we should have to t u r n away from it so as to travel back to the beginning o f 
history. I n the matter at hand, that procedure seems especially unorthodox. 
Religions are held to be o f unequal value and standing; i t is c o m m o n l y said 
that not all contain the same measure o f truth. Thus it w o u l d seem that the 
higher forms o f religious thought cannot be compared w i t h the lower w i t h -
*Here, knowledge (science) acquired by means of systematic observation. This use of the term positive is 
indebted to Auguste Comte (1798—1857) who postulated a human evolution from the theological to meta-
physical to positive epochs. The complexities of the term positive in general, and in Comtes use of it, are 
examined by André Lalande, Dictionnaire technique de la philosophie, Paris, F. Alcan, 1923, pp. 595-600. 
T will call those societies and the men of those societies primitive in the same sense. This term cer-
tainly lacks precision, but it is hard to avoid; if care is taken to specify its meaning, however, it can safely 
be used. 
1 


2 
Introduction 
out b r i n g i n g the higher forms d o w n to the lower level. To grant that the 
crude cults o f Australian tribes might help us understand Christianity, for ex-
ample, is to assume—is it not?—that Christianity proceeds from the same 
mentality, i n other words, that it is made up o f the same superstitions and 
rests o n the same errors. T h e theoretical importance sometimes accorded to 
primitive religions could therefore be taken as evidence o f a systematic irre¬
ligion that invalidated the results o f research by prejudging them. 
I need not go into the question here whether scholars can be found w h o 
were guilty o f this and w h o have made history and the ethnography o f reli-
gion a means o f making war against religion. I n any event, such could not pos-
sibly be a sociologist's point o f view. Indeed, it is a fundamental postulate o f 
sociology that a human institution cannot rest upon error and falsehood. I f it 
did, it could not endure. I f it had not been grounded i n the nature o f things, 
i n those very things i t w o u l d have met resistance that it could not have over-
come. Therefore, w h e n I approach the study o f primitive religions, it is w i t h 
the certainty that they are grounded i n and express the real. I n the course o f 
the analyses and discussions that follow, we w i l l see this principle coming up 
again and again. W h a t I criticize i n the schools I part company w i t h is pre-
cisely that they have failed to recognize it. N o doubt, w h e n all we do is con-
sider the 
formulas 
literally, these religious beliefs and practices 
appear 
disconcerting, and our inclination might be to write them off to some sort o f 
inborn aberration. B u t we must k n o w h o w to reach beneath the symbol to 
grasp the reality it represents and that gives the symbol its true meaning. T h e 
most bizarre or barbarous rites and the strangest myths translate some human 
need and some aspect o f life, whether social or individual. T h e reasons the 
faithful settle for i n justifying those rites and myths may be mistaken, and most 
often are; but the true reasons exist nonetheless, and it is the business o f sci-
ence to uncover them. 
Fundamentally, then, there are no religions that are false. A l l are true af-
ter their o w n fashion: A l l fulfill given conditions o f human existence, though 
in different ways. Granted, i t is not impossible to rank t h e m hierarchically. 
Some can be said to be superior to others, i n the sense that they b r i n g higher 
mental faculties into play, that they are richer i n ideas and feelings, that they 
contain proportionately more concepts than sensations and images, and 
that they are more elaborately systematized. B u t the greater complexity 
and higher ideal content, however real, are not sufficient to place the corre-
sponding religions into separate genera. A l l are equally religious, just as all 
living beings are equally living beings, from the humblest plastid to man. I f I 
address myself to primitive religions, then, i t is not w i t h any ulterior motive 
o f disparaging religion i n general: These religions are to be respected no less 


Introduction 
3 
than the others. T h e y fulfill the same needs, play the same role, and proceed 
from the same causes; therefore, they can serve just as well to elucidate the 
nature o f religious life and, i t follows, to solve the problem I wish to treat. 
Still, w h y give them a k i n d o f priority? W h y choose them i n preference to 
others as the subject o f m y study? This choice is solely for reasons o f method. 
First o f all, w e cannot arrive at an understanding o f the most m o d e r n re-
ligions w i t h o u t tracing historically the manner i n w h i c h they have gradually 
taken shape. Indeed, history is the only method o f explanatory analysis that 
can be applied to them. History alone enables us to break d o w n an institu-
t i o n into its component parts, because it shows those parts to us as they are 
b o r n i n time, one after the other. Second, by situating each part o f the insti-
t u t i o n w i t h i n the totality o f circumstances i n w h i c h i t was b o r n , history puts 
into our hands the only tools we have for identifying the causes that have 
brought it into being. Thus, whenever we set out to explain something h u -
man at a specific m o m e n t i n time—be i t a religious belief, a moral rule, a 
legal principle, an aesthetic technique, or an economic system—we must be-
gin by going back to its simplest and most primitive f o r m . W e must seek to 
account for the features that define i t at that period o f its existence and then 
show h o w it has gradually developed, gained i n complexity, and become 
what it is at the m o m e n t under consideration. 
It is easy to see h o w important the determination o f the initial starting 
point is for this series o f progressive explanations. A cartesian principle had it 
that the first link takes precedence i n the chain o f scientific truths. To be sure, 
it is out o f the question to base the science o f religions o n a n o t i o n elaborated 
i n the cartesian manner—that is, a logical concept, pure possibility c o n -
structed solely by force o f intellect. W h a t we must find is a concrete reality 
that historical and ethnographic observation alone can reveal to us. B u t i f that 
primary conception must be arrived at by other methods, the fact remains 
that it is destined to have an important influence o n all the subsequent propo-
sitions that science establishes. Biological evolution was conceived altogether 
differently from the m o m e n t the existence o f unicellular organisms was dis-
covered. Likewise, the particulars o f religious facts are explained differendy i f 
naturism is placed at the beginning o f religious evolution than i f animism, or 
some other f o r m , is placed there. Indeed, even the most specialized scholars 
must choose a hypothesis and take their inspiration from i t i f they want to try 
to account for the facts they analyze—unless they mean to confine t h e m -
selves to a task o f pure erudition. W i l l y - n i l l y , the questions they ask take the 
following form: W h a t has caused naturism or animism to take o n such and 
such a particular aspect here or there, and to be enriched or impoverished i n 
such and such a way? Since taking a position o n the initial problem is u n -


4 
Introduction 
avoidable, and since the solution given w i l l affect the science as a whole, the 
problem is best confronted at the outset. This is what I propose to do. 
Besides, apart from those indirect consequences, the study o f primitive 
religions i n itself has immediate interest o f the first importance. 
I f it is useful to k n o w what a given religion consists of; it is far more i m -
portant to examine w h a t religion is i n general. This is a problem that has al-
ways intrigued philosophers, and not w i t h o u t reason: It is o f interest to all 
humanity. Unfortunately, the m e t h o d philosophers ordinarily use to solve it 
is purely one o f dialectic: A l l they do is analyze the idea they have o f religion, 
even i f they have to illustrate the results o f that mental analysis w i t h examples 
borrowed 
from those religions that best suit their model. B u t w h i l e this 
m e t h o d must be abandoned, the problem o f definition remains; and philos-
ophy's great service has been to prevent it from being settled once and for 
all* by the disdain o f the savants. T h e problem can i n fact be approached i n 
another way. Since all religions may be compared, all being species w i t h i n 
the same genus, some elements are o f necessity c o m m o n to t h e m all. B y that 
I mean not only the outward and visible features that they all equally exhibit 
and that make it possible to define religion i n a provisional way at the begin-
ning o f research. T h e discovery o f these apparent signs is relatively easy, for 
the observation required does not go beyond the surface o f things. B u t these 
external resemblances presuppose deeper ones. A t the foundation o f all sys-
tems o f belief and all cults, there must necessarily be a certain number o f fun-
damental representations and modes o f ritual conduct^ that, despite the 
diversity o f forms that the one and the other may have taken on, have the 
same objective meaning everywhere and everywhere fulfill the same func-
tions. I t is these enduring elements that constitute what is eternal and human 
i n religion. T h e y are the w h o l e objective content o f the idea that is expressed 
w h e n religion i n general is spoken of. 
H o w , then, can those elements be uncovered? 
Surely it is not b y observing the complex religions that have arisen i n the 
course o f history. Each o f those religions is formed from such a variety o f el-
ements that i t is very hard to distinguish what is secondary to t h e m from 
what is primary, and what is essential from what is accessory. Simply consider 
religions like those o f Egypt, India, or classical antiquity! Each is a dense tan-
gle o f many cults that can vary according to localities, temples, generations, 
dynasties, invasions, and so on. Popular superstitions intermingle i n t h e m 
w i t h the most sophisticated dogmas. Neither religious t h i n k i n g nor religious 
* Swain rendered Durkheim's prescrit as "suppressed," as if he had written proscrit. 
^Attitudes rituelles. On this phrase, see below, p. 301n. 


Introduction 
5 
practice is shared equally among the mass o f the faithful. T h e beliefs as well 
as the rites are taken i n different ways, depending o n men, milieux, and cir-
cumstances. Here it is priests, there monks, elsewhere the laity; here, mystics 
and rationalists, theologians and prophets, and so on. U n d e r such conditions, 
it is difficult to perceive what m i g h t be c o m m o n to all. I t is indeed possible 
to find ways o f studying some particular phenomenon fruitfully—such as 
prophetism, monasticism, or the mysteries—through one or another o f those 
systems i n w h i c h it is especially well developed. B u t h o w can one find the 
c o m m o n basis o f religious life under the luxuriant vegetation that grows over 
it? H o w can one find the fundamental states characteristic o f the religious 
mentality i n general through the clash o f theologies, the variations o f ritual, 
the multiplicity o f groupings, and the diversity o f individuals? 
T h e case is altogether different i n the lower societies. T h e lesser devel-
opment o f individuality, the smaller scale o f the group, and the homogeneity 
o f external circumstances all contribute to reducing the differences and vari-
ations to a m i n i m u m . T h e group regularly produces an intellectual and moral 
uniformity o f w h i c h we find only rare examples i n the more advanced soci-
eties. Everything is c o m m o n to everyone. T h e movements are stereotyped; 
everyone executes the same ones i n the same circumstances; and this confor-
m i t y o f conduct merely translates that o f thought. Since all the conscious-
nesses are pulled along i n the same current, the individual type virtually 
confounds itself w i t h the generic type. A t the same time that all is u n i f o r m , 
all is simple. W h a t could be more basic than those myths composed o f a sin-
gle theme, repeated endlessly, or than those rites composed o f a small n u m -
ber o f movements, repeated until the participants can do no more. Neither 
the popular nor the priestly imagination has yet had the time or the means to 
refine and transform the basic material o f ideas and religious practices; re-
duced to essentials, that material spontaneously presents itself to examina-
tion, and discovering i t calls for only a m i n i m a l effort. Inessential, secondary, 
and luxurious developments have not yet come to hide what is primary.
2 
Everything is boiled d o w n to what is absolutely indispensable, to that w i t h -
out w h i c h there w o u l d be no religion. B u t the indispensable is also the f u n -
damental, i n other words, that w h i c h it is above all important for us to know. 
Thus, primitive civilizations are prime cases because they are simple 
cases. This is why, among all the orders o f facts, the observations o f ethnog-
2This is not to say, of course, that primitive cults do not go beyond bare essentials. Quite the contrary, 
as we will see, religious beliefs and practices that do not have narrowly utilitarian aims are found in every 
religion (Bk.III, chap.4, §2). This nonutilitarian richness is indispensable to religious life, and of its very 
essence. But it is by far less well developed in the lower religions than in the others, and this fact will put 
us in a better position to determine its raison d'être. 


6 
Introduction 
raphers have often been veritable revelations that have breathed new lite into 
the study o f human institutions. Before the middle o f the nineteenth century, 
for example, it was generally believed that the father was the essential ele-
ment o f the family; it was not even imaginable that there could be a family 
organization o f w h i c h paternal power was not the keystone. Bachofen's dis-
covery toppled that o l d notion. U n t i l quite recent times, it was thought ob-
vious that the moral and legal relations that constitute kinship were only 
another aspect o f the physiological relations that result from shared descent. 
Bachofen and his successors, McLennan, M o r g a n , and many others, were 
still operating under the influence o f that preconception. But, quite the con-
trary, we have k n o w n ever since we became acquainted w i t h the nature ot 
the primitive clan that kinship cannot be defined by c o m m o n blood.* To re-
turn to religions: Exclusive consideration o f the religious forms that are the 
most familiar to us l o n g led us to believe that the idea o f god was character-
istic o f all that is religious. T h e religion I w i l l study below is largely a stranger 
to any notion o f divinity. I n it, the forces to w h i c h the rites are addressed dif-
fer greatly from those that are o f paramount importance i n our m o d e r n reli-
gions, and yet they w i l l help us to understand our m o d e r n religions better. 
N o t h i n g is more unjust, therefore, than the disdain w i t h w h i c h too many 
historians still regard ethnographers' w o r k . I n point o f fact, ethnography has 
often brought about the most fertile revolutions i n the various branches o f 
sociology. For the same reason, moreover, the discovery o f unicellular crea-
tures, w h i c h I noted earlier, transformed the idea o f life that was widely held. 
Since life is d o w n to its fundamental features among very simple beings, 
those features may be less easily misread. 
But primitive religions do not merely allow us to isolate the constituent 
elements o f religion; their great advantage is also that they aid i n its explana-
tion. Because the facts are simpler, the relations between t h e m are more ap-
parent. T h e reasons m e n invoke to explain their actions to themselves have 
not yet been refined and revamped by sophisticated thought: T h e y are closer 
and more akin to the motives that caused those actions. To understand a 
delusion properly and to be able to apply the most appropriate treatment, the 
doctor needs to k n o w what its point o f departure was. That event is the more 
easily detected the nearer to its beginnings the delusion can be observed. 
*Jacob Johann Bachofen (1815—1887) postulated the existence of matriliny (reckoning descent 
through the female line) and matriarchy or mother right, a stage he envisaged as standing between prim-
itive promiscuity and patriarchy. Ethnographic study worldwide has borne out the first and discredited the 
second. Like Bachofen. John Ferguson McLennan (1827-1881) and Lewis Henry Morgan (1818—1881) 
were lawyers interested in the rules that govern family and property. Among other achievements, Morgan 
pioneered the study of kin statuses distinct from blood relationship; McLennan is credited with having 
drawn attention to totemism. See below, Bk.I. chap.4, p. 85. 


Introduction 
1 
Conversely, the longer a sickness is left to develop, the more that original 
point o f departure slips out o f view. This is so because all sorts o f interpreta-
tions have intervened along the way, and the tendency o f those interpreta-
tions is to repress the original state into the unconscious and to replace it 
w i t h other states through w h i c h the original one is sometimes not easy to 
detect. T h e distance between a systematized delusion and the first impres-
sions that gave b i r t h to it is often considerable. T h e same applies to religious 
thought. As it progresses historically, the causes that called it into existence, 
though still at w o r k , are seen no more except through a vast system o f dis-
torting interpretations. T h e popular mythologies and the subtle theologies 
have done their w o r k : They have overlaid the original feelings w i t h very dif-
ferent ones that, although stemming from primitive feelings o f w h i c h they 
are the elaborated f o r m , nevertheless allow their true nature to show only i n 
part. T h e psychological distance between the cause and the effect, and be-
tween the apparent cause and the effective cause, has become wider and 
more difficult for the m i n d to overcome. T h e remainder o f this w o r k w i l l be 
an illustration and a test o f this methodological point. W e w i l l see how, i n the 
primitive religions, the religious phenomenon still carries the visible i m p r i n t 
o f its origins. It w o u l d have been m u c h more difficult for us to infer those 
origins by considering more developed religions alone. 
Thus, the study I undertake is a way o f taking up again the old problem 
o f the o r i g i n o f religions but under new conditions. Granted, i f by o r i g i n one 
means an absolute first beginning, there is n o t h i n g scientific about the ques-
tion, and i t must be resolutely set aside. There is no radical instant w h e n 
religion began to exist, and the point is not to find a roundabout way o f c o n -
veying ourselves there i n thought. Like every other human institution, reli-
gion begins nowhere. So all speculations i n this genre are rightly discredited; 
they can consist o f only subjective and arbitrary constructions 
w i t h o u t 
checks o f any sort. T h e problem I pose is altogether different. I w o u l d like to 
find a means o f discerning the ever-present causes o n w h i c h the most basic 
forms o f religious thought and practice depend. For the reasons just set forth, 
the causes are more easily observable i f the societies i n w h i c h they are o b -
served are less complex. That is w h y I seek to get closer to the origins.
3 T h e 
reason is not that I ascribe special virtues to the lower religions. Quite the 
contrary, they are crude and rudimentary; so there can be no question o f 
making t h e m out to be models o f some sort, w h i c h the later religions w o u l d 
3It will be seen that I give the word "origins," like the word "primitive," an entirely relative sense. I 
do not mean by it an absolute beginning but the simplest social state known at present—the state beyond 
which it is at present impossible for us to go. When I speak about origins and the beginnings of history 
or religious thought, this is the sense in which those phrases must be understood. 


8 
Introduction 
only have had to reproduce. B u t their very lack o f elaboration makes them 
instructive, for i n this way they become useful experiments i n w h i c h the facts 
and the relations among facts are easier to detect. To uncover the laws o f the 
phenomena he studies, the physicist seeks to simplify those phenomena and 
to r i d them o f their secondary characteristics. I n the case o f institutions, na-
ture spontaneously makes simplifications o f the same k i n d at the beginning 
o f history. I wish only to put those simplifications to good use. Doubtless, I 
w i l l be able to obtain only very elementary facts by this method. W h e n I 
have accounted for them, to the extent this w i l l be possible, the novelties o f 
all kinds that have been produced i n the course o f evolution w i l l still not be 
explained. B u t although I w o u l d not dream o f denying the importance o f the 
problems such novelties pose, I think those problems benefit by being treated 
at the proper time, and there is good reason not to tackle them until after 
those whose study I have undertaken. 
II 
M y research is not solely o f interest to the science o f religions. There is an as-
pect o f every religion that transcends the realm o f specifically religious ideas. 
T h r o u g h it, the study o f religious phenomena provides a means o f revisiting 
problems that until n o w have been debated only among philosophers. 
It has long been k n o w n that the first systems o f representations that man 
made o f the w o r l d and himself were o f religious origin. There is no religion 
that is not b o t h a cosmology and a speculation about the divine. I f philosophy 
and the sciences were b o r n i n religion, i t is because religion itself began by 
serving as science and philosophy. Further, and less often noted, religion has 
not merely enriched a human intellect already formed but i n fact has helped 
to f o r m it. M e n owe to religion not only the content o f their knowledge, i n 
significant part, but also the f o r m i n w h i c h that knowledge is elaborated. 
A t the root o f our judgments, there are certain fundamental notions that 
dominate our entire intellectual life. It is these ideas that philosophers, be-
ginning w i t h Aristotle, have called the categories o f understanding: notions 
o f time, space,
4 number, cause, substance, personality. * They correspond to 
*Usually referred to in Kantian circles as the "categories of understanding" or the "categories of the 
understanding" technically these are called "pure concepts of understanding"—that is, concepts, or rules 
for organizing the variety of sense perceptions, that lie ready in the mind and are brought into play by our 
efforts to make sense of our sensations. For clarifying correspondence on these points, I thank Professor 
Robert Paul Wolff. 
4I call time and space categories because there is no difference between the role these notions play in 
intellectual life and that which falls to notions of kind and cause. (See on this point [Octave] Hamelin, Es-
sai sur les éléments principaux de la représentation, Paris, Alcan [1907], pp. 63, 76.) 


Introduction 
9 
the most universal properties o f things. They are like solid frames that con-
fine thought. T h o u g h t does not seem to be able to break out o f them w i t h -
out destroying itself, since it seems we cannot think o f objects that are not i n 
time or space, that cannot be counted, and so forth. T h e other ideas are c o n -
tingent and changing, and we can conceive o f a man, a society, or an epoch 
that lacks them; but these fundamental notions seem to us as almost insepa-
rable from the normal functioning o f the intellect. T h e y are, as it were, the 
skeleton o f thought. N o w , w h e n one analyzes primitive religious beliefs m e -
thodically, one naturally finds the principal categories among them. They are 
b o r n i n and from religion; they are a product o f religious thought. This is a 
point that I w i l l make again and again i n the course o f this book. 
Even n o w that point has a certain interest o f its o w n , but here is what 
gives it its true significance. 
T h e general conclusion o f the chapters to follow is that religion is an 
eminently social thing. Religious representations are collective representa-
tions that express collective realities; rites are ways o f acting that are b o r n 
only i n the midst o f assembled groups and whose purpose is to evoke, m a i n -
tain, or recreate certain mental states o f those groups. B u t i f the categories are 
o f religious o r i g i n , then they must participate i n * what is c o m m o n to all re-
ligion: They, too, must be social things, products o f collective thought. A t 
the very least—since w i t h our present understanding o f these matters, radi-
cal and exclusive theses are to be guarded against—it is legitimate to say that 
they are rich i n social elements. 
This, it must be added, is something one can begin to see even n o w for 
certain o f the categories. For example, what i f one tried to imagine what the 
notion o f time w o u l d be i n the absence o f the methods we use to divide, 
measure, and express i t w i t h objective signs, a time that was not a succession 
o f years, months, weeks, days, and hours? I t w o u l d be nearly impossible to 
conceive of. We can conceive o f time only i f we differentiate between m o -
ments. N o w , w h a t is the o r i g i n ofthat differentiation? Undoubtedly, states o f 
consciousness that we have already experienced can be reproduced i n us 
i n the same order i n w h i c h they originally occurred; and, i n this way, bits o f 
our past become immediate again, even w h i l e spontaneously distinguishing 
themselves from the present. B u t however important this distinction might 
*The phrase "participate in," which occurs frequently, has usually not been replaced with simpler pos-
sibilities such as "partakes of" or "shares in" because the notion of participation that can be seen in the 
sentence "Jesus participated in divine and human nature" must be borne in mind, together with an argu-
ment in which Dürkheim was engaged. Lucien Lévy-Bruhl, whose book Les Fonctions mentales dans les 
sociétés inférieures Dürkheim criticizes, considered "participations" to exemplify the inherent illogic of 
"primitive" thought. Dürkheim held just the opposite. 


10 
Introduction 
be for our private experience, it is far from sufficient to constitute the notion 
or category o f time. T h e category o f time is not simply a partial or complete 
commemoration o f our lived life. It is an abstract and impersonal framework 
that contains not only our individual existence but also that o f humanity. It 
is like an endless canvas o n w h i c h all duration is spread out before the mind's 
eye and o n w h i c h all possible events are located i n relation to points o f refer-
ence that are fixed and specified. It is not my time that is organized i n this 
way; it is time that is conceived o f objectively by all m e n o f the same civi-
lization. This by itself is enough to make us begin to see that any such orga-
nization w o u l d have to be collective. A n d indeed, observation establishes that 
these indispensable points, i n reference to w h i c h all things are arranged tem-
porally, are taken from social life. T h e division into days, weeks, months, 
years, etc., corresponds to the recurrence o f rites, festivals, and public cere-
monies at regular intervals.
3 A calendar expresses the r h y t h m o f collective ac-
tivity w h i l e ensuring that regularity.
6 
T h e same applies to space. As H a m e l i n
7 has shown, space is not the 
vague and indeterminate m e d i u m that Kant imagined. I f purely and ab-
solutely homogeneous, it w o u l d be o f no use and w o u l d offer nothing for 
thought to h o l d o n to. Spatial representation essentially consists i n a primary 
coordination o f given sense experience. B u t this coordination w o u l d be i m -
possible i f the parts o f space were qualitatively equivalent, i f they really were 
mutually interchangeable. To have a spatial ordering o f things is to be able to 
situate them differently: to place some on the right, others o n the left, these 
above, those below, n o r t h or south, east or west, and so forth, just as, to 
arrange states o f consciousness temporally, it must be possible to locate them 
at definite dates. That is, space w o u l d not be itself if, like time, it was not d i -
vided and differentiated. B u t where do these divisions that are essential to 
5In support of this assertion, see Henri Hubert and Marcel Mauss, Mélanges d'histoire des religions, the 
chapter on "La Représentation du temps dans la religion," Paris, Alcan [1909]. 
6Through this we see how completely different are the complexus of sensations and images that serves 
C
o orient us in duration, and the category of time. The first are the summary of individual experiences, 
which hold only for the individual who has had them. By contrast, the category of time expresses a time 
common to the group—social time, so to speak. This category itself is a true social institution. Thus it is 
peculiar to man; animals have no representation of this kind. 
This distinction between the category of time and the corresponding individual sensations 
could easily be made in regard to space and cause. This may perhaps help clear up certain confusions, 
which have fed controversies on these questions. I will return to this point at the Conclusion of the 
present work. 
7Hamelin, Essai sur les éléments principaux de la représentation, pp. 75fF. 


Introduction 
11 
space come from? I n itself it has no right, no left, no high or low, no n o r t h 
or south, etc. A l l these distinctions evidently arise from the fact that different 
affective colorings have been assigned to regions. A n d since all m e n o f the 
same civilization conceive o f space i n the same manner, it is evidently neces-
sary that these affective colorings and the distinctions that arise from t h e m 
also be held i n c o m m o n — w h i c h implies almost necessarily that they are o f 
social o r i g i n .
8 
Besides, i n some instances this social character is made manifest. There 
are societies i n Australia and N o r t h America i n w h i c h space is conceived i n 
the f o r m o f an immense circle, because the camp itself is circular;
9 and the 
spatial circle is divided i n exactly the same way as the tribal circle and i n its 
image. As many regions are distinguished as there are clans i n the tribe, and 
it is the place the clans occupy i n the encampment that determines the o r i -
entation o f the regions. Each region is defined by the totem o f the clan to 
w h i c h it is assigned. A m o n g the Z u f i i , for example, the pueblo is made up o f 
seven sections; each o f these sections is a group o f clans that has acquired its 
o w n unity. I n all likelihood, it was originally a single clan that later subdi-
vided. Space similarly contains seven regions, and each o f these seven sec-
tions o f the w o r l d is i n intimate relationship w i t h a section o f the pueblo, that 
is, w i t h a group o f clans.
1 0 "Thus," says Cushing, "one division is considered 
to be i n relation w i t h the north; another represents the west, another the 
south,
1 1 etc." Each section o f the pueblo has its distinctive color, w h i c h sym-
bolizes it; each region has its o w n color, w h i c h is that o f the corresponding 
section. Over the course o f history, the number o f basic clans has varied, and 
the number o f regions has varied i n the same way. Thus, spatial organization 
was modeled o n social organization and replicates it. Far from being built 
into human nature, no idea exists, up to and including the distinction be-
otherwise, in order to explain this agreement, one would have to accept the idea that all individu-
als, by virtue of their organico-psychic constitution, are affected in the same manner by the different parts 
of space—which is all the more improbable since the different regions have no affective coloring. More-
over, the divisions of space vary among societies—proof that they are not based exclusively on the inborn 
nature of man. 
9See Emile Durkheim and Marcel Mauss, "De Quelques formes primitives de la classification," AS, 
vol. VI, 1903, pp. 47ff. 
10Ibid., pp. 34ff. 
"[Frank Hamilton] Cushing, "Outlines of Zuñi Creation Myths," Tlnrteenth Report, BAE, Washing-
ton, DC, Government Printing Office, 1896, pp. 367ff. [Throughout, quoted material is translated into 
English from Durkheim s French renderings.] 


12 
Introduction 
tween right and left, that is not, i n all probability, the product o f religious, 
hence collective, representations.
1 2 
Analogous demonstrations concerning the notions o f genus, force, per-
sonality, and efficacy w i l l be found below. O n e might even ask whether the 
notion o f contradiction does not also arise from social conditions. W h a t 
tends to make this plausible is the fact that the h o l d the n o t i o n o f contradic-
tion has had over thought has varied w i t h times and societies. Today the 
principle o f identity governs scientific thought; but there are vast systems o f 
representation that have played a major role i n the history o f ideas, i n w h i c h 
it is c o m m o n l y ignored: These systems are the mythologies, from the crud-
est to the most sophisticated.
1 3 Mythologies deal w i t h beings that have the 
most contradictory attributes at the same time, that are one and many, mate-
rial and spiritual, and capable o f subdividing themselves indefinitely w i t h o u t 
losing that w h i c h makes t h e m what they are. These historical variations o f 
the rule that seems to govern our present logic show that, far from being en-
coded from eternity i n the mental constitution o f man, the rule depends at 
least i n part u p o n historical, hence social, factors. W e do not k n o w exactly 
what these factors are, but we can presume that they exist.
1 4 
Once this hypothesis is accepted, the problem o f knowledge can be 
framed i n new terms. 
U p to the present, only t w o doctrines have opposed one another. For 
some, the categories cannot be derived from experience. They are logically 
prior to experience and condition it. T h e y are thought o f as so many simple 
data that are irreducible and immanent i n the human intellect by virtue o f its 
natural makeup. T h e y are thus called a priori. For others, by contrast, the cat-
egories are constructed, made out o f bits and pieces, and it is the individual 
w h o is the artisan ofthat construction.
1 3 
i2See Robert Hertz, "La Prééminence de la main droite: Etude de polarité religieuse," RP, Decem-
ber, 1909. On this question of the relations between the representation of space and the form of the 
group, see the chapter in [Friedrich] Ratzel, Politische Geographie [Leipzig, R. Oldenbourg, 1897], titled 
"Der Raum im Geiste der Völker" [pp. 261-262]. 
1 3I do not mean to say that it is unknown to mythological thinking but that mythological thinking de-
parts from this principle more often and more overdy than scientific thought. Conversely, I will show that 
science cannot help but violate it, even while following it more scrupulously than religion does. In this 
respect and many others, there are only differences of degree between science and religion; but if these 
should not be overstated, it is important to notice them, for they are significant. 
14This hypothesis has already been advanced by the founders of Völkerpsychologie. It is referred to, for 
example, in a short article by Wilhelm Windelband titled, "Die Erkenntnisslehre unter dem Völkerpsy-
chologischen Geschichtspunkte," in ZK [Lichtenstein, Kraus Reprints, Ltd., 1968], VIII, pp. 166ff. Cf. a 
note by [Heymann] Steinthal on the same subject, ibid., pp. 178ff. 
1:,Even in the theory of [Herbert] Spencer, the categories are constructed 
from 
experience. The only 
difference in this respect between ordinary and evolutionary empiricism is that, according to the latter, 


Introduction 
13 
B o t h solutions give rise to grave difficulties. 
Is the empiricist thesis adopted? T h e n the categories must be stripped o f 
their characteristic properties. I n fact, they are distinguished from all other 
knowledge by their universality and their necessity. T h e y are the most gen-
eral concepts that exist, because they are applied to all that is real; and just as 
they are not attached to any particular object, they are independent o f any 
individual subject. They are the c o m m o n ground where all minds meet. W h a t 
is more, minds meet there o f necessity: Reason, w h i c h is none other than the 
fundamental categories taken together, is vested w i t h an authority that we can-
not escape at w i l l . W h e n we try to resist it, to free ourselves from some o f these 
fundamental notions, we meet sharp resistance. Hence, far from merely de-
pending u p o n us, they impose themselves u p o n us. B u t the characteristics o f 
empirical data are diametrically opposite. A sensation or an image is always 
linked to a definite object or collection o f definite objects, and it expresses the 
momentary state o f a particular consciousness. I t is fundamentally individual 
and subjective. Moreover, we can do as w e wish w i t h representations that are 
o f this origin. O f course, w h e n sensations are present to us, they impose them-
selves o n us in 
fact. By right, however, we remain free to conceive them other-
wise than they are and to picture them as occurring i n an order different from the 
one i n w h i c h they occurred. I n regard to them, n o t h i n g is b i n d i n g o n us u n -
less considerations o f a different sort intervene. Here, then, are t w o sorts o f 
knowledge that are like opposite poles o f the intellect. Under these conditions, 
to reduce reason to experience is to make reason disappear—because it is to 
reduce the universality and necessity that characterize reason to mere appear-
ances, illusions that might be practically convenient but that correspond to 
nothing i n things. Consequently, it is to deny all objective reality to that l o g -
ical life w h i c h the function o f the categories is to regulate and organize. Clas-
sical empiricism leads to irrationalism; perhaps it should be called by that name. 
Notwithstanding the sense we ordinarily attach to the labels, it is the 
apriorists w h o are more attentive to the facts. Since they do not take it as self-
evident truth that the categories are made o f the same elements as our sense 
representations, they are not c o m m i t t e d to impoverishing the categories sys-
tematically, emptying t h e m o f all real content and reducing t h e m to mere 
verbal artifices. Q u i t e the contrary, apriorists leave the categories w i t h all 
their distinctive characteristics. T h e apriorists are rationalists; they believe 
the results of individual experience are consolidated by heredity. But that consolidation adds nothing es-
sential; no element enters into their composition that does not originate in the experience of the indi-
vidual. Also, according to that theory, the necessity with which the categories impose themselves upon us 
in the present is itself the product of an illusion, a superstitious prejudice that is deeply rooted in the or-
ganism but without foundation in the nature of things. 


14 
Introduction 
that the w o r l d has a logical aspect that reason eminently expresses. To do this, 
however, they have to ascribe to the intellect a certain power to transcend 
experience and add to what is immediately given. B u t for this singular 
power, they offer neither explanation nor warrant. Merely to say it is inher-
ent i n the nature o f h u m a n intellect is not to explain that power. It w o u l d still 
be necessary to see where we acquire this astounding prerogative and h o w we 
are able to see relationships i n things that mere spectating cannot reveal to us. 
To confine oneself to saying that experience itself is possible only o n that 
condition is to shift the problem, perhaps, but not to solve it. T h e point is to 
k n o w h o w it happens that experience is not enough, but presupposes condi-
tions that are external and prior to experience, and h o w it happens that these 
conditions are met at the time and i n the manner needed. To answer these 
questions, it has sometimes been imagined that, beyond the reason o f i n d i -
viduals, there is a superior and perfect reason from w h i c h that o f individuals 
emanated and, by a sort o f mystic participation, presumably acquired its mar-
velous faculty: That superior and perfect reason is divine reason. But, at best, 
this hypothesis has the grave disadvantage o f being shielded from all experi-
mental control, so it does not meet the requirements o f a scientific hypothe-
sis. M o r e than that, the categories o f human thought are never fixed i n a 
definite form; they are ceaselessly made, unmade, and remade; they vary ac-
cording to time and place. B y contrast, divine reason is immutable. H o w 
could this invariance account for such constant variability? 
Such are the t w o conceptions that have competed for centuries. A n d i f 
the debate has gone o n and on, i t is because the arguments back and forth are 
i n fact more or less equivalent. I f reason is but a f o r m o f individual experi-
ence, then reason is no more. O n the other hand, i f the capacities w i t h w h i c h 
it is credited are recognized but left unaccounted for, then reason apparently 
is placed outside nature and science. Faced w i t h these opposite objections, 
the intellect remains uncertain. B u t i f the social o r i g i n o f the categories is ac-
cepted, a new stance becomes possible, one that should enable us, I believe, 
to avoid these opposite difficulties. 
T h e fundamental thesis o f apriorism is that knowledge is formed from 
t w o sorts o f elements that are irreducible one to the other—two distinct, su-
perimposed layers, so to speak.
1 6 M y hypothesis keeps this principle intact. 
T h e knowledge that people speak o f as empirical—all that theorists o f e m -
piricism have ever used to construct reason—is the knowledge that the direct 
^'[t is perhaps surprising that I should not define apriorism by the hypothesis of innateness. But that 
idea actually has only a secondary role in the doctrine. It is a simplistic way of portraying the irreducibil-
ity of rational cognition to empirical data. To call it innate is no more than a positive way of saying that it 
is not a product of experience as usually conceived. 


Introduction 
15 
action ot objects calls forth i n our minds. Thus they are individual states that 
are w h o l l y " explained by the psychic nature o f the individual. B u t i f the cat-
egories are essentially collective representations, as I think they are, they 
translate states o f the collectivity, first and foremost. T h e y depend upon the 
way m w h i c h the collectivity is organized, u p o n its morphology, its religious, 
moral, and economic institutions, and so on. Between these t w o kinds o f 
representations, then, is all the distance that separates the individual from the 
social; one can no more derive the second from the first than one can deduce 
the society from the individual, the whole from the part, or the complex 
from the simple.
1 8 Society is a reality stti generis; it has its o w n characteristics 
that are either not found i n the rest o f the universe or are not found there i n 
the same f o r m . T h e representations that express society therefore have an al-
together different content from the purely individual representations, and 
one can be certain i n advance that the former add something to the latter. 
T h e manner i n w h i c h b o t h kinds o f representations are formed brings 
about their differentiation. Collective representations are the product o f an 
immense cooperation that extends not only through space but also through 
time; to make them, a multitude o f different minds have associated, inter-
mixed, and combined their ideas and feelings; long generations have accu-
mulated their experience and knowledge. A very special intellectuality that is 
infinitely richer and more complex than that o f the individual is distilled in 
them. That being the case, we understand h o w reason has gained the power 
to go beyond the range o f empirical cognition. It owes this power not to 
some mysterious virtue but simply to the fact that, as the w e l l - k n o w n for-
mula has it, man is double. I n h i m are t w o beings: an individual being that 
has its basis i n the body and whose sphere o f action is strictly limited by this 
fact, and a social being that represents w i t h i n us the highest reality i n the i n -
tellectual and moral* realm that is knowable through observation: I mean so-
!'~On Durkheim's characteristic uses of the term "moral," see above, p. Iv—lvi. 
' At least to the extent that there are individual, and thus fully empirical, representations. But m fact 
there probably is no case in which those two sorts of elements are not found closelv bound up together. 
^Furthermore, this irreducibility should not be understood in an absolute sense. I do not mean that 
there is nothing in the empirical representations that announces the rational ones, or that there is nothing 
in the individual that can be considered the harbinger ot social life. If experience w a
s completely foreign 
to all that is rational, reason would not be applicable to it. Likewise, if the psychic nature of the mciis id-
ual was absolutely resistant to social life, society would be impossible. Therefore a full analvsis ot the cat-
egories would look for the seeds of rationalitv in individual consciousness. ! shall have occasion to return 
to this point in my Conclusion. All I w
7ish to establish here is that there is a distance between the indis-
tinct seeds of reason and reason properly so-called that is comparable to the distance between the proper-
ties of mineral elements, from which the living being is made, and the characteristic properties of life, 
once constituted. 


16 
Introduction 
ciety [J'entends la société]. I n the realm o f practice, the consequence o f this 
duality i n our nature is the irreducibility o f the moral ideal to the utilitarian 
motive; i n the realm o f thought, it is the irreducibility o f reason to individ-
ual experience. As part o f society, the individual naturally transcends himself, 
both w h e n he thinks and w h e n he acts. 
This same social characteristic enables us to understand where the ne-
cessity o f the categories comes from. A n idea is said to be necessary* when, 
due to some sort o f internal property, it enjoys credence w i t h o u t the support 
o f any proof. I t thus contains i n itself something that compels the intellect 
and wins over intellectual adherence w i t h o u t prior examination. A p r i o r i s m 
postulates that remarkable capacity w i t h o u t accounting for it. To say that the 
categories are necessary because they are indispensable to thought is simply 
to repeat that they are necessary. B u t i f they have the o r i g i n that I am at-
tributing to them, n o t h i n g about their ascendancy should surprise us any 
longer. T h e y do indeed express the most general relationships that exist be-
tween things; having broader scope than all our ideas, they govern all the 
particulars o f our intellectual life. If, at every moment, m e n d i d not agree o n 
these fundamental ideas, i f they did not have a homogeneous conception o f 
time, space, cause, number, and so on. A l l consensus among minds, and thus 
all c o m m o n life, w o u l d become impossible. 
Hence society cannot leave the categories up to the free choice o f i n d i -
viduals w i t h o u t abandoning itself. To live, it requires not only a m i n i m u m 
moral consensus but also a m i n i m u m logical consensus that it cannot do 
w i t h o u t either. Thus, i n order to prevent dissidence, society weighs o n its 
members w i t h all its authority. Does a m i n d seek to free itself from these 
norms o f all thought? Society no longer considers this a h u m a n m i n d i n the 
full sense, and treats it accordingly. This is w h y i t is that w h e n w e try, even 
deep d o w n inside, to get away from these fundamental notions, we feel that 
we are not fully free; something resists us, from inside and outside ourselves. 
Outside us, it is o p i n i o n that judges us; more than that, because society is 
represented inside us as well, it resists these revolutionary impulses from 
w i t h i n . W e feel that we cannot abandon ourselves to t h e m w i t h o u t our 
thought's ceasing to be truly human. Such appears to be the o r i g i n o f the 
very special authority that is inherent i n reason and that makes us trustingly 
accept its promptings. This is none other than the authority o f society
1 9 pass-
i n g into certain ways o f t h i n k i n g that are the indispensable conditions o f all 
*Note here that the sense of the word "necessary" is distinct from the everyday concept of need. See 
also the next paragraph. 
l yIt has often been noticed that social disturbances multiply mental disturbances. This is further evi-
dence that logical discipline is an aspect of social discipline. The former relaxes when the latter weakens. 


Introduction 
17 
c o m m o n action. Thus the necessity w i t h w h i c h the categories press t h e m -
selves u p o n us is not merely the effect o f habits whose yoke we could slip 
w i t h little effort; nor is that necessity a habit or a physical or metaphysical 
need, since the categories change w i t h place and time; it is a special sort o f 
moral necessity that is to intellectual life what obligation is to the w i l l .
2 0 
B u t i f the categories at first do no more than translate social states, does 
it not follow that they can be applied to the rest o f nature only as metaphors? 
I f their purpose is merely to express social things, i t w o u l d seem that they 
could be extended to other realms only by convention. Thus, insofar as they 
serve us i n conceiving the physical or biological w o r l d , they can only have 
the value o f artificial symbols—useful perhaps, but w i t h no connection to re-
ality. W e w o u l d thus return to nominalism and empiricism by another route. 
To interpret a sociological theory o f knowledge i n that way is to forget that 
even i f society is a specific reality, it is not an empire w i t h i n an empire: It is part 
o f nature and nature's highest expression. T h e social realm is a natural realm 
that differs from others only i n its greater complexity. I t is impossible that na-
ture, i n that w h i c h is most fundamental i n itself, should be radically different 
between one part and another o f itself. I t is impossible that the fundamental 
relations that exist between things—precisely those relations that the categor-
ies serve to express—should be fundamentally dissimilar i n one realm and an-
other. If, for reasons that we shall have to discover,
2 1 they stand out more clearly 
i n the social w o r l d , it is impossible that they should not be found elsewhere, 
though i n more shrouded forms. Society makes t h e m more manifest but has 
no m o n o p o l y o n them. This is w h y notions w o r k e d out o n the model o f so-
cial things can help us think about other sorts o f things. A t the very least, if, 
w h e n they deviate from their initial meaning, those notions play i n a sense the 
role o f symbols, it is the role o f well-founded symbols. I f artifice enters i n , 
through the very fact that these are constructed concepts, it is an artifice that 
closely follows nature and strives to come ever closer to nature.
2 2 T h e fact 
2"There is an analogy between this logical necessity and moral obligation but not identity—at least not 
at present. Today, society treats criminals differently 
from 
people who are mentally handicapped. This is 
evidence that, despite significant similarities, the authority attached to logical norms and that inherent in 
moral norms are not of the same nature. They are two different species of one genus. It would be inter-
esting to research what that difference (probably not primitive) consists of and where it comes from, since 
for a long time public consciousness barely distinguished the delinquent 
from 
the mentally ill. From this 
example, we can see the numerous problems raised by the analysis of these notions, which are generally 
thought elementary and simple but actually are extremely complex. 
21This question is treated in the Conclusion of this book. 
22Hence the rationalism that is immanent in a sociological theory of knowledge stands between em-
piricism and classical apriorism. For the first, the categories are purely artificial constructs; for the second, 
on the other hand, they are naturally given; for us, they are works of art, in a sense, but an art that imi-
tates nature ever more perfectly. 


18 
Introduction 
that the ideas o f time, space, genus, cause, and personality are constructed 
from social elements should not lead us to conclude that they are stripped o f 
all objective value. Q u i t e the contrary, their social o r i g i n leads one indeed to 
suppose that they are not w i t h o u t foundation i n the nature o f things.
2 3 
I n this fresh formulation, the theory o f knowledge seems destined to j o i n 
the opposite advantages o f the t w o rival theories, w i t h o u t their disadvan-
tages. I t preserves all the essential principles o f apriorism but at the same time 
takes inspiration from the positive turn o f m i n d that empiricism sought to 
satisfy. It leaves reason w i t h its specific power, but accounts for that power, 
and does so w i t h o u t leaving the observable w o r l d . It affirms as real the dual-
ity o f our intellectual life, but explains that duality, and does so w i t h natural 
causes. T h e categories cease to be regarded as primary and unanalyzable facts; 
and yet they remain o f such complexity that analyses as simplistic as those 
w i t h w h i c h empiricism contented itself cannot possibly be right. N o longer 
do they appear as very simple notions that anyone can sift from his personal 
observations, and that popular imagination unfortunately complicated; quite 
the contrary, they appear as ingenious instruments o f thought, w h i c h human 
groups have painstakingly forged over centuries, and i n w h i c h they have 
amassed the best o f their intellectual capital.
2 4 A w h o l e aspect o f human his-
tory is, i n a way, summed up i n them. This amounts to saying that to succeed 
i n understanding and evaluating them, it is necessary to t u r n to new proce-
dures. To k n o w what the conceptions that we ourselves have not made are 
made of, i t cannot be enough to consult our o w n consciousness. We must 
l o o k outside ourselves, observe history, and institute a whole science, a c o m -
plex one at that, w h i c h can advance only slowly and by collective labor. T h e 
present w o r k is an attempt to make certain fragmentary contributions to that 
science. W i t h o u t m a k i n g these questions the direct subject o f m y study, I w i l l 
take advantage o f all the opportunities that present themselves to capture at 
b i r t h at least some o f those ideas that, while religious i n origin, were b o u n d 
nevertheless to remain at the basis o f human mentality. 
23For example, the category of time has its basis in the rhythm of social life; but if there is a rhythm of 
collective life, one can be certain that there is another in the life of the individual and, more generally, that 
of the universe. The first is only more marked and apparent than the others. Likewise, we will see that the 
notion of kind was formed 
from 
that of the human group. But if men form natural groups, one can sup-
pose that there exist among things groups that are at once similar to them and different. These natural 
groups of things are genera and species. 
24This is why it is legitimate to compare the categories with tools: Tools, for their part, are accumu-
lated material capital. Moreover, there is close kinship between the three ideas of tool, category, and in-
stitution. 


B O O K 
O N E 
PRELIMINARY 
QUESTIONS 


C H A P T E R O N E 
DEFINITION OF RELIGIOUS 
PHENOMENA AND OF 
RELIGION
1 
In order to identify the simplest and most primitive religion that observa-
t i o n can make k n o w n to us, we must first define what is properly under-
stood as a religion. I f we do not, w e r u n the risk o f either calling a system o f 
ideas and practices religion that are i n no way religious, or o f passing by reli-
gious phenomena w i t h o u t detecting their true nature. A good indication 
that this danger is not imaginary, and the point by no means a concession to 
empty methodological formalism, is this: H a v i n g failed to take that precau-
tion, M . Frazer,* a scholar to w h o m the comparative science o f religions is 
nevertheless gready indebted, failed to recognize the profoundly religious 
character o f the beliefs and rites that w i l l be studied below—beliefs and rites 
i n w h i c h , I submit, the original seed o f religious life i n humanity is visible. 
I n the matter o f definition, then, there is a prejudicial question that must be 
treated before any other. It is not that I hope to arrive straightaway at the 
deep and truly explanatory features o f religion, for these can be determined 
only at the end o f the research. B u t what is b o t h necessary and possible is to 
point out a certain number o f readily visible outward features that allow us to 
recognize religious phenomena wherever they are encountered, and that 
prevent their being confused w i t h others. I t u r n to this preliminary step. 
I f taking this step is to yield the results it should, we must begin by free-
i n g our minds o f all preconceived ideas. W e l l before the science o f religions 
instituted its methodical comparisons, m e n had to create their o w n idea o f 
what religion is. T h e necessities o f existence require all o f us, believers and 
unbelievers, to conceive i n some fashion those things i n the midst o f w h i c h 
*Sir James George Frazer (1854-1941). 
'I have already tried to define the phenomenon of religion, in a work published by AS, vol. II [1899], 
pp. Iff. ["De la Definition des phénomènes religieux"]. As will be seen, the definition given there differs 
from the one I now propose. At the end of 
this chapter (p. 44, n. 68), I will give the reasons for these mod-
ifications. They do not, however, involve any fundamental change in the conceptualization of the facts. 
21 


22 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
we live, about w h i c h we continually make judgments, and o f w h i c h our con-
duct must take account. B u t since these notions are formed unmethodically, 
i n the comings and goings o f life, they cannot be relied o n and must be r i g -
orously kept to one side i n the examination that follows. I t is not our pre-
conceptions, passions, or habits that must be consulted for the elements o f 
the definition w e need; definition is to be sought from reality itself. 
Let us set ourselves before this reality. Putting aside all ideas about reli-
gion i n general, let us consider religions i n their concrete reality and try to 
see what features they may have i n c o m m o n : R e l i g i o n can be defined only 
i n terms o f features that are found wherever religion is found. I n this c o m -
parison, then, we w i l l incorporate all the religious systems we can know, past 
as w e l l as present, the most primitive and simple as well as the most m o d e r n 
and refined, for we have no right to exclude some so as to keep only certain 
others, and no logical m e t h o d o f doing so. To anyone w h o sees religion as 
nothing other than a natural manifestation o f human activity, all religions are 
instructive, w i t h o u t exception o f any k i n d : Each i n its o w n way expresses 
man, and thus each can help us understand better that aspect o f our nature. 
Besides, we have seen that the preference for studying religion among the 
most civilized peoples is far from being the best m e t h o d .
2 
Before taking up the question and i n order to help the m i n d free itself o f 
commonsense notions whose influence can prevent us from seeing things as 
they are, it is advisable to examine h o w those prejudices have entered into 
some o f the commonest definitions. 
I 
O n e n o t i o n that is generally taken to be characteristic o f all that is religious 
is the n o t i o n o f the supernatural. B y that is meant any order o f things that 
goes beyond our understanding; the supernatural is the w o r l d o f mystery, the 
unknowable, or the incomprehensible. R e l i g i o n w o u l d then be a k i n d o f 
speculation u p o n all that escapes science, and clear thinking generally. A c -
cording to Spencer, "Religions that are diametrically opposite i n their dog-
mas agree i n tacidy recognizing that the w o r l d , w i t h all i t contains and all 
that surrounds it, is a mystery seeking an explanation"; he makes t h e m out 
basically to consist o f "the belief i n the omnipresence o f something that goes 
2See above, p. 3.1 do not push the necessity of 
these definitions further or the method to be followed. 
The exposition is to be found in my Règles de la méthode sociologique [Paris, Alcan, 1895], pp. 43ff. Cf. Le 
Suicide; [étude de sociologie] (Paris, F. Alcan [1897]), pp. Iff. 


Definition of Religious Phenomena and of Religion 
23 
beyond the intellect."
3 Similiarly, M a x M i i l l e r saw all religion as "an effort to 
conceive the inconceivable and to express the inexpressible, an aspiration t o -
ward the infinite."
4 
Certainly the role played by the feeling o f mystery has not been u n i m -
portant i n certain religions, including Christianity. Even so, the importance 
o f this role has shown marked variation at different moments o f Christian 
history. There have been periods w h e n the n o t i o n o f mystery has become 
secondary and even faded altogether. To m e n o f the seventeenth century, for 
example, dogma contained n o t h i n g that unsettled reason. Faith effortlessly 
reconciled itself w i t h science and philosophy; and thinkers like Pascal, w h o 
felt strongly that there is something profoundly obscure i n things, were so l i t -
tle i n harmony w i t h their epochs that it was their fate to be misunderstood 
by their contemporaries.
5 Therefore, i t w o u l d seem rash to make an idea that 
has been subject to periodic eclipse the essential element even o f Christian-
ity. 
W h a t is certain, i n any case, is that this idea appears very late i n the his-
tory o f religions. It is totally alien not only to the peoples called primitive but 
also to those w h o have not attained a certain level o f intellectual culture. O f 
course, w h e n we see m e n i m p u t i n g extraordinary virtues to insignificant o b -
jects, or populating the universe w i t h extraordinary principles made up o f 
the most disparate elements and possessing a sort o f ubiquity that is hard to 
conceptualize, it is easy for us to find an air o f mystery i n these ideas. It seems 
to us that these m e n have resigned themselves to ideas so problematic for our 
m o d e r n reason only because they have been unable to find more rational 
ones. I n reality, however, the explanations that amaze us seem to the p r i m i -
tive the simplest i n the w o r l d . H e sees t h e m not as a k i n d of ultima ratio*' to 
w h i c h the intellect resigns itself i n despair but as the most direct way o f c o n -
ceiving and understanding what he observes around h i m . For h i m , there is 
nothing strange i n being able, by voice or gesture, to command the elements, 
h o l d up or accelerate the course o f the stars, make the rain fall or stop it, and 
so on. T h e rites he uses to ensure the fertility o f the soil or o f the animal 
species that nourish h i m are no more irrational i n his eyes than are, i n our 
*Last resort. 
'[Herbert Spencer, First Principles, New York, D. Appleton, 1862, French translation based on the 
sixth English edition], Paris, F. Alcan [1902], pp. 38-39, [p. 37 in the English edition. Trans.]. 
4Max Miiller, Introduction to the Science of Religions [London, Longmans, 1873], p. 18. Cf. [Lectures on] 
the Origin and [Growth] of 
Religion [as Illustrated by the Religions of India, London, Longmans, 1878], p. 23. 
5The same turn of mind is also to be found in the period of scholasticism, as is shown in the formula 
according to which the philosophy of that period was defined, Fides quaerens intellectum [Faith in search of 
intellect. Trans.]. 


24 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
o w n eyes, the technical processes that our agronomists use for the same pur-
pose. T h e forces he brings into play by these various means do not seem to 
h i m particularly mysterious. Certainly, these forces differ from those the 
m o d e r n scientist conceives o f and teaches us to use; they behave differently 
and cannot be controlled i n the same way; but to the one w h o believes i n 
them, they are no more unintelligible than gravitation or electricity is to 
physicists today. 
Furthermore, as we w i l l see i n the course o f this w o r k , the idea o f nat-
ural forces is very likely derived from that o f religious forces, so between the 
one and the other there cannot be the chasm that separates the rational from 
the irrational. N o t even the fact that religious forces are often conceived o f 
as spiritual entities and conscious wills is any p r o o f o f their irrationality. Rea-
son does not resist a priori the idea that inanimate bodies m i g h t be moved by 
intelligences, as h u m a n bodies are, even though present-day science does not 
easily accommodate this hypothesis. W h e n Leibniz proposed to conceive the 
external w o r l d as an immense society o f intelligences, between w h i c h there 
were not and could not be any but spiritual relations, he meant to be w o r k -
ing as a rationalist. H e d i d not see this universal animism as anything that 
might offend the intellect. 
Besides, the idea o f the supernatural, as we understand it, is recent. It 
presupposes an idea that is its negation, and that is i n no way primitive. To be 
able to call certain facts supernatural, one must already have an awareness that 
there is a natural order of things, i n other words, that the phenomena o f the 
universe are internally linked according to necessary relationships called laws. 
Once this principle is established, anything that departs from those laws nec-
essarily appears as beyond nature and, thus, beyond reason: For what is i n this 
sense natural is also rational, those relations expressing only the manner i n 
w h i c h things are logically connected. N o w , the idea o f universal determin-
ism is o f recent origin; even the greatest thinkers o f classical antiquity d i d not 
achieve full awareness o f it. That idea is territory w o n by the empirical sci-
ences; it is the postulate o n w h i c h they rest and w h i c h their advancement has 
proved. So long as this postulate wag lacking or not well established, there 
was nothing about the most extraordinary events that d i d not appear per-
fectly conceivable. So long as what is immovable and inflexible about the or-
der o f things was u n k n o w n , and so long as i t was seen as the w o r k o f 
contingent wills, it was o f course thought natural that these wills or others 
could modify the order o f things arbitrarily. For this reason, the miraculous 
interventions that the ancients ascribed to their gods were not i n their eyes 
miracles, i n the m o d e r n sense o f the w o r d . To them, these interventions 
were beautiful, rare, or terrible spectacles, and objects o f surprise and w o n -


Definition of Religious Phenomena and of Religion 
25 
der (9auu,aTct, mirabilia, miracula); but they were not regarded as glimpses into 
a mysterious w o r l d where reason could not penetrate. 
That mind-set is all the more readily understandable to us because it has 
not completely disappeared. A l t h o u g h the principle o f determinism is firmly 
established i n the physical and natural sciences, its introduction into the so-
cial sciences began only a century ago, and its authority there is still con-
tested. T h e idea that societies are subject to necessary laws and constitute a 
realm o f nature has deeply penetrated only a few minds. I t follows that true 
miracles are thought possible i n society. There is, for example, the accepted 
n o t i o n that a legislator can create an institution out o f nothing and transform 
one social system into another, by fiat—just as the believers o f so many reli-
gions accept that the divine w i l l made the w o r l d out o f nothing or can arbi-
trarily mutate some beings into others. As regards social things, we still have 
the mind-set o f primitives. B u t if, i n matters sociological, so many people t o -
day linger over this old-fashioned idea, it is not because social life seems o b -
scure and mysterious to them. Q u i t e the opposite: I f they are so easily 
contented w i t h such explanations, i f they cling to these illusions that are re-
peatedly contradicted by experience, i t is because social facts seem to t h e m 
the most transparent things i n the w o r l d . This is so because they have not yet 
appreciated the real obscurity, and because they have not yet grasped the 
need to t u r n to the painstaking methods o f the natural sciences i n order p r o -
gressively to sweep away the darkness. T h e same cast o f m i n d is to be found 
at the root o f many religious beliefs that startle us i n their oversimplification. 
Science, not religion, has taught m e n that things are complex and difficult to 
understand. But, Jevons replies,
6 the human m i n d has no need o f properly 
scientific education to notice that there are definite sequences and a constant 
order o f succession between phenomena or to notice that this order is often 
disturbed. A t times the sun is suddenly eclipsed; the rain does not come i n 
the season w h e n i t is expected; the m o o n is slow to reappear after its peri-
odic disappearance, and the like. Because these occurrences are outside the 
ordinary course o f events, people have imputed to t h e m extraordinary, ex-
ceptional—in a w o r d , extranatural—causes. I t is i n this form, Jevons claims, 
that the idea o f the supernatural was b o r n at the beginning o f history; and it 
is i n this way and at this m o m e n t that religion acquired its characteristic o b -
ject. 
T h e supernatural, however, is not reducible to the unforeseen. T h e new 
is just as m u c h part o f nature as the opposite. I f w e notice that, i n general, 
phenomena occur one after the other i n a definite order, w e also notice that 
6[Frank Byron] Jevons, Introduction to the History of 
Religions [London, Methuen, 1896], p. 15. 


26 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
the order is never more than approximate, that i t is not exactly the same at 
different times, and that it has all kinds o f exceptions. W i t h even very little 
experience, we become accustomed to having our expectations unmet; and 
these setbacks occur too often to seem extraordinary to us. Given a certain 
element o f chance, as well as a certain uniformity i n experience, we have no 
reason to attribute the one to causes and forces different from those to w h i c h 
the other is subject. To have the idea o f the supernatural, then, it is not 
enough for us to witness unexpected events; these events must be conceived 
o f as impossible besides—that is, impossible to reconcile w i t h an order that 
righdy or w r o n g l y seems to be a necessary part o f the order o f things. I t is 
the positive sciences that have gradually constructed this notion o f a neces-
sary order. I t follows that the contrary notion cannot have predated those sci-
ences. 
Furthermore, no matter h o w m e n have conceived their experience o f 
novelties and chance occurrences, these conceptions can i n no way be used 
to characterize religion. Religious conceptions aim above all to express and 
explain not what is exceptional and abnormal but what is constant and reg-
ular. As a general rule, the gods are used far less to account for monstrosity, 
oddity, and anomaly than for the normal march o f the universe, the move-
ment o f the stars, the r h y t h m o f the seasons, the annual g r o w t h o f vegetation, 
the perpetuation o f species, and so forth. Hence, any n o t i o n that equates re-
ligion w i t h the unexpected is w i d e o f the mark. Jevons's reply is that this way 
o f conceiving religious forces is not primitive. According to h i m , people 
conceived o f t h e m first i n order to account for disorder and accident, and 
only later used t h e m to explain the uniformities o f nature.
7 B u t it is unclear 
what could have made m e n impute such obviously contradictory functions 
to them, one after the other. Moreover, the supposition that sacred beings 
were at first confined to the negative role o f disturbers is completely arbi-
trary. As indeed we w i l l see, starting w i t h the simplest religions we know, the 
fundamental task o f sacred beings has been to maintain the normal course o f 
life by positive action.
8 
Thus the idea o f mystery is not at all original. I t does not come to man 
as a given; man himself has forged this idea as w e l l as its contrary. For this rea-
son, it is only i n a small number o f advanced religions that the idea o f mys-
tery has any place at all. Therefore i t cannot be made the 
defining 
characteristic o f religious phenomena w i t h o u t excluding from the definition 
most o f the facts to be defined. 
7 Ibid., p. 23. 
8See below Bk. III. chap. 2. 


Definition of Religious Phenomena and of Religion 
27 
II 
Another idea by w h i c h many have tried to define religion is that o f divinity. 
According to M . R é v i l l e ,
9 " R e l i g i o n is the determination o f human life 
by the sense o f a b o n d j o i n i n g the human m i n d w i t h the mysterious m i n d 
whose domination o f the w o r l d and o f itself i t recognizes, and w i t h w h i c h it 
takes pleasure i n feelingjoined." I t is a fact that i f the w o r d " d i v i n i t y " is taken 
i n a precise and narrow sense, this definition leaves aside a multitude o f o b -
viously religious facts. T h e souls o f the dead and spirits o f all kinds and ranks, 
w i t h w h i c h the religious imaginations o f so many diverse peoples have p o p -
ulated the w o r l d , are always the objects o f rites and sometimes even o f regu-
lar cults. Strictly speaking, however, they are not gods. Still, all that is 
necessary to make the definition include t h e m is to replace the w o r d " g o d " 
w i t h the more inclusive t e r m "spiritual being." 
This is what Tylor has done. " I n studying the religions o f lower races," 
he says, "the first point is to define and specify what one means by religion. 
I f one insists that the t e r m means belief i n a supreme being . . . , a certain 
number o f tribes w i l l be excluded 
from the w o r l d o f religion. B u t that 
too-narrow definition has the flaw o f identifying religion w i t h certain o f its 
particular developments. . . . It seems better to set 'spiritual beings' as a 
m i n i m u m definition."
1 0 "Spiritual beings" must be understood to mean c o n -
scious subjects that have capacities superior to those o f ordinary men, w h i c h 
therefore rightly includes the souls o f the dead, génies, and demons as well as 
deities, properly so-called. It is important to notice immediately the particu-
lar idea o f religion that this definition entails. T h e only relations we can have 
w i t h beings o f this sort are determined by the nature ascribed to them. T h e y 
are conscious beings, and w e can only influence t h e m as w e influence c o n -
sciousnesses generally, that is, by psychological means, by trying to convince 
or rouse them either w i t h words (invocations and prayers) or w i t h offerings 
and sacrifices. A n d since the object o f religion w o u l d then be to order our 
relations w i t h these special beings, there could be religion only where there 
are prayers, sacrifices, propitiatory rites, and the like. I n this way, we w o u l d 
have a very simple criterion for distinguishing what is religious from what is 
not. Frazer
1 1 systematically applies this criterion, as do several ethnographers.
1 2 
9[Albert Réville], Prolégomènes de l'histoire des religions [Paris, Fischbacher, 1881], p. 34. 
10Edward Burnett Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. I [London, John Murray, 1873, p. 491]. 
"Starting with the 
first 
edition of The Golden Bough, vol. I, pp. 30-32. [James Frazer, The Golden 
Bough, 2 vols., London and New York, Macmillan, 1890.] 
12Including [Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen and even [Konrad Theodor] Preuss, who 
calls all nonindividualized religious forces magic. 


28 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
B u t however obvious this definition may seem, given habits o f m i n d that 
w e owe to our o w n religious upbringing, there are many facts to w h i c h it is 
not applicable but that nevertheless belong to the domain o f religion. 
I n the first place, there are great religions from w h i c h the idea o f gods 
and spirits is absent, or plays only a secondary and inconspicuous role. This 
is the case i n Buddhism. Buddhism, says Burnouf, "takes its place i n opposi-
tion to Brahmanism as a morality w i t h o u t god and an atheism w i t h o u t N a -
ture."
1 3 " I t recognizes no god on w h o m man depends," says M . Barth; "its 
doctrine is absolutely atheist."
1 4 A n d M . Oldenberg, for his part, calls it "a 
religion w i t h o u t god."
1 5 T h e entire essence o f Buddhism is contained i n four 
propositions that the faithful call the Four N o b l e Truths.
1 6 T h e first states 
that the existence o f suffering is tied to the perpetual change o f things; the 
second finds the cause o f suffering i n desire; the third makes the suppression 
o f desire the only way to end suffering; the fourth lists the three stages that 
must be passed through to end suffering—uprightness, meditation, and f i -
nally wisdom, full knowledge o f the doctrine. T h e end o f the road—deliv-
erance, salvation by Nirvana—is reached after these stages have been passed 
through. 
I n none o f these principles is there any question o f divinity. The B u d -
dhist is not preoccupied w i t h k n o w i n g where this w o r l d o f becoming i n 
w h i c h he lives and suffers came from; he accepts i t as a fact,
1 7 and all his striv-
i n g is to escape it. O n the other hand, for this w o r k o f salvation he counts 
only o n himself; he "has no god to thank, just as i n his struggle he calls u p o n 
none to help."
1 8 Instead o f praying—in the usual sense o f the w o r d , turning 
to a superior being to beg for help—he withdraws into himself and m e d i -
tates. This is not to say "that he denies outright the existence o f beings 
"[Eugène] Burnouf, Introduction à l'histoire du bouddhisme indien, 2d. ed. [Paris, Maisonneuve, 1876], p. 
464. The last word of the text means that Buddhism does not even accept the existence of an eternal Na-
ture. 
"Auguste Barth, The Religions of India [translated 
from 
French by Rev. J. Wood, London, Houghton 
Mifflin, 1882], p. 110. 
15[Hermann] Oldenberg, Le Bouddha [Sa vie, sa doctrine, sa communauté, translated from the German by 
A. Foucher, Paris, F. Alcan, 1894, p. 51. I could not find an edition Dürkheim lists as translated by 
"Hoey" and giving the page as 53. Trans.]. 
16Ibid. [pp. 214, 318]. Cf. Hendrick Kern, Histoire du bouddhisme dans l'Inde, vol. I [Paris, Ernest Ler-
oux, 1901], pp. 389ff. 
"Oldenberg, Bouddha, p. 259 [this passage actually examines the denial of the existence of the soul. 
Trans.]; Barth, Religions of 
India, p. 110. 
'"Oldenberg, Bouddha, p. 314. 


Definition of Religious Phenomena and of Religion 
29 
named Indra, A g n i , or Varuna;
1 9 but he feels that he owes them nothing and 
has n o t h i n g to do w i t h them," because their power is effective only over the 
things o f this w o r l d — a n d those things, for h i m , are w i t h o u t value. H e is thus 
atheist i n the sense that he is uninterested i n whether gods exist. Moreover, 
even i f they exist and no matter what power they may have, the saint, or he 
w h o is unfettered by the w o r l d , regards himself as superior to them. The 
stature o f beings lies not i n the extent o f their power over things but i n the 
extent o f their progress along the way to salvation.
2 0 
It is true that, i n at least some divisions o f the Buddhist church, * the 
Buddha has come to be regarded as a k i n d o f god. H e has his temples and has 
become the object o f a cult. B u t the cult is very simple, essentially limited to 
offerings o f a few flowers and the veneration o f relics or sacred images. I t is 
little more than a commemorative cult. B u t further, assuming the t e r m to be 
apposite, this divinization o f the Buddha is peculiar to what has been called 
N o r t h e r n Buddhism. " T h e Buddhists o f the South," says Kern, "and the 
least advanced among the Buddhists o f the N o r t h can be said, according to 
presently available evidence, to speak o f the founder o f their doctrine as i f he 
were a man."
2 1 T h e y probably do ascribe to the Buddha extraordinary p o w -
ers, superior to those ordinary mortals possess; but it is a very old belief i n 
India (and a belief widespread i n many different religions) that a great saint is 
gifted w i t h exceptional virtues.
2 2 Still, a saint is not a god, any more than a 
priest or a magician is, despite the superhuman faculties that are often as-
cribed to them. Besides, according to the best scholarly authority, this sort o f 
theism and the complex mythology that ordinarily goes w i t h it are no more 
than a derivative and deviant f o r m o f Buddhism. A t first, the Buddha was not 
regarded as anything other than "the wisest o f m e n . "
2 3 " T h e conception o f a 
Buddha w h o is other than a man w h o has reached the highest degree o f h o -
liness is," says Burnouf, "outside the circle o f ideas that are the very founda-
*Here, as in the definition of religion (p. 44), Durkheim capitalizes the word "church." 
19Barth [Religions of India], p. 109. "I am deeply convinced," says Burnouf as well, "that if Çâkya had 
not found around him a Pantheon full of the gods whose names I gave, he would have seen no need what-
ever to invent it" ([Eugene Bournoufj, Bouddhisme indien, p. 119). 
20Burnouf, Bouddhisme indien, p. 117. 
21Kern, Histoire du bouddhisme, vol. I, p. 289. 
22"The belief universally accepted in India that great holiness is necessarily accompanied by supernat-
ural faculties, is the sole support that he (Çâkya) had to find in spirits" (Burnouf, Bouddhisme indien, p. 
119). 
23Ibid., p. 120. 


30 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
t i o n o f even the simple Sutras";
2 4 and as the same author adds elsewhere, "his 
humanity has remained a fact so uncontestably acknowledged by all that it 
did not occur to the m y t h makers, to w h o m miracles come very easily, to 
make a god out o f h i m after his death."
2 5 Hence, one may ask whether he has 
ever reached the point o f being completely stripped o f human character and 
thus whether it w o u l d be proper to liken h i m to a g o d ;
2 6 whatever the case 
is, it w o u l d be to a god o f a very special nature, and whose role i n no way re-
sembles that o f other divine personalities. A god is first o f all a living being 
on w h o m man must count and o n w h o m he can count; now, the Buddha has 
died, he has entered Nirvana, and he can do n o t h i n g more i n the course o f 
human events.
2 7 
Finally, and whatever else one may conclude about the divinity o f the 
Buddha, the fact remains that this conception is w h o l l y extraneous to what 
is truly fundamental i n Buddhism. Buddhism consists first and foremost i n 
the idea o f salvation, and salvation only requires one to k n o w and practice 
the right doctrine. O f course, that doctrine w o u l d not have been knowable 
i f the Buddha had not come to reveal it; but once that revelation was made, 
the Buddha's w o r k was done. F r o m then on, he ceased to be a necessary fac-
tor i n religious life. T h e practice o f the Four H o l y Truths w o u l d be possible 
even i f the m e m o r y o f the one w h o made t h e m k n o w n was erased from 
m e m o r y .
2 8 Very different from this is Christianity, w h i c h is inconceivable 
w i t h o u t the idea o f Christ ever present and his cult ever practiced; for it is 
through the ever-living Christ, daily sacrificed, that the c o m m u n i t y o f the 
faithful goes o n communicating w i t h the supreme source o f its spiritual 
life.
2 9 
24Ibid„ p. 107. 
25Ibid., p. 302. 
26Kern makes this point in the following terms: "In certain respects, he is a man; in certain respects, 
he is not a man; in certain respects, he is neither one nor the other" (Histoire du bouddhisme vol. 1
, p. 290). 
27"The idea that the divine head of the Community is not absent from among his people, but in real-
ity remains among them as their master and king, in such a way that the cult is nothing other than the ex-
pression of the permanence of that common life—this idea is entirely foreign to Buddhists. Their own 
master is in Nirvana; if his faithful cried out to him he could not hear them" (Oldenberg, Le Bouddha [p. 
368]). 
28"In all its basic traits, the Buddhist doctrine could exist, just as it does in reality, even if the idea of 
Buddha remained wholly foreign to it" (Oldenberg, Le Bouddha, p. 322). And what is said of the histor-
ical Buddha also applies to all the mythological ones. 
29See in this connection Max Müller, Natural Religion [London, Longmans, Green & Co., 1889], pp. 
103ff., 190. 


Definition of Religious Phenomena and of Religion 
31 
A l l the preceding applies equally to another great religion o f India, Jain-
ism. Additionally, the t w o doctrines h o l d practically the same conception o f 
the w o r l d and o f life. "Like the Buddhists," says M . Barth, "the Jainists are 
atheists. They reject the idea o f a creator; for them, the w o r l d is eternal and 
they explicitly deny that there could exist a being perfect from all eternity." 
Like the N o r t h e r n Buddhists, the Jainists, or at least certain o f them, have 
nevertheless reverted to a sort o f deism; i n the inscriptions o f the Deccan, 
one Jinapati* is spoken of, a k i n d o f supreme Jina w h o is called the first cre-
ator; but such language, says the same author, "conflicts w i t h the most ex-
plicit statements o f their most authoritative authors."
3 0 
Furthermore, this indifference to the divine is so developed i n Buddhism 
and Jainism because the seed existed i n the Brahmanism from w h i c h b o t h re-
ligions derive. I n at least certain o f its forms, Brahmanic speculation led to "a 
frankly materialist and atheist explanation o f the universe."
3 1 W i t h the pas-
sage o f time, the multiple deities that the peoples o f India had learned to 
worship were more or less amalgamated into a k i n d o f abstract and imper-
sonal principal deity, the essence o f all that exists. M a n contains w i t h i n h i m -
self this supreme reality, i n w h i c h n o t h i n g o f divine personhood remains; or 
rather, he is one w i t h it, since nothing exists apart from it. Thus to find and 
unite w i t h this reality, he does not have to search for support outside himself; 
all it takes is for h i m to focus o n himself and meditate. Oldenburg says, 
" W h e n Buddhism takes up the grand endeavor o f imagining a w o r l d o f sal-
vation i n w h i c h man saves himself, and o f creating a religion w i t h o u t a god, 
Brahmanic speculation has already prepared the ground. T h e n o t i o n o f d i -
vinity has gradually receded; the figures o f the ancient gods d i m , and slowly 
disappear. Far above the terrestrial w o r l d , Brahma sits enthroned i n his eter-
nal quiet, and only one person remains to take an active part i n the great 
w o r k o f salvation: M a n . "
3 2 N o t e , then, that a considerable part o f religious 
evolution has consisted o f a gradual movement away from the ideas o f spiri-
tual being and divinity. Here are great religions i n w h i c h invocations, propi-
tiations, sacrifices, and prayers properly so-called are far from dominant, and 
therefore do not exhibit the distinguishing mark by w h i c h , it is claimed, 
specifically religious phenomena are to be recognized. 
*This term means "conquering lord" and, according to current scholarship, refers to a spiritual ideal, 
not c
o a creator. I am indebted to my colleague Douglas Brooks on this point. 
30Barth, Religions of India, p. 146. 
"Barch, ["Religions de l'Inde"] in Encyclopédie des sciences religieuses [Paris, Sandoz et Fischbacher, 
1877-1882], vol. VI, p. 548. 
3201denberg, Le Bouddha [p. 51]. 


32 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
B u t many rites that are w h o l l y independent o f any idea o f gods or spiri-
tual beings are found even i n deistic religions. First o f all, there are a m u l t i -
tude o f prohibitions. For example, the Bible commands the w o m a n to live i n 
isolation for a definite period each m o n t h ,
3 3 imposes similar isolation at the 
time o f c h i l d b i r t h ,
3 4 and forbids hitching a donkey and a horse together or 
wearing a garment i n w h i c h hemp is mixed w i t h l i n e n .
3 5 It is impossible to 
see what role belief i n Yahweh could have played i n these prohibitions, for 
he is absent from all the relations thus prohibited and could hardly be inter-
ested i n them. T h e same can be said for most o f the dietary restrictions. Such 
restrictions are not peculiar to the Hebrews; i n various forms, they are found 
i n innumerable religions. 
It is true that these rites are purely negative, but they are nonetheless re-
ligious. Furthermore, there are other rites that impose active and positive 
obligations u p o n the faithful and yet are o f the same nature. They act o n their 
o w n , and their efficacy does not depend u p o n any divine power; they m e -
chanically b r i n g about the effects that are their reason for being. They c o n -
sist neither o f prayers nor o f offerings to a being o n whose g o o d w i l l the 
anticipated result depends; instead, the result is achieved through the auto-
matic operation o f the ritual. Such is the case, for example, o f sacrifice i n 
Vedic religion. "Sacrifice," says M . Bergaigne, "exerts direct influence u p o n 
celestial phenomena";
3 6 i t is all powerful by itself and w i t h o u t any divine i n -
fluence. 
For instance, i t is sacrifice that broke the doors o f the cave where the 
auroras were imprisoned, and thus did daylight erupt into the w o r l d .
3 7 L i k e -
wise, it was appropriate hymns that acted directly to make the waters o f the 
sky 
flow o n earth—and this despite the gods.
38 
Certain ascetic practices are 
equally efficacious. Consider this: "Sacrifice is so m u c h the principle, par ex-
3 3I Sam. 21, 6. [This is in fact about the sexual purity of men. Trans.] 
34Lev. 12. 
35Deut. 12, 1
0
—
1
1
. [These verses are in fact about establishing a place for God's name to dwell in. 
They go on to discuss sacrifices. Trans.] 
36Abel Bergaigne, La Religion védique [d'après les hymnes du Rig Véda, 4 vols. Paris, F. Vieweg, 
1878-1897], vol. I, p. 22. 
37Ibid., p. 133. 
3 8M. Bergaigne writes, "No text better reveals the inner meaning of magical action by man upon the 
waters of the sky than Verse X, 32, 7, in which that belief is expressed in general terms a
s applicable to 
the man of today as to his real or mythological ancestors. The ignorant man queried the savant; taught by 
the savant, he acts, and therein lies the benefit of his teaching, he conquers the rush of the rapids." Ibid, 
(p. 137). 


Definition of Religious Phenomena and of Religion 
33 
cellence, that not only the o r i g i n o f m e n but even that o f the gods has been 
ascribed to it. Such an idea may very well seem strange. It is explicable, h o w -
ever, as one ultimate consequence, among others, o f the idea that sacrifice is 
all powerful."
3 9 Thus, the w h o l e first part o f M . Bergaigne's w o r k deals only 
w i t h those sacrifices i n w h i c h the deities play no role. 
This fact is not peculiar to Vedic religion; to the contrary, it is quite 
widespread. I n any cult, there are practices that act by themselves, by a virtue 
that is their o w n , and w i t h o u t any god's stepping i n between the individual 
w h o performs the rite and the object sought. W h e n the Jew stirred the air at 
the Feast o f the Tabernacles by shaking w i l l o w branches i n a certain rhythm, 
it was to make the w i n d b l o w and the rain fall; the belief was that the rite 
produced the desired result automatically, provided it was correctly per-
f o r m e d .
4 0 I t is this, by the way, that explains the primary importance that 
nearly all cults give to the physical aspect o f ceremonies. This religious for-
malism (probably the earliest f o r m o f legal formalism) arises from the fact 
that, having i n and o f themselves the source o f their efficacy, the formulas to 
be pronounced and the movements to be executed w o u l d lose efficacy i f they 
were not exactly the same as those that had already proved successful. 
Thus there are rites w i t h o u t gods, and indeed rites from w h i c h gods de-
rive. N o t all religious virtues emanate from divine personalities, and there are 
cult ties other than those that unite man w i t h a deity. Thus, religion is 
broader than the idea o f gods or spirits and so cannot be defined exclusively 
i n those terms. 
Ill 
W i t h these definitions set aside, let us n o w see h o w we can approach the 
problem. 
First, let us note that, i n all these formulas, scholars have been trying to 
express the nature o f religion as a whole. A l t h o u g h religion is a w h o l e c o m -
posed o f parts—a more or less complex system o f myths, dogmas, rites, and 
ceremonies—they operate as i f it formed a k i n d o f indivisible entity. Since a 
w h o l e can be defined only i n relationship to the parts that comprise it, a bet-
ter m e t h o d is to try to characterize the elementary phenomena from w h i c h 
any religion results, and then characterize the system produced by their 
"Ibid., p. 139. 
^Other examples are to be found in [Henri] Hubert, "Magia," in Dictionnaire des antiquités, vol. VI, p. 
1509 [Paris, Hachette, 1877-1918]. 


34 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
union. This m e t h o d is all the more indispensable i n v i e w o f the fact that 
there are religious phenomena that do not fall under the jurisdiction o f any 
particular religion. Those that f o r m the subject matter o f folklore do not. I n 
general, these phenomena are j u m b l e d survivals, the remnants o f extinct re-
ligions; but there are some as well that are f o r m e d spontaneously under the 
influence o f local causes. I n Europe, Christianity undertook to absorb and 
assimilate them; it i m p r i n t e d t h e m w i t h Christian coloration. Nonetheless, 
there are many that have persisted u n t i l recendy or that still persist more or 
less autonomously—festivals o f the maypole, the summer solstice, carnival, 
assorted beliefs about genies and local demons, and so on. A l t h o u g h the re-
ligious character o f these phenomena is receding more and more, their reli-
gious importance is still such that they have permitted Mannhardt* and his 
school to rejuvenate the science o f religions. A definition o f religion that d i d 
not take t h e m into account w o u l d not encompass all that is religious. 
Religious phenomena fall into t w o basic categories: beliefs and rites. 
T h e first are states o f o p i n i o n and consist o f representations; the second are 
particular modes o f action. Between these t w o categories o f phenomena lies 
all that separates t h i n k i n g from doing. 
T h e rites can be distinguished f r o m other human practices—for exam-
ple, moral practices—only by the special nature o f their object. Like a rite, a 
moral rule prescribes ways o f behaving to us, but those ways o f behaving ad-
dress objects o f a different k i n d . I t is the object o f the rite that must be char-
acterized, i n order to characterize the rite itself. T h e special nature o f that 
object is expressed i n the belief. Therefore, only after having defined the be-
lief can we define the rite. 
Whether simple or complex, all k n o w n religious beliefs display a c o m -
m o n feature: T h e y presuppose a classification o f the real or ideal things that 
m e n conceive o f into t w o classes—two opposite genera—that are widely 
designated by t w o distinct terms, w h i c h the words profane and sacred translate 
fairly well. T h e division o f the w o r l d into t w o domains, one containing all 
that is sacred and the other all that is profane—such is the distinctive trait o f 
religious thought. Beliefs, myths, dogmas, and legends are either representa-
tions or systems o f representations that express the nature o f sacred things, 
the virtues and powers attributed to them, their history, and their relation-
ships w i t h one another as w e l l as w i t h profane things. Sacred things are not 
""Wilhelm Mannhardt (1831-1880). Influenced by Jakob Grimm and borrowing methods from the 
new disciplines of 
geology and archaeology, he pioneered the scientific study of 
oral tradition in Germany. 
James G. Frazer's The Golden Bough drew on Mannhardt's European material. 


Definition of Religious Phenomena and of Religion 
35 
simply those personal beings that are called gods or spirits. A rock, a tree, a 
spring, a pebble, a piece o f w o o d , a house, i n a w o r d anything, can be sacred. 
A rite can have sacredness; indeed there is no rite that does not have it to 
some degree. There are words, phrases, and formulas that can be said only by 
consecrated personages; there are gestures and movements that cannot be ex-
ecuted by just anyone. I f Vedic sacrifice has had such great efficacy—if, i n -
deed, sacrifice was far from being a method o f gaining the gods' favor but, 
according to mythology, actually generated the gods—that is because the 
virtue i t possessed was comparable to that o f the most sacred beings. T h e cir-
cle o f sacred objects cannot be fixed once and for all; its scope can vary i n f i -
nitely from one religion to another. W h a t makes Buddhism a religion is that, 
i n the absence o f gods, i t accepts the existence o f sacred things, namely, the 
Four N o b l e Truths and the practices that are derived from t h e m .
4 1 
B u t I have confined myself thus far to enumerating various sacred things 
as examples: I must n o w indicate the general characteristics by w h i c h they 
are distinguished from profane things. 
O n e m i g h t be tempted to define sacred things by the rank that is o r d i -
narily assigned to t h e m i n the hierarchy o f beings. T h e y tend to be regarded 
as superior i n dignity and power to profane things, and particularly to man, 
i n no way sacred w h e n he is only a man. Indeed, he is portrayed as occupy-
i n g a rank inferior to and dependent u p o n them. W h i l e that portrayal is cer-
tainly not w i t h o u t truth, n o t h i n g about it is truly characteristic o f the sacred. 
Subordination o f one thing to another is not enough to make one sacred and 
the other not. Slaves are subordinate to their masters, subjects to their king, 
soldiers to their leaders, lower classes to r u l i n g classes, the miser to his gold, 
and the power seeker to the power holders. I f a man is sometimes said to have 
the religion o f beings or things i n w h i c h he recognizes an eminent value and 
a k i n d o f superiority to h i m , i t is obvious that, i n all such cases, the w o r d is 
taken i n a metaphorical sense, and there is n o t h i n g i n those relations that is 
religious i n a strict sense.
4 2 
O n the other hand, w e should bear i n m i n d that there are things w i t h 
w h i c h man feels relatively at ease, even though they are sacred to the highest 
degree. A n amulet has sacredness, and yet there is n o t h i n g extraordinary 
about the respect i t inspires. Even face to face w i t h his gods, man is not al-
ways i n such a marked state o f inferiority, for he very often uses physical co'-
ercion o n t h e m to get what he wants. H e beats the fetish w h e n he is 
41Not to mention the sage or the saint who practices these truths, and who is for this reason sacred. 
42This is not to say that the relations cannot take on a religious character, but that they do ¡y>t neces-
sarily. 


36 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
displeased, only to be reconciled w i t h i t if, i n the end, it becomes more 
amenable to the wishes o f its worshipper.
4 3 To get rain, stones are t h r o w n 
into the spring or the sacred lake where the god o f the rain is presumed to 
reside; it is believed that he is forced by this means to come out and show 
himself.
4 4 Furthermore, w h i l e i t is true that man is a dependent o f his gods, 
this dependence is mutual. T h e gods also need man; w i t h o u t offerings and 
sacrifices, they w o u l d die. I w i l l have occasion to show that this dependence 
o f gods o n their faithful is found even i n the most idealistic* religions. 
However, i f the criterion o f a purely hierarchical distinction is at once 
too general and too imprecise, nothing but their heterogeneity is left to de-
fine the relation between the sacred and the profane. B u t what makes this 
heterogeneity sufficient to characterize that classification o f things and to dis-
tinguish 
it from any other is that i t has a very particular feature: It is absolute. 
I n the history o f human thought, there is no other example o f t w o categories 
o f things as profoundly differentiated or as radically opposed to one another. 
T h e traditional opposition between good and evil is n o t h i n g beside this one: 
G o o d and evil are t w o opposed species o f the same genus, namely morals, 
just as health and illness are n o t h i n g more than t w o different aspects o f the 
same order o f facts, life; by contrast, the sacred and the profane are always and 
everywhere conceived by the human intellect as separate genera, as t w o 
worlds w i t h nothing i n c o m m o n . T h e energies at play i n one are not merely 
those encountered i n the other, but raised to a higher degree; they are dif-
ferent i n k i n d . This opposition has been conceived differently i n different re-
ligions. Here, localizing the t w o kinds o f things i n different regions o f the 
physical universe has appeared sufficient to separate them; there, the sacred is 
t h r o w n into an ideal and transcendent milieu, w h i l e the residuum is aban-
doned as the property o f the material w o r l d . B u t w h i l e the forms o f the c o n -
trast are variable,
4 5 the fact o f it is universal. 
This is not to say that a being can never pass from one o f these worlds to 
the other. B u t w h e n this passage occurs, the manner i n w h i c h i t occurs 
*For the meaning of "idealistic," bear in mind Durkheim's contrast (above, p. 2) between religions 
that contain more concepts and fewer sensations and images. 
43[Fritz] Schultze, [Der] Fetichismus [Ein Beitrag zur Anthropologic und Religionsgeschichte, Leipzig, C. 
Wilfferodt, 1871], p. 129. 
"Examples of these customs will be found in [James George] Frazer, Golden Bough, 2d ed., vol. I 
[New York, Macmillan, 1894], pp. 8Iff. 
45The conception according to which the profane is opposed to the sacred as the rational is to the ir-
rational; the intelligible to the mysterious, is only one of the forms in which this opposition is expressed. 
Science, once constituted, has taken on a profane character, especially in the eyes of the Christian reli-
gions; in consequence, it has seemed that science could not be applied to sacred things. 


Definition of Religious Phenomena and of Religion 
37 
demonstrates the fundamental duality o f the t w o realms, for it implies a true 
metamorphosis. Rites o f initiation, w h i c h are practiced by a great many peo-
ples, demonstrate this especially well. Initiation is a l o n g series o f rites to i n -
troduce the young man into religious life. For the first time, he comes out o f 
the purely profane w o r l d , where he has passed his childhood, and enters into 
the circle o f sacred things. This change o f status is conceived not as a mere 
development o f preexisting seeds but as a transformation totius substantiae. * 
A t that moment, the young man is said to die, and the existence o f the par-
ticular person he was, to cease—instantaneously to be replaced by another. 
H e is b o r n again i n a new f o r m . Appropriate ceremonies are held to b r i n g 
about the death and the rebirth, w h i c h are taken not merely i n a symbolic 
sense but literally.
4 6 Is this not p r o o f that there is a rupture between the p r o -
fane being that he was and the religious being that he becomes? 
Indeed, this heterogeneity is such that i t degenerates into real antago-
nism. T h e t w o worlds are conceived o f not only as separate but also as hos-
tile and jealous rivals. Since the condition o f belonging fully to one is fully 
to have left the other, man is exhorted to retire completely from the profane 
i n order to live an exclusively religious life. F r o m thence comes monasticism, 
w h i c h artificially organizes a milieu that is apart from, outside of, and closed 
to the natural milieu where ordinary m e n live a secular life, and that tends al-
most to be its antagonist. F r o m thence as well comes mystic asceticism, 
w h i c h seeks to uproot all that may remain o f man's attachment to the w o r l d . 
Finally, from thence come all forms o f religious suicide, the crowning logical 
step o f this asceticism, since the only means o f escaping profane life fully and 
finally is escaping life altogether. 
T h e opposition o f these t w o genera is expressed outwardly by a visible 
sign that permits ready recognition o f this very special classification, w h e r -
ever it exists. T h e m i n d experiences deep repugnance about mingling, even 
simple contact, between the corresponding things, because the notion o f the 
sacred is always and everywhere separate from the n o t i o n o f the profane i n 
man's m i n d , and because we imagine a k i n d o f logical v o i d between them. 
T h e state o f dissociation i n w h i c h the ideas are found i n consciousness is too 
strongly contradicted by such mingling, or even by their being too close to 
*Of the whole essence. 
46See James George Frazer, "On Some Ceremonies of the Central Australian Tribes," in AAAS [Mel-
bourne, Victoria, published by the association], 1901 [vols. VIII-IX], pp. 313ff. The concept is, more-
over, very common. In India, mere participation in the sacrificial act has the same effects; the sacrifices 
by the very fact of entering into the circle of sacred things, changes personality. (See Henri Hubert and 
Marcel Mauss, "Essai sur [la nature et fonction du] sacrifice," AS, vol. II [1897], p. 101.) 


38 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
one another. T h e sacred thing is, par excellence, that w h i c h the profane must 
not and cannot touch w i t h impunity. To be sure, this prohibition cannot go 
so far as to make all communication between the t w o worlds impossible, for 
i f the profane could i n no way enter into relations w i t h the sacred, the sacred 
w o u l d be o f no use. This placing i n relationship i n itself is always a delicate 
operation that requires precautions and a more or less complex initiation.
4 7 
Yet such an operation is impossible i f the profane does not lose its specific 
traits, and i f it does not become sacred itself i n some measure and to some 
degree. T h e t w o genera cannot, at the same time, b o t h come close to one 
another and remain what they were. 
N o w we have a first criterion o f religious beliefs. N o doubt, w i t h i n these 
t w o fundamental genera, there are secondary species that are themselves 
more or less incompatible w i t h each other.
4 8 B u t characteristically, the reli-
gious phenomenon is such that it always assumes a bipartite division o f the 
universe, k n o w n and knowable, into t w o genera that include all that exists 
but radically exclude one another. Sacred things are things protected and iso-
lated by prohibitions; profane things are those things to w h i c h the p r o h i b i -
tions are applied and that must keep at a distance from what is sacred. 
Religious beliefs are those representations that express the nature o f sacred 
things and the relations they have w i t h other sacred things or w i t h profane 
things. Finally, rites are rules o f conduct that prescribe h o w man must c o n -
duct himself w i t h sacred things. 
W h e n a certain number o f sacred things have relations o f coordination 
and subordination w i t h one another, so as to f o r m a system that has a certain 
coherence and does not belong to any other system o f the same sort, then the 
beliefs and rites, taken together, constitute a religion. B y this definition, a re-
ligion is not necessarily contained w i t h i n a single idea and does not derive 
from 
a single principle that may vary w i t h the circumstances it deals w i t h , 
while remaining basically the same everywhere. Instead, it is a whole formed 
o f separate and relatively distinct parts. Each homogeneous group o f sacred 
things, or indeed each sacred thing o f any importance, constitutes an organi-
zational center around w h i c h gravitates a set o f beliefs and rites, a cult o f its 
o w n . There is no religion, however unified it may be, that does not acknowl-
edge a plurality o f sacred things. Even Christianity, at least i n its Catholic 
form, accepts the V i r g i n , the angels, the saints, the souls o f the dead, etc.-— 
47See what I say about initiation on p. 37, above. 
48Later I will show how, for example, certain species of sacred things between which there is incom-
patibility exclude one another as the sacred excludes the profane (Bk.III, chap.5, §4). 


Definition of Religious Phenomena and of Religion 
39 
above and beyond the divine personality (who, besides, is both three and one). 
As a rule, furthermore, religion is not merely a single cult either but is made 
up o f a system o f cults that possess a certain autonomy. This autonomy is also 
variable. Sometimes the cults are ranked and subordinated to some dominant 
cult into w h i c h they are eventually absorbed; but sometimes as well they sim-
ply exist side by side i n confederation. T h e religion to be studied i n this book 
w i l l provide an example o f this confederate organization. 
A t the same time, we can explain w h y groups o f religious phenomena 
that belong to no constituted religion can exist: because they are not or are 
no longer integrated into a religious system. If, for specific reasons, one o f 
those cults just mentioned should manage to survive w h i l e the whole to 
w h i c h i t belonged has disappeared, i t w i l l survive only i n fragments. This is 
what has happened to so many agrarian cults that live o n i n folklore. I n cer-
tain cases, what persists i n that f o r m is not even a cult, but a mere ceremony 
or a particular r i t e .
4 9 
A l t h o u g h this definition is merely preliminary, i t indicates the terms i n 
w h i c h the problem that dominates the science o f religions must be posed. I f 
sacred beings are believed to be distinguished from the others solely by the 
greater intensity o f the powers attributed to them, the question o f h o w m e n 
could have imagined t h e m is rather simple: N o t h i n g more is needed than to 
identify those forces that, through their exceptional energy, have managed to 
impress the human m i n d forcefully enough to inspire religious feelings. B u t 
if, as I have tried to establish, sacred things are different i n nature from p r o -
fane things, i f they are different i n their essence, the problem is far more 
complex. I n that case, one must ask what led man to see the w o r l d as t w o 
heterogeneous and incomparable worlds, even though nothing i n sense ex-
perience seems likely to have suggested the idea o f such a radical duality. 
IV 
Even so, this definition is not yet complete, for it fits equally well two orders o f 
things that must be distinguished even though they are akin: magic and religion. 
Magic, too, is made up o f beliefs and rites. Like religion, it has its o w n 
myths and dogmas, but these are less well developed, probably because, given 
its pursuit o f technical and utilitarian ends, magic does not waste time i n pure 
speculation. Magic also has its ceremonies, sacrifices, purifications, prayers, 
49This is the case, 
for 
example, of certain marriage and funeral rites. 


40 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
songs, and dances. Those beings w h o m the magician invokes and the forces 
he puts to w o r k are not only o f the same nature as the forces addressed by re-
ligion but very often are the same forces. I n the most primitive societies, the 
souls o f the dead are i n essence sacred things and objects o f religious rites, but 
at the same time, they have played a major role i n magic. I n Australia
5 0 as well 
as i n Melanesia,
5 1 i n ancient Greece as w e l l as among Christian peoples,
5 2 the 
souls, bones, and hair o f the dead figure among the tools most often used by 
the magician. Demons are also a c o m m o n instrument o f magical influence. 
N o w , demons are also surrounded by prohibitions; they too are separated and 
live i n a w o r l d apart. Indeed, i t is often difficult to distinguish them from 
gods proper.
5 3 Besides, even i n Christianity, is not the devil a fallen god? A n d 
apart from his origins, does he not have a religious character, simply because 
the hell o f w h i c h he is the keeper is an indispensable part i n the machinery 
o f the Christian religion? T h e magician can invoke regular and 
official 
deities. Sometimes these are gods o f a foreign people: For example, the 
Greek magicians called u p o n Egyptian, Assyrian, or Jewish gods. Sometimes 
they are even national gods: Hecate and Diana were objects o f a magic cult. 
T h e V i r g i n , the Christ, and the saints were used i n the same manner by 
Christian magicians.
5 4 
M u s t we therefore say that magic cannot be rigorously differentiated 
from 
religion—that magic is full o f religion and religion full o f magic and, 
consequently, that it is impossible to separate t h e m and define the one w i t h -
out the other? W h a t makes that thesis hard to sustain is the marked repug-
nance o f religion for magic and the hostility o f magic to religion i n return. 
Magic takes a k i n d o f professional pleasure i n profaning holy things,
5 5 i n -
verting religious ceremonies i n its rites.
5 6 O n the other hand, while religion 
has not always condemned and prohibited magic rites, i t has generally re-
50See [Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen, The Native Tribes of Central Australia [Lon-
don, Macmillan, 1889], pp. 534£F., and Northern Tribes of Central Australia [London, Macmillan, 1904], p. 
463; [Alfred William] Howitt, Native Tribes of South East Australia [London, Macmillan, 1904], pp. 
359-361. 
51See [Robert Henry] Codrington, The Melanesians [Studies in Their 
Anthropology and Folklore, Oxford, 
Clarendon Press, 1891], chap. 12. 
52See Hubert, "Magia," in Dictionnaire des antiquités. 
53For example, in Melanesia the tindalo is a spirit that is sometimes religious and sometimes magical 
(Codrington, The Melanesians, pp. 125ff., 194ff.). 
54See Hubert and Mauss, "Esquisse d'une théorie générale de la magie," AS, vol. VII [1904], pp. 
83-84. 
55For example, the Host is profaned in the Black Mass. 
56See Hubert, "Magia," in Dictionnaire des antiquités. 


Definition of Religious Phenomena and of 
Religion 
41 
garcled t h e m w i t h disfavor. As messieurs H u b e r t and Mauss point out, there 
is something inherendy antireligious about the maneuvers o f the magician.
5 7 
So i t is difficult for these t w o institutions not to oppose one another at some 
point, whatever the relations between them. Since m y intention is to l i m i t 
m y research to religion and stop where magic begins, discovering what dis-
tinguishes them is all the more important. 
Here is h o w a line o f demarcation can be drawn between these t w o 
domains. 
Religious beliefs proper are always shared by a definite group that pro-
fesses t h e m and that practices the corresponding rites. N o t only are they i n -
dividually accepted by all members o f that group, but they also belong to the 
group and unify it. T h e individuals w h o comprise the group feel j o i n e d to 
one another by the fact o f c o m m o n faith. A society whose members are 
united because they imagine the sacred w o r l d and its relations w i t h the p r o -
fane w o r l d i n the same way, and because they translate this c o m m o n repre-
sentation into identical practices, is what is called a C h u r c h . * I n history we 
do not find religion w i t h o u t Church. Sometimes the C h u r c h is narrowly na-
tional; sometimes i t extends beyond frontiers; sometimes it encompasses an 
entire people (Rome, Athens, the Hebrews); sometimes it encompasses only 
a fraction (Christian denominations since the c o m i n g o f Protestantism); 
sometimes it is led by a body o f priests; sometimes i t is more or less w i t h o u t 
any official directing body.
5 8 B u t wherever we observe religious life, i t has a 
definite group as its basis. Even so-called private cults, like the domestic cult 
or a corporate cult, satisfy this condition: T h e y are always celebrated by a 
group, the family or the corporation. A n d , furthermore, even these private 
religions often are merely special forms o f a broader religion that embraces 
the totality o f life.
5 9 These small Churches are i n reality only chapels i n a 
larger C h u r c h and, because o f this very scope, deserve all the more to be 
called by that name.
6 0 
*Durkheim capitalizes this term. 
"Hubert and Mauss, "Esquisse," p. 19. 
58Certainly it is rare for each ceremony not to have its director at the moment it is conducted; even in 
the most crudely organized societies, there generally are men designated, due to the importance of their 
social role, to exercise a directive influence upon religious life (for example, the heads of local groups in 
certain Australian societies). But this attribution of functions is nevertheless very loose. 
5 9In Athens, the gods addressed by the domestic cult are only specialized forms of the gods of the City 
(Zev; KTrjoxo?, Zev; epicetos). [Zeus, protector of property, Zeus, the household god. Trans.] Similarly, 
in the Middle Ages, the patrons of brotherhoods are saints of the calendar. 
^For the name of Church ordinarily applies only to a group whose common beliefs refer to a sphere 
of less specialized things. 


42 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
Magic is an entirely different matter. Granted, magic beliefs are never 
w i t h o u t a certain currency. T h e y are often widespread among broad strata o f 
the population, and there are even peoples where they count no fewer active 
followers than religion proper. B u t they do not b i n d m e n w h o believe i n 
them to one another and unite them into the same group, living the same life. 
There is no Church of magic. Between the magician and the individuals w h o 
consult h i m , there are no durable ties that make t h e m members o f a single 
moral body, comparable to the ties that j o i n the faithful o f the same god or 
the adherents o f the same cult. T h e magician has a clientele, not a Church, 
and his clients may have no mutual relations, and may even be u n k n o w n to 
one another. Indeed, the relations they have w i t h h i m are generally acciden-
tal and transient, analogous to those o f a sick man w i t h his doctor. T h e offi-
cial and public character w i t h w h i c h the magician is sometimes invested 
makes no difference. That he functions i n broad daylight does not j o i n h i m 
i n a more regular and lasting manner w i t h those w h o make use o f his services. 
It is true that, i n certain cases, magicians f o r m a society among themselves. 
They meet more or less periodically to celebrate certain rites i n c o m m o n i n 
some instances; the place held by witches' meetings i n European folklore is 
well k n o w n . B u t these associations are not at all indispensable for the func-
tioning 
o f magic. Indeed, they are rare and rather exceptional. To practice his 
art, the magician has no need whatever to congregate w i t h his peers. H e is 
more often a loner. I n general, far from seeking company, he flees it. " H e 
stands aloof, even from his colleagues."
6 1 B y contrast, religion is inseparable 
from the idea o f Church. I n this first regard, there is already a fundamental dif-
ference between magic and religion. Furthermore, and above all, w h e n magic 
societies o f this sort are formed, they never encompass all the adherents o f 
magic. Far from it. They encompass only the magicians. Excluded from them 
are the laity, as it were—that is, those for whose benefit the rites are conducted, 
w h i c h is to say those w h o are the adherents o f regular cults. N o w , the magi-
cian is to magic what the priest is to religion. B u t a college o f priests is no more 
a religion than a religious congregation that worships a certain saint i n the 
shadows o f the cloister is a private cult. A Church is not simply a priesdy broth-
erhood; it is a moral c o m m u n i t y * made up o f all the faithful, both laity and 
priests. Magic ordinarily has no c o m m u n i t y o f this sort.
6 2 
*Note the 
first 
use in this book of this fundamentally important Durkheimian concept which can also 
be thought of as "imagined community." See pp. xxii-xxxiii, xiv. 
61Hubert and Mauss, "Esquisse," p. 18. 
62[William] Robertson Smith had already shown that magic is opposed to religion as the individual is 
to the social {[Lectures on] the Religion of the Semites, 2d ed. [London, A. & C. Black, 1894], pp. 264-265). 


Definition of Religious Phenomena and of Religioi 
43 
B u t i f one includes the n o t i o n o f C h u r c h i n the definition o f religion, 
does one not by the same stroke exclude the individual religions that the i n -
dividual institutes for himself and celebrates for himself alone? There is 
scarcely any society i n w h i c h this is not to be found. As w i l l be seen below, 
every Ojibway has his personal manitou that he chooses himself and to w h i c h 
he bears specific religious obligations; the Melanesian o f the Banks Islands 
has his tamaniu;
63 the R o m a n has his genius;
64 
the Christian has his patron 
saint and his guardian angel, and so forth. A l l these cults seem, by definition, 
to be independent o f the group. A n d not only are these individual religions 
very c o m m o n throughout history, but some people today pose the question 
whether such religions are not destined to become the dominant f o r m o f re-
ligious life—whether a day w i l l not come w h e n the only cult w i l l be the one 
that each person freely practices i n his innermost self.
6 5 
But, let us put aside these speculations about the future for a moment. I f 
we confine our discussion to religions as they are i n the present and as they 
have been i n the past, i t becomes obvious that these individual cults are not 
distinct and autonomous religious systems but simply aspects o f the religion 
c o m m o n to the w h o l e C h u r c h o f w h i c h the individuals are part. T h e patron 
saint o f the Christian is chosen from the official list o f saints recognized by 
the Catholic Church, and there are canonical laws that prescribe h o w each 
believer must conduct this private cult. I n the same way, the idea that every 
man necessarily has a protective genie is, i n different forms, at the basis o f a 
large number o f American religions, as well as o f R o m a n religion (to cite 
only these t w o examples). As w i l l be seen below, that idea is tightly b o u n d 
up w i t h the idea o f soul, and the idea o f soul is not among those things that 
can be left entirely to individual choice. I n a w o r d , it is the Church o f w h i c h 
he is a member that teaches the individual what these personal gods are, what 
their role is, h o w he must enter into relations w i t h them, and h o w he must 
honor them. W h e n one analyzes the doctrines o f that C h u r c h systematically, 
sooner or later one comes across the doctrines that concern these special 
cults. Thus there are not t w o religions o f different types, turned i n opposite 
Further, in thus differentiating magic from religion, I do not mean to set up a radical discontinuity be-
tween them. The frontiers between these two domains are often blurred. 
63[Robert Henry] Codrington, "Notes on the Customs of Mota, Bank Islands in RSV, vol. XVI 
[1880], p. 136. 
M[Augusto] Negrioli, Dei Genii pressa i Romani, [Bologna, Ditto Nicola Zanichelli, 1900]. 
65This is the conclusion at which [Herbert] Spencer arrives in his Ecclesiastical Institutions [Part VI of 
The Principles of Sociology, New York, D. Appleton, 1886], chap. 16. It is also the conclusion of [Auguste] 
Sabatier, in his Esquisse d'une philosophie de la religion d'après la Psychologie et l'Histoire, [Paris, Fischbacher, 
1897], and that of the entire school to which he belongs. 


44 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
directions, but the same ideas and principles applied i n b o t h cases—here, to 
circumstances that concern the group as a whole, and there, to the life o f the 
individual. Indeed, this unity is so close that, among certain peoples,
6 6 the 
ceremonies d u r i n g w h i c h the believer first enters into communication w i t h 
his protective genie are combined w i t h rites whose public character is i n -
contestable, namely, rites o f i n i t i a t i o n .
6 7 
W h a t remains are the present-day aspirations toward a religion that 
w o u l d consist entirely o f interior and subjective states and be freely c o n -
structed by each one o f us. B u t no matter h o w real those aspirations, they 
cannot affect our definition: This definition can be applied only to real, ac-
complished facts, not to uncertain possibilities. Religions can be defined as 
they are n o w or as they have been, not as they may be tending more or less 
vaguely to become. It is possible that this religious individualism is destined 
to become fact; but to be able to say i n what measure, we must first k n o w 
what religion is, o f what elements it is made, from what causes it results, and 
what function i t performs—all questions whose answers cannot be preor-
dained, for we have not crossed the threshold o f research. O n l y at the end o f 
this study w i l l I try to l o o k into the future. 
We arrive thus at the following definition: A religion is a unified system of 
beliefs and practices relative to sacred things, that is to say, things set apart and forbid-
den—beliefs and practices which unite into one single moral community called a 
Church, all those who adhere to them. T h e second element thus holds a place i n 
m y definition that is no less essential than the first: I n showing that the idea 
o f religion is inseparable from the idea o f a Church, it conveys the n o t i o n 
that religion must be an eminently collective t h i n g .
6 8 
66Among numerous Indian peoples of North America, in particular. 
"However, that factual point does not settle the question of whether external and public religion is 
anything other than the development of 
an interior and personal religion that would be the primitive phe-
nomenon, or whether, on the other hand, the personal religion is the extension, inside individual con-
sciousnesses, of the exterior one. The problem will be taken up directly below (Bk. II, chap. 5, §2. Cf. 
Bk. II, chap. 6 and Bk. II, chap. 7, §1). For now I merely note that the individual cult presents itself to 
the observer as an element and an appendage of the collective cult. 
^It is there that my definition picks up the one I proposed some time ago in the Année sociologique. In 
that work, I defined religious beliefs exclusively by their obligatory character; but that obligation evidendy 
arises, a
s I showed, from the fact that those beliefs belong to a group that imposes them on its members. 
Thus the two definitions partly overlap. If I have thought it necessary to propose a new one, it is because 
the first was too formal and went too far in downplaying the content of religious representatiops. In the 
discussions that follow, we will see the point of having placed in evidence immediately what is characteris-
tic of this content. In addition, if the imperative character is indeed a distinctive feature of religious beliefs, 
it has infinite gradations; consequently, it is not easily perceptible in some cases. There arise difficulties and 
troublesome questions that are avoided if this criterion is replaced by the one I have used above. 


C H A P T E R T W O 
THE LEADING CONCEPTIONS 
OF THE ELEMENTARY 
RELIGION 
I. Animism 
W
i t h this definition i n hand, we can set out i n search o f the elementary 
religion, our intended goal. 
Even the crudest religions that history and ethnography make k n o w n to 
us are already so complex that they do not fit the notion people sometimes 
have o f primitive mentality. T h e y display not only a luxuriant system o f beliefs 
but also such variety i n principles and wealth i n basic ideas that it has seemed 
impossible to regard them as anything but a late product o f a rather long evo-
lution. From this scholars have concluded that i n order to uncover the truly 
original f o r m o f religious life, they had to delve beneath these observable re-
ligions, analyze t h e m to identify the basic elements they share, and find out 
whether there is one such element from w h i c h the others are derived. 
Set i n those terms, the problem has received t w o contrary solutions. 
It can be said that there is no religious system, o l d or new, i n w h i c h we 
do not find what amounts to t w o religions existing side by side and i n vari-
ous forms. A l t h o u g h closely allied and even interpenetrating, yet they remain 
distinct. O n e is addressed to phenomena i n nature—whether great cosmic 
forces, such as the winds, the rivers, the stars, the sky, etc., or the objects o f 
all sorts that populate the earth's surface, such as plants, animals, rocks, etc. 
For this reason, i t is given the name "naturism." T h e other is addressed to 
spiritual beings—spirits, souls, genies, demons, deities proper. These beings 
are animate and conscious agents, like man, but differ from man i n the na-
ture o f the powers ascribed to them, i n particular the special characteristic 
that they do not affect the senses i n the same way; they are not usually per-
ceptible to human eyes. This religion o f spirits is called "animism." T w o i n -
compatible theories have been put forward to explain the more or less 
45 


46 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
universal coexistence o f the t w o sorts o f cult. Some h o l d animism to have 
been the primary religion, and naturism only a derivative and secondary 
f o r m . Others h o l d that the cult o f nature was the starting p o i n t o f religious 
evolution, and the cult o f spirits only a special case o f it. 
U p to now, these t w o theories have been the only ones by w h i c h people 
have tried to explain the origins o f religious thought rationally.
1 Thus, the 
chief problem that the science o f religions most often sets itself comes d o w n 
to deciding w h i c h o f these t w o solutions must be adopted, or whether it is 
not better to combine t h e m and, i f so, what place should be assigned to each 
o f the" t w o elements.
2 Even those scholars w h o accept neither hypothesis i n 
its entirety still retain some o f the propositions o n w h i c h they rest.
3 Thus we 
have a certain number o f ready-made ideas and seeming truisms that must be 
subjected to critique before we take up the study o f the facts o n our o w n ac-
count. H o w indispensable i t is to try a n e w approach w i l l be clearer once the 
inadequacy o f these traditional notions is understood. 
I 
Tylor developed the animist theory i n its essential features.
4 It is true that 
Spencer, w h o thereafter took it up, d i d not merely copy it w i t h o u t m o d i f i -
cation.
5 But, o n the whole, b o t h Tylor and Spencer pose the questions i n the 
same terms, and, w i t h one exception, the solutions adopted are identical. I 
'Thus I leave aside here the theories that, wholly or in part, involve supraexperimental data. This is 
true, for example, of the theory Andrew Lang set forth in his book The Making of 
Religion [London, Long-
mans, 1898], and that Wilhelm Schmidt took up again, with variations of detail, in a series of articles on 
"L'Origine de l'idée de Dieu" (in Anthropos [vols. Ill, IV], 1908, 1909). Lang does not wholly reject ei-
ther animism or naturism but accepts that, in the last analysis, there is a sense or a direct intuition of the 
divine. Also, while I do not believe I must present and discuss that idea in this chapter, I do not intend to 
pass over it in silence, but will return to it below, when I explain the facts to which it is applied (II.9, 
p. 4). 
2This is the case, for example, of Fustel de Coulanges, who accepts the two ideas concurrendy (see 
Bk. I and Bk. Ill, chap. 2 [of La Cité antique, Paris, Hachette, 1870] . 
3In this way, Jevons, while criticizing animism as set forth by Tylor, accepts his theories on the gene-
sis of the idea of soul and the anthropomorphic instinct of man. Inversely, while [Hermann Karl] Usener, 
in his Gotternamen [Versuch einer Lehre von der religiosen Degengriffebildung, Bohn, F. Cohen, 1887], rejects 
certain of hypotheses of Max Miiller to be presented below, he accepts the chief postulates of natur-
ism. 
4[Edward Burnett] Tylor, Primitive Culture [2 vols., London, J. Murray, 1871], chaps. 11, 18. 
5See [Herbert Spencer], Principles of Sociology, 1st and 6th parts [New York, D. Appleton, 1886]. 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion 
47 
can therefore combine the t w o doctrines i n the following exposition, noting 
the point at w h i c h they part company. 
Three conditions must be met i f animist beliefs and practices are legiti-
mately to be seen as the original f o r m o f religious life: First, because o n that 
hypothesis the idea o f soul is the cardinal idea o f religion, one must show h o w 
it was formed, w i t h o u t taking any o f its elements from an earlier religion; sec-
ond, it must be shown h o w souls became the object o f a cult and turned into 
spirits; third, since the cult o f spirits is not the w h o l e o f any religion, h o w the 
cult o f nature was derived from that cult must also be explained. 
According to animist theory, the idea o f soul was suggested to man by 
the p o o r l y understood spectacle o f the double life that he normally leads, o n 
the one hand while awake, o n the other w h ü e asleep. T h e claim is that, for 
the savage,
6 the representations he has i n his m i n d are o f the same signifi-
cance whether he is awake or dreaming. H e objectifies both; that is, he sees 
t h e m as the images o f external objects, the entire appearance o f w h i c h they 
reproduce more or less accurately. Thus, w h e n he dreams o f having visited a 
far-off country, he believes he really has gone there. B u t he can have gone 
there only i f t w o beings exist i n h i m : one, his body, w h i c h remained 
stretched out o n the ground and w h i c h , w h e n he awakens, he finds still i n 
the same position; and another, w h i c h has moved through space d u r i n g that 
same time. Likewise, i f while he sleeps, he sees himself talking w i t h one o f 
his friends w h o he knows is far away, he concludes that this friend, too, is 
composed o f t w o beings: one w h o is sleeping some distance away, and an-
other w h o has manifested himself through the dream. F r o m the repetition o f 
such experiences, litde by little the idea emerges that a double, another self, 
exists i n each o f us, and that i n particular conditions it has the power to leave 
the body i n w h i c h i t lives and to travel far and wide. 
O f course, this double replicates all the basic features o f the visible being 
that serves as its external envelope. A t the same time, however, it differs 
from 
the visible being i n several respects. I t is more mobile, since i t can cover vast 
distances i n an instant. I t is more malleable and more plastic; for, to leave the 
body, it must be able to pass through the body's openings, especially the nose 
and m o u t h . I t is conceived o f as somehow made o f matter, but o f a m u c h 
more subtle and ethereal matter than any w e k n o w empirically. This double 
6This is the word Tylor [Primitive Culture, pp. 489fF.] uses. It has the drawback of 
seeming to imply that 
human beings, in the full sense of the term, exist before civilization exists. However, there is no suitable 
term to render the idea; the term "primitive," which I prefer to use for want of anything better, is, as I 
have said, far from satisfactory. 


48 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
is the soul. A n d it is beyond doubt that, i n many societies, the soul has been 
thought o f as an image o f the body. It is even thought to reproduce acciden-
tal deformities, such as those caused by wounds or mutilations. Certain Aus-
tralians cut o f f their enemy's right t h u m b after killing h i m , so that his soul, 
having been relieved o f its o w n t h u m b by the same stroke, cannot throw a 
spear and avenge itself. B u t at the same time, even though it resembles the 
body, there is something already semi-spiritual about it. People say that " i t is 
the most insubstantial part o f the body, as light as air," that " i t has neither 
flesh, nor bones, nor nerves"; that it is "like a purified body."
7 
I n addition, other facts o f experience that turned minds onto the same 
path quite naturally tended to gather around this fundamental fact o f the 
dream: fainting, apoplexy, catalepsy, ecstasy—every state o f temporary u n -
consciousness. Actually, they are explained very well by the hypothesis that 
the principle o f life and awareness can momentarily leave the body. Besides, 
it was natural that this principle should have been merged w i t h the double, 
since each day the absence o f the double d u r i n g sleep suspends life and 
thought. Thus various observations seemed mutually to test and confirm the 
idea o f the b u i l t - i n duality o f m a n .
8 
B u t the soul is not a spirit. I t is attached to a body from w h i c h it exits 
quite rarely; and, so l o n g as it is n o t h i n g more, i t is the object o f no cult. B y 
contrast, although the spirit generally has a definite thing as its residence, it 
can move away at w i l l , and man can enter into relations w i t h i t only by tak-
ing ritual precautions. T h e soul could become spirit, then, only i f it trans-
formed itself. This metamorphosis was quite easily arrived at, merely by the 
application o f the foregoing ideas to the reality o f death. To a rudimentary 
intellect, death is not m u c h different from a l o n g fainting spell or a prolonged 
sleep; i t has all their traits. Thus, death also seems to consist i n a separation o f 
soul and body, analogous to the separation that occurs each night; but be-
cause they do not see the body to revive, they come to accept the idea o f a 
separation that is not limited to a specified period. Indeed, once the body is 
destroyed—and the object o f funeral is i n part to hasten this destruction—the 
separation is o f necessity considered final. Here, then, are spirits detached 
from 
any body and at liberty i n space. I n this way a population o f souls is 
formed all around the living, their number g r o w i n g over time. Because these 
souls o f m e n have the needs and passions o f men, they seek to involve t h e m -
7Ibid., vol. I, pp. 455£F. 
8See Spencer, Principles of Sociology, vol. I, pp. 1439".; and Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. I, pp. 434ff., 
445ff. 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion 
49 
selves i n the lives o f their former companions and to help the living or h a r m 
them, depending o n the feelings they still have for them. Their nature makes 
t h e m either very precious allies or very formidable enemies. Thanks to their 
extreme 
fluidity, 
they can go inside bodies and cause t h e m disorders o f all 
kinds, or they can increase the bodies' vitality. A n d so people take up the 
habit o f ascribing to t h e m all the events o f life that are slighdy unusual: There 
are hardly any they cannot account for. I n this way they constitute a verita-
ble arsenal o f causes, always at hand, never leaving the m i n d that is i n search 
o f explanations unequipped. Does a man seem inspired; does he speak w i t h 
eloquence; does he seem lifted above b o t h himself and the ordinary level o f 
men? I t is because a benevolent spirit is i n h i m , animating h i m . Is another 
man taken by a seizure or by madness? A n evil spirit has entered his body, ag-
itating h i m . There is no sickness that cannot be put d o w n to some such i n -
fluence. 
I n this way, the power o f souls increases from all that is attributed to 
them, so m u c h so that, i n the end, man finds himself a captive i n this imag-
inary w o r l d , even though he is its creator and model. H e becomes the vassal 
o f those spiritual forces that he has made w i t h his o w n hands and i n his o w n 
image. For i f these souls are so m u c h i n control o f health and illness and o f 
good and evil things, i t is wise to seek their benevolence or to appease them 
w h e n they are annoyed. F r o m thence come offerings, sacrifices, prayers—in 
short, the w h o l e apparatus o f religious observances.
9 
Behold, then, the soul transformed. I t has gone from being merely a life 
principle animating a h u m a n body, to being a spirit, a good or evil genie, and 
even a deity, depending o n the scope o f the effects i m p u t e d to it. B u t since 
it is death that is presumed to have brought about this apotheosis, i n the end 
it is to the dead, to the souls o f the ancestors, that the first cult that h u m a n -
ity has k n o w n was addressed. Thus: T h e first rites were mortuary rites; the 
first sacrifices, food offerings to satisfy the needs o f the departed; and the first 
altars, tombs.
1 0 
B u t because these spirits were o f h u m a n o r i g i n , they were interested 
only i n the lives o f m e n and were thought to act only u p o n human events. 
Yet to be explained is h o w other spirits were imagined i n order to account 
for other phenomena o f the universe, and h o w a cult o f nature was then 
formed alongside the cult o f the ancestors. 
As Tylor has it, this extension o f animism is due to the peculiar mental-
ity o f the primitive, w h o , like the child, does not distinguish the animate 
'Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. II [pp. 113ff.]. 
,0Ibid., vol. I [pp. 113ff., 481ff.]. 


50 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
from the inanimate. Because the first beings o f w h i c h the child begins to 
f o r m any idea are humans—himself and his parents—he tends to imagine all 
things o n the model o f human nature. H e sees the toys he uses, and the var-
ious objects that affect his senses, as living beings like himself. T h e primitive 
thinks like a child, so he too is inclined to endow things, even inanimate 
things, w i t h a nature similar to his o w n . A n d thus, for the reasons already 
given, once he has arrived at the idea that man is a body that a spirit ani-
mates, then he must o f necessity impute to natural bodies that same sort o f 
duality, plus souls like his o w n . T h e sphere o f influence could not be the 
same for both, however. T h e souls o f m e n have direct influence only over the 
w o r l d o f men. T h e y have a sort o f predilection for the human body, once 
death has given t h e m their liberty. O n the other hand, the souls o f things re-
side above all i n things and are viewed as the operative causes o f all that hap-
pens to things. Health or illness, agility or clumsiness, and the rest, are 
accounted for by the souls o f men; the phenomena o f the physical w o r l d 
above all—the movement o f the waters or o f the stars, the germination o f the 
plants, the abundant reproduction o f the animals, and the rest—are accounted 
for by the souls o f things. Thus, the finishing touch to that first philosophy o f 
man, o n w h i c h the cult o f the ancestors is based, was a philosophy o f the world. 
Vis-a-vis those cosmic spirits, man found himself i n an even more o b v i -
ous state o f dependence than vis-a-vis the wandering doubles o f his ances-
tors. W i t h the ancestors, he could only have ideal* and imaginary relations, 
but he really does depend u p o n things. Since he needs their cooperation i n 
order to live, man came to believe that he also needed the spirits that were 
held to animate those things and control their various manifestations. H e i m -
plored their help through offerings and prayers. Thus, the finishing touch to 
the religion o f man was a religion o f nature. 
Herbert Spencer objects that this explanation rests o n a hypothesis that is 
contradicted by the facts. I t is held, he says, that there was a time w h e n man 
did not grasp the differences between the animate and the inanimate. B u t as 
we ascend among the animals, we see an increasing capacity to make that dis-
tinction. T h e higher animals do not confuse an object that moves by itself, 
whose movements are directed toward goals, w i t h objects that are moved m e -
chanically from outside. " W h e n a cat w h o is playing w i t h a mouse he has 
caught sees that i t stays still for a long while, he touches i t w i t h his claw to 
make it run. Obviously, the cat thinks that a living being that one bothers w i l l 
try to escape."
1 1 M a n , even primitive man, could not be less intelligent than 
*Note Durkheim's use of this term in reference to things of the mind. 
"Spencer, Principles of Sociology, vol. I [p.126]. 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion 
51 
animals lower than he o n the scale o f evolution. It was not through lack o f dis-
cernment, then, that he moved from the cult o f ancestors to the cult o f things. 
According to Spencer, w h o o n this point (but o n this point only) parts 
company w i t h Tylor, this passage is indeed due to a confusion, but one o f a 
different k i n d . H e thinks i t results, at least i n the main, from the numberless 
ambiguities o f language. I n many lower societies, i t is a very c o m m o n cus-
t o m to give each individual the name o f an animal, plant, star, or some other 
natural object, either at b i r t h or later. But, given the extreme imprecision o f 
his language, it is very difficult for the primitive to distinguish a metaphor 
from reality. Thus he w o u l d quickly have lost sight o f the fact that these 
names were only figures o f speech and, by taking t h e m literally, ended up be-
lieving that an ancestor called Tiger or L i o n was actually a tiger or a lion. 
A n d so, the cult o f w h i c h that ancestor had been the object theretofore, 
w o u l d have been transposed thereafter to the animal w i t h w h i c h the ances-
tor had become one and the same. A n d , the same substitution being opera-
tive for the plants, stars, together w i t h all the natural phenomena, the religion 
o f nature took the place o f the old religion o f the dead. To be sure, Spencer 
points to other confusions besides this one, reinforcing its effect i n this case 
or that. For example, as he proposes, the animals that frequent the environs 
o f the tombs or houses o f m e n were taken for reincarnated souls and revered 
as such;
1 2 or else, the mountain held by tradition to be the site where the race 
began was taken to be its actual founder; the ancestors being presumed to 
have come from it, and the m e n to be its descendants, the mountain itself was 
therefore treated as an ancestor.
1 3 B u t as Spencer admits, these additional 
causes could have had only a secondary influence. Principally, what led to the 
institution o f naturism was "the 
literal interpretation o f metaphorical 
names. " 
For the sake o f completeness i n m y o w n exposition o f animism, I had to 
give an account o f this theory, but i t is too inadequate to the facts, and today 
too universally abandoned, to warrant being dwelled u p o n further. For a 
phenomenon as widespread as the religion o f nature to be explainable by an 
illusion, the cause o f the very illusion that is invoked w o u l d have to be 
equally widespread. Even w h e n such errors as those o f w h i c h Spencer re-
ports a few isolated examples (where we find such examples) can indeed ex-
plain the transformation o f the cult o f ancestors into a cult o f nature, it is not 
12Ibid., pp. 322ff. 
"Ibid., pp. 366-367. 
14Ibid., p. 346. Cf. p. 384. 


52 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
clear w h y they w o u l d be so widely produced. N o psychic mechanism neces-
sitates them. N o doubt, through their o w n ambiguity, words could lead peo-
ple to be mistaken; but, at the same time, all the personal memories that the 
ancestor left i n men's memories must have w o r k e d against the confusion. 
W h y w o u l d the tradition that portrayed the ancestor as he had been—that is, 
as a man w h o had lived a man's life—have given way everywhere to the 
magic o f words. Besides, people must have had a certain difficulty accepting 
the idea that men could have been b o r n from a mountain or a star, an animal 
or a plant; the idea o f such an exception to the ordinary conditions o f pro-
creation was b o u n d to raise strong resistance. I n this way, far from finding the 
way made straight, this error w o u l d have been impeded by all sorts o f reasons 
defending minds against it. Therefore h o w its victory could have been so 
general, despite so many obstacles, is not clear. 
II 
There remains the theory o f Tylor, w h i c h still has great authority. Since his 
hypotheses o n dreams and o n h o w the ideas o f soul and spirit originated are 
still authoritative, it is important to evaluate them. 
To begin, it must be acknowledged that the theorists o f animism have 
rendered an important service to the science o f religions, and indeed to the 
general history o f ideas, by applying historical analysis to the idea o f soul. I n -
stead o f taking i t to be a simple and immediate given o f consciousness, as so 
many philosophers have, they saw it—far more correctly—as a complex 
whole and as a product o f history and mythology. I t is beyond doubt that, by 
its nature, origins, and functions, the idea o f soul is fundamentally religious. 
Philosophers received i t from religion; and the f o r m i t takes among the 
thinkers o f antiquity cannot be understood unless the mythical elements that 
entered into it are taken into account. 
B u t even though setting the problem is to Tylor's credit, his solution 
nonetheless raises serious difficulties. 
First, there are reservations to be had about the very principle o n w h i c h 
his theory is based. I t grants as self-evident that the soul is altogether distinct 
from the body, that i t is the body's double, and that, whether inside or out-
side the body, i t ordinarily lives its o w n autonomous life. N o w , we w i l l see
1 5 
that this conception is not that o f the primitive or, at least, that i t expresses 
15See below, Bk. II, chap. 8. 


Tl\e Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion 
53 
only one aspect o f the idea he has o f the soul. To the primitive, although the 
soul is i n certain respects independent o f the body i t animates, nevertheless it 
is partly merged w i t h the body, so m u c h so that it cannot be radically sepa-
rated from the body: Certain organs are not only the special seat o f the soul 
but also its outward f o r m and physical manifestation. T h e notion is more 
complex than the doctrine assumes, then, and so i t is doubtful that the ex-
periences invoked are sufficient explanation. For even i f those experiences 
enabled one to understand h o w man came to believe he was double, they 
could not explain w h y that duality not only does not exclude, but actually 
entails, a profound unity and an intimate i n t e r p é n é t r a t i o n o f the t w o beings 
thus differentiated. 
However, let us grant that the idea o f soul is reducible to the idea o f d o u -
ble and see how, according to Tylor, that second idea was formed. Suppos-
edly the experience o f dreaming suggested i t to man. To understand how, as 
his body remained lying o n the ground, he could see more or less distant 
places as he slept, he is led to think o f himself as being made o f t w o beings: 
o n the one hand, his body, and, o n the other, a second self able to leave the 
body i n w h i c h i t lives and move about i n space. But, o n the face o f it, to have 
been able to thrust itself u p o n m e n w i t h a k i n d o f necessity, this idea w o u l d 
have to have been the only possible hypothesis, or at least the simplest. N o w , 
i n fact, there are simpler hypotheses, ideas that, i t seems, must have come to 
m i n d just as naturally. For example, w h y w o u l d the sleeper not have imag-
ined that he was able to see at a distance as he slept? I m p u t i n g such a capac-
ity to himself w o u l d have taxed his imagination less than constructing such a 
complicated idea as that o f a double—made o f an ethereal substance, half-
invisible, and w i t h no example from direct experience. 
I n any case, granting that certain dreams call forth the animist explana-
t i o n rather naturally, many others certainly are absolutely resistant to it. Very 
often, our dreams refer to past events; we see again what we have seen or 
done while awake, yesterday, day before yesterday, d u r i n g our youth, and so 
on; such dreams are c o m m o n , having a rather large place i n our nighttime 
life: B u t the idea o f a double cannot account for them. Even i f the double 
can transport itself from one point to another i n space, it is not clear h o w the 
double could go back through the stream o f time. H o w could a man, h o w -
ever primitive his intellect, believe w h e n he awakes that he has just been pre-
sent at, or actually taken part i n , events that he knows happened at a different 
time? H o w could he imagine that he had lived a life w h i l e sleeping that he 
knew was long since past? I t w o u l d have been m u c h more natural for h i m to 
see those renewed images as what they really are: memories like those he has 
i n daytime, but o f special intensity. 


54 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
Besides, i n the scenes we take part i n and witness w h i l e we sleep, some 
contemporary is constantly taking some role at the same time as we. We 
think we see and hear h i m i n the same place as we. According to animism, 
the primitive w i l l explain these facts by imagining that his o w n double has 
been visited or met by the doubles o f certain o f his friends. B u t all it w i l l take 
for h i m to notice that their experience does not coincide w i t h his is to ques-
tion t h e m w h e n he awakens. They, too, have had dreams at the same time, 
but entirely different ones. T h e y did not see themselves taking part i n the 
same scene but believe they visited entirely different places. A n d since, i n that 
case, contradictions must be the rule, h o w w o u l d those contradictions not 
lead men to think that there was apparendy an error, that they imagined it, 
that they were taken i n by some illusion? For there is a certain oversimplifi-
cation i n the blind credulity that is ascribed to the primitive. H e is far from 
finding i t necessary to objectify all his sensations. H e is not incapable o f 
noticing that his senses sometimes trick h i m , even w h e n he is awake. W h y 
w o u l d he believe them to be more infallible at night than i n daytime? Hence, 
a good many reasons stand i n the way o f his taking dreams for realities too 
easily and interpreting t h e m by a doubling o f his being. 
Furthermore, even i f the hypothesis o f the double could satisfactorily ex-
plain all dreaming, and all dreaming could be explained i n no other way, one 
w o u l d still have to say w h y man tried to explain i t at all. N o doubt, the 
dream has the makings o f a possible problem. B u t we continually bypass 
problems that we do not see as such, whose existence we do not even suspect 
so l o n g as nothing has made us feel any need to see t h e m as problems. Even 
w h e n the taste for pure speculation is w i d e awake, i t is far from true that re-
flection 
raises all the questions to w h i c h i t could possibly apply itself; only 
those that are o f particular interest attract it. Especially w h e n the phenomena 
i n question always recur i n the same manner, habit easily puts curiosity to 
sleep and we no longer even imagine querying ourselves. To shake o f f that 
torpor, practical needs, or at least very pressing theoretical interest, must at-
tract our attention and t u r n it i n that direction. A n d so i t happens that, at 
every m o m e n t o f history, there are a great many things that we give up t r y -
ing to understand, w i t h o u t even noticing that we are so doing. U n t i l not 
very long ago, the sun was believed to be only several feet i n diameter. There 
was something incomprehensible i n the fact that a luminous disc o f such 
small diameter could be adequate to light the Earth—and yet centuries went 
by before humanity thought o f resolving that contradiction. 
Heredity is a phenomenon that has been k n o w n for a l o n g time, but only 
very recently has anyone tried to construct a theory o f it. Indeed, the accep-
tance o f certain beliefs made it completely unintelligible. Thus, i n certain 


Tlie Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion 
55 
Australian societies to be discussed, the child is not physiologically the prod-
uct o f its parents.
1 6 Inevitably, such intellectual laziness is greatest i n the 
primitive. This frail being, w h o must struggle so hard for his life against the 
forces that assail it, lacks the wherewithal for the l u x u r y o f speculation. H e 
probably does not reflect unless he has to. I t is therefore not easy to see what 
could have led h i m to make dreaming the topic o f his meditations. W h a t is 
dreaming i n our life? W h a t a small place it has, especially since it leaves very 
vague impressions i n m e m o r y and is quickly erased; and h o w surprising, 
then, that a man o f such crude intellect should have put so m u c h effort into 
trying to explain it! O f the t w o existences that he leads one after the other, 
daytime and nighttime, it is the first, his daytime existence, that should i n -
terest h i m more. Is i t not strange that the nighttime existence should have so 
captivated his attention that he made it the basis o f a whole system o f c o m -
plicated ideas destined to have such profound influence on his thought and 
conduct? 
Everything tends to prove, therefore, that the animist theory o f the soul 
must be reassessed, despite its continuing authority. Today, the primitive 
probably does attribute his dreams, or certain o f them, to the movements of. 
his double. B u t this is not the same as saying that dreams actually provided 
the raw material from w h i c h the idea o f double or soul was made. Instead o f 
being derived from the phenomena o f dreams, ecstasy, and possession, it 
could have been applied to t h e m after the fact. As often happens, once an 
idea is formed, i t is used to organize or to shed light ( w i t h light that is some-
times more apparent than real) on facts w i t h w h i c h the idea was uncon-
nected at first, and that, i n themselves, could not have suggested it. Today, 
G o d and the immortality o f the soul are often proved w i t h a showing that 
those beliefs are implied i n the basic principles o f morality. I n reality, those 
beliefs are o f a completely different origin. T h e history o f religious thought 
could provide numerous examples o f these retrospective justifications that 
can teach us n o t h i n g about either the manner i n w h i c h those ideas took 
f o r m or about the elements o f w h i c h they are made. 
It is likely, furthermore, that the primitive distinguishes among his 
dreams and does not explain t h e m all i n the same way. Here i n Europe, there 
are still many people for w h o m the state o f sleep is a sort o f magico-religious 
state i n w h i c h the m i n d , partially unburdened o f the body, has an acuteness 
16See [Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen, The Native Tribes of Central Australia [London, 
Macmillan, 1889], pp. 123—127; [Carl] Strehlow, Die Aranda- und Loritja-Stämme in Zentral-Australien [2 
vols., Frankfurt, J. Baer, 1907], pp. 52ff. 


56 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
o f vision that it does not enjoy i n wakefulness. Still they do not go so far as 
to consider all their dreams to be so many mystic intuitions. Instead, like 
everyone else, they see the majority o f their dreams only as profane states and 
empty plays o f images, mere hallucinations. T h e primitive can be thought o f 
as always having made similar distinctions. C o d r i n g t o n states emphatically 
that the Melanesians do not indiscriminately explain all their dreams as m i -
grations o f souls, but only those that strike their imagination vividly.
1 7 W e 
should probably understand that to mean those dreams i n w h i c h the sleeper 
believes he is i n touch w i t h religious beings, good or evil genies, souls o f the 
dead, and so on. Likewise, the D i e r i make a very clear distinction between 
ordinary dreams and those nighttime visions i n w h i c h some deceased friend 
or relative appears to them. T h e y give different names to those t w o sorts o f 
state. They see the first as a mere flight o f the imagination, but they ascribe 
the second to the w o r k o f an evil spirit.
1 8 A l l the facts H o w i t t offers as ex-
amples, showing that the Australian ascribes to the soul the power to leave the 
body, also have a mystical character: T h e sleeper believes himself transported 
into the land o f the dead, or else that he is talking w i t h a deceased f r i e n d .
1 9 
These dreams are c o m m o n among primitives.
2 0 I t is probably i n connection 
w i t h such facts that the theory t o o k f o r m . To account for them, the n o t i o n 
that the souls o f the dead come back to be w i t h the living as they sleep is ac-
cepted. Acceptance o f this explanation was all the easier because no fact o f 
experience could disconfirm it. B u t such dreams were possible only where 
people already had the ideas o f spirits, souls, and lands o f the dead—that is, 
only where religious evolution was relatively advanced. Far from having been 
able to provide religion w i t h the fundamental idea o n w h i c h it rests, they 
presupposed and were the result o f a religious system already constituted.
2 1 
"[Robert Henry Codrington],The Melanesians [Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1891], pp. 249-250. 
18[Alfred William] Howitt, The Native Tribes of 
South-East Australia [London, Macmillan, 1904], p. 358 
(following Gason). 
19Ibid„ pp. 434-442. 
20The Negroes of southern Guinea, says Tylor, have "during their sleep almost as many relations with 
the dead as they have during the day with the living" (Primitive Culture, vol. I, p. 443). Of these peoples, 
the same author cites this remark by an observer: "They regard all their dreams as visits by spirits of their 
dead friends" (ibid., vol. I, p. 514 ). The statement is surely exaggerated, but it is further proof that mys-
tical dreams are common among primitives. This tends as well to confirm the etymology Strehlow offers 
for the Arunta word altjirerama, which means "to dream." It is composed of altjira, which Strehlow trans-
lates a
s "god," and rama, which means "see." So the dream would be the moment when the man is in re-
lation with the sacred beings (Aranda, vol. I, p. 2). 
2 1 Andrew Lang (who also refuses to concede that the idea of the soul was suggested to man by the ex-
perience of dreaming) believed he could derive it from other experiential data: the facts of spiritism 
(telepathy, seeing at a distance, etc.). I do not think it necessary to discuss his theory, a
s set forth in his 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion 
57 
III 
B u t let us come to the very heart o f the doctrine. 
Wherever the idea o f a double may come from, that idea is not 
enough—on the animists' o w n admission—to explain h o w the ancestor cult 
was formed, the cult that is regarded as the original type o f all religions. To 
have become the object o f a cult, the double had to cease being a mere 
replica o f the individual. I t had to take o n the characteristics required for 
placement o n a par w i t h the sacred beings. Death is said to b r i n g about this 
transformation. B u t where w o u l d the special property that people impute to 
death come from? Even i f the analogy between sleep and death might have 
been enough to make people believe that the soul survives the body (and o n 
this point, there are reservations to be had), w h y w o u l d this soul completely 
change its nature simply as a result o f being n o w detached from the body? If, 
w h i l e i t lived, it was only a profane thing, a walking life-principle, h o w 
w o u l d i t suddenly become a sacred thing and the object o f religious feelings? 
Apart from greater freedom o f movement, death adds nothing essential to it. 
Being attached to no regular residence from then on, it can do at any time 
the things i t once d i d only at night; but the things i t can do are still o f the 
same nature. So w h y w o u l d the living have seen this uprooted and vagabond 
double o f yesterday's friend as anything but a fellow human? I t was a fellow 
h u m a n whose nearness m i g h t indeed have been inopportune, but it was not 
a deity.
2 2 
I n fact, it seems that, far from tending to increase the vital energies, 
death should actually have sapped them. I t is a widespread belief i n the lower 
societies that the soul shares intimately i n the body's life. I f the body is i n -
jured, the soul itself is injured i n the corresponding place. Hence, it should 
book The Making of Religion. In fact, it rests on the hypothesis that spiritism is a constant fact of observa-
tion, that seeing at a distance is a real faculty of man or, at least, of certain men—and we know the extent 
to which this postulate is disputed. What is still more disputable is that the facts of spiritism should be suf-
ficiently apparent and sufficiendy common to have been able to serve as the basis of all the religious be-
liefs and practices that bear upon souls and spirits. Examination of these questions would take me too far 
away 
from 
the object of my study. Furthermore, since Lang's theory remains open to several of the ob-
jections that I will address to Tylor's, my engaging in such an examination is still less necessary. 
^[Frank Byron] Jevons makes a similar observation. Along with Tylor, he accepts that the idea of the 
soul comes from dreaming and that, once this idea was created, man projected it into things. But, he adds, 
the fact that nature has been conceived of as animate in the way man is does not explain why it should 
have become the object of a cult. "From the fact that man sees a tree that bends and a 
flame 
that comes 
and goes a
s a living being like himself, it does not at all follow that either is considered a supernatural be-
ing; on the contrary, to the extent that they resemble him, they can do nothing that in his eyes is super-
natural" (An Introduction to the History of Religion [London, Methuen, 1896], p. 55). 


58 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
age along w i t h the body. I n fact, there are peoples among w h o m funeral re-
spects are not paid to m e n w h o have reached senility; they are treated as i f 
their souls had become senile as w e l l .
2 3 There are even cases i n w h i c h certain 
privileged individuals are lawfully put to death before they arrive at old 
age—for example, kings or priests thought to be vessels o f some powerful 
spirit whose protection society is anxious to keep. T h e object i n this is to 
prevent the spirit from being stricken w i t h the physical degeneration o f those 
w h o are its temporary trustees. Thus, the spirit is removed before age weak-
ens the body i n w h i c h it is residing; since i t has lost none o f its strength, the 
spirit is transferred into a younger body i n w h i c h it w i l l be able to keep its 
vitality intact.
2 4 B u t i n that case, w h e n death results from sickness or o l d age, 
it w o u l d seem that the soul could retain only diminished power. A n d indeed, 
i f the soul is only the double o f the body, i t is unclear h o w it could survive at 
all once the body has finally disintegrated. F r o m this point o f view, the idea 
o f its survival becomes barely intelligible. Hence, here is a gap—a logical and 
psychological void—between the idea o f a double at liberty and that o f a 
spirit to w h i c h a cult is addressed. 
That v o i d seems all the greater w h e n we realize h o w w i d e an abyss sep-
arates the sacred w o r l d from the profane one. It is obvious that a mere change 
o f degree could not possibly be enough to make a thing pass from one cate-
gory to the other. Sacred beings are not distinguished from profane ones 
merely by the strange or unsettling forms they take o n or by the wider p o w -
ers they enjoy. There is no c o m m o n measure between them. N o w , there is 
nothing i n the idea o f a double that could account for such a radical hetero-
geneity. It is said that, once freed from the body, the double can do either 
great good or great h a r m to the living, depending o n the manner i n w h i c h 
it regards them. B u t upsetting those around h i m is not enough to make a be-
ing appear to be o f a different nature from those whose peace i t threatens. To 
be sure, some fear and restraint always enter into the feelings the faithful have 
for the things they reverence; but it is a fear sui generis, made o f respect more 
than fear, and made mainly o f that very special e m o t i o n that majesty elicits i n 
man. T h e idea o f majesty is essentially religious. I n a sense, therefore, we 
have explained nothing about religion so long as w e have not discovered 
where that idea comes from, what i t corresponds to, and what could have 
23See [Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen, Northern Tribes [of Central Australia, London, 
Macmillan, 1904], p. 506; and Native Tribes, p. 512. [Reference is to the relationship of soul and life; it is 
not about funeral practices. Therefore the footnote is probably to the sentence ". . . the soul participates 
actively in the life of the body." Trans.] 
24This is the ritual and mythical theme that [Sir James George] Frazer studies in his The Golden Bough 
[a Study in Magk and Religion, London, Macmillan, 1890]. 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion 
59 
awakened i t i n consciousnesses. Mere human souls could not possibly be i n -
vested w i t h this trait for the simple reason that they are disembodied. 
A n example from Melanesia brings this out. T h e Melanesians believe 
that man possesses a soul that leaves the body at death, w h e n it changes 
names and becomes what they call a tindalo, a natmat, etc. A t the same time, 
they also have a cult to the souls o f the dead: These souls are prayed to and 
invoked. Offerings and sacrifices are made to them. B u t not every tindalo* 
is the object o f those ritual practices. That h o n o r goes only to those that e m -
anate from m e n w h o , d u r i n g their lifetimes, were credited by public opinion 
w i t h the very special virtue that the Melanesians call mana. Later, I explain 
the idea that this w o r d expresses. For the time being, suffice i t to say that it 
is the distinguishing characteristic o f any sacred being. Mana, says Codring¬
ton, "is that w h i c h permits the production o f effects that are outside the or-
dinary power o f men, and outside the ordinary processes o f nature."
2 5 A 
priest, a sorcerer, or a ritual formula has mana, as does a sacred stone or a 
spirit. Thus, the only tindalos given religious honors are those that were al-
ready sacred beings w h i l e their owners were alive. As to other souls, those 
that come from ordinary men, from the c o m m o n herd o f the profane, they 
are "nothings after death, as before," according to the same author.
2 6 Since it 
consummates the separation from profane things more fully and finally, death 
may very well reinforce the sacredness o f the soul, i f the soul already has this 
quality, but death does not create it. 
Furthermore if, as the animist hypothesis assumes, the first sacred beings 
truly had been the souls o f the dead, and the first cult had been that o f the 
ancestors, one should notice that the lower the type o f society is, the more 
predominant this cult is i n religious life. Instead, the truth is the other way 
around. T h e ancestral cult develops and appears in its characteristic f o r m 
only i n advanced societies such as China, Egypt, and the GreeTc and R o m a n 
cities? o n the other hand, it is lacking i n the Australian societies, w h i c h .rep-
resent, as w e w i l l see, the lowest and simplest for mupf social organization we 
kacjw. To be sure, funeral and m o u r n i n g rites are to be found i n those soci-
eties, but even though the name "cult" has sometimes been given to prac-
tices o f this sort, they do not constitute a cult. I n fact, a cult is not a mere 
collection o f ritual precautions that man is responsible for taking i n certain 
*The French text sometimes takes these foreign terms out of italics once they have been explained. I 
have done this consistendy throughout. 
25Codrington, The Melanesians, p. 119. 
26Ibid., p. 125. [Although the passage Durkheim cites is indeed a discussion of mana, the quotation 
does not appear there. Trans.] 


60 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
circumstances. I t is a system o f rites, feasts, and various ceremonies all having 
the characteristic that they recur periodically. T h e y meet the need that the faithful 
feel periodically to tighten and strengthen the b o n d between them and the 
sacred beings o n w h i c h they depend. * This is w h y one speaks o f nuptial rites 
and not o f a nuptial cult, o f b i r t h rites but not a cult o f the newborn: T h e 
events that occasion these rites i m p l y no periodicity. I n the same way, there 
is an ancestor cult only i f sacrifices are made o n the tombs from time to time, 
i f libations are poured there more or less frequendy, or i f regular feasts are 
celebrated i n honor o f the dead person. B u t the Australian does not have any 
dealings o f this sort w i t h his dead. Certainly he must ritually bury their re-
mains, m o u r n t h e m for a period and i n a manner prescribed and, i f need be, 
avenge t h e m .
2 7 B u t once he has carried out these pious duties, once the 
bones are dry and the m o u r n i n g has ended, then all is said and done, and the 
survivors have no further obligations toward those o f their relatives w h o are 
no more. True, there is indeed a f o r m i n w h i c h the dead continue to keep a 
certain place i n the lives o f their k i n , even after the m o u r n i n g is over. T h e i r 
hair or certain o f their bones
2 8 are sometimes kept because o f special virtues 
attached to them. Still, they have ceased to be like persons, and have dropped 
to the rank o f anonymous and impersonal amulets. I n that state, they are the 
object o f no cult, and the only purposes they still have are magical. 
-"" 
However, some Australian tribes periodically celebrate rites i n honor o f 
fabled ancestors that tradition places at the o r i g i n o f time. Generally these 
ceremonies consist i n a sort o f dramatic performance, i n w h i c h are m i m e d 
the deeds attributed i n m y t h to those legendary heroes.
2 9 Still, the personages 
thus depicted are not m e n w h o , after having experienced the life o f men, 
were transformed by death into something like gods. Instead they are 
thought to have enjoyed superhuman powers throughout their lives. Every-
thing great that was done i n the history o f the tribe, and even i n the history 
o f the w o r l d , is attributed to them. I n large part, i t is they w h o have made 
the earth as it is and m e n as they are. Thus the aura that continues to sur-
round t h e m does not come merely from the fact that they are ancestors— 
*In nearly all contexts, the word "depend" seems to mean both "counting upon" and "being sub-
jects of." 
27Apparendy sometimes there are even funeral offerings (see [Walter E.] Roth, "Superstition, Magic 
and Medicine," in North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin, no. 5, sec. 69 [Brisbane, G. A. Vaughn, 1903]; 
and "Burial [Ceremonies and the Disposal of the Dead"] in North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin, no. 
10, in RAM, vol. VI, part 1907, 5, p. 395). But these offerings are not periodic. 
28See Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 538, 553; and Northern Tribes, pp. 463, 543, 547. 
29See especially Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, chaps. 6, 7, 9. 


Tlie Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion 
61 
w h i c h is to say, i n sum, from the fact that they are dead—but from the fact 
that a divine characteristic is attributed to them, and has been d o w n the ages. 
To repeat the Melanesian expression, they are by nature endowed w i t h mana. 
Consequently, n o t h i n g i n any o f this demonstrates that death should have the 
least power to deify Indeed, one cannot say w i t h o u t impropriety that these 
rites constitute an ancestor cult, since they are not addressed to ancestors as 
such. For a true cult o f the dead to be possible, the real ancestors—the rela-
tives that m e n really lose each day—must become the object o f a cult after 
they die. Once again, no traces o f a cult o f this type exist i n Australia. 
Thus the cult that should have been dominant i n the lower societies, ac-
cording to the hypothesis, is nonexistent i n them, according to reality. I n the 
final analysis, the Australian is concerned w i t h his dead only at the very m o -
ment o f death and immediately following. Nevertheless, as we w i l l see, i n re-
gard to sacred beings o f an altogether different nature, these same peoples 
practice a complex cult made up o f multiple ceremonies that sometimes oc-
cupy weeks and even months. I t is unthinkable that the few rites the Aus-
tralian performs w h e n he happens to lose one o f his relatives should have 
been the o r i g i n o f those permanent cults that return regularly every year and 
take up a significant part o f his life. T h e contrast is so great, i n fact, that one 
m i g h t well ask whether i t is not the first that derives from the second— 
whether the souls o f men, far from being the model o n w h i c h the gods were 
imagined, were from the beginning conceived o f as emanations o f the deity. 
IV 
I f the cult o f the dead is not primitive, animism has no basis. It might there-
fore seem pointless to examine the third thesis o f the system, concerning the 
transformation o f the cult o f the dead into a cult o f nature. B u t its examina-
tion is necessary, since the postulate o n w h i c h i t rests is found even among 
historians o f religion w h o do not accept animism properly so-called, such as 
B r i n t o n ,
3 0 L a n g ,
3 1 R é v i l l e ,
3 2 and Robertson Smith himself.
3 3 
-"•[Daniel Garrison Brinton], The Religions of Primitive Peoples [New York, G. P. Putnam's, 1897], pp. 
4
7
8
"
. 
31[Andrew Lang], Mythes, cultes et religions [ Paris, F. Alcan, 1896], p. 50. 
32[Albert Réville], Les Religions des peuples non civilisés, vol. II [Paris, Fischbacher, 1883], Conclusion. 
33[William Robertson Smith, Lectures on the Religions] of the Semites, 2d ed. [London, A & C Black, 
1894], pp. 126, 132. 


62 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
This extension o f the cult o f the dead to the whole o f nature is thought 
to arise from the fact that we tend instinctively to conceive all things i n our 
o w n image, that is, as living and thinking beings. W e saw that Spencer has al-
ready disputed the reality o f this so-called instinct. Since an animal clearly 
distinguishes living bodies from natural objects, i t seemed to h i m impossible 
that man, as heir o f the animal, should not have had this same faculty o f dis-
crimination from the start. B u t as sure as may be the facts that Spencer cites, 
i n this particular case they do not have the character o f p r o o f that he believes 
they have. Indeed, his argument assumes that all the faculties, instincts, and 
abilities o f the animal have passed to man i n their entirety. B u t a great many 
errors originate i n this principle, w h i c h is wrongly taken as self-evident 
truth. For example, from the fact that sexual jealousy is generally very strong 
among the higher animals, i t has been concluded that this same jealousy must 
be found i n man, from the beginning o f history and w i t h the same inten-
sity.
3 4 Today it cannot be doubted that man is able to practice a sexual c o m -
munism that w o u l d be impossible i f that jealousy could not weaken or even 
disappear w h e n necessary.
3 5 This is so because man is not simply an animal, 
plus certain qualities: H e is something different. H u m a n nature is the p r o d -
uct o f a recasting, so to speak, o f animal nature. There have been gains as well 
as losses i n the course o f the intricate operations o f w h i c h this recasting is the 
result. H o w many instincts have w e not lost! W e have lost them because man 
is i n relationship not only w i t h a physical milieu, but also w i t h a social m i -
lieu that is infinitely more extensive, stable, and powerful than those to 
whose influence animals are subject. I n order to live, then, he must adapt to 
it. N o w , to maintain itself, society often needs us to see things from a certain 
standpoint and feel t h e m i n a certain way. It therefore modifies the ideas we 
w o u l d be inclined to have about them, and the feelings to w h i c h w e w o u l d 
be inclined i f we obeyed only our animal nature—even to the extent o f re-
placing them w i t h quite opposite feelings. Does society not go so far as to 
make us see our o w n life as a thing o f little value, w h i l e for animals life is 
property par excellence?
3 6 Thus to try to infer the mental makeup o f the 
primitive man from that o f the higher animals is a vain quest. 
34Such, for example, is the reasoning of [Edward Alexander] Westermarck (Origine du marriage dans 
l'espèce humaine [Paris, Guillaumain, 1895], p.6). 
33By sexual communism, I do not mean that state of 
promiscuity in which man supposedly recognized 
no matrimonial rules. I believe that such a state has never existed. But it has often happened that a group 
of men have regularly united with one or several women. 
36See my [Le] Suicide, [Paris, F. Alcan, 1897], pp. 233ff. 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion 
63 
B u t w h i l e the objection raised by Spencer does not have the force its au-
thor thought i t did, neither can the animist postulate draw any authority 
from the confusions children seem to make. W h e n we hear a child angrily 
abusing an object that has hit h i m , we conclude that he sees the object as a 
conscious being like himself; but this is a poor understanding o f his speech 
and gestures. I n reality, he is a stranger to the very complex reasoning that is 
imputed to h i m . H e blames the table that has hurt h i m not because he sup-
poses it to be animate and intelligent, but because it has hurt h i m . Once 
anger is aroused by the pain, it seeks something o n w h i c h to discharge itself; 
the anger naturally goes to the very same thing that provoked it, even though 
that thing can do nothing. T h e behavior o f the adult i n a similar case is of-
ten just as unreasonable. W h e n we are intensely angry, we feel the need to 
abuse and destroy, but w i t h o u t i m p u t i n g any sort o f conscious ill w i l l to the 
objects o n w h i c h we vent our anger. There is so little confusion that, w h e n 
the e m o t i o n o f the child has cooled, he knows very well h o w to distinguish 
a chair from a person: H e does not treat b o t h i n the same way. His tendency 
to treat his toys as i f they were h u m a n beings is explained similarly. His very 
intense need to play creates suitable material for itself, just as, i n the preced-
ing case, the strong feelings that pain had unleashed created their o w n , out o f 
nothing. Thus, to be able to play conscientiously w i t h his puppet, he imag-
ines it as a living person. T h e illusion is the easier for h i m , moreover, because 
imagination is his sovereign mistress; he scarcely thinks i n anything but i m -
ages, and we k n o w to what extent images are pliable things that bend i n obe-
dience to all that desire commands. B u t so little is he the dupe o f his o w n 
fiction that i f it suddenly became reality and his puppet bit h i m , he w o u l d be 
the first astonished.
3 7 
Let us therefore put aside these dubious analogies. To k n o w i f man was 
originally inclined toward the confusions that are ascribed to h i m , i t is not 
the animal or the child o f today that must be considered, but the primitive 
beliefs themselves. I f the spirits and gods o f nature really are constructed i n 
the image o f the h u m a n soul, they must bear the mark o f their o r i g i n and the 
essential traits o f their model. To be conceived o f as the inward principle that 
animates the body is the trait par excellence o f the soul. It is the soul that 
moves the body and makes it live, such that life ends or is suspended w h e n 
the soul leaves. I t is i n the body that the soul has its natural residence—so 
long as the body exists, at least. Such is not the case for the spirits i n charge 
o f the various natural phenomena. T h e god o f the sun is not necessarily i n 
37Spencer, Principles of Sociology, p. 188. 


64 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
the sun, or the spirit o f a certain rock i n the rock that serves as its primary 
residence. A spirit undoubtedly has close relations w i t h the body to w h i c h it 
is attached, but to call that spirit its soul is to use a very inaccurate phrase. " I n 
Melanesia," says C o d r i n g t o n , " i t does not seem that people believe i n the ex-
istence o f spirits that animate a natural object, such as a tree, a waterfall, a 
storm or a rock, i n such a way as to be for that object what the soul is be-
lieved to be for the human body. It is true that Europeans talk about spirits 
o f the sea, the storm, or the forest; but the idea o f the natives that is trans-
lated i n this way is altogether different. T h e natives think that the spirit fre-
quents the forest or the sea and has the power to raise storms and make 
travelers sicken."
3 8 Whereas the soul is basically the inside o f the body, the 
spirit pursues the greater part o f its existence outside the object that serves as 
its base. Here, then, is a difference that does not seem to show that the idea 
o f spirit came from the idea o f soul. 
From another point o f view, i f man really had been driven to project his 
image into things, the first sacred beings w o u l d have been conceived o f in his 
image. N o w , far from being primitive, anthropomorphism is the mark o f a 
relatively advanced civilization. A t the beginning, sacred beings are c o n -
ceived o f i n the f o r m o f animals or plants, from w h i c h human f o r m has 
slowly emerged. It w i l l be seen below that i n Australia, animals and plants are 
i n the highest rank o f sacred things. Even among the Indians o f N o r t h A m e r -
ica, the great cosmic deities that are beginning to be the object o f a cult are 
very often conceived o f i n the f o r m o f animals.
3 9 "According to this t u r n o f 
mind," says Reville, not w i t h o u t surprise, "no distinction is made between 
animal, man, and divine being," "and, most often, one would say that the ani-
mal 
form is the fundamental 
form."
40 
To find a god constructed entirely out o f human elements, one must 
come almost to Christianity. I n Christianity, the G o d is a man, not only i n 
the physical aspect i n w h i c h he temporarily manifested himself but also i n 
the ideas and feelings he expresses. B u t even though the gods i n R o m e and 
Greece were generally represented w i t h human traits, several mythical per-
sonages nonetheless carried the mark o f an animal origin. There is Dionysus, 
w h o m one often meets i n the f o r m o f a bull or at least w i t h the horns o f a 
bull; there is Demeter, represented w i t h the mane o f a horse; there are Pan, 
38Codringcon, The Meianesians, p. 123. 
3
9[}ames Owen] Dorsey, "A Study of Siouan Cults," in Xlth Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American 
Ethnology [Washington, D.C., Government Printing Office, 1894], pp. 431ff. 
40Réville, La Religion des peuples non civilisés, vol. I, p. 248. 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion 
65 
Silenus, the Fauns, etc.
4 1 Thus, it is far from true that man was strongly i n -
clined to impose his f o r m u p o n things. W h a t is more, he began to imagine 
himself as a close participant i n animal nature. Indeed, there is a belief that is 
nearly universal i n Australia, and also very widespread among the Indians o f 
N o r t h America, that the ancestors o f m e n were animals or plants, or at least 
that, w h o l l y or i n part, the first m e n had the distinguishing characteristics o f 
certain animal or plant species. Thus, man d i d not see beings like himself 
everywhere—far from it. H e started out thinking o f himself i n the image o f 
beings from w h i c h he specifically differed. 
V 
Further, the animist theory implies a consequence that is perhaps its o w n best 
refutation. 
I f that theory was true, one w o u l d have to accept the notion that reli-
gious beliefs are so many hallucinatory representations, w i t h o u t any objective 
basis. T h e assumption is that all those beliefs are derived from the idea o f soul, 
since spirits and gods are seen as nothing more than purified souls. But, ac-
cording to Tylor and his followers, the very n o t i o n o f soul itself is made o f the 
vague and variable images that fill our minds during sleep—for the soul is the 
double, and the double is nothing but the man as he appears to himself w h e n 
he is asleep. F r o m this point o f view, sacred beings w o u l d be mere imaginings 
that man created i n a sort o f delirium that seizes h i m regularly each day; and, 
from this point o f view, i t is impossible to see what useful ends they serve or 
to what they correspond i n reality. I f he prays, i f he makes sacrifices and of-
ferings, i f he binds himself to the multiple privations that ritual prescribes to 
h i m , that is only because some k i n d o f i n b o r n aberration has made h i m take 
dreams for perceptions, death for a prolonged sleep, and inanimate objects for 
living, thinking beings. I n this way (as many have been led to concede), not 
only does the f o r m i n w h i c h religious forces are or have been conceived o f 
fail to express t h e m accurately, and not only do the symbols w i t h whose help 
they have been thought about partially mask their nature, but, more even 
than that, there w o u l d be nothing behind these images and forms but the 
nightmares o f uncultivated minds. I n the end, religion w o u l d be only a dream, 
""[Marinus Willem] de Visser, De Graecorum diis non referentibus speciem humanam, Lugduni-Batavorum, 
apud G. Los, 1900; Cf. [Paul] Perdrizet, Bulletin de correspondance hellénique [Athens, Ecole française 
d'Athènes], 1889, p. 635. 


66 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
systematized and lived, but w i t h o u t foundation i n the real.
4 2 A n d this is why, 
w h e n the theorists o f animism seek the origins o f religious thought, they do 
not overly exert themselves. W h e n they think they have managed to explain 
what could have led to imagine beings o f strange and vaporous form, such as 
those we see i n dreams, the problem appears solved. 
I n reality, the problem has not even been touched. I t is unthinkable that 
systems o f ideas like religions, w h i c h have held such a large place i n history— 
the well to w h i c h peoples i n all the ages have come to draw the energy they 
had to have i n order to live—could be mere fabrics o f illusion. Today we 
agree to recognize that law, morals, and scientific thought itself were b o r n i n 
religion, were long confounded w i t h it, and have remained imbued w i t h its 
spirit. H o w could a h o l l o w phantasmagoria have been able to m o l d human 
consciousnesses so powerfully and so lastingly? Surely, it ought to be a p r i n -
ciple for the science o f religions that religion expresses n o t h i n g that is not i n 
nature: There is no science except science o f natural phenomena. To w h i c h 
realm o f nature these realities belong, and what has made m e n conceive o f 
them i n the singular f o r m that is peculiar to religious thought, is the w h o l e 
question. B u t to make the posing o f that question even possible, we must first 
allow that real things are conceived o f i n that way. W h e n the philosophers o f 
the eighteenth century treated religion as a vast error invented by priests, 
they could at least explain its persistence by the interest o f the priestly caste 
i n duping the masses. B u t i f the people themselves created those systems o f 
mistaken ideas, and at the same time were duped by them, h o w could this 
amazing dupery have perpetuated itself through the whole course o f history? 
Indeed, whether the t e r m "science o f religions" can be used w i t h o u t 
impropriety i n those circumstances, is questionable. A science is a discipline 
that, however conceived, always applies to a reality that is given. Physics and 
chemistry are sciences because physicochemical phenomena are real, and o f 
a reality that is independent o f the truths those sciences demonstrate. There 
4 2 According to Spencer, however, the belief in spirits has a grain of 
truth: the idea "that the power that 
is manifested in consciousness is another form of the power that is manifested outside of consciousness" 
([Herbert Spencer], "Ecclesiastical Institutions" [part VI, sec. 659], in Principles of Sociology, vol. Ill, 
p. 169]). By this, Spencer means that the notion of force in general is the feeling of the force that we have, 
spread to the entire universe. Animism implicidy concedes this when it populates nature with spirits anal-
ogous to our own. But even if this hypothesis was true—and it calls forth serious reservations that I will 
state (Bk. Ill, chap. 3, §3)—it is not in any way religious; and it calls for no cult. Thus it would still be the 
case that the system of religious symbols and rites, the classification of things as sacred and profane—all 
that is properly religious in religion—does not correspond to anything in reality. Moreover, this grain of 
truth is also, and even more, a grain of error: For if it is true that the forces of nature and those of con-
sciousness are akin, they are also profoundly different, and to treat them as identical is to open oneself to 
strange errors. 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion 
67 
is a psychological science because there really are consciousnesses, w h i c h do 
not acquire from the psychologist their right to exist. B u t religion could not 
possibly survive the animist theory i f one day it was recognized as true by all 
men: M e n could not fail to free themselves from errors whose nature and 
o r i g i n w o u l d thus stand revealed. W h a t sort o f science is it whose principal 
discovery is to make the very object it treats disappear? 


CHAPTER. T H R E E 
THE LEADING CONCEPTIONS 
OF THE ELEMENTARY 
RELIGION (CONTINUATION) 
II. Naturism 
T
he outlook o f the naturist school has an entirely different inspiration. I t 
is also recruited from different milieux. T h e animists are ethnographers 
or anthropologists, for the most part. T h e religions they have studied are 
among the crudest that humanity has practiced. Hence the primary i m p o r -
tance these theorists give to the souls o f the dead, spirits, and demons, that 
is, to spiritual beings o f the second order: Spiritual beings o f a higher order 
are virtually u n k n o w n i n those religions.
1 B y contrast, the theories I w i l l 
n o w present are the w o r k o f scholars w h o have been mainly concerned w i t h 
the great civilizations o f Europe and Asia. 
As soon as researchers, following the brothers G r i m m , saw the fruitful-
ness o f comparing the different mythologies o f the Indo-European peoples, 
they were struck by the remarkable similarities these mythologies displayed. 
M y t h i c a l personages were identified that, although having different names, 
symbolized the same ideas and had the same functions. T h e names t h e m -
selves were compared, and researchers believed it could sometimes be shown 
that they were not unrelated. I t appeared that such similarities could be ex-
plained only by c o m m o n origin. So researchers were led to suppose that, dif-
ferent as these ideas were i n appearance, they were i n reality different forms 
'This no doubt explains as well the sympathy that folklorists like [Wilhelm] Mannhardt [1831-1880] 
have felt for animist ideas. In popular religions, as in the lower religions, spiritual beings of the second or-
der have prominence. [Friedrich L. W. Schwartz] Der Ursprung der Mythologie, Berlin [W. Herzt], 1860. 
68 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion (Continuation) 
69 
originating from a c o m m o n source that m i g h t be discoverable. T h e y postu-
lated that, by using the comparative method, i t should be possible to go back, 
beyond the great religions, to a far more ancient system o f ideas, a truly 
primitive religion from w h i c h the others derived. 
W h a t contributed most to arousing these ambitions was the discovery o f 
the Vedas, a w r i t t e n text whose antiquity may w e l l have been exaggerated at 
the m o m e n t i t was discovered, but that nevertheless is one o f the most an-
cient w e have i n an Indo-European language. Thus, by using the ordinary 
methods o f philology, they were i n a position to study a literature as old as or 
older than that o f H o m e r and a religion thought to be more primitive than 
that o f the ancient Germans. Clearly, a document o f such value was b o u n d 
to shed n e w light o n the religious beginnings o f humanity, and the science 
o f religions could not fail to be revolutionized by it. 
So m u c h was the conception thus b o r n called for by the state o f science 
and by the general current o f ideas that it emerged at almost the same time 
i n t w o different countries. I n 1856, M a x M u l l e r set forth the principles i n his 
Oxford Essays.
2 Clearly i n the same spirit, Adalbert Kuhn's book, Origine du 
feu et de la boisson divine,
3 appeared three years later. Once advanced, the idea 
spread very rapidly i n scientific circles. Kuhn's name is closely associated w i t h 
that o f his brother-in-law [Friedrich] Schwartz, whose b o o k L'Origine de la 
mythologie
4 appeared shordy after Kuhn's. [ H y m a n n ] Steinthal and the w h o l e 
German school o f Voelkerpsychologie* belong to the same movement. T h e 
theory was i m p o r t e d into France i n 1863 by M . M i c h e l Breal.
5 I t met so l i t -
de resistance that, according to [Otto] Gruppe,
6 "there came a time w h e n , 
apart from a few classical philologists w o r k i n g outside Vedic studies, all the 
*Folk Psychology, the title of a ten-volume work by Wilhelm Wundt (1832—1920). The founder of ex-
perimental psychology, Wundt envisaged a comparative social psychology to supplement individual ex-
perimental psychology with research into the data of anthropology, history, and linguistics. 
2In an essay tided Comparative Mythology [New York, Arno Press, 1977], pp. 47ff. [The French trans-
lation was titled, Essai de mythologie comparée, Paris-London, 1859]. 
3[Adalbert, Kuhn], Herabkunft des Feuers und Göttertranks, Berlin [F. Dummler], 1859 (a new edition of 
it was done by Ernst Kuhn in 1886). Cf. Der Schuss des Wilden Jägers auf den Sonnenhirsch, ZDP, vol. 
I (1869), pp. 89-169; Entwicklungsstufen des Mythus, Berlin Academy, 1873. 
4[Schwartz], Der Ursprung der Mythologie, Fl. 
5In his book Hercule et Cocus, Etude de mythologie comparée [Paris, A. Durand, 1863, p. 12]. L'Essaie de 
mythologie comparée by Max Muller is cited there as a work "that marks a new era in the history of Mythol-
ogy- (p. 12). 
6[Otto Gruppe], Die griechischen Kulte und Mythen [Ihren Beziehungen zu der orientalischen Religionen, 
Leipzig, B. G. Teubner, 1887]. 


70 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
mythologists took the principles o f M a x M u l l e r or o f K u h n as the starting 
point o f their explanations."
7 I t is important, therefore, to examine what they 
are and what they are w o r t h . 
Since no one has presented those principles more systematically than 
M a x Muller, I take from h i m the elements o f the exposition to follow.
8 
I 
We have seen that the underlying assumption o f animism is that religion, at 
least at its origin, does not express any experiential reality. M a x M u l l e r sets 
out from the opposite principle. For h i m , it is axiomatic that religion rests o n 
an experience from w h i c h it draws its entire authority. "To hold its proper 
place as a legitimate element o f our consciousnesses," he says, "religion must 
begin, as does all our knowledge, w i t h sense experience."
9 Taking up the old 
empiricist adage Nihil est in intellectu quod non antefuerit in sensu, * he applies 
it to religion and asserts that there can be nothing i n the faith that was not 
first i n the senses. Here is a doctrine that seemingly ought to escape the se-
rious objection I raised to animism. Indeed, it seems that religion must o f ne-
cessity appear, from this p o i n t o f view, not as a k i n d o f vague and confused 
dreaming but as a system o f ideas and practices well grounded i n reality. 
B u t what are the sense experiences that give rise to religious thought? 
This is the question the study o f the Vedas should have helped to resolve. 
T h e names o f its gods are generally either c o m m o n nouns still used as 
such or archaic c o m m o n nouns whose original meaning can be recovered. 
B o t h designate the principal phenomena o f nature. Thus at first Agni, the 
""Nothing is in the mind that was not first in the senses. 
7[Ernest] Renan must be counted among the writers who adopted that conception. See his Nouvelles 
études d'histoire religieuse [Paris, Caiman Lévy], 1884, p. 31. 
8Apart from his Comparative Mythology, the works of Max Muller in which his general theories of re-
ligion are presented are the following: The Hibbert Lectures [Lectures on the Origin and Growth of 
Religion as 
Illustrated by the Religions of 
India, London, Longmans, Green & Co.] (1878), translated into French under 
the title Origine et développement de la religion [étudiés à la lumière des religions de l'Inde, Paris, C. Reinwald, 
1879] ; Natural Religion [London, Longmans, 1889]; Physical Religion [London, Longmans, 1891]; Anthro-
pological Religion [London, Longmans, \S92];Theosophy or Psychological Religion [London, Longmans, 
1895]; Contributions to the Science of 
Mythology [London, Longmans, 1897]. Because of the relationships be-
tween the mythological theories of Max Muller and his linguistic philosophy, the foregoing works must 
be compared with those of his books that are devoted to language or to logic, in particular, Lectures on the 
Science of 
Language [London, Longmans, 1873], translated into French as Nouvelles leçons sur la science du lan-
gage], and The Science of 
Thought [London, Longmans, 1878]. 
9Mùller, Natural Religion, p. 114. 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion (Continuation) 
71 
name o f one o f India's principal deities, meant only the natural phenomenon 
o f fire as the senses perceive it, w i t h o u t any mythological addition. I n the 
Vedas themselves, i t is still used i n that meaning; i n any case, the fact o f its 
preservation i n other Indo-European languages clearly shows that this mean-
ing was primitive: T h e Latin ignis, the Lithuanian ugnis, and the ancient Slav 
ogny are close relatives o f Agni. Similarly, the kinship o f the Sanskrit Dyaus, 
the Greek Zeus, the Latin Jovis, and the H i g h German Zio is undisputed t o -
day. That kinship proves that these different words denote one and the same 
deity, recognized as such by different Indo-European peoples before their 
separation. N o w , Dyaus means "the bright sky." These facts and others like 
t h e m tend to demonstrate that, among these peoples, the bodies and forces o f 
nature were the first objects to w h i c h religious feeling became attached. They 
were the first things to be deified. Taking a further step along the road to gen-
eralization, M a x M u l l e r believed he had valid grounds for concluding that the 
religious evolution o f humanity i n general had the same starting point. 
H e justifies that inference almost exclusively w i t h psychological consid-
erations. To h i m , the varied spectacles that nature offers to man seem to meet 
all the necessary conditions for arousing the religious idea i n the m i n d d i -
rectly. I n fact, he says, "at the first glance m e n cast u p o n the w o r l d , nothing 
appeared less natural to t h e m than nature. Nature was for them the great sur-
prise and the great fear; i t was a permanent marvel and a permanent miracle. 
It was only later, w h e n m e n discovered their constancy, their invariance, and 
their regular recurrence, that certain aspects o f that miracle were called nat-
ural, i n the sense that they were foreseen, ordinary, and intelligible. . . . I t is 
this vast domain open to feelings o f surprise and fear, this marvel, this mira-
cle, this immense u n k n o w n opposed to what is k n o w n . . . that provided the 
first impulse to religious thought and religious language."
1 0 A n d , to illustrate 
his thought, he applies it to a natural force that has a large place i n Vedic re-
ligion: fire. "Try," he says, "to transport yourself backward i n thought to that 
stage i n primitive life where, o f necessity, one must place the o r i g i n and even 
the first phases o f the religion o f nature; y o u w i l l find i t easy to imagine what 
impression the first appearance o f fire must have made o n the human m i n d . 
N o matter how it first appeared—whether it came from lightning, whether 
it was obtained by rubbing tree branches against one another, or whether it 
sprang forth as sparks from rocks—it was something that moved, that pro-
gressed, from which one had to protect oneself, that carried destruction 
with it; but at the same time, it was something that made life possible in 
'"Müller, Physical Religion, pp. 119-120. 


72 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
winter, gave protection at night, and served as both an offensive and a de-
fensive weapon. Thanks to fire, man ceased to be a devourer o f raw meat 
and became an eater of cooked foods. Later, it was also by means of fire that 
metals were worked, and tools and weapons made; it thus became an indis-
pensable factor in all technical and artistic progress. Where would we be, 
even now, without fire?"
1 1 
M a n cannot enter into relations w i t h nature w i t h o u t gaining a sense o f its i n -
finity and its immensity, as the same author says i n another w o r k . I t surpasses 
h i m i n every direction. Beyond the spaces he sees, there are others that 
stretch out limitlessly; each m o m e n t o f duration is preceded and followed by 
a time to w h i c h no l i m i t can be set; the 
flowing 
river manifests an infinite 
force, since nothing exhausts i t .
1 2 There is no aspect o f nature that is not 
equipped to awaken i n us the overwhelming sensation o f an infinite that en-
velops and dominates us.
1 3 For Miiller, it is from this sensation that religions 
are derived.
1 4 
However, only their seed was present i n the sensation.
1 5 R e l i g i o n is truly 
formed only w h e n these natural forces are no longer conceived o f abstractly. 
They must be transformed into personal agents, living and thinking beings, 
spiritual powers, gods; for the cult is usually addressed to beings o f this sort. 
We have seen that animism, too, must pose this question, and h o w it answers: 
M a n supposedly had some certain i n b o r n inability to distinguish the animate 
from 
the inanimate, together w i t h an irresistible urge to conceive o f the 
inanimate i n animate f o r m . This solution, M a x M i i l l e r rejects.
1 6 According 
to h i m , i t is language that brought about the metamorphosis, through its i n -
fluence over thought. 
That metamorphosis is easily understood i n the following way: Puzzled 
by these marvelous forces o n w h i c h they felt dependent, m e n were roused to 
think about them; they asked themselves what those forces consisted o f and 
tried to replace the vague awareness they originally had o f them w i t h a 
clearer idea, a better-defined concept. B u t as our author quite rightly says,
1 7 
"Ibid., p. 121; cf. p. 304. 
12Muller, Natural Religion, pp. 121ff., 149-155. 
,3"The overwhelming pressure of the infinite" (ibid., p. 138). 
"Ibid., pp. 195-196. 
15Max Miiller goes so far as to say that, when thought has not gone beyond that phase, it has only a 
very few of the features that we now impute to religion (Physical Religion, p. 120). 
16Ibid., p. 128. 
"See Miiller, The Science of Thought, p. 30. 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion (Continuation) 
73 
ideas and concepts are impossible w i t h o u t words. Language is not only the 
outward clothing o f our thought; i t is thought's internal skeleton. Language 
does not merely stand outside thought, translating something that is already 
formed, but i n actuality serves to f o r m thought. However, since language has 
its o w n nature, its laws are not the same as those o f thought. Thus since lan-
guage helps to fashion thought, i t is b o u n d to do a certain measure o f v i o -
lence to thought and to distort it. Distortion o f this k i n d supposedly gave rise 
to the peculiarity o f our religious representations. 
To t h i n k is actually to order and thus to classify our ideas. To think o f 
fire, for example, is to place it into such and such category o f things, so as to 
be able to say it is this or that, this and not that. A t the same time, to classify 
is to name, for a general idea has no existence and no reality except i n and 
through the w o r d that expresses it, and that alone makes it what i t is. So the 
language o f a people always influences the manner i n w h i c h the new things 
that people come to k n o w are classified i n their minds—those things must fit 
into preexisting frameworks. For this reason, w h e n m e n set out to make a 
comprehensive representation o f the universe, the language they spoke i n -
delibly marked the system o f ideas that was then b o r n . 
We still k n o w some part o f that language—at least the Indo-European 
peoples do. Despite its remoteness, our languages still contain relics that en-
able us to imagine what i t must have been. These relics are the roots. M a x 
M u l l e r considers these root words—these words from w h i c h the other words 
we use are derived and w h i c h are found as the basis o f all the Indo-European 
idioms—as so many echoes o f the language spoken by the ancient people be-
fore their separation: that is, as the m o m e n t w h e n that religion o f nature, the 
object o f explanation, was being formed. N o w , the roots display t w o re-
markable characteristics that, although as yet well documented for this par-
ticular group o f languages only, our author believes to be equally verifiable i n 
the other linguistic families.
1 8 
First, the roots are typified. That is, they express not particular things or 
individuals but types—and indeed types having very w i d e application. They 
represent the most general themes o f thought. T h e fundamental categories o f 
the m i n d that govern the w h o l e o f mental life at each historical m o m e n t — 
and whose order philosophers have often tried to reconstruct—are found i n 
t h e m fixed and crystallized, as i t were.
1 9 
!8Muller, Natural Religion, pp. 393ff. 
"Muller, Physical Religion, p. 133; The Science ofThought, p. 219, Nouvelles leçons sut la science du langage, 
vol. II, pp. Iff. 


74 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
Second, the types to w h i c h they correspond are types o f action, not types 
o f objects. W h a t they express are the most general ways o f acting that can be 
observed among living things, particularly among humans: the acts o f strik-
ing, pushing, rubbing, tying, lifting, pressing, climbing, descending, walking, 
and so on. I n other words, man generalized and named his principal modes 
o f action before generalizing and naming the phenomena o f nature.
2 0 
B y virtue o f their extreme generality, these words could easily be applied 
to all sorts o f objects that they d i d not originally include. Moreover, this ex-
treme suppleness enabled t h e m to give b i r t h to the many words that are de-
rived from them. So w h e n man, t u r n i n g to things, set out to name t h e m i n 
order to be able to t h i n k about them, he applied those words to things even 
though they had not been meant for things. B y virtue o f their origin, they 
could designate the various forces o f nature only by those manifestations that 
most resembled h u m a n actions: T h e thunderbolt was called that thing that 
digs up the ground w h e n i t descends or spreads fire, the w i n d that thing 
that moans or blows, the sun that thing that hurls golden arrows though space, 
the river that thing that runs, and so on. B u t because natural phenomena be-
came assimilated to h u m a n actions i n this way, this something to w h i c h they 
were j o i n e d was o f necessity imagined i n the f o r m o f personal agents more 
or less like man. This was only a metaphor, but one that was taken literally. 
T h e error was inevitable because the science that alone could have swept 
away the illusion d i d not yet exist. I n sum, because it was made up o f h u m a n 
elements that translated h u m a n states, language could not be applied to na-
ture w i t h o u t transfiguring i t .
2 1 Even today, remarks M . Breal, it somehow 
slants the manner i n w h i c h w e imagine things. " W e do not express an idea, 
even w h e n i t merely denotes a quality, w i t h o u t giving i t a gender, that is to 
say, a sex. W e cannot speak o f an object, even i f i t is considered i n a general 
way, w i t h o u t specifying i t w i t h an article. Every subject o f a sentence is pre-
sented as an acting being, every idea as an action, and the duration o f each 
action, passing or permanent, as delimited by the tense i n w h i c h w e put the 
verb."
2 2 O f course, our scientific culture makes i t easy for us to correct the 
errors that language m i g h t thereby suggest to us, but the influence o f words 
must have been all powerful w h e n they had no counterweight. Thus, u p o n 
the physical w o r l d , as i t is revealed to our senses, language superimposed a 
20Muller, The Science of Thought, p. 272. 
21Ibid., vol. I, p. 327; Physical Religion, pp. 125ff. 
2 2 [Michel Jules Alfred Bréal], Mélanges de mythologie et de linguistique [Paris, Hachette, 1877], p. 8. 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion (Continuation) 
75 
new w o r l d , a w o r l d comprising only spiritual beings that i t had created out 
o f n o t h i n g and that were from then o n regarded as the determining causes o f 
physical phenomena. 
Moreover, the workings o f language did not stop there. Once words had 
been forged to designate these personalities, w h i c h popular imagination had 
put behind things, the personalities reacted u p o n the words themselves, 
thereby creating the riddles o f all kinds that the myths were invented to solve. 
Sometimes a single object received several names corresponding to the several 
aspects i n w h i c h it presented itself to experience. So i t came about that there 
are more than twenty words i n the Vedas to denote the sky. Being different, 
the words were believed to correspond to as many distinct personalities. B u t at 
the same time, these personalities were strongly felt to have an air o f kinship. 
To account for that kinship, they were imagined as f o r m i n g one family; ge-
nealogies, a marital status, and a history were invented for them. I n other cases, 
different things were designated by a single term. To explain h o w different 
things came to have the same name, it was allowed that the corresponding 
things were really transformations o f one another; and new 
fictions 
were 
forged to make these metamorphoses intelligible. O r again, a w o r d that had 
ceased to be understood was the origin o f fables intended to give it a mean-
ing. Thus the creative w o r k o f language continued, i n ever more complex 
constructions. A n d as mythology came to endow each god w i t h an ever more 
extensive and complete biography, the divine personalities, at first undistin-
guished from things, n o w separated from things and stood o n their o w n . 
Thus, supposedly, the n o t i o n o f the divine was formed. T h e religion o f 
the ancestors? O n l y an echo o f the earlier r e l i g i o n .
2 3 According to this the-
ory, the idea o f the soul was formed for reasons rather similar to those Tylor 
gave, except that, for M a x Miiller, the purpose o f that idea was to account 
for death, not for dreams.
2 4 T h e n , under the influence o f various (in part, ac-
cidental) circumstances,
2 5 the souls o f men, once separated from the body, 
were drawn litde by little into the circle o f divine beings, and thus were u l -
timately 
deified as well. B u t this n e w cult was merely the product o f a sec-
ondary formation. 
Further proof: Deified m e n have very often 
been 
2 3 Müller, Anthropological Religion, pp. 128—130. 
24This explanation, however, is no better than [Edward Burnett] Tylor's. According to Max Müller, 
man was unable to accept that life ended with death. For that reason, he concluded that there are two be-
ings in him, one of which survives the body. It is hard to see what could have made people believe that 
life continues, when the body is in full decomposition. 
25See for details, Müller, Anthropological Religion, pp. 35Iff. 


76 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
imperfect gods, or demigods, w h i c h all peoples have always k n o w n h o w to 
distinguish from deities proper.
2 6 
II 
This doctrine rests i n part o n various linguistic postulates that were then and 
still are very m u c h i n dispute. Scholars have questioned the reality o f many 
concordances that M a x M i i l l e r thought he saw among the names o f gods i n 
the various European languages. T h e y have especially cast doubt o n his i n -
terpretation o f them: T h e y have questioned whether, far from being the 
mark o f a very primitive religion, the concordances might not be the late re-
sult o f either direct borrowings or natural interchange among peoples.
2 7 
Moreover, i t is n o longer accepted today that roots could have existed i n iso-
lation as autonomous realities—or, consequently, that they enable us even 
hypothetically to reconstruct the primitive language o f the Indo-European 
peoples.
2 8 Finally, recent studies w o u l d tend to prove that not all the Vedic 
deities had the exclusively naturist quality that M a x M i i l l e r and his school at-
tributed to t h e m .
2 9 B u t I w i l l leave aside questions whose examination pre-
supposes the linguist's very specialized competence, i n order to take up the 
general principles o f the system. Besides, the naturist idea should not be too 
closely mingled w i t h the disputed postulates, for that idea is accepted by a 
number o f scholars w h o do n o t ascribe to language the dominant role M a x 
M i i l l e r did. 
That man has an interest i n k n o w i n g the w o r l d around h i m and that, 
consequendy, his reflection was quickly applied to it, everyone w i l l readily 
accept. T h e help o f the things w i t h w h i c h he was i n immediate contact was 
so necessary that he inevitably tried to investigate their nature. B u t if, as na-
26Ibid., p. 130. This does not stop Max Miiller from seeing Christianity as the high point of this en-
tire development. The religion of the ancestors, he says, assumes there is something divine in man. Is that 
not the idea that is at the basis of the teaching of Christ (ibid., pp. 3788)? There is no need to emphasize 
what is odd about a conception that makes Christianity the culmination of the cult of the dead. 
2 7On this same point, see the critique to which Gruppe subjects the hypotheses of Max Miiller in 
Crieschischen Kulte und Mythen, pp. 7
9
—
1
8
4
. 
^See [Antoine] Meillet, Introduction à l'étude comparative des langues indo-européennes [Paris, Hachette, 
1903], p. 119. 
29[Herman] Oldenberg, Die Religion des Veda [Berlin, W. Hertz, 1844], pp. 59ff.; [Antoine] Meillet, 
"Le Dieu Iranien Mithra,"J/4, vol. X, no. 1 (July-August 1907), pp. 143ff. 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion (Continuation) 
77 
turism contends, religious thought was b o r n from these particular reflec-
tions, then i t becomes inexplicable that religious thought should have sur-
vived the first tests made, and unintelligible that religious thought has been 
maintained. If, i n fact, we have a need to k n o w things, i t is i n order to act i n 
a manner appropriate to them. B u t the representation o f the universe that re-
l i g i o n gives us, especially at the beginning, is too grossly incomplete to have 
been able to b r i n g about practices that had secular utility. According to that 
representation o f the universe, things are n o t h i n g less than living, thinking 
beings—consciousnesses and personalities like those the religious imagina-
t i o n has made into the agents o f cosmic phenomena. So i t is not by conceiv-
i n g o f t h e m i n that f o r m and treating t h e m according to that n o t i o n that man 
could have made t h e m helpful to h i m . I t is not by praying to them, celebrat-
i n g t h e m i n feasts and sacrifices, and imposing fasts and privations o n himself 
that he could have prevented t h e m from harming h i m or obliged them to 
serve his purposes. Such procedures could have succeeded only o n very rare 
occasions—miraculously, so to speak. I f the point o f religion was to give us a 
representation o f the w o r l d that w o u l d guide us i n our dealings w i t h it, then 
religion was i n no position to carry out its function, and humanity w o u l d not 
have been slow to notice that fact: Failures, infinitely more c o m m o n than 
successes, w o u l d have notified t h e m very quickly that they were o n the 
w r o n g path; and religion, constantly shaken by these constant disappoint-
ments, w o u l d have been unable to last. 
N o doubt, sometimes an error does indeed perpetuate itself i n history. 
B u t barring an altogether unusual conjunction o f circumstances, i t cannot 
maintain itself this way unless i t proves to be practically true—that is to say, if, 
w h i l e not giving us a correct theoretical idea o f the things to w h i c h it is re-
lated, it expresses correctly enough the manner i n w h i c h those things affect 
us, for better or for worse. U n d e r those conditions, behavior decided upon 
for the w r o n g reasons has every chance o f being the right behavior, at least 
overall; and so w h y the error could have survived the test o f experience be-
comes understandable.
3 0 O n the other hand, an error, and especially an or-
ganized system o f errors that leads and can only lead to practical setbacks, is 
not viable. W h a t is there i n c o m m o n between the rites by w h i c h the faithful 
have tried to act o n nature and the procedures that the sciences have taught 
us to use and that we n o w k n o w to be the only effective ones? I f that is what 
m e n asked o f religion, w e cannot understand w h y religion should have been 
able to survive, unless clever tricks prevented t h e m from noticing that it did 
30This is applicable to numerous maxims of popular wisdom. 


78 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
not give them what they expected o f it. I t w o u l d therefore be just as well to 
go back once more to the simplistic explanations o f the eighteenth century.
3 1 
O n l y i n appearance, therefore, does naturism escape the objection I 
made against animism a short while ago. Since naturism reduces religion to 
nothing more than an immense metaphor w i t h o u t objective foundation,* it 
too makes religion out to be a system o f hallucinatory images. I t does, o f 
course, assign religion a point o f departure i n reality—namely, the sensations 
that the phenomena o f nature induce i n us; but by the magical workings o f 
language, this sensation is transformed into bizarre ideas. Religious thought 
comes into contact w i t h reality only to shroud it straightaway w i t h a thick 
veil that hides its true forms, this veil being the fabric o f fabulous beliefs spun 
by mythology. Thus, hke the delirious individual, the believer lives i n a w o r l d 
populated w i t h beings and things that have only a verbal existence. W h a t is 
more, M a x M i l l i e r himself recognizes this, since for h i m myths arise from a 
malady o f thought. A t first, he ascribed t h e m to a malady o f language, but 
since language and thought are inseparable to h i m , what is true o f one is true 
o f the other. " W h e n I tried briefly to characterize the inner nature o f 
mythology," he says, " I called i t a malady o f language more than a one o f 
thought. B u t after all I had said i n m y b o o k The Science of Thought about the 
inseparability o f thought and language, and therefore about the absolute iden-
tity between a malady o f language and one o f thought, no further equivoca-
tion seemed possible. . . . Depicting the high G o d as guilty o f every crime, 
tricked by men, out o f sorts w i t h his wife, and beating his children, is surely 
symptomatic o f an abnormal condition or a malady o f thought, or better, o f 
madness outright."
3 2 This argument is valid not only against M a x M i l l i e r and 
* Valeur objective. Compare the similar passage on p. 80. 
3 1 It is true that this argument does not change the minds of those who see religion as a technique (es-
pecially a hygienic technique), the rules of which were well founded, even if sanctioned by imaginary be-
ings. But I will not tarry here to criticize an idea that is so untenable and that, in fact, has never been 
argued systematically by minds that were even minimally well informed in the history of religions. It is 
difficult to show in what way the terrible practices of initiation sustain the health that they place in jeop-
ardy; in what way the dietary prohibitions, which very commonly apply to perfecdy wholesome animals, 
are hygienic; in what way sacrifices, which took place during the building of a house, made the house 
more solid, and so forth. No doubt, there are religious precepts that turn out to have technical utility at 
the same time, but they disappear in the mass of others. And indeed, very often the services that they do 
render have their opposites. If there is a religious prophylaxis, there is also a religious 
filth 
deriving from 
the same principles. The commandment to take the deceased person away 
from 
the camp because he is 
the seat of a dreaded spirit has practical utility. But the same belief has the relatives anointing themselves 
with the liquids that come 
from 
the body as it rots, because they are thought to have exceptional virtues. 
In matters technical, magic has served more often than religion. 
32Mùller, [Etudes de mythologie comparée, pp. 51—52]. 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion (Continuation) 
79 
his theory but against the very principle o f naturism, however applied. D o 
what we may, i f expressing the forces o f nature is made out to be the p r i n c i -
pal object o f religion, i t is impossible to see religion as anything other than a 
system o f deceiving fictions, the survival o f w h i c h is incomprehensible. 
True, M a x M u l l e r thought he escaped that objection, the seriousness o f 
w h i c h he sensed, by radically distinguishing mythology from religion and ex-
cluding it from religion. H e claims the right to reserve the name "religion" 
only for beliefs that c o n f o r m to the prescriptions o f wholesome morality and 
to the teachings o f a rational theology. H e considered myths, o n the other 
hand, to have been parasitic developments that, under the influence o f lan-
guage, came to graft themselves onto the fundamental representations and 
pervert them. Thus, for h i m , the belief i n Zeus was religious to the extent 
that the Greeks saw Zeus as a supreme G o d , father o f humanity, protector o f 
laws, avenger o f crimes, and so forth. B u t everything about the biography o f 
Zeus, his marriages and his adventures, was only mythology.
3 3 
B u t this distinction is arbitrary. W h i l e there is no doubt that mythology 
is important to aesthetics as well as to the science o f religions, it is nonethe-
less one o f the essential elements o f religious life. I f m y t h is w i t h d r a w n from 
religion, ritual must also be w i t h d r a w n : Rites are most c o m m o n l y addressed 
to definite personalities that have a name, a character, definite attributes, and 
a history; and those vary according to the way i n w h i c h the personalities are 
conceived. T h e cult one renders to the deity depends o n the f o r m ascribed 
to that deity. Indeed the rite is often nothing other than the m y t h i n action. 
T h e Christian c o m m u n i o n is inseparable from the paschal m y t h from w h i c h 
it takes its entire meaning. Thus i f all mythology results from a sort o f verbal 
delusion, the question I posed remains intact: T h e existence and, above all, 
the persistence o f the cult become inexplicable. I t does not make sense that 
m e n could go o n d o i n g things for centuries, poindessly. Besides, i t is not 
only the particular traits o f divine figures that are specified by the myths. T h e 
very idea that there are gods, spiritual beings, and custodians assigned to var-
ious departments o f nature is essentially mythical, no matter h o w those be-
ings are depicted.
3 4 W h a t remains i f one takes away from the religions o f the 
33See Miiller, Science du langage [vol. II, p. 147]; and Physical Religion, pp. 276ff. In the same vein is 
Bréal, Mélanges de mythologie et de linguistique, p. 6: "To bring to the question of the origin of mythology 
the necessary clarity, it is necessary to distinguish carefully the gods, who are a direct product of human in-
tellect, from the legends, which are only its indirect and involuntary product." 
34Max Muller recognizes this. See Physical Religion, p. 132, and Mythologie Comparée, p. 58. "The 
gods," he says, "are nomina [names] and not numina [shades], names without being and not beings with-
out name." 


80 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
past everything that rests o n the n o t i o n o f gods conceived as cosmic agents? 
T h e idea o f divinity i n itself, o f a transcendent power to w h i c h man is sub-
ordinate and o n w h i c h he leans? B u t that is a philosophical and abstract c o n -
ception that has never been realized as such i n any historical religion; it is 
w i t h o u t interest for the science o f religions.
3 5 Let us therefore guard against 
differentiating among religious beliefs, keeping some because they seem just 
and wholesome, to us, and rejecting others as u n w o r t h y o f being called reli-
gious because they offend and unsetde us. A l l myths, even those we find 
most unreasonable, have been objects o f faith.
3 6 M a n believed i n them no less 
than i n his o w n sensations; he regulated his conduct i n accordance 
w i t h 
them. Despite appearances, therefore, they cannot be w i t h o u t objective 
foundation [fondement objectif]. 
Nevertheless, i t w i l l be said, no matter h o w religions are explained, they 
have certainly erred about the true nature o f things: T h e sciences have 
demonstrated that. So the modes o f action they encouraged or imposed 
u p o n man could only rarely have had useful effects: I t is not w i t h purifica-
tions that sicknesses are cured, or w i t h sacrifices or songs that the crop is 
made to grow. I n this way, the objection that I have made against naturism 
seems applicable to all possible systems o f explanation. 
B u t there is one that escapes it. Let us suppose that religion answers a 
need quite different from adapting us to tangible things^ There w i l l be no risk 
o f its being weakened solely because it satisfies this need poorly or not at all. 
I f religious faith was not b o r n to place man i n harmony w i t h the physical 
w o r l d , the errors it might have caused h i m to make i n his struggle w i t h the 
w o r l d w o u l d not harm it at its source, since it is fed from another. I f it was not 
for such reasons that people were led to believe, they must have gone o n be-
lieving even w h e n those reasons were contradicted by the facts. O n e even 
imagines that faith could have been rather strong, strong enough not only to 
35Granted, Max Miiller holds that, 
for 
the Greeks, "Zeus was and remained the name of the supreme 
deity despite all the mythological obscurities" (Science du Langage [vol. II, p. 173]). I will not dispute that 
assertion, which in historical terms is quite disputable; but in any case, that conception of Zeus could 
never be other than a glimmering amid the totality of the Greeks' religious beliefs. 
Moreover, in a later work, Max Miiller goes a
s far as to make the very idea of god in general the prod-
uct of a wholly verbal process and, in consequence, a mythological elaboration (Physical Religion, p. 138). 
36Apart from myths proper, there certainly have always been fables that were not believed or, at least, 
were not believed to the same degree and in the same manner and that for this reason were not religious 
in character. The line of demarcation between fables and myths is certainly 
fluid 
and hard to determine. 
But this is no reason to make all the myths into fables, any more than we would dream of making all the 
fables into myths. There is at least one characteristic that is sufficient in many cases to differentiate the re-
ligious myth, and that is its relationship to the cult. 


The Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion (Continuation) 
81 
endure such contradictions but also to deny them and inhibit the believer 
from perceiving their import—thus making them harmless to religion. W h e n 
a religious feeling is strong, i t does not accept that religion could be guilty, and 
it readily prompts explanations that acquit religion: I f the rite does not pro-
duce the expected results, the failure is imputed either to some flaw o f execu-
tion or to the intervention o f a contrary deity. B u t for that to occur, religious 
ideas must not draw their origin from a feeling that is disturbed by the set-
backs o f experience, for otherwise, where w o u l d their resilience come from? 
Ill 
W h a t is more, even though man m i g h t have had reason to go o n explaining 
the cosmic phenomena w i t h religious symbols, despite every setback, still 
those symbols w o u l d have to have been the k i n d that suggest such interpre-
tation. W h e r e w o u l d they have acquired such a property? Here again, we 
come face to face w i t h one o f those postulates that seem obvious only be-
cause they have not been examined critically. It is set up as axiomatic that the 
natural play o f physical forces has all i t takes to arouse the idea o f the sacred 
i n us. B u t w h e n the evidence (sketchy, by the way) that has been adduced to 
support this proposition is examined more closely, w e notice that it boils 
d o w n to a preconceived idea. 
We talk about the amazement that m e n must have felt as they discovered 
the w o r l d . B u t i t is a regularity shading o f f into m o n o t o n y that above all 
characterizes the life o f nature. Every m o r n i n g , the sun climbs the horizon, 
and every evening i t sets; every m o n t h , the m o o n completes the same cycle; 
the river flows uninterruptedly i n its bed; the same seasons periodically b r i n g 
back the same sensory experiences. Some unexpected event occurs here and 
there, no doubt: T h e sun is eclipsed, the m o o n disappears behind the clouds, 
the river floods. B u t these passing disturbances can never give b i r t h to any-
thing but equally passing impressions, the m e m o r y o f w h i c h is erased after a 
time; so they could not possibly serve as the basis o f those stable and perma-
nent systems o f ideas and practices that constitute religions. Ordinarily, the 
course o f nature is u n i f o r m , and uniformity cannot produce strong e m o -
tions. To conceive the savage as being full o f admiration before these marvels 
is to transfer to the o r i g i n o f history feelings that are m u c h more modern. H e 
is too used to those marvels to be powerfully surprised. It takes intellectual 
cultivation and reflection to shake o f f this yoke o f habit and discover all that 
is amazing even i n that very regularity. Furthermore, as I observed earlier,
3 7 
37See above p. 25. 


82 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
it is not enough that we admire an object for it to appear to us as sacred— 
that is, for i t to be marked w i t h the quality that makes all direct contact w i t h 
it seem a profanation and a sacrilege. W e misunderstand what is specific to 
religious feeling i f we confuse i t w i t h every impression o f admiring surprise. 
B u t fading admiration, some say, there is one impression that man can-
not help but feel i n the presence o f nature. H e cannot enter into relations 
w i t h nature w i t h o u t realizing that it goes as far as he can be, or see, and then 
beyond that. Its immensity overwhelms h i m . That sensation o f an infinite 
space surrounding h i m , o f an infinite time preceding and to follow the pres-
ent moment, o f forces infinitely superior to those at his disposal, cannot fail 
to arouse the idea inside h i m that there is an infinite power outside h i m to 
w h i c h he is subject. This idea then enters into our conception o f the divine 
as an essential element. 
B u t let us remember what is at issue. T h e question is h o w man could 
have arrived at thinking that there are, i n reality, t w o categories o f radically 
heterogeneous and incomparable things. H o w could the panorama o f nature 
have given us the idea o f that duality? Nature is always and everywhere iden-
tical to itself. It does not matter that nature extends to the infinite: Beyond 
the farthest l i m i t o f m y gaze, i t does not differ from what it is this side. T h e 
space that I conceive beyond the h o r i z o n is still space, identical to the space 
I see. T h e time that passes endlessly is made up o f moments identical to those 
I have lived through. Space, like time, repeats itself indefinitely; i f the por-
tions o f it that I reach have no sacredness i n themselves, h o w could the o t h -
ers have any? T h e fact that I do not perceive t h e m direcdy is not sufficient to 
transform t h e m .
3 8 I t makes no difference for a w o r l d o f profane things to be 
limitless; it remains a profane w o r l d . Does one say that the physical forces 
w i t h w h i c h we interact exceed our own? B u t the sacred forces are not dis-
tinguished from the profane merely by their greater intensity; they are differ-
ent; they have special qualities that the profane have not. O n the other hand, 
all those forces manifest i n the universe—both those i n us and those outside 
us—are o f the same nature. M o s t o f all, what could have enabled us to lend 
any sort o f preeminence to some, as compared to others? N o t h i n g . So i f re-
ligion was really b o r n out o f the need to assign causes to physical p h e n o m -
38Furthermore, there is actual twisting of words in Max Miiller's language. Sense experience, he says, 
implies, at least in certain cases, "that beyond the known there is something unknown, something that I ask 
permission to call infinite" (Natural Religion, p. 195. Cf. p. 218). The unknown is no more necessarily the in-
finite than the infinite is necessarily the unknown—if it is totally identical to itself and, thus, to what we 
do know about it. It would have to be shown that what we perceive of the infinite is different in nature 
from what we do not. 


Tlie Leading Conceptions of the Elementary Religion (Continuation) 
83 
ena, the forces imagined i n this way w o u l d not be more sacred than those 
that the scientist o f today conceives o f i n accounting for the same facts.
3 9 
There w o u l d not have been sacred beings—or, consequently, religion. 
Furthermore, 
even supposing that this sensation 
o f "being over-
w h e l m e d " really could suggest the idea o f religion, i t w o u l d not have had 
that effect o n the p r i m i t i v e — f o r that sensation he does not have. H e has ab-
solutely no awareness that cosmic forces are so far superior to his o w n . B e -
cause science has not yet come to teach h i m modesty, he ascribes to himself 
a d o m i n i o n over things that he does not have, but the illusion o f it is enough 
to prevent h i m from feeling dominated by them. As I have said, he believes 
he can tell the elements what to do: unchain the w i n d , force the rain to fall, 
stop the sun w i t h a wave o f the hand, etc.
4 0 R e l i g i o n itself helps to give h i m 
that security, for it is believed to arm h i m w i t h broad powers over nature. I n 
part, the rites are meant to enable h i m to impose his wishes o n the w o r l d . 
Thus, far from being inspired by a sense man has o f his smallness before the 
universe, religions have the opposite inspiration. T h e effect o f even the most 
elevated and idealistic is one o f reassuring man i n his struggle w i t h things. I t 
professes that faith, by itself, is able "to move mountains"—that is, to d o m i -
nate the forces o f nature. H o w could they provide this confidence i f their 
origin really was a sensation o f weakness and powerlessness? 
Furthermore, i f natural things truly had become sacred beings by virtue 
o f their imposing forms or the force they display, we w o u l d observe that the 
sun, the m o o n , the sky, the mountains, the sea, the w i n d s — i n short, the 
great cosmic phenomena—-were the first to be lifted to that status; none are 
better equipped to dazzle the senses and the imagination. B u t i n fact, the 
great cosmic phenomena were not deified until fairly recent times. T h e first 
beings to w h i c h the cult was addressed—the p r o o f o f this w i l l be given i n the 
chapters to follow—are humble plants and animals i n relation to w h i c h man 
found himself o n an equal footing at the very least: the duck, the hare, the 
kangaroo, the emu, the lizard, the caterpillar, the frog, and so forth. Their 
objective qualities surely could not have been the o r i g i n o f the religious feel-
ings they inspired. 
39This Max Miiller unintentionally acknowledges in certain places. He admits seeing little difference 
between the notion of Agni, the god of fire, and the notion of ether by which the modern physicist ex-
plains light and heat (Physical Religion, pp. 126-127). Besides, he connects the idea of divinity to that of 
agency (p. 138), to an idea of causality that is in no way natural and profane. The fact that religion depicts 
the causes thus conceived in the form of personal agents is insufficient to explain why those causes should 
have sacredness. A personal agent can be profane, and, besides, many religious forces are essentially im-
personal. 
40When I come to speak about rites and about faith in their efficacy, we will see how these illusions 
can be understood (Bk. Ill, chap. 2). 


C H A P T E R F O U R 
TOTEMISM AS ELEMENTARY 
RELIGION 
Review of the Question—Method of Treating It 
A
lthough seemingly quite opposed i n their conclusions, the t w o systems I 
have just examined are nonetheless i n agreement o n a fundamental 
point: T h e y frame the problem i n identical terms. B o t h set out to construct 
the n o t i o n o f the divine out o f the sensations that certain natural phenomena, 
either physical or biological, arouse i n us. According to the animists, dreams 
were the starting point o f religious evolution; according to the naturists, cer-
tain cosmic manifestations were. According to both, however, the seed o f the 
great opposition between the sacred and the profane is to be found i n nature. 
B u t such an enterprise is impossible. I t assumes a veritable creation out 
o f nothing. N o fact o f ordinary experience can give us the idea o f something 
whose defining trait is to be outside the w o r l d o f ordinary experience. A 
man as he appears to himself i n his dreams is only a man. T h e natural forces 
that our senses perceive are only natural forces, however intense they may be. 
Hence m y criticism o f b o t h doctrines. To explain h o w these supposed data 
o f religious thought could take o n a sacredness that has no objective basis, 
they had to adopt the n o t i o n that a w h o l e w o r l d * o f hallucinatory represen-
tations superimposed themselves u p o n those data o f experience, distorting 
t h e m to the point o f making t h e m unrecognizable, and replacing reality w i t h 
mere figments o f the imagination. I n one case, it is the illusions o f dreaming 
that supposedly brought about such a transfiguration; i n the other, i t is the 
brilliant but vacant march o f images evoked by words. B u t i n either case, one 
arrived necessarily at religion as the product o f delirious interpretation. 
Thus one positive conclusion arises from this critical examination. Since, 
i n themselves, neither man nor nature is inherently sacred, b o t h acquire sa-
* The 
first 
edition says monde, or "world"; the second says mode. 
84 


Totemism as Elementary Religion 
85 
credness elsewhere. Beyond the h u m a n individual and the natural w o r l d , 
then, there must be some other reality i n relation to w h i c h this species o f 
delirium that every religion is, i n some sense, takes o n meaning and objec-
tive significance. I n other words, beyond what has been called naturism and 
animism, there must be another more fundamental and more primitive cult, 
o f w h i c h animism and naturism are derivative forms or particular aspects. 
That cult exists. I t is the one to w h i c h the ethnographers have given the 
name "totemism." 
I 
T h e w o r d " t o t e m " appeared i n the ethnographic literature only at the end o f 
the eighteenth century. I t crops up first i n the b o o k o f an Indian interpreter, 
J. Long, w h i c h was published i n L o n d o n i n 1791.
1 For nearly half a century, 
totemism was k n o w n exclusively as an A m e r i c a n institution.
2 I t was only i n 
1841 that Grey, i n a passage that is still celebrated,
3 drew attention to the ex-
istence o f similar practices i n Australia. F r o m then on, scholars began to re-
alize that they were i n the presence o f a system that has a certain generality. 
rBut they saw i t as being essentially an archaic institution, an ethno-
graphic curiosity w i t h o u t m u c h interest for the historian. M c L e n n a n was the 
first to try to connect totemism w i t h general human history. I n a series o f ar-
ticles published i n the Fortnightly Review,
4 he set out to show not only that 
totemism was a religion but also that a multiplicity o f beliefs and practices 
that recur i n m u c h more advanced religious systems were derived from it. H e 
even went so far as to make it the source o f all the animal- and plant-
worshipping cults that can be observed among ancient peoples. That exten-
sion o f totemism was surely overstated. T h e cult o f animals and plants has 
multiple causes that cannot be reduced to only one w i t h o u t very great over-
simplification. Yet by its overstatements, this simplification had the advantage 
o f drawing attention to the historical importance o f totemism. 
For their part, the Americanists had l o n g since noticed that totemism 
was linked w i t h a definite social organization, one based o n the division o f 
'[John Long], Voyages and Travels of 
an Indian Interpreter and Trader, [Cleveland, A. H. Clark, 1904]. 
2This idea was so widespread that M. [Albert] Reville still treated America as the classical locale of 
totemism ([Les] Religions des peuples non civilises, vol. I [Paris, Fishbacher, 1883], p. 242). 
3[George Grey,] Journals oflwo Expeditions in North- West and Western Australia, vol. II [London, T. & W. 
Boone, 1841], p. 228. 
4[James Ferguson McLennan] "The Worship of Animals and Plants" ["Totems and Totemism"—ap-
parendy Durkheim's expansion of the title. Trans.], [FR, vol. XII old series, vol. VI new series (1869), pp. 
407-427, 562-582], [vol. XIII old series, vol. VII new series (1870), pp. 194-200]. 


86 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
society into clans.
5 I n 1877, i n his Ancient Society,
6 Lewis H . M o r g a n under-
took the study o f this social organization i n order to determine its distin-
guishing features and, at the same time, to show its prevalence among the 
Indian tribes o f N o r t h and Central America. A t almost the same time, and 
moreover at Morgan's suggestion, Fison and H o w i t t
7 documented the exis-
tence o f the same social system i n Australia, as w e l l as its relations w i t h 
totemism. 
U n d e r the influence o f these leading ideas, studies could be done more 
methodically. Research encouraged by the Bureau o f American Ethnology 
contributed greatly to the progress o f these studies.
8 B y 1887, the documents 
were o f sufficient number and significance for Frazer to have judged it o p -
portune to collect and present t h e m to us i n a systematic overview. Such is 
the object o f his small b o o k tided Totemism,
9 i n w h i c h totemism is studied as 
b o t h religion and legal institution. B u t this study was purely descriptive, 
making no effort either to explain totemism
1 0or to delve into its fundamen-
tal ideas. 
Robertson Smith was the first to take up the task o f elaboration. H e re-
alized more keenly than his predecessors h o w rich i n seeds foxihe future this 
5This idea is clearly expressed in a study by [Albert] Gallatin, "A Synopsis of the Indian Tribes" (Ar-
chaeologia Americana vol. II, pp. 109ff. [also New York, AMS Press, 1973.]), and in a circular letter of Mor-
gan [an article under the name A. P. Morris. Trans.], reproduced in CJ (1860), p. 149. 
6[Lewis Henry Morgan, Ancient Society or Researches in the Lines of Human Progress 
from Savagery, through 
Barbarism to Civilisation, London, Macmillan, 1887.] This work had been prepared for and preceded by 
two others by the same author: [Lewis Henry Morgan, The League of the [Hodenosaunee or] Iroquois, New 
York, M. H. Newman, 1851; and Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family, Washington, 
D.C., Smithsonian Institution, 1870]. 
'[Lorimer Fison and Alfred Howitt], Kamilaroi and Kurnai [Group Marriage and Relationship, and Mar-
riage by Element, Draum Chiefly 
from the Usage of the Australian Aborigines, Melbourne, G. Robertson, 1880]. 
"Beginning with the first volumes of the Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology [First An-
nual Report, 1879—1881, Washington, DC, Government Printing Office, 1881. Trans.], we find the 
study of [John Wesley] Powell, "Wyandot Government" (vol. I, p. 59), those of [Frank Hamilton] Cush-
ing, "Zuiii Fetishes" (vol. II, p. 9), [Erminnie Adele] Smith, "Myths of the Iroquois" (vol. II, p. 76), and 
the important work of [J. Owen] Dorsey "Omaha Sociology" (vol. Ill, p. 211), which are all contribu-
tions to the study of totemism. 
9It [James George Frazer, "Totemism"] 
first 
appeared, abridged, in the Encyclopedia Britannica [9th ed., 
Edinburgh, Adam & Charles Black, 1887]. 
1 0In his Primitive Culture [New York, Henry Holt, 1871], Tylor [Edward Burnett] had already at-
tempted an explanation of totemism, to which I will return later but do not recount here; by reducing 
totemism to no more than a special case of the ancestor cult, that explanation completely misunderstands 
the importance of totemism. I mention in this chapter only the observations or theories that have led to 
important advances in the study of totemism. 


Totetnism as Elementary Religion 
87 
crude and confused religion was. To be sure, M c L e n n a n had already c o m -
pared totemism w i t h the great religions o f antiquity, but that was only be-
cause he thought he had found a cult o f animals and plants i n both. B u t to 
reduce totemism to a k i n d o f animal or plant worship was to see only what 
was most superficial and, even at that, to misunderstand its true nature. Smith 
set out to move beyond the letter o f totemic beliefs i n order to find the fun-
damental principles governing them. I n his b o o k Kinship and Marriage in 
Early Arabia,
11 
he had already shown that totemism presupposes a consub-
stantiality o f man and animal (or plant), whether natural or acquired. I n his 
Religion of the Semites,
12 he made this same idea the o r i g i n o f the w h o l e sac-
rificial system. H e contended that humanity owes the principle o f alimentary 
c o m m u n i o n to totemism. Certainly we may find Smith's theory one-sided, 
and it is no longer adequate to the facts we n o w have. Nonetheless, it c o n -
tains an ingenious insight and i t has had a fruitful influence o n the science o f 
religions. Frazer draws u p o n these same ideas i n The Golden Bough.
13 
I n it he 
relates to European folklore the totemism that M c L e n n a n had related to the 
religions o f classical antiquity and Smith to those o f the Semitic peoples. 
McLennan's school and Morgan's thus came to j o i n that o f Mannhardt.
1 4 
D u r i n g this time, the American tradition continued to develop, and w i t h 
an independence, moreover, that it has kept until quite recently. Three groups 
o f societies i n particular were the object o f research o n totemism: the tribes 
o f the Northwest—the T l i n g i t , the Haida, the Salish, and the Tshimshian; 
the great Sioux nation; and finally, i n America's center, the Pueblo Indians. The 
first were studied principally by Dall, Krause, Boas, Swanton, and H i l l Tout; 
the second by Dorsey; the last by Mindeleff, M r s . Stevenson, and Cushing.
1 5 
B u t however rich the harvest o f facts collected, the available documents re-
mained fragmentary. A l t h o u g h the American religions contain many traces 
o f totemism, they have nevertheless gone beyond the totemic phase proper. 
O n the other hand, documentation o n Australia scarcely went beyond isolated 
"[William Robertson Smith], Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia, Cambridge [Cambridge Univer-
sity Press], 1885. 
12[William Robertson Smith], Leaures on the Religion of the Semites [London, A & C Black, 1889]. This 
is the published version of a course taught at the University of Aberdeen in 1888. Cf. the article "Sacri-
fice" in the Encyclopedia Britannica [9th ed., Edinburgh, Adam & Charles Black, 1887]. 
13[James George] Frazer, The Golden Bough [A Study in Magic and Religion], London [and New York, 
Macmillan], 1890. Since then, a three-volume second edition has appeared (1900), and the third of five 
volumes is in the process of publication. [This text was reissued by St. Martin's Press in 1990. Trans.] 
14It is well to cite the interesting work of [Edwin] Sidney Hardand, The Legend of 
Perseus, 3 vols. [Lon-
don, D. Nutt, 1894-1896] in this connection. 
15Here I confine myself 
to giving the authors' names; the books will be indicated below, as I use them. 


88 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
beliefs and rites, rites o f initiation and prohibitions relative to the totem. 
Thus it is w i t h facts taken from hither and y o n that Frazer tried to sketch an 
overall picture o f totemism. Whatever its obvious merit, a reconstruction u n -
dertaken i n these conditions could only be incomplete and hypothetical. A l l 
things considered, a fully functioning totemic system had not yet been seen. 
This gap has been filled only i n recent years. T w o remarkably astute o b -
servers, Messieurs B a l d w i n Spencer and F. J. Gillen, have discovered,
1 6 i n the 
interior o f the Australian continent, a rather large number o f tribes i n w h i c h 
they saw i n operation a full religious system whose basis and coherence were 
provided by totemic beliefs. T h e results o f their inquiry were set forth i n t w o 
works that have given n e w life to the study o f totemism. T h e first, The Na-
tive Tribes of Central Australia,
17 
treats the most central o f those tribes, the 
Arunta, the Luritcha,* and, a litde farther south, o n the western shore o f 
Lake Eyre, the Urabunna. T h e second, 
titled The Northern Tribes of Central 
Australia,
18 
treats the societies to the n o r t h o f the Urabunna: They occupy 
the territory that extends from the Macdonnell Ranges to the Carpenter 
Gulf. To cite only the main groups, these are the Unmatjera, the Kaitish, the 
Warramunga, the T j i n g i l l i , the Binbinga, the Walpari, the Gnanji and 
finally, 
on the very shores o f the gulf, the Mara and the A n u l a .
1 9 
*The spelling "Loritja" is used elsewhere. 
''Although Spencer and Gillen were the 
first 
to study these tribes thoroughly they were not the first 
to speak about them. Howitt had drawn attention to the social organization of the Wuaramongo (Warra-
munga of Spencer and Gillen) a
s long ago as 1888 in "Further Notes on the Australian Class [Systems]," 
JAI, [vol. XVIII (1889)], pp. 44—45. The Arunta had already been studied in summary fashion by [Rev-
erend Louis] Schulze ("The Aborigines of the Upper and Middle Finke River" [RSSv4, vol. XIV, pp. 
210-246], 2d installment]; the organization of the Chingalee (the Tjingilli of Spencer and Gillen), the 
Wombya, etc., by [R. H.] Mathews, "Wombya Organization of the Australian Aborigines, " AA, vol. II 
new series [1900], p. 494; "Divisions of Some West Australian Tribes, ibid., p. 185; ["Divisions of Aus-
tralian Tribes"], APS, vol. XXXVII [1898], pp. 151-152 and ["Australian Divisional Systems"] JRS, vol. 
XXXII, p. 71, vol. XXXIII, p. 111). In addition, he 
first 
cites results of the study conducted on the 
Arunta that had already been published in [Baldwin Spencer], Report on the Work of the Horn Scientific Ex-
pedition to Central Australia, part IV [London, Dulau], 1896. The 
first 
part of 
this Report is by [Edward] Stir-
ling, the second is Gillen's; and the entire publication was directed by Baldwin Spencer. 
17[Sir Baldwin Spencer and Francis James Gillen], The Native Tribes of Central Australia [London, 
Macmillan, 1899], hereafter abbreviated, Native Tribes or Nat. Tr. [I have used Native Tribes. Trans.] 
I8[Sir Baldwin Spencer and Francis James Gillen], The Northern Tribes of Central Australia [London, 
Macmillan, 1904], hereafter Northern Tribes or North. Tr. [I have used Northern Tribes. Trans.] 
1 9I write "the Arunta," "the Anula," "the Tjingilli," etc. without adding an "s" to these names to mark 
the plural. It seems illogical to incorporate into words that are not French a grammatical sign that has its 
meaning only in our language. I will make exception to this rule only when the tribal name has obviously 
been gallicized (les Hurons, for example). [I have followed Durkheim in not adding "s" to proper nouns, 
but to avoid the confusion that can arise because English articles do not indicate plurals, I have made com-
mon nouns plural by adding "s." Trans.] 


Totemism as Elementary Religion 
89 
M o r e recently, Carl Strehlow, a German missionary w h o also spent many 
years i n these same societies o f central Australia,
2 0 has begun to publish his 
o w n studies o n t w o o f these tribes, the Aranda and the Loritja (Arunta and 
Luritcha o f Spencer and Gillen).
2 1 H a v i n g mastered the language spoken by 
these peoples,
2 2 Strehlow was able to report many totemic myths and reli-
gious songs, most o f w h i c h are given to us i n their original texts. N o t w i t h -
standing variations o f detail that are easily explained and whose importance 
has been gready exaggerated,
2 3 we w i l l see that Strehlow's observations, 
while 
complementing, specifying, and sometimes 
correcting those o f 
Spencer and Gillen, o n the w h o l e c o n f i r m them. 
These discoveries gave rise to an abundant literature, to w h i c h I w i l l have 
occasion to return. T h e works o f Spencer and Gillen especially have had 
great influence, not only because they were the oldest but because the data 
were presented i n a systematic f o r m that enabled t h e m to guide later studies
2 4 
and also to provoke speculation. T h e results were commented upon, de-
bated, and interpreted i n all kinds o f ways. A t the same time H o w i t t , whose 
fragmentary studies were scattered through many different publications,
2 5 
20[Carl] Strehlow has been in Australia since 1892. He lived 
first 
among the Dieri and moved from 
there to live among the Arunta. 
21Strehlow, DieAranda-und Loritja-Stämme in Zentral-Australien [Frankfurt, Joseph Baer, 1907]. To date, 
four volumes have been published; the 
first 
appeared when this book had just been completed. I was un-
able to evaluate it. The 
first 
two volumes deal with myth and legend, the third with the cult. It is proper 
to add to Strehlow's name that of [Gustav] von Leonhardi, who played an important role in the publica-
tion. Not only was he responsible for editing Strehlow's manuscripts, but also, by judicious questions on 
more than one point, he led Strehlow to specify some of his observations. By the way, an article that 
Leonhardi gave to Globus [Hildbringhausen, Brunswick, 1861—1910] may profitably be consulted; and 
one will find many extracts from his correspondence with Strehlow ("Ueber einige religiöse und 
totemistische Vorstellungen der Aranda und Loritja in Zentral-Australien," Globus vol. XCI, p. 285). Cf. 
on the same subject an article of Northcote W. Thomas ["Religious Ideas of the Arunta"], Folklore vol. 
XVI [1905], pp. 428ff. 
22While not ignorant of the language, Spencer and Gillen know it far less well than Strehlow. 
23Notably by [Hermann] Klaatsch, "Schlussbericht über meine Reise nach Australien in den jähren 
1904-1907," ZE, vol. XXIX [1907], pp. 635ff. 
24The book of K. Langloh Parker [Catherine Somerville Parker], The EuahlayiTribe [London, A. Con-
stable, 1905]; that of [Erhard] Eylmann, Die Eingeborenen der Kolonie Südaustralien [Berlin, D. Reimer, 
1908]; that of 
John Mathew, Two Representative Tribes of Queensland [London, T. F. Urwin, 1910]; and cer-
tain recent articles by Mathew show the influence of Spencer and Gillen. 
25The list of these publications is to be found in the preface of [Alfred William] Howitt [Native Tribes 
of South-East Australia, New York, Macmillan, 1904], pp. 8-9. 


90 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
undertook to do for the southern tribes what Spencer and Gillen had done 
for those o f the center. I n his Native Tribes of South-East Australia,
26 
he gives 
us an overview o f social organization among the peoples w h o occupy south-
ern Australia, N e w South Wales, and a large part o f Queensland. T h e ad-
vances thus achieved prompted Frazer to supplement his Totemism w i t h a sort 
o f c o m p e n d i u m
2 7 that brings together all the important documents that c o n -
cern either totemic religion or the kinship and marriage organization that is 
thought, rightly or wrongly, to be connected w i t h it. T h e aim o f this w o r k 
is not to give us a general and systematic v i e w o f totemism but rather to make 
available to researchers the materials necessary for constructing one.
2 8 I n it 
the facts are arranged i n a stricdy ethnographic and geographical order: Each 
continent and, w i t h i n each continent, each tribe or ethnic group is studied 
separately. A study as broad as this, passing so many different peoples i n re-
view one after the other, certainly could not be equally detailed throughout; 
but it is still a useful reference that can facilitate research. 
II 
It emerges from this b r i e f account that Australia is the most favorable terrain 
for the study o f totemism. For this reason, I w i l l make it the principal area o f 
m y observation. 
I n Totemism, Frazer was interested primarily i n collecting every trace o f 
totemism that can be found i n history and ethnography. This led h i m to i n -
clude i n his study societies whose k i n d and degree o f cultural development 
are quite disparate: Ancient E g y p t ,
2 9 Arabia, Greece,
3 0 and the southern 
26Ibid. From now on, I will cite this book with the abbreviation Nat. Tr. [Native Tribes. Trans.], but al-
ways preceded by the name "Howitt" to distinguish it from the first book of Spencer and Gillen, whose 
title I abridge in the same way. [To avoid the confusion that can arise from these abbreviations, I precede 
every short citation by the author's surname. Trans.] 
27[James George Frazer], Totemism and Exogamy, 4 vols., London [Macmillan], 1910. This work be-
gins with a republication of the little book Totemism, reproduced without fundamental changes. [This re-
publication is found in vol. I. Trans.] 
2 8It is true that, at the beginning and end, we find general theories of totemism that will be set forth 
and discussed further on. But these theories are relatively independent of the collected facts accompany-
ing them, for they had already been published in various review articles well before this work appeared. 
Those articles were reproduced in the first volume (pp. 89—172). 
29Ibid., p. 12. 
30Ibid., p. 15. 


Tolemism as Elementary Religion 
91 
Slavs
3 1 figure alongside the tribes o f Australia and America. This procedure 
was unsurprising i n a disciple o f the anthropological school. The aim o f that 
school is not to situate religions i n the social milieux o f w h i c h they are part
3 2 
and to differentiate among t h e m o n that basis. Instead, as the name indicates, 
the aim is to go beyond national and historical differences i n order to arrive 
at the universal and truly h u m a n basis o f religious life. T h e y assume that man 
possesses a religious nature i n and o f himself, by virtue o f his o w n constitu-
tion and independent o f all social conditions, and they propose to deter-
mine* what that nature is.
3 3 I n research o f this sort, all peoples can be drawn 
upon. N o doubt, i t w o u l d be preferable to inquire most o f the most p r i m i -
tive, because among primitives that original nature is more likely to be i n the 
open; but since i t can also be found among the more civilized, they too are 
naturally called u p o n to testify. Even more w i l l all those thought «-o be not 
very distant from the origins (all those assembled haphazardly under the i m -
precise rubric o f savages) be put o n the same plane and consulted inter-
changeably. Moreover, since from this point o f v i e w the facts are o f interest 
only i n proportion to their degree o f universality, researchers feel obliged to 
amass the largest possible number o f them. I t is not thought possible to make 
the scope o f comparison too broad. 
Such cannot be m y method, and for several reasons. 
First, for the sociologist as for the historian, social facts exist i n relation-
ship w i t h the social system to w h i c h they belong^; hence they cannot be u n -
derstood apart from it. This is w h y t w o facts belonging to t w o different 
societies cannot be fruitfully compared simply because they resemble one an-
other. Those societies must also resemble one another—which is to say that 
the societies themselves must be varieties o f the same species. T h e compara-
tive m e t h o d w o u l d be impossible i f social types d i d not exist, and i t cannot 
"
"
T
h
e typo-ridden French second edition says terminer ("to finish" or "finish off"), instead of déter-
miner. 
tThe term "function," in one of the senses associated with functionalism, appears in the French text: 
Les 
faits sociaux sont 
fonction du système social dont ils 
font partie. 
31Ibid., p. 32. [Frazer's actual reference is to Transylvania, not to the southern Slavs. Trans.] 
3 2In this regard, it should be noted that the more recent work, Totemism and Exogamy, marks an im-
portant advance in Frazer's thought and method. Whenever he describes the religious or household insti-
tutions of a tribe, he makes an effort to determine the geographical and social conditions in which that 
tribe is found. As sketchy as these analyses may be, they still suggest a break with the old methods of the 
anthropological school. 
3 3Of course, I, too, consider that the principal object of the science of religions is to arrive at an un-
derstanding of the religious nature of man. But since I see it not as an innate given but a product of social 
causes, there can be no question of determining it wholly apart from the social milieu. 


92 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
be usefully applied except w i t h i n the same type. W h a t mistakes have been 
left unmade through failure to understand this rule! So it is that scholars have 
improperly compared facts that, despite external resemblances, had neither 
the same meaning nor the same import: primitive democracy and that o f t o -
day, the collectivism o f lower societies and the socialist tendencies o f today, 
the monogamy that is prevalent among the Australian tribes and that sanc-
tioned by our codes, etc. Confusions o f this sort are found even i n Frazer's 
book. H e often jumbles together mere animal-worship and practices that are 
specifically totemic, even though the sometimes enormous distance between 
the corresponding social milieux precludes any n o t i o n o f assimilating the 
two. Thus, i f we do not wish to fall into the same mistakes, we must c o n -
centrate our research o n a clearly defined type o f society rather than extend 
our research over all possible societies. 
Indeed, it is important to focus as narrowly as possible. W e can usefully 
compare only facts that we k n o w well. W h e n w e undertake to encompass all 
sorts o f societies and civilizations, we cannot k n o w any w i t h the requisite 
competence; w h e n we put together facts from everywhere to compare them, 
we are forced to take t h e m indiscriminately, having neither the means nor, 
for that matter, the time to treat t h e m critically. These chaotic and sketchy 
comparisons have discredited the comparative m e t h o d among a certain 
number o f good minds. That m e t h o d can yield serious results only i f it is ap-
plied to a rather limited number o f societies, so that each o f them can be 
studied w i t h adequate precision. T h e key is to choose those i n w h i c h the i n -
vestigation has the greatest chance o f being 
fruitful. 
I n any event, the quality o f the facts is m u c h more important than their 
number. Q u i t e secondary, i n m y v i e w ,
3 4 is the question whether totemism 
was more widespread or less so. I f totemism interests me, that is mainly be-
cause, through studying i t , I hopejto discover relationships thatjwill help us 
understand what religion isrTo establish relationships, it is neither necessary 
nor always useful to stack experiments one u p o n the other. It is far more i m -
portant to have well-done experiments that are truly significant. A solitary 
fact can shed light o n a law, w h i l e a multitude o f vague and imprecise obser-
vations can lead only to confusion. I n every k i n d o f science, the scientist 
w o u l d be submerged by the facts that present themselves i f he did not make 
a choice among them. H e must perceive w h i c h ones promise to be the most 
instructive and t u r n his attention to those, w h i l e t u r n i n g aside from the o t h -
ers temporarily. 
34Hence the importance I ascribe to totemism is entirely independent of the question whether it was 
universal, a point that cannot be repeated too many times. 


Totemism as Elementary Religion 
93 
This is why, w i t h one exception that w i l l be indicated later, I propose to 
limit m y research to the Australian societies. T h e y fulfill all the conditions 
that have just been listed. T h e y are completely homogeneous; and w h i l e one 
can discern varieties among them, they belong to the same type. Indeed, 
their homogeneity is so great that the framework o f social organization is not 
only the same but designated by names that are either identical or equivalent 
in many tribes that are sometimes very far from one another.
3 5 I n addition, 
the most thorough documentation w e have concerns Australian totemism. 
Finally, what I propose above all to study i n this w o r k is the most primitive 
and the simplest religion that can be found. To discover that religion, there-
fore, it is natural for me to address myself to societies that stand as close as 
possible to the origins o f evolution. I t is obviously there that I have the great-
est chance o f discovering that religion and studying it properly. N o w , there 
are no societies that exhibit this characteristic more fully than do the Aus-
tralian tribes. N o t only is their technology quite rudimentary—the house 
and even the hut are still u n k n o w n among them—but their organization is 
the most primitive and the simplest k n o w n . I t is the organization that I have 
called elsewhere
3 6 "organization based u p o n clans." Beginning i n the next 
chapter, I w i l l set out its basic traits. 
Still, w h i l e making Australia the main object o f m y research, I t h i n k it 
useful not to disregard completely the societies i n w h i c h totemism was first 
discovered: the Indian tribes o f N o r t h America. 
There is nothing ill founded about expanding the field o f comparison i n 
this way. Granted, the American peoples are more advanced than those o f Aus-
tralia. T h e technology has become more developed, the people live i n houses 
or tents, and there are even fortified villages. T h e social density is greater, and 
centralization, w h i c h is altogether absent i n Australia, begins to appear: There 
are vast confederations under a central authority, such as that o f the Iroquois. 
Sometimes there is a complex system o f differentiated and hierarchically or-
dered classes. Nonetheless, the basic lines o f societal structure remain what 
they are i n Australia; it is still organization based o n clans. Thus we do not have 
two different types but t w o varieties o f the same type, w h i c h are rather close 
35This is the case of the phratries and the marriage classes; on this point, see Spencer and Gillen, 
Northern Tribes, chap. Ill; Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 109, 137-142; [Northcote Whitridge] Thomas, Kin-
ship [Organizations] and [Croup] Marriage in Australia [Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1906], 
chaps. VI, VII. 
3 6 Emile Dürkheim, Division du travail social, 3d ed. [Paris, F. Mean, (1893) 1902], p. 150. [Also in 
Emile Dürkheim on the Division of Labor in Society, New York, Macmillan, 1933, p. 175. Trans.]. 


94 
PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS 
to one another. They are t w o successive moments i n a single evolution; i n 
consequence, they are similar enough to make comparisons possible. 
Besides, such comparisons can have their uses. Precisely because the 
technology o f the Indians is m u c h more advanced than that o f the Aus-
tralians, certain aspects o f the social organization c o m m o n to b o t h are more 
easily studied among the Indians. As long as m e n are still making their first 
steps i n the art o f expressing their thought, i t is not easy for the observer to 
perceive what moves them; for n o t h i n g translates i n an obvious way what 
happens i n these obscure minds that have only a confused and fleeting self-
awareness. For example, religious symbols are at that point only formless 
combinations o f lines and colors, the meaning o f w h i c h is not easy to guess, 
as we w i l l see. There are indeed many actions and movements by w h i c h i n -
ward states are expressed; but since those states are by nature 
fleeting, 
they 
quickly disappear 
from view. T h e reason totemism was noticed earlier i n 
N o r t h America than i n Australia is this: i t was more readily seen—even 
though i n America i t had a relatively smaller place i n the totality o f religious 
life. Besides, where the beliefs and institutions are not captured i n a rather 
definite material f o r m , they are more likely to change under the influence o f 
the slightest circumstance, or to be erased from m e m o r y altogether. Thus, 
there is something changeable 
and protean about the Australian clans, 
whereas the corresponding organization i n America most often has greater 
stability and more clearly defined contours. Thus, although A m e r i c a n 
totemism is further from the origins than Australia's, there are important fea-
tures whose remnants i t has better preserved for us. 
I n the second place, to understand an institution properly, i t is often well 
to follow it into advanced phases o f its evolution,
3 7 for sometimes i t is only 
w h e n the institution is fully developed that its true meaning appears w i t h 
greatest clarity. O n those grounds as well, since A m e r i c a n totemism has a 
longer history, it can help clarify certain aspects o f Australian totemism.
3 8 A t 
the same time, i t w i l l put us i n a better position to see h o w totemism is c o n -
nected w i t h the religious forms that have come later and to place it w i t h i n 
the context o f historical development. 
3 7Of course, things do not always work in this fashion. As I have said, the simplest forms frequently 
help us better understand the more complex. On this point, no rule of method is automatically applica-
ble to all possible cases. 
3 8It is in this way that individual totemism in America will help us understand its role and importance 
in Australia. Since individual totemism is very rudimentary in Australia, it probably would have passed 
unnoticed. 


Totemism as Elementary Religion 
95 
I n the analyses to follow, I w i l l not bar myself from using certain data 
drawn from the Indian societies o f N o r t h America. I use it not because there 
could be any question o f studying American totemism here.
3 9 Such a study 
must be done direcdy, i n and o f itself, and not buried i n the study I w i l l u n -
dertake: I t w o u l d pose different problems and w o u l d involve a whole set o f 
specific investigations. I use American data only as a supplement and only 
w h e n it appears well suited to helping us understand the Australian data bet-
ter. T h e latter are the real and immediate object o f m y research.
4 0 
"Moreover, in America there is not one type of totemism but different types that would have to be 
distinguished. 
'"I will depart from that circle of facts quite rarely, when a particularly instructive comparison seems 
essential. 


B O O K 
T W O 
"HE ELEMENTARY 
B 
ELIEFS 


C H A P T E R O N E 
THE PRINCIPAL TOTEMIC 
BELIEFS 
The Totem as Name and as Emblem 
O
w i n g to its nature, m y study w i l l be i n t w o parts. Since every religion is 
made up o f intellectual conceptions and ritual practices, I must treat i n 
succession the beliefs and rites that make up totemic religion. Nevertheless, 
these t w o elements o f religious life are too closely allied for any radical sepa-
ration to be possible. A l t h o u g h i n principle derived from the beliefs, the cult 
nevertheless reacts u p o n them, and the m y t h is often modeled o n the rite so 
as to account for it, especially w h e n the meaning o f the rite is not, or is no 
longer, apparent. Conversely, there are beliefs that do not clearly manifest 
themselves except through rites that translate them. Thus, the t w o parts o f 
the analysis cannot fail to interpenetrate. Still, they are o f such a different or-
der that separate study o f t h e m is indispensable. A n d since it is impossible to 
understand anything about a religion w i t h o u t k n o w i n g the ideas o n w h i c h it 
rests, we must first become acquainted w i t h those ideas. 
M y intention is not to retrace here all the speculative byways o f religious 
thought, even among the Australians. I wish to get d o w n to the elementary 
ideas at the basis o f religion, but the point is not to follow speculative 
thought through all the sometimes quite luxuriant detail that the m y t h o l o g -
ical imagination has given t h e m i n these societies. W h e n myths can aid i n 
understanding the fundamental notions better, I w i l l certainly use those, but 
w i t h o u t making mythology itself the object o f study. Besides, insofar as 
mythology is a w o r k o f art, it does not belong solely to the science o f reli-
gions. I n addition, the mental processes o f w h i c h i t is the outcome are far too 
complex to allow t h e m to be studied indirectly and obliquely. M y t h o l o g y is 
a difficult problem i n its o w n right, one that must be treated i n and o f itself 
and according to its o w n specialized method. 
99 


100 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
A m o n g the beliefs o n w h i c h totemic religion rests, the most important 
are those that concern the totem, and so we must begin w i t h those beliefs. 
I 
A t the basis o f most Australian tribes, we find a group that has a dominant place 
i n collective life: That group is the clan. Two essential traits characterize it. 
First, the individuals w h o comprise i t consider themselves j o i n e d by a 
b o n d o f kinship but a b o n d o f a particular sort. This kinship does not arise 
from the fact that they have well-defined relations o f c o m m o n blood; they are 
k i n solely because they bear the same name. T h e y are not fathers, mothers, 
sons or daughters, uncles or nephews o f one another i n the sense w e n o w 
give those terms; nevertheless they regard themselves as f o r m i n g a single fam-
ily, w h i c h is broad or narrow depending o n the size o f the clan, solely because 
they are collectively designated by the same w o r d . A n d i f we say they regard 
one another as being o f the same family, i t is because they acknowledge re-
ciprocal obligations identical to those that have been incumbent o n k i n i n all 
ages: obligations o f help, vengeance, not marrying one another, and so forth. 
I n this first characteristic, the clan is not different from the R o m a n gens 
and the Greek yevos, for kinship among the gentiles arose exclusively from the 
fact that all the members o f the gens carried the same name,
1 the nomen gen-
tilicium. A n d o f course the^ens is i n sense a clan, but i t is a variety o f the genus 
that must not be confused w i t h the Australian clan.
2 Whaxdjitiiiguisligs-tlie 
Australianjclan is that the name it bears is also that^of a definite species o f m a -
terial things w i t h w h i c h i t thinks i t has special relations whose nature I w i l l 
address below, i n particular, relations o f kinship. T h e species o f things that 
serves to designate the clan collectively is called its totem. T h e clan's totem is 
also that o f each clan member. 
Every clan has a totem that belongs to it alone; t w o different clans o f the 
same tribe cannot have the same one. Indeed, one is part o f a clan only by 
virtue o f having a certain name. So all w h o bear this name are members o f it 
i n the same right; however scattered across the tribal territory they may be, 
they all have the same k i n relations w i t h one another.
3 I n consequence, t w o 
'Here is the definition Cicero gave to gentility. Gentiles sunt qui inter se eodem nomine sunt (Top. 6). 
[Members of a gens are those who have the same family name. Trans.] 
2In general, a clan is a family group in which kinship results only 
from 
having the same name. It is in 
this sense that the gens is a clan. The totemic clan is a particular species within the genus thus constituted. 
3To a certain extent, the ties of solidarity extend even beyond the limits of the tribe. When individu-
als of different tribes have the same totem, they have special duties toward one another. This fact is ex-
plicidy stated for certain tribes of North America. (See [James George] Frazer, Totemism and Exogamy, vol. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs 
101 
groups that have the same t o t e m can only be t w o sections o f the same clan. 
It is c o m m o n for a clan not to reside i n the same place, but to have members 
i n different places. Even so, the clan's unity is felt, though it has no geo-
graphical basis. 
Regarding the w o r d "totem": T h e Ojibway, an A l g o n q u i n tribe, use this 
w o r d to denote the species o f things whose name a clan bears.
4 A l t h o u g h the 
t e r m is not Australian,
5 and i n fact is found i n only one society o f America, 
ethnographers have adopted i t and use i t generally to denote the institution 
I am describing. Schoolcraft, the first to extend the meaning i n this sense, 
spoke o f a "totemic system."
6 This extension, o f w h i c h there are numerous 
examples i n ethnography, does have drawbacks. I t is not quite right for an i n -
stitution o f such importance to bear a name that is given haphazardly, taken 
from 
a strictly local dialect, and i n no way reflecting the distinctive traits o f 
the thing i t expresses. B u t today this usage o f the w o r d is so universally ac-
cepted that i t w o u l d be an excess o f purism to rebel against i t .
7 
I n the great majority o f cases, the objects that serve as totems* belong to 
III [4 vols., London, Macmillan, 1910], pp. 57, 81, 299, 356-357. The texts on Australia are less explicit. 
Still, the prohibition of marriage between members of the same totem is probably international. 
*In this chapter, Durkheim applies the adjective "totemic" (totemique) to "system," "group," "belief," 
"mark," "representation," "significance," "coat of arms," "symbol," and "decoration"—indeed, to every-
thing except the animal or plant that serves as the totem of some group. I believe he intends to keep re-
minding the reader that while an animal or plant is the totem of some group, in itself it is not the totem; 
hence his careful locution, "the animal that serves as totem," which weighs down English sentences. Hav-
ing stated this reminder, I simplify with "totemic animal" from now on. 
4[Lewis Henry] Morgan, Ancient Society [or Researches in the Lines of Human Progress from Savagery 
through Barbarism to Civilization, London, Macmillan, 1877], p. 165. 
5In Australia, the words used vary by tribe. In the regions observed by Grey, people said Kobong; the 
Dieri say Murdu ([Alfred William] Howitt, The Native Tribes of South-East Australia [New York, Macmil-
lan, 1904], p. 91), the Narrinyeri, Ngaitye ([Rev. George] Taplin, in [Edward] Micklethwaite Curr, [The 
Australian Race; Its Origin, Languages, Customs, Place of Landing in Australia, and the Routes by Which It Sprea
Itself over That Continent], vol. II ([Melbourne, J. Ferres, 1886-87], p. 244), the Warramunga, Mungai or 
Mungaii [Sir Baldwin Spencer and Francis James Gillen] Northern Tribes [of Central Australia, London, 
Macmillan, 1904], p. 754), etc. 
6[Henry Rowe] Schoolcraft, [Historical and Statistical Information Respecting the History, Condition, and 
Prospects of the] Indian Tribes of the United States, IV [Philadelphia, Lippincott Grambo, 1851—1857], p. 86. 
[The phrase "totemic element" appears on this page, but the passage is not about a "totemic system." 
Trans.] 
'And yet the fate of this word is all the more regrettable, since we do not even know exacdy how it is 
spelled. Some spell it totam, others toodaim or dodaim or ododam. See Frazer, Totemism qnd Exogamy, vol. I, 
p. 1. Even the meaning of the word is not exactly defined. If we rely on the 
first 
observer of the Ojibway, 
J. Long, the word totem designates the protective genie, the individual totem (to be discussed later, Bk. II, 
chap. 4), and not the totem of the clan. But the reports of other explorers say exacdy the opposite (see on 
this point Frazer, Totemism and Exogamy, vol. Ill, pp. 49—52). 


102 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
either the plant or animal k i n g d o m but mainly to the latter. Inanimate things 
are used m u c h more rarely. O f more than 500 totemic names listed by 
H o w i t t from among the tribes o f the Australian Southwest, barely forty are 
not names o f either plants or animals: T h e y are clouds, rain, hail, 
frost, 
m o o n , sun, w i n d , autumn, summer, winter, certain stars, thunder, 
fire, 
smoke, water, red ochre, and sea. To be noted is the very l i m i t e d place given 
to heavenly bodies and, more generally, to the great cosmic phenomena that 
nonetheless were to have a great future i n the course o f religious develop-
ment. A m o n g all the clans o f w h i c h H o w i t t speaks, there are only t w o w i t h 
the m o o n as t o t e m ,
8 t w o w i t h the sun,
9 three w i t h a star,
1 0 three w i t h the 
thunder,
1 1 and t w o w i t h l i g h t n i n g .
1 2 O n l y the rain is an exception; unlike 
the others, rain is very c o m m o n .
1 3 
Such are the totems that may be called normal, but totemism has its ab-
normalities as well. Sometimes the t o t e m is not a w h o l e object but part o f 
one. This seems to be rather u n c o m m o n i n Australia;
1 4 H o w i t t cites only a 
single example.
1 5 However, i t m i g h t well t u r n out to be a rather frequent oc-
currence i n tribes i n w h i c h the totemic groups have been excessively subdi-
vided, i n w h i c h one could say that the totems themselves must have been 
broken i n order to provide names for the many divisions. This seems to have 
happened 
among the Arunta and the Loritja. 
I n those t w o societies, 
Strehlow lists as many as 442 totems, several o f w h i c h designate not an ani-
mal species but a particular part o f such animals—for example, the tail or the 
stomach o f the opossum, or the fat o f the kangaroo.
1 6 
"The Wotjobaluk (p. 121) and the Buandik (p. 123). 
'Ibid. 
10The Wolgal (p. 102), the Wotjobaluk, and the Buandik. 
"The Muruburra (p. 117), the Wotjobaluk, and the Buandik. 
12The Buandik and the Kaiabara (p. 116). Note that all these examples are taken from only 
five 
tribes. 
"Similarly, of 204 kinds of totems collected by Spencer and Gillen in a large number of tribes, 188 
are animals or plants. Inanimate objects are the boomerang, cold water, darkness, 
fire, 
lightning, the 
moon, red ochre, resin, salt water, the evening star, a stone, the sun, water, the whirlwind, the wind, and 
hailstones (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 773. Cf. Frazer, Totemism and Exogamy, vol. I, pp. 
253-254). 
,4Frazer (Totemism and Exogamy, pp. 10, 13) cites numerous cases and even makes them a genus apart, 
which he calls split-totems. But these examples are taken from tribes in which totemism is profoundly al-
tered, as in Samoa and in the tribes of Bengal. 
"Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 107. 
16See the tables compiled by [Carl] Strehlow, Die Aranda- und Loritja-Stdmme in Zentral-Australien, 
Frankfurt, J. Baer, 1907, vol. II, pp. 6
1
—
7
2 (cf. Ill, xiii—xvii). It is worth noting that these fragmentary 
totems are exclusively animal totems. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs 
103 
T h e totem is ordinarily not an individual but a species or a variety: I t is 
not such and such kangaroo or crow but the kangaroo or the crow i n gen-
eral. Nonetheless, it is sometimes a particular object. This is unavoidably the 
case w h e n a thing that is unique o f its k i n d serves as totem: the sun, the 
m o o n , such and such constellation, and so forth. B u t sometimes, as well, 
clans draw their names from this fold, that geologically caused depression i n 
the terrain, that anthill, and so forth. W h i l e i t is true that we have only a 
small number o f examples i n Australia, Strehlow mentions some.
1 7 B u t the 
very causes that have given rise to these abnormal totems show that they are 
o f relatively recent origin. W h a t actually has caused the erection o f certain 
sites into totems is that a mythical being is thought to have stopped there and 
to have done some deed o f his legendary life.
1 8 These ancestors are at the 
same time presented to us i n the myths as themselves belonging to clans that 
once had perfecdy normal totems, that is, taken from animal or plant species. 
So the totemic names that commemorate the exploits o f these heroes cannot 
be primitive, but instead are linked w i t h a f o r m o f totemism that is already 
derivative and altered. T h e question arises whether the meteorological t o -
tems are not o f the same o r i g i n , since the sun, m o o n , and stars are often 
identified w i t h ancestors o f the mythical age.
1 9 
Sometimes—though rarely—a group o f ancestors or a single ancestor is 
used as a totem. T h e totem i n this case is not named after a real thing or a 
species o f real things but after a purely mythical being. Spencer and Gillen 
long ago noted t w o or three totems o f this sort. A m o n g the Warramunga and 
among the T j i n g i l l i is a^ cjan that bears the name o f an ancestor called T h a -
balla, w h o seems to incarnate gaiety.
2 0 Another Warramunga clan bears the 
name o f a fabulous giant snake named Wollunqua, from w h o m the clan is 
held to be descended.
2 1 We are indebted to Strehlow for several examples o f 
17Ibid., pp. 52, 72. 
18For example, one of those totems is a depression in which an ancestor of the wildcat totem rested; 
another is an underground gallery dug by an ancestor of the Mouse clan (ibid., p. 72). 
l9[Sir Baldwin Spencer and Francis James Gillen], NativeTribes [of Central Australia, London, Macmil-
lan, 1899], pp. 561ff. Strehlow [Aranda], vol. II, p. 71 n. 2. [Alfred William] Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 
426ff.; "On Australian Medicine Men," JA1, vol. XVI (1887), p. 53; "Further Notes on the Australian 
Class Systems," _/,4/, vol. XVIII [1899], pp. 63ff. 
20According to the translation of Spencer and Gillen, "Thaballa" means "the boy who laughs." The 
members of the clan that bears his name believe they hear him laugh in the rocks that serve as his resi-
dence (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 207, 215 [227 n.]). According to the myth reported on p. 
422, there was an initial group of mythical Thaballas (cf. p. 208). The clan of the Kati, fully developed 
men ("full-grown men" as Spencer and Gillen say) seems to be of the same sort (p. 207). 
21Ibid„ pp. 226ff. 


104 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
this sort.
2 2 I n all these cases, i t is rather easy to see what must have happened. 
U n d e r the influence o f various causes, and through the development o f 
mythological thought itself, the collective and impersonal totem gave way to 
certain mythical personages w h o moved to the first rank and became totems 
themselves. 
Thus, as interesting as these various irregularities may be, nothing about 
t h e m should require us to modify our definition o f the totem. They do not, 
as was once believed,
2 3 constitute so many kinds o f totems more or less irre-
ducible to one another and to the n o r m a l totem, as I have defined it. T h e y 
are only secondary and sometimes mutant forms o f one and the same n o t i o n 
that is by far the most c o m m o n and that there is every reason to regard also 
as the most primitive. 
H o w 
the totemic name is acquired bears more o n the recruitment and 
organization o f the clan than on religion; it thus belongs more to the sociol-
ogy o f the family than to religious sociology.
2 4 Therefore, I w i l l not go be-
yond a summary sketch o f the most basic governing principles. 
Depending on the tribe, three different rules are i n use. 
I n many societies, i n fact i n most, the child has the totem o f its mother, 
by birth: This is the case among the D i e r i and the Urabunna o f south-central 
Australia; the Wotjobaluk and the Gournditch-Mara o f Victoria; the Kami¬
laroi, the Wiradjuri, the W o n g h i b o n , and the Euahlayi o f N e w South Wales; 
the Wakelbura, the Pitta-Pitta, and the Kurnandaburi o f Queensland, to cite 
only the most important names. Since i n this case the mother must be o f a 
different totem from her husband, given the rule o f exogamy, and yet lives at 
her husband's place o f origin, the members o f a single totem are o f necessity 
dispersed among different places, depending o n marriages. As a result, the 
totemic group has no territorial base. 
Elsewhere, the totem is transmitted i n the paternal line. I n that case, the 
child remains near its father, and the local group is essentially made up o f peo-
ple w h o belong to the same totem, w i t h only the married w o m e n i n them 
22Strehlow [Aranda], vol. II, pp. 71-72. Strehlow reports from among the Loritja and the Arunta the 
totem of a mythical water snake, which is very like that of the serpent Wollunqua. 
23This is true of Klaatsch, in his article previously cited (see [Hermann Klaatsch, "Schlussbericht iiber 
meine Reise nach Australien in den Jahren 1904-1907"], ZE, vol. XXXIX ([1907], above, p. 89, n. 23). 
24As I indicated in the preceding chapter, totemism concerns both religion and the family. In lower 
societies, these problems are closely interrelated, but both are so complex that they must be dealt with sep-
arately. Moreover, familial organization cannot be understood in advance of knowing primitive religious 
ideas, for those ideas serve as principles of the family. This is why it was necessary to study totemism as 
religion before studying the totemic clan as family grouping. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs 
105 
representing foreign totems. I n other words, each locality has its o w n totem. 
In Australia until recent times, this mode o f organization had only been met 
w i t h i n some tribes where totemism is i n decay—for example, among the 
Narrinyeri, where the totem has virtually no religious character anymore.
2 5 
Thus there was good reason to believe that a close connection existed be-
tween the totemic system and descent i n the maternal line. B u t Spencer and 
Gillen have observed, i n the northern part o f central Australia, a whole group 
o f tribes i n w h i c h the totemic religion is still practiced and yet the transmis-
sion o f the totem moves through the paternal line: These are the Warra-
munga, the Gnanji, the Umbaia, the Binbinga, the Mara, and the A n u l a .
2 6 
Finally, a third combination is observed among the Arunta and the 
Loritja. Here the t o t e m o f the child is not necessarily that o f either its mother 
or its father but that o f the mythical ancestor w h o mystically impregnated the 
mother at the time o f conception, by procedures that the observers report i n 
different ways.
2 7 A definite technique permits recognition o f w h i c h ancestor 
it is and to w h i c h totemic group he belongs.
2 8 B u t because chance places one 
ancestor and not another close to the mother, the t o t e m o f the child turns 
out to be subject to fortuitous circumstances.
2 9 
Above and beyond the totems o f clans are the totems o f phratries. A l -
though not different i n nature from clan totems, they must nevertheless be 
distinguished. 
A group o f clans u n i t e d by particular bonds o f fraternity is called a 
phratry. N o r m a l l y , an Australian tribe is divided i n t o t w o phratries, w i t h 
the various clans divided between them. A l t h o u g h there are societies from 
25See Taplin, "The Narrinyeri Tribe," in Curr, The Australian Race, vol. II, pp. 244—245; Howitt, Na-
tive Tribes, p. 131. 
26Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 163, 169, 170, 172. Still, it should be noted that in all these 
tribes except the Mara and the Anula, the transmission of the totem in the paternal line is apparently the 
most widespread rule, but there are exceptions. 
27According to Spencer and Gillen (Native Tribes, pp. 123ff.), the ancestor's soul is incarnated in the 
body of the mother and then becomes the soul of the child. According to Strehlow (Aranda, vol. II, pp. 
51ff.), although conception is the work of the ancestor, it does not involve a reincarnation. But in both 
interpretations, the totem specific to the child does not necessarily depend on that of its parents. 
28Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 133; Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 53. 
29For the most part, it is the locality where the mother thinks she conceived that determines the totem 
of the child. As we will see, each totem has its center, and the ancestors prefer to frequent the places that 
serve as the centers of their respective totems. The totem of the child is thus that of the locality where the 
mother thinks she conceived. Further, as the mother must be most often in the environs of the place that 
is the totemic center of 
her husband, the child usually has the same totem a
s the father. This doubdess ex-
plains why most of the inhabitants in each locality belong to the same totem ([Spencer and Gillen] Native 
Tribes, p. 9). 


106 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
w h i c h that organization has disappeared, there is every reason to believe 
that it was once widespread. I n Australia, at any rate, no tribe has more 
than t w o phratries. 
I n almost all cases i n w h i c h the phratries have a name whose meaning 
could be determined, the name turned out to be that o f an animal; i t there-
fore seems to be a totem. A . Lang has shown this clearly i n a recent b o o k .
3 0 
Accordingly, among the Gournditch-Mara (Victoria), one o f the phratries is 
called K r o k i t c h and the other Kaputch; the first o f these means " w h i t e cock-
atoo" and the second "black cockatoo."
3 1 T h e same terms are found, w h o l l y 
or i n part, among the Buandik and the W o t j o b a l u k .
3 2 A m o n g the Warra-
munga, the names used, B u n j i l and Waangqui, mean eaglehawk and crow.
3 3 
T h e words " M u k w a r a " and "Kilpara" are used for the same objects i n a large 
number o f tribes i n N e w South Wales;
3 4 they designate the same animals.
3 5 
T h e eaglehawk and the crow have also given their names to the two phratries 
o f the Ngarigo and the W o l g a l .
3 6 A m o n g the Kuinmurbura, it is the w h i t e 
cockatoo and the crow.
3 7 Other examples could be cited. Thus we come to 
see the phratry as an ancient clan that was broken up, the present clans as the 
result o f this dismemberment, and the solidarity that joins them as a relic o f 
their original unity.
3 8 I t is true that the phratries i n certain tribes seem no 
longer to have definite names; i n others, where names exist, the meaning is 
no longer k n o w n even to the natives. This is i n no way surprising. T h e phra-
tries are doubtless a primitive institution, since they are receding everywhere; 
30[Andrew Lang], The Secret of theTotem [London, Longmans, 1905], pp. 159ff. Cf. [Lorimer] Fison 
and [Alfred William] Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kurnai [Group Marriage by Elopement Drawn Chiefly 
from the Us-
age of 
Australian Aborigines; also The Kurnai Tribe, Their Customs in Peace and War, Melbourne, G. Robertson, 
1880], pp. 40-41; John Mathew, Eaglehawk and Crow [London, D. Nutt, 1899]; [Northcote Whitridge] 
Thomas, Kinship [Organization] and [Group] Marriage in Australia [Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press, 1906], pp. 52ff. 
31Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 124. 
32Ibid., pp. 121, 123, 124; Curr [TheAustralian Race], vol. Ill, p. 461. 
33Ho,witt, Native Tribes, p. 126. 
MIbid., pp. 98ff. 
35Curr [The Australian Race], vol. II, p. 165; [Robert] Brough Smyth, [The Aborigines ofVictoria, vol. I, 
Melbourne, J. Ferres, Government Printer, 1878], p. 423; Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 429. 
^Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 101-102. 
37[John] Mathew, Two Representative Tribes of Queensland [London, T. F. Unwin, 1910], p. 139. 
38Other support for this hypothesis could be adduced, but that would make it necessary to bring in 
considerations relative to familial organization, and I am trying to keep the two matters separate. More-
over, that question is of only secondary relevance to my subject. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs 
107 
it is the clans, their offspring, that have come to the fore. So it is natural that 
the names the phratries bore should gradually have been erased from m e m -
ory or that people should have ceased to understand them, for they must 
have belonged to a very archaic language that is no longer used. As p r o o f o f 
this, i n several cases i n w h i c h we k n o w what animal's name it bears, the w o r d 
that designates that animal i n everyday language is entirely different from the 
one that designates the phratry.
3 9 
There is a k i n d o f subordination between the phratry totem and the clan 
totems. Each clan i n principle belongs to one and only one phratry. I t is very 
unusual for a clan to have members i n the other phratry, a case that is almost 
never seen outside certain tribes o f the center, especially the A r u n t a .
4 0 Still, 
even where disruptive influences have produced overlappings o f that k i n d , 
the majority o f clan members are entirely contained i n one o f the tribe's t w o 
halves; only a m i n o r i t y are found o n the other side.
4 1 Hence, the t w o phra-
tries do not as a rule interpenetrate; hence, the possible totems an individual 
can have are determined by the phratry to w h i c h he belongs. I n other words, 
the phratry t o t e m is like a genus o f w h i c h the clan totems are species. W e w i l l 
see that this comparison is not purely metaphorical. 
I n addition to the phratries and clans, w e often find i n Australian soci-
eties a secondary group that is not w i t h o u t a certain distinctiveness: the mar-
riage class. 
Subdivisions o f the phratry, whose number may vary from tribe to tribe, 
are called marriage classes; sometimes we find t w o per phratry and some-
times four.
4 2 T h e i r recruitment and functioning are regulated by t w o p r i n c i -
ples. First, i n each phratry, each generation belongs to a different class from 
the generation directly preceding it, so w h e n there are t w o classes per phra-
try, they necessarily alternate i n each generation. T h e children belong to the 
39For example, Mukwara, which designates a phratry among the Barkinji, the Paruinji, and the 
Milpulko, means "eaglehawk," according to Brough Smyth; among the clans included in that phratry, 
there is one that has the eaglehawk as its totem, but here that animal is designated by the word Bilyara. 
The reader will find several cases of this sort cited by Lang, Secret of the Totem, p. 162. 
"
"
"
S
p
e
n
c
e
r and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 115. According to Howitt (Native Tribes pp. 121, 454), among 
the Wotjobaluk, the Pelican clan is also represented in both phratries. This seems to me doubtful. Possi-
bly the two clans had two different species of pelicans as their totems. This is what seems to emerge from 
the information given by [R. H.] Mathews on the same tribe ("[Ethnological Notes on the] Aboriginal 
Tribes of New South Wales and Victoria," in RSNSW [vol. XXXVIII], 1904, pp. 287-288). 
4 1On this question, see my article [with Marcel Mauss] "[Sur] le Totémisme," in AS, vol. V [1902], 
pp. 82ff. 
4 2On the question of Australian classes in general, see my article "La Prohibition de l'inceste," in AS, 
vol. I [1898], pp. 9fF., and specifically on the tribes having eight classes, "L'Organisation matrimoniale des 
sociétés australiennes," in AS, vol. VIII [1905], pp. 118-147. 


108 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
class to w h i c h their parents do not belong, and the grandchildren are o f the 
same class as their grandparents. Thus, among the Kamilaroi, the Kupathin 
phratry comprises t w o classes, Ippai and K u m b o ; the D i l b i phratry comprises 
two others, called M u r r i and K u b b i . Since filiation goes i n the maternal line, 
the child is o f its mother's phratry; i f the mother is Kupathin, the child w i l l 
also be a Kupathin. B u t i f she is o f the Ippai class, he w i l l be a K u m b o ; then, 
i f female, that child's children w i l l again count w i t h i n the Ippai class. L i k e -
wise, the children o f w o m e n o f the M u r r i class w i l l be o f the K u b b i class, and 
the children o f the K u b b i w o m e n w i l l again be M u r r i . * W h e n there are four 
classes per phratry instead o f two, the system is more complex, but the p r i n -
ciple is the same. T h e four classes basically f o r m t w o pairs o f two classes each, 
and these t w o classes alternate i n each generation i n the manner just i n d i -
cated. Second, i n principle, the members o f a class can contract marriage i n 
only one class o f the other phratry.
4 3 T h e Ippai must marry i n the K u b b i 
class; the M u r r i , i n the K u m b o class. Because this organization profoundly 
affects marriage relations, these groupings have been given the name "mar-
riage classes." 
Scholars have asked whether these classes sometimes had totems, as the 
phratries and the clans do. This question arose because, i n certain Queensland 
tribes, each marriage class is subject to dietary restrictions peculiar to it. T h e 
individuals w h o comprise i t must abstain from the flesh o f certain animals 
that the other classes may freely eat.
4 4 W o u l d these animals not be totems? 
T h e dietary restriction, however, is not the characteristic mark o f t o t e m -
ism. T h e totem is, first and foremost, a name and, as we w i l l see, an e m -
blem.^ I n the societies just examined, no marriage class bears the name o f an 
animal or plant or has an e m b l e m .
4 5 I t is possible, o f course, that these re-
*The children of the Kubbi men will take their class 
from 
their mother. Trans. 
^That is, a stylized representation of the group designated—flags, coats of arms, and distinctive paint-
ing on people and things are examples. 
,3This principle is not upheld everywhere with equal rigor. In the tribes of the center that have eight 
classes, in particular, beyond the class with which marriage is regularly permitted, there is another with 
which people have a kind of secondary connubium (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 126). The same 
is true of certain tribes with four classes. Each class has the choice between two classes of the other phra-
try. This is true of the Kabi (see Mathew, in Curr, vol. Ill, p. 162 [This reference remains obscure. Trans.]). 
44See [Walter Edmund] Roth, Ethnological Studies among the North-West-Central Queensland Aborigines 
(Brisbane, E. Gregory, Government Printer, 1897), pp. 56ff.; [Edward] Palmer, "Notes on Some Aus-
tralian Tribes," JAI, vol. XIII (1894), [pp. 302ff.]. 
45Still, a few tribes are cited in which marriage classes have the names of animals or plants. This is the 
case of the Kabi (Mathew, Two Representative Tribes, p. 150), tribes observed by Mrs. [Daisy M.] Bates 
("The Marriage Laws and Customs of the W. Australian Aborigines," in VGJ, vols. XXIII—XXIV, p. 47) 
and perhaps of two tribes observed by Palmer. But these phenomena are very rare and their significance 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs 
109 
strictions derive from totemism indirectly. Conceivably the animals protected 
by t h e m originally served as totems for clans that have since disappeared, 
while the marriage classes have remained. Sometimes indeed they do have a 
staying power that clans do not have. As a result, the restrictions n o w adrift 
from their original supports may have spread throughout each class, since 
there were no longer any other groupings to w h i c h they could become at-
tached. B u t even i f that rule was b o r n o f totemism, clearly it no longer rep-
resents anything more than a weakened and diluted f o r m o f totemism.
4 6 
A l l that has just been said o f the t o t e m i n the Australian societies is ap-
plicable to the Indian tribes o f N o r t h America. T h e only difference is that 
totemic organization among the Indians has a boundedness and a stability 
that it lacks i n Australia. T h e Australian clans are not simply very numerous 
but o f almost unlimited number i n a single tribe. T h e observers cite some o f 
t h e m by way o f example but never succeed i n giving us a full list. T h e rea-
son is that the list is never definitively closed. T h e same process o f segmenta-
t i o n that originally dismembered the phratry and gave rise to clans proper 
goes o n endlessly w i t h i n the clans; as a consequence o f that progressive 
crumbling, a clan often has only a very small membership.
4 7 I n America, by 
contrast, the f o r m o f the totemic system is better defined. I n America the 
poorly established. Moreover, it is not surprising that the classes, as well as the sexual groups, have some-
times adopted the names of animals. This unusual extension of totemic names in no way modifies my 
conception of totemism. [The ethnographer Durkheim identified simply as "Mrs. Bates" is the subject of 
a full-scale biography: Julia Blackburn, Daisy Bates in the Desert, New York, Pantheon, 1994. Trans.) 
"^The same explanation perhaps applies to certain other tribes of the Southeast and East in which, if 
Howitt's informants are to be believed, one would 
find 
totems specifically assigned to each marriage class 
as well. This presumably would be the case among the Wiradjuri, the Wakelbura, and the Bunta-Murra 
of the River Bulloo (Howitt, NativeTribes pp. 210, 221, 226). However, by his own admission, the testi-
monies he gathered are suspect. In fact, it emerges from the lists he compiled that several totems are found 
in both classes of the same phratry. 
The explanation I propose, after Frazer (Totemism and Exogamy, pp. 531fE), raises another difficulty. In 
principle, each clan, hence each totem, is represented indiscriminately in both classes of a single phratry, 
since one of those classes is that of children and the other that of the parents from whom the children get 
their totems. Thus, when the clans disappeared, the totemic prohibitions that survived must have re-
mained common to the two marriage classes, since, in the cases cited, each class has its own. Whence that 
differentiation? The example of the Kaiabara (a tribe of the south of Queensland) enables us, perhaps, to 
visualize how this differentiation occurred. In that tribe, the children have their mother's totem, but it is 
individualized by a distinctive mark. If the mother has the black eaglehawk totem, the child's is the white 
eaglehawk (Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 229). Here, apparendy, are beginnings of a tendency for totems to dif-
ferentiate according to marriage class. 
4 7 
A tribe of a few hundred people sometimes has as many as 
fifty 
or sixty clans and even many more. 
See on this point Durkheim and Mauss, "De Quelques formes primitives de classification," in AS, vol. VI 
(1903), p. 28, n.l. 


110 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
tribes are, o n the average, markedly bigger than i n Australia but there are 
fewer clans. Since a single tribe rarely has more than about t e n ,
4 8 and often 
fewer, each clan is a m u c h larger group. M o s t o f all, their number is better 
defined: People k n o w h o w many there are and tell us.
4 9 
This difference is due to their more advanced social organization. F r o m 
the first time those tribes were observed, the social groups were deeply 
rooted i n the soil and consequently better able to withstand the forces toward 
dispersion that assailed them. A t the same time, the society already had too 
strong a sense o f its unity to remain unconscious o f itself and the parts c o m -
prising it. Thus, the A m e r i c a n example gives us a better grasp o f organiza-
tion based o n clans. To judge that organization by the way it n o w appears i n 
Australia w o u l d b £ misleading. There, i n fact, i t is i n a state o f disorder and 
dissolution that is by no means normal; i t ought to be seen instead as the 
product o f a decay that is attributable as m u c h to the natural wear and tear o f 
time as to the disorganizing influence o f the whites. To be sure, i t is unlikely 
that the Australian clans were ever as large or as structurally durable as the 
American clans. Still, there must have been a time w h e n the distance be-
tween the t w o was not so great as i t is today. T h e societies o f America w o u l d 
never have managed to equip themselves w i t h the substantial skeleton they 
did i f the clan had always been so fluid and insubstantial. 
Indeed, that greater stability has enabled the archaic system o f phratries 
to persist i n America w i t h a clarity and relief that it no longer has i n Australia. 
I n Australia, the phratry is everywhere i n decline; i t is often nothing more 
than a group w i t h o u t a name. W h e n i t does have a name, that name is taken 
from a foreign language or from one that is no longer spoken and is no longer 
understood or no longer means m u c h to the native. W e have been able to i n -
fer the existence o f phratry totems from a few survivals* that are, for the most 
part, so inconspicuous that they have escaped a number o f observers. B y c o n -
trast, i n certain parts o f America, this system o f phratries has remained at the 
fore. T h e tribes o f the northwest coast, i n particular the T l i n g i t and the 
Haida, have attained a relatively advanced level o f civilization, and yet they 
"•Rendered here as "survivals," which is seldom used today, Durkheim's term survivances belongs to 
evolutionary theories of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. It refers to traits thought of as 
vestiges from an earlier stage and, consequendy without present meaning or function. 
48Except among the Pueblo Indians of the Southwest, where they are more numerous. See [Freder-
ick Webb] Hodge, "Pueblo Indian Clans," in AA, 1st ser., vol. IX (October 1895), pp. 345ff. Even so, we 
can ask whether the groups having those totems are clans or subclans. 
49See the tables compiled by Morgan in Ancient Society, pp. 153—185. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs 
111 
are divided into t w o phratries that are subdivided into a number o f clans: 
phratries o f the C r o w and the W o l f among the T l i n g i t ,
5 0 and o f the Eagle and 
the C r o w among the Haida.
5 1 That division is not merely nominal; it corre-
sponds to existing custom and profoundly marks life. Compared to the dis-
tance between the phratries, the moral distance between clans is small.
5 2 T h e 
name each o f t h e m bears is not a mere w o r d whose meaning has been for-
gotten or is k n o w n but vaguely. I t is a totem i n the full sense o f the w o r d , and 
it has all the essential attributes o f the totem, such as they w i l l be described 
below.
5 3 So o n this point as well, there was good reason not to disregard the 
tribes o f America, because there we can directly observe examples o f phratry 
totems, whereas Australia only offers us a few d i m vestiges o f them. 
II 
The totem is not simply a name; it is an emblem, a true coat o f arms, and its 
resemblance to the heraldic coat o f arms has often been commented upon. 
"Every family," says Grey o f the Australians, "adopts an animal or a plant as 
their crest and sign"
5 4—and what Grey calls a family is indisputably a clan. As 
Fison and H o w i t t also say, " T h e Australian organization shows that the totem 
is, first o f all, the badge o f a group."
5 5 Schoolcraft speaks i n the same terms 
about the totems o f N o r t h America: " T h e totem is i n fact a design that cor-
responds to the heraldic emblems o f the civilized nations, and each person is 
authorized to wear i t as p r o o f o f the identity o f the family to w h i c h he be-
longs. This is shown by the real etymology o f the w o r d from w h i c h dodaim 
50[Avrel] Krause, Die Tlinkit-Indianer [Jena, H. Constenoble, 1885], p. 112; [John Reed] Swanton, 
"Social Condition, Beliefs and Linguistic Relationship of the Tlingit Indians," BAE, XKVIth Report 
[1908], p. 398. 
51[John Reed] Swanton, Contributions to the Ethnology of the Haida [Leiden, E. J. Brill, 1905], p. 62. 
52"The distinction between the two clans is absolute in every respect," says Swanton, p. 68; he calls 
"clans" what I call "phratries." The two phratries, he says elsewhere, are like two peoples foreign to one 
another. 
53Among the Haida at least, the totem of the clans proper is even more altered than the totem of the 
phratries. The custom that permits a clan to give or to sell the right to wear its totem arises from the fact 
that each clan has a number of totems, some of them shared with other clans (see Swanton, pp. 107, 268). 
Because Swanton calls clans phratries, he is obliged to give the name "family" to clans proper, and the 
name "household" to real families. But the actual meaning of the terminology he adopts is not in doubt. 
^[George Grey],_foMmais ofTwo Expeditions in Northwestern and Western Australia, II [London, T. and W. 
Boone, 1841], p. 228. 
55[Fison and Howitt], Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 165. 


112 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
is derived, w h i c h means village or residence o f a family group."
5 6 Therefore, 
w h e n the Indians entered into relations w i t h the Europeans and made c o n -
tracts w i t h them, each clan sealed the treaties thus concluded w i t h its 
t o t e m .
5 7 
T h e nobles o f the feudal age sculpted, engraved, and i n every way dis-
played their coats o f arms o n the walls o f their castles, o n their weapons, and 
o n all kinds o f other objects belonging to them. T h e blacks o f Australia and 
the Indians o f N o r t h America do the same w i t h their totems. T h e Indians 
w h o accompanied Samuel Hearne painted their totems o n their shields be-
fore going into battle.
5 8 I n time o f war, according to Charlevoix, certain I n -
dian tribes had banners, made o f bits o f bark attached to the end o f a pole o n 
w h i c h the totems were represented.
5 9 A m o n g the T l i n g i t , w h e n a conflict 
breaks out between t w o clans, the champions o f the t w o enemy groups wear 
helmets o n w h i c h their respective totems are painted.
6 0 A m o n g the Iroquois, 
the skin o f the totemic animal was placed o n each w i g w a m , as a mark o f the 
clan.
6 1 According to another observer, the animal was stuffed w i t h straw and 
placed i n front o f the door.
6 2 A m o n g the Wyandot, each clan has its o w n or-
naments and distinctive painting.
6 3 A m o n g the Omaha, and among the 
Sioux more generally, the t o t e m is painted o n the tent.
6 4 
Wherever the society has become sedentary, where the house has re-
placed the tent and the plastic arts are more developed, the totem is carved 
^[Schoolcraft], Indian Tribes, vol. I, p. 420. [The quoted material is not on this page, nor is the discus-
sion relevant. Trans.] Cf. vol. I, p. 52. This etymology is, by the way, very disputable. Cf. [Frederick Webb 
Hodge], Handbook of 
American Indians North of 
Mexico (Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of Ethnology, lid 
part [Washington, Government Printing Office, 1907-1910], p. 787. 
5
7[Schoolcraft] Indian Tribes, vol. Ill, p. 184. Garrick Mallery, Picture-Writing of the American Indians, 
BAE, Xth Report, 1893, p. 377. 
58[Samuel] Hearne, [A] Journey [from Prince of Wale's Fort in Hudson's Bay] to the Northern Ocean 
[Dublin, Printed for P. Byrne and J. Rice, 1796], p. 148 (cited in [James George] Frazer, "Totemism" 
([Encyclopedia Britannica, 9th ed. (Edinburgh, Adam and Charles Black, 1887)], p. 30). 
59[Pierre François Xavier de] Charlevoix, Histoire et description de la Nouvelle France, vol. V [Paris, Chez 
la Veuve Ganeau, 1744], p. 329. 
60Krause, Tlinkit-Indianer, p. 248. 
6'Erminnie A. Smith, "Myths of the Iroquois," BAE Second [Annual] Report [Washington, Govern-
ment Printing Office, 1883], p. 78. 
62[Richard Irving] Dodge, Our Wild Indians [Hartford, A. D. Washington and Co., 1882], p. 225. 
63[John Wesley] Powell, "Wyandot Government," First Annual Report, BAE, Washington, Govern-
ment Printing Office, 1881), p. 64. 
"[James Owen] Dorsey, "Omaha Sociology," Third [Annual] Report, [BAE, Washington, Govern-
ment Printing Office, 1884], pp. 229, 240, 248. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs 
113 
on the w o o d and o n the walls. This occurs, for example, among the Haida, 
the Tshimshian, the Salish, and the T l i n g i t . Krause says, " T h e totemic arms 
are a very special house decoration among the Tlingit." These are animal 
forms combined i n certain cases w i t h h u m a n forms and sculpted o n poles 
that rise beside the door as high as fifteen meters; they are usually painted i n 
very flashy colors.
6 5 Yet totemic representations are not very numerous i n a 
Tlingit village; there are only a few, and those are found i n front o f the 
houses o f chiefs and the rich. T h e y are m u c h more c o m m o n , often several 
per house, i n the neighboring tribe o f the H a i d a .
6 6 W i t h its many sculpted 
poles standing o n all sides and sometimes very tall, a Haida village gives the 
impression o f a holy city bristling w i t h tiny bell towers and minarets.
6 7 
A m o n g the Salish, the totem is often drawn o n the interior walls o f the 
house.
6 8 Elsewhere i t is found o n canoes, utensils o f all kinds, and funeral 
monuments.
6 9 
T h e preceding examples are taken exclusively from among the Indians o f 
N o r t h America because such sculptures, engravings, and permanent repre-
sentations are possible only where the technology o f the arts already has a 
degree o f refinement that the Australian tribes have not yet attained. I n 
consequence, the totemic representations o f the k i n d just mentioned are 
rarer and less apparent i n Australia than i n America. Nonetheless, there are 
some examples. A m o n g the Warramunga, at the end o f the funeral cere-
monies, the bones o f the deceased are buried after having been dried and re-
duced to powder; a figure representing the totem is traced o n the ground 
beside the place where they are deposited.
7 0 A m o n g the Mara and the A n ¬
ula, the body is placed i n a piece o f hollowed-out w o o d that is also decorated 
w i t h the identifying designs o f the t o t e m .
7 1 I n N e w South Wales, O x l e y 
65Krause, Tlinkit-Indianer, pp. 130-131. 
"•Ibid., p. 308. 
67See the photograph of a Haida village in Swanton, Haida, PI. IX. Cf. [Edward] Tylor, "Totem Post 
of the Haida Village of Masset," JAI, New Series, vol. I [1907], p. 133. 
^Charles Hill Tout, "Report on the Ethnology of the Stadumh of British Columbia," JAI, vol. 
XXXV, 1905, p. 155. 
69Krause, Tlinkit-Indianer, p. 230; Swanton, Haida, pp. 129, 135ff.; Schoolcraft, Indian Tribes, vol. I, pp. 
5
2
—
5
3
, 337, 356. In this last case, the totem is represented upside down as a sign of 
mourning. Similar cus-
toms are found among the Creek (C. Swan, in Schoolcraft, Indian Tribes of 
the United States, vol. V, p. 265), 
among the Delaware ([John Gottlieb Ernestus] Heckwelder, An Account of the History, Manners, and Cus-
toms of the Indian Nations Who Once Inhabited Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, A. Small, 1818], pp. 246—247). 
70Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 168, 537, 540. 
71Ibid., p. 174. 


114 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
found carvings o n trees near the t o m b where a native was buried, to w h i c h 
Brough Smyth ascribes totemic significance.
7 2 T h e natives o f Upper Darling 
engrave their shields w i t h totemic images.
7 3 According to Collins, almost all 
the utensils are covered w i t h ornaments that probably have the same mean-
ing; figures o f this sort are also found on rocks.
7 4 Since, for reasons to be set 
forth below, it is not always easy to interpret these totemic designs, they may 
well be more c o m m o n than they seem. 
These varied facts provide a sense o f the large place held by the totem i n 
the social life o f primitives. Thus far, however, it has appeared to us more or 
less as apart from man himself; we have seen it represented only o n things. B u t 
totemic images are not only reproduced o n the outsides o f houses and canoes, 
on weapons, instruments, and tombs; they recur o n men's bodies. M e n do 
not simply place their emblem on the objects they possess but also wear it o n 
their persons; they i m p r i n t i t i n their flesh, and i t becomes part o f them. This 
mode o f representation is i n fact, and by far, the most important one. 
Indeed, generally the members o f each clan seek to give themselves the 
outward appearance o f their totem. A t certain religious festivals among the 
Tlingit, the person w h o conducts the ceremony wears a costume that w h o l l y 
or i n part represents the body o f the animal whose name the clan bears.
7 5 
Special masks are used for this purpose. T h e same practices crop up again 
throughout the American N o r t h w e s t .
7 6 T h e y are also found among 
the 
Minnitaree w h e n they go into battle
7 7 and among the Pueblo 
Indians.
7 8 
Elsewhere, w h e n the totem is a bird, the individuals wear its feathers o n their 
heads.
7 9 A m o n g the Iowa, each clan has a special way o f cutting the hair. I n 
the Eagle clan, t w o large tufts are arranged at the front o f the head, w h i l e an-
72Brough Smyth, Aborigines of 
Victoria, vol. I, p. 99n. 
"Ibid., p. 284. Strehlow cites an example of the same sort among the Arunta, Aranda, vol. Ill, p. 68. 
74[David Collins], An Account of the English Colony in New South Wales, vol. II [London, Printed for T. 
Cadell and W. Davies, 1804], p. 381. 
75Krause, Ttinkit-Indiana, p. 327. 
76Swanton, "Social Conditions," pp. 435£F.; [Franz] Boas, "The Social Organization and the Secret 
Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians," in Report of the United States National Museum for 1895, Washington, 
Government Printing Office, 1897, p. 358. 
77Frazer, Totemism and Exogamy, vol. I, p. 26. 
78[John Gregory] Bourke, The Snake Dance of the Moquis of Arizona [Chicago, Rio Grande Press, 
1962], p. 229; J. W. Fewkes, "The Group of 
Tusayan Ceremonials Called Katcinas," in XVth Report [BAE, 
Washington, Government Printing Office], 1897, pp. 251-263. 
79[Johann Georg] Miiller, Geschichte der amerikanischen Urreligionen [Basel, Schewighauser, 1855], p. 
327. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs 
115 
other hangs behind; i n the Buffalo clan, the hair is arranged i n the shape o f 
horns.
8 0 Similar arrangements are found among the Omaha: Each clan has its 
o w n hairstyle. I n the Tortoise clan, for example, the head is shaved, leaving 
six curls—two o n each side, one i n front and one behind—so as to imitate 
the feet, head, and tail o f the animal.
8 1 
B u t i t is most often o n the body itself that the totemic mark is imprinted, 
for this is a mode o f representation that is w i t h i n the reach o f less advanced 
societies. I t has sometimes been asked whether the c o m m o n rite o f extract-
ing a young man's t w o upper incisors w h e n he reaches puberty might not 
have the purpose o f imitating the f o r m o f the totem. This has not been es-
tablished as fact, but i t is w o r t h n o t i n g that the natives themselves sometimes 
explain the custom i n that way. For example, among the Arunta, the extrac-
tion o f teeth is practiced only i n the clan o f rain and water. According to tra-
dition, that operation is performed to make t h e m resemble certain black 
clouds w i t h light edges that are held to announce the speedy c o m i n g o f 
rain—the clouds being considered as things o f the same family.
8 2 This is ev-
idence that the native himself realizes that the purpose o f these deformations 
is to give h i m the appearance o f his totem, at least conventionally. Also 
among the Arunta, d u r i n g the rites o f subincision,* specific kinds o f gashes 
are made o n the sisters and the future wife o f the novice; the f o r m o f the re-
sulting scars appears as w e l l o n a sacred object called the churinga J o f w h i c h 
I w i l l presendy speak. T h e lines drawn o n the churinga are emblematic o f 
the t o t e m .
8 3 A m o n g the Kaitish, the euro is considered to be closely akin to 
the rain;
8 4 the people o f the rain clan wear small earrings made o f euro 
teeth.
8 5 A m o n g the Yerkla, a certain number o f gashes that leave scars are i n -
flicted o n the young man d u r i n g initiation; the number and f o r m o f these 
*A form of genital mutilation that involves a cut made along the underside of the penis, and that in 
some traditions is accompanied by circumcision as well. 
^Dürkheims convention of not pluralizing words that are not pluralized in their original languages by 
the addition of "s" (like "churinga," "waninga," and "nurtunja") can lead to confusion in English, 
in which articles do not have plurals. For that reason where he says les churinga, I say "the churingas." 
Also, I have followed his tendency to remove Australian terms from italics, once they have been ex-
plained. 
""Schoolcraft, Indian Tribe^ vol. Ill, p. 269. 
81Dorsey, "Omaha Sociology," pp. 229, 238, 240, 245. 
82Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 451. 
83Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 257. 
84What these relations of kinship signify will be seen below (Bk. II, chap. 4). 
85Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 296. 


116 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
scars vary according to t o t e m .
8 6 O n e o f Fison's informants notes the same 
sort o f thing i n the tribes he studied.
8 7 According to H o w i t t , the same sort 
o f relationship between certain scarifications and the water totem exists 
among the D i e r i .
8 8 Finally, among the Indians o f the Northwest, the custom 
o f tattooing the totem o n the body is very widespread.
8 9 
T h e tattoos made by mutilation or scarification do not always have tot-
emic significance;
9 0 but the case is otherwise for simple designs painted o n 
the body: Those usually represent the totem. True, the native does not wear 
them every day. W h e n he engages i n purely economic occupations, as w h e n 
the small family groups disperse for h u n t i n g and 
fishing, they do not en-
cumber themselves w i t h this paraphernalia, w h i c h can be quite elaborate. 
B u t w h e n the clans come together to share a c o m m o n life and devote t h e m -
selves to religious ceremonies, wearing i t is obligatory. As we w i l l see, each 
o f those ceremonies is the affair o f a specific totem, and, i n principle, the 
rites that are addressed to a totem can be performed only by the people o f 
that totem. Those w h o conduct t h e m ,
9 1 playing the role o f celebrants—and 
sometimes even those w h o are present as spectators—always wear designs o n 
their bodies that represent the t o t e m .
9 2 O n e o f the principal rites o f initia-
tion, the one that initiates the y o u n g man into the religious life o f the tribe, 
is the painting o f the totemic symbol u p o n his body.
9 3 I t is true that, among 
^Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 744-746; cf. p. 129. 
s7Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 66 n. It is true that this is disputed by other informants. 
88Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 744. 
89Swanton, Haida, pp. 41£f. See plates XX and XXI; Boas, The Social Organization of the Kwakiutl, p. 
318; Swanton, Tlinkit, Plates xviff. In one case outside the two ethnographic regions we are specifically 
studying, such tattoos are placed on the animals that belong to the clan. The Bechuana of 
southern Africa 
are divided into a certain number of clans: the people of the crocodile, the buffalo, the monkey, etc. The 
people of the crocodile, for example, make an incision on the ears of their beasts, the shape of which re-
sembles the face of the animal ([Eugene Arnaud] Casalis, Les Bassoutos [English trans., The Basutos, 
Capetown, C. Struik, 1965], p. 221). According to [William] Robertson Smith, the same custom existed 
among the ancient Arabs (Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia [Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 
1885], pp. 212-214). 
'"According to Spencer and Gillen, there are some that have no religious meaning (see Native Tribes, 
pp. 41-42; Northern Tribes, pp. 45, 54-56). 
9!Among the Arunta, this rule has exceptions that will be explained below. 
92Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, p. 162; Northern Tribes, pp. 179, 259, 292, 295-296; Schulze, [Rev-
erend Louis, "Aborigines of the Upper and Middle Finke River," RSSA, vol. XIV, 1891], p. 221. What 
is represented in this way is not always the totem itself but one of those objects that, being associated with 
the totem, are regarded a
s things of the same family. [The reference states that bodies are painted; it does 
not mention painting as a religious rite. Trans.] 
"This is the case, for example, among the Warramunga, the Walpari, the Wulmala, the TjingiUi, the 
Umbaia, and the Unmatjera (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 339, 348). Among the Warramunga, 


Tlie Principal Totemic Beliefs 
117 
the Arunta, the design thus made does not always and necessarily represent 
the totem o f the novice;
9 4 but this is an exception, no doubt a result o f the 
disturbed state into w h i c h the totemic organization o f that tribe has fallen.
9 5 
What is more, even among the Arunta, at the most solemn m o m e n t o f the 
initiation (its high point and consecration being the m o m e n t w h e n the 
novice is admitted to the sanctuary where the sacred objects o f the clan are 
kept), an emblematic painting is drawn o n h i m . This time it is indeed the 
totem o f the young man that is represented.
9 6 T h e ties that b i n d the i n d i v i d -
ual to his t o t e m are so close that, i n the tribes o f the N o r t h American n o r t h -
west coast, the emblem o f the clan is painted not only o n the living but even 
on the dead: A totemic mark is placed o n the corpse before burial.
9 7 
at the moment the design is made, the officiants say the following words to the novice: "This mark be-
longs to your place: Do not turn your eyes to another place." According to Spencer and Gillen, "This lan-
guage means that the young man must not involve himself in any ceremonies but those that concern his 
totem; they also testify to the close association that is held to exist between a man, his totem, and the place 
especially consecrated to that totem." (Northern Tribes, p. 584.) Among the Warramunga, the totem is 
transmitted from father to children; consequendy each locality has its own. 
94Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, pp. 215, 241, 376. 
9 5It will be recalled (see p. 105 above) that in this tribe, the child can have a different totem from his 
father or his mother and, more generally, of his kin. The relatives of both sides are the designated cele-
brants of the initiation ceremonies. As a result, since a man in principle is qualified a
s operator or cele-
brant only for ceremonies of his own totem, it follows that in certain cases, the rites at which the child is 
initiated necessarily concern a totem other than his own. This is how it comes about that the paintings 
made on the body of the novice do not necessarily represent his totem. Cases of this kind are to be found 
in Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 229. This shows, moreover, that if there is an anomaly, it is because 
the ceremonies of circumcision nevertheless belong essentially to the totem that would be the totem of 
the novice himself if the totemic organization was not disturbed—if the totemic organization was among 
the Arunta what it is among the Warramunga (ibid., p. 219). 
The same disruption has had another consequence. Its effect everywhere has been to loosen some-
what the bonds that unite each totem with a definite group, since the same totem can include members 
in all the possible local groups, and even in the two phratries indiscriminately. The idea that ceremonies 
of a totem could be conducted by an individual of a different totem—an idea that is contrary to the very 
principles of totemism, as we will see better below—has thus been able to establish itself without exces-
sive resistance. It is conceded that a man to whom a spirit has revealed the formula of a ceremony is qual-
ified to preside in it, even though he was not of the totem concerned (ibid., p. 519). Proof that this is an 
exception to the rule, and the result of a kind of toleration, is that the beneficiary of the formula thus re-
vealed cannot do with it as he pleases. If he transmits the formula, and such transmissions are common, it 
can only be to a member of the totem to which the rite refers (ibid.). 
%Ibid., p. 140. In this case, the novice keeps the decoration in which he was dressed until it goes away 
by itself with the passage of time. 
97Franz Boas, "First General Report on the Indians of British Columbia," in BAAS, Fifth Report of 
the 
Committee on the North-Westem Tribes of 
the Dominion of Canada [London, Offices of the Association, 1890], 
p. 41. 


118 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
III 
These totemic decorations suggest that the t o t e m is not merely a name and 
an emblem. T h e y are used d u r i n g religious ceremonies and are part o f the 
liturgy: Thus, while the totem is a collective label, i t also has a religious char-
acter. I n fact, things are classified as sacred and profane by reference to the 
totem. It is the very archetype o f sacred things. 
T h e tribes o f central Australia, principally the Arunta, the Loritja, the 
Kaitish, the Unmatjera, and the I l p i r r a ,
9 8 use certain instruments i n their 
rites that, among the Arunta, are called churingas, according to Spencer and 
Gillen and, according to Strehlow, Tjurunga." 
T h e y are pieces o f w o o d or 
bits o f polished stone o f various shapes but generally oval or o b l o n g .
1 0 0 Each 
totemic group has a more or less sizable collection o f them. Upon each of them 
is engraved a design representing the totem of this group.
101 
Some churingas are 
pierced at one end, w i t h a string made from human hair or opossum fur 
passed through the hole. Those that are made o f w o o d and pierced i n this 
way serve the same purpose as those cult instruments* to w h i c h the English 
ethnographers have given the name " b u l l roarers." H e l d by the string 
from 
w h i c h they are suspended, they are rapidly w h i r l e d i n the air so as to produce 
the same sort o f h u m m i n g that is made by the "devils" that our children use 
as toys today; this deafening noise has ritual meaning and accompanies all re-
ligious ceremonies o f any importance. Thus, churingas o f this k i n d are actu-
ally bull roarers. Others, w h i c h are not w o o d e n or are not pierced, cannot be 
used i n this manner. Nevertheless, they evoke the same feelings o f religious 
respect. 
Indeed every churinga, however used, counts among the most preemi-
nently sacred things. N o t h i n g has surpassed i t i n religious dignity. T h e w o r d 
that designates i t makes this immediately clear. A t the same time that 
"churinga" is a n o u n , i t is also an adjective—meaning "sacred." Thus, among 
This term applies to special containers, knives, coverings, bells, and other objects used in the course 
of religious rites. 
98There are some among the Warramunga as well, but fewer than among the Arunta, and although 
they have a certain place in the myths, they do not 
figure 
in the totemic ceremonies (Spencer and Gillen, 
Northern Tribes, p. 163). 
"Other names are used in other tribes. I give the Arunta term a generic sense, because it is in that 
tribe that the churingas have greatest importance and are the best studied. 
100Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 81. 
""There are some, but not many, that do not bear any obvious design (see Spencer and Gillen, Native 
Tribes, p. 144). 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs 
119 
the names that each Arunta has, there is one so sacred that it must not be re-
vealed to a stranger; i t is pronounced b u t rarely and i n a l o w voice, a sort 
o f mysterious m u r m u r . That name is called aritna churinga (aritna means 
"name").
1 0 2 M o r e generally, the w o r d "churinga" designates all ritual acts; 
for example, ilia churinga means the cult o f the E m u .
1 0 3 Thus, churinga, pe-
riod, used as a noun, is the thing whose quintessential feature is to be sacred. 
The profane, therefore—women and-young m e n not yet initiated into reli-
gious life—may n o t touch or see the churingas; they are only permitted to 
look from afar and even then rarely.
1 0 4 
T h e churingas are piously kept i n a special place the Arunta call the ert-
natulunga—a sort o f small cave hidden i n a deserted place.
1 0 5 T h e entrance is 
carefully closed w i t h rocks placed so skillfully that a passing stranger never 
suspects that the religious treasury o f the clan is nearby. Such is the churingas' 
sacredness that it is passed o n to the place where they are deposited; w o m e n 
and the uninitiated may not come near it. Y o u n g m e n may do so only w h e n 
their initiation is completely over, and even then, some are judged to merit 
that privilege only after several years o f t r i a l .
1 0 6 T h e religiousness o f the place 
radiates beyond and is transfused into all that surrounds it: Everything partic-
ipates i n the same quality and is for that reason insulated from profane c o n -
tact. Is a man chased by another? H e is safe i f he reaches the ertnatulunga; he 
cannot be captured there.
1 0 7 Even a w o u n d e d animal that takes refuge there 
102Ibid„ pp. 139, 648; Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 75. 
103Strehlow, who spells it Tjurunga, translates the word a little differently. "This word," he says, "means 
all that is secret and personal" (der eigene geheime). Tju is an old word that means hidden, secret, and runga 
means that which is personal to me." But Kempe, who has more authority than Strehlow in the matter, 
translates tju as "great," "powerful," or "sacred" ([Reverend H.[ Kempe, "Vocabulary of the Tribes In-
habiting the MacdonnellvRanges," in RSSA, vol. XIV (1890-1891, 1898), pp. 1-54], under "Tju." 
Moreover, Strehlows translation is basically not so far from the preceding as one might think at first 
glance, for what is secret is that which is taken away from the knowledge of the profane, in other words, 
that which is sacred. As concerns the meaning of the word runga, that seems very doubtful. The cere-
monies of the emu belong to all the members of the Emu clan; all can participate in them; they are not 
the personal property of any member. 
104Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 130-132; Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 78. A woman who has 
seen the churinga and the man who has shown it to her are both put to death. 
105Strehlow calls that place, defined exacdy in the same terms Spencer and Gillen use, arknanuaua in-
stead of ertnatulunga (Aranda, vol. II, p. 78). 
106[Spencer and Gillen], Northern Tribes, p. 270, and Native Tribes, p. 140. 
I07Ibid., p. 135. 


120 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
must be respected.
1 0 8 Quarrels are prohibited. It is a place o f peace, as is said 
i n the Germanic societies; i t is the sanctuary o f the totemic group; it is a true 
asylum. 
T h e churinga's virtues are manifested not only by the way it keeps the 
profane at a distance. I t is isolated i n this way because i t is a thing o f great re-
ligious value, and its loss w o u l d tragically injure the group and the i n d i v i d u -
als. T h e churinga has all sorts o f miraculous qualities. B y its touch, wounds 
are healed, especially those resulting from circumcision;
1 0 9 i t is similarly ef-
fective against illness;
1 1 0 it makes the beard g r o w ;
1 1 1 it conveys important 
powers over the totemic species, whose normal reproduction i t ensures;
1 1 2 it 
gives m e n strength, courage, and perseverance, w h i l e depressing and weak-
ening their enemies. Indeed, this last belief is so deep-rooted that w h e n t w o 
fighters 
are battling, i f one happens to glimpse that his opponent is wearing 
churingas, he instandy loses confidence and his defeat is certain.
1 1 3 Thus, no 
ritual instruments have a more important place i n religious ceremonies.
1 1 4 
Their powers are passed o n to the celebrants or to the congregation by a k i n d 
o f anointing; the faithful are smeared w i t h fat and then the churingas are 
rubbed against their arms, legs, and stomach.
1 1 5 O r the churingas are covered 
w i t h d o w n that flies away i n all directions w h e n they are whirled, this being 
one way to spread the virtues they c o n t a i n .
1 1 6 
Churingas are not merely useful to individuals; the collective fate o f the 
entire clan is b o u n d up w i t h theirs. Losing t h e m is a disaster, the greatest mis-
fortune that can befall the g r o u p .
1 1 7 Sometimes churingas leave the ertnatu-
l08Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 78. However, Strehlow says that a murderer who takes refuge near an 
ertnatulunga is mercilessly pursued there and put to death. I have some difficulty reconciling that fact with 
the privilege the animal enjoys and wonder if the greater rigor with which the criminal is treated is not 
recent and if it should not be ascribed to a weakening of the taboo that originally protected the ertnatu-
lunga. 
109[Spencer and Gillen], Native Tribes, p. 248. 
110Ibid., pp. 545-546; Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 79. For example, the dust scraped from a stone 
churinga and dissolved in water makes a potion that heals the sick. 
"'Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 545—546; Strehlow, Aranda vol. II, p. 79 disputes that. 
"
2For example, a churinga of the Yam totem that is placed in the ground makes yams grow at that 
spot (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 275). It has the same power over the animals (Strehlow, 
Aranda, vol. II, pp. 76, 78; vol. Ill, pp. 3, 7). 
"
3[Spencer and Gillen], Native Tribes, p. 135; Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 79. 
114[Spencer and Gillen], Northern Tribes p. 278. 
"
5Ibid.,p. 180. 
"
6Ibid., pp. 272-273. 
1 1 7 Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, p. 135. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs 
121 
lunga—for example, w h e n they are lent to some foreign g r o u p . "
8 There is 
real public m o u r n i n g w h e n this happens. For t w o weeks, the people o f the 
totem cry and lament, covering their bodies w i t h w h i t e clay as they do w h e n 
they have lost one o f their k i n .
1 1 9 T h e churingas are not left for individuals 
to do w i t h as they please; the ertnatulunga where they are kept is under the 
control o f the group's chief. To be sure, each individual has special rights over 
certain o f t h e m ;
1 2 0 but even i f he is to some extent their owner, he can use 
them only w i t h the consent o f the chief and under the chief's guidance. I t is 
a collective treasury, the H o l y A r k * o f the clan.
1 2 1 T h e devotion they receive 
further illustrates the great value that is attached to them. They are handled 
w i t h a respect that is displayed by the solemnity o f the movements.
1 2 2 T h e y 
are cared for, oiled, rubbed, and polished; w h e n they are carried from one 
place to another, it is i n the midst o f ceremonies, p r o o f that this travel is con-
sidered an act o f the very highest importance.
1 2 3 
I n themselves, the churingas are merely objects o f w o o d and stone like 
so many others; they are distinguished from profane things o f the same k i n d 
by only one particularity: T h e totemic mark is drawn or engraved upon 
them. That mark, and only that mark, confers sacredness o n them. To be 
sure, Spencer and Gillen believe that the churinga serves as the residence o f 
an ancestral soul and that the authority o f that soul gives the object its prop-
erties.
1 2 4 Strehlow views that interpretation as incorrect but the one he pro-
*Here, Dürkheim shifts from the term sacrée to the term sainte, using the expression l'arche sainte, 
which is a fixed phrase meaning "something that may not be touched"—quite like the English "sacred 
cow," which in turn derives 
from 
ritual practice in India. 1 have used the term "holy" not only because 
"Holy Ark" is the standard expression in American English, but also to let the reader note the shift and 
reflect on its possible implications (see p. btix). 
l I 8A group lends its churinga to another with the idea that those latter will pass on to it some of the 
virtues they have and that their presence will rejuvenate individuals and the collectivity (ibid., pp. 158ff.). 
I19Ibid., p. 136. 
120Each individual has a personal bond first of all to one special churinga that serves as a security for 
his life and then to those he has inherited 
from 
his relatives. 
,21Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 154; Northern Tribes, p. 193. The churingas are so marked with 
collective significance that they replace the "message sticks" that envoys carry when they go to summon 
foreign groups to a ceremony (NativeTribes, pp. 141—142). 
122Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 326. [Neither "solemnity" nor other words describing move-
ments appear at this place. Trans.] It should be noted that the bull roarers are treated in the same way 
(Mathews, "Aboriginal Tribes" pp. 307-308). 
l23Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 161, 250ff. 
I24Ibid., p. 138. 


122 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
poses does not markedly differ from it: H e is o f the o p i n i o n that the churinga 
is regarded as an image o f the ancestors body or as the body itself.
1 2 5 Thus, 
again, i t is feelings inspired by the ancestor and projected onto the material 
object that make it into a k i n d o f fetish. Yet b o t h conceptions—which barely 
differ except i n the literal detail o f the myth—were obviously forged after the 
fact to make the sacredness i m p u t e d to churingas intelligible. There is n o t h -
ing i n the makeup o f those pieces o f w o o d and stone, and i n their appear-
ance, that predestines t h e m to being regarded as the seat o f an ancestral soul 
or the image o f the ancestor's body. So that respect was not caused by the 
myth; far from it. I f m e n conceived this m y t h , it was to account for the reli-
gious respect that those things elicited. Like so many other mythical expla-
nations, this one resolves the question only by repeating i t i n slightly different 
terms, for to say that the churinga is sacred, and that it has such and such re-
lationship w i t h a sacred being, is not to account for the fact but to state one 
fact i n t w o different ways. Second, as Spencer and Gillen admit, even among 
the Arunta, there are churingas that are made by the elders o f the group, w i t h 
the full knowledge o f and i n full v i e w o f everyone;
1 2 6 those obviously do not 
come from the great ancestors. Still, despite a few differences, they have the 
same power as the others and are kept i n the same way. Finally, there are 
whole tribes i n w h i c h a churinga is not at all thought o f as being associated 
w i t h a spirit.
1 2 7 Its religious nature comes to i t from another source; and what 
w o u l d be the source i f not the totemic i m p r i n t it bears? Thus, the outward 
displays o f the rite are addressed to that image, and that image sanctifies* the 
object o n w h i c h i t is engraved. 
A m o n g the Arunta and i n the neighboring tribes, there exist t w o other 
liturgical instruments that are clearly attached to the t o t e m and to the 
*To express the idea "to make something sacred," Durkheim uses the word sanctifier. That idea should 
be kept distinct 
from 
other meanings of the verb "to sanctify." 
125Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, pp. 76, 77, 82. For the Arunta, it is the actual body of the ancestor; for 
the Loritja, it is only the body's image. 
126Just after the birth of a child, the mother shows the father where she believes the soul of the ances-
tor entered her. Accompanied by several relatives, the father goes to that place, and they look for the 
churinga that they believe the ancestor dropped at the moment of reincarnating himself. If one is found, 
it is probably because some elder of the totemic group put it there (the hypothesis of Spencer and Gillen). 
If they do not find it, they make a new churinga according to a prescribed technique (Spencer and Gillen, 
NativeTribes, p. 132; cf. Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 80). 
127This is true of the Warramunga, the Urabunna, the Worgaia, the Umbaia, the Tjingilli, and the 
Gnanji (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 258, 275—276). Then, say Spencer and Gillen, "they were 
regarded as having especial value because of their association with a totem" (ibid., p. 276). There are ex-
amples of the same sort among the Arunta (NativeTribes, p. 156). 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs 
123 
churinga itself, w h i c h ordinarily enters into their making: the nurtunja and 
the waninga. 
T h e nurtunja,
128 
w h i c h is found among the A r u n t a o f the n o r t h and their 
immediate neighbors,
1 2 9 is a vertical support consisting o f either a lance, sev-
eral lances tied together i n a bundle, or simply a p o l e .
1 3 0 Bunches o f plants 
are fastened all around it w i t h belts or bands made o f hair. D o w n , arranged 
either i n circles or i n parallel lines r u n n i n g from top to b o t t o m o f the sup-
port, is attached to the upper end. T h e top is decorated w i t h feathers o f the 
eaglehawk. (This is the commonest and most typical f o r m ; there are many 
variations i n particular cases.)
1 3 1 
T h e waninga, w h i c h is found only among the southern Arunta, the 
Urabunna, and the Loritja, has no one model either. Reduced to its most ba-
sic components, i t also has a vertical support made w i t h a stick about a foot 
long or w i t h a lance several meters high that is cross-cut, sometimes by one 
or sometimes by t w o pieces.
1 3 2 I n the first case, i t resembles a cross. D i a g o -
nally crossing the space between the arms o f the cross and the ends o f the 
central axis are ties made w i t h either human hair or the fur o f an opossum or 
a bandicoot; they are pressed tighdy together, f o r m i n g a diamond-shaped 
web. W h e n there are t w o cross-bars, the belts go from one to the other, and 
from there to the top and b o t t o m o f the support. T h e y are sometimes cov-
ered w i t h a coat o f d o w n thick enough to hide t h e m from view. T h e 
waninga thus looks quite like a 
flag.
133 
H a v i n g their o w n role i n many rites, nurtunjas and waningas are objects 
o f religious respect entirely like the respect evoked by the churingas. M a k i n g 
and erecting t h e m is carried out w i t h the greatest solemnity. W h e t h e r 
fixed 
128Strehlow says Tnatanja (Aranda, vol. I, pp. 4
—
5
)
. 
129The Kaitish, the Ilpirra, and the Unmatjera, but it is rare among the last group. 
""Sometimes the pole is replaced with very long churingas placed end to end. 
"'Sometimes a smaller nurtunja is suspended at the top of the main one. In other cases, the nurtunja 
is given the form of a cross or a T. More rarely, the central support is absent (Spencer and Gillen, Native 
Tribes, pp. 298-300, 360-364, 627). 
132Sometimes there are three such transverse ban. 
133Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 231-234, 306-310, 627. In addition to the nurtunja and the 
waninga, Spencer and Gillen distinguish a third sort of sacred pole or flag, the kauaua (Native Tribes, pp. 
364, 370, 629), whose functions they admit not having been able to determine exacdy. They note only 
that the kauaua "is regarded as something common to the members of all the totems." But according to 
Strehlow (Aranda, vol. Ill, p. 23, n.2), the kauaua of which Spencer and Gillen speak is merely the nur-
tunja of the Wild Cat totem. Since that animal is the object of a tribal cult, it is understandable that the 
veneration its nurtunja receives should be common to all the clans. 


124 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
o n the ground or carried by a celebrant, they mark the central point o f the 
ceremony; the dances take place and the rites unfold around them. D u r i n g 
initiation, the novice is led to the foot o f a nurtunja that has been erected for 
the occasion. "Here," he is told, "is the nurtunja o f your father; i t has already 
served to make many young men." After this, the neophyte must kiss the nur-
tunja.
1 3 4 W i t h this kiss, he enters into relations w i t h the religious principle 
that is held to reside i n it; i t is a genuine c o m m u n i o n that is to give the y o u n g 
man the strength he must have to endure the terrible operation o f subinci-
s i o n .
1 3 5 I n addition, the nurtunja plays an important role i n the mythology o f 
these societies. T h e myths report that, i n the mythical age o f the great an-
cestors, the territory o f the tribe was crisscrossed i n all directions by compa-
nies made up exclusively o f individuals having the same t o t e m .
1 3 6 Each o f 
those bands carried a nurtunja. W h e n a company stopped to make camp and 
before they dispersed to hunt, the people set their nurtunja into the ground 
and suspended the churingas from the t o p .
1 3 7 I n other words, they entrusted 
it w i t h their most valuable possessions. A t the same time, i t was a sort o f flag 
that served as the rallying point o f the group. O n e cannot fail to be struck by 
the similarities o f the nurtunja to the sacred poles o f the O m a h a .
1 3 8 
This sacredness stems from one cause: It is a material representation o f the 
clan. I n fact, the vertical lines or rings o f d o w n that cover it, or indeed the 
belts that j o i n the arms o f the waninga to the central axis (of different colors, 
as well), are not arranged arbitrarily, at the w h i m o f those officiating. T h e y 
must affect a f o r m that is stricdy imposed by tradition and that, i n the minds 
o f the natives, represents the t o t e m .
1 3 9 Here w e need wonder no longer, as i n 
the case o f the churingas, i f the veneration this cult instrument receives 
merely reflects that inspired by the ancestors: I t is a rule that each nurtunja or 
waninga lasts only during the ceremony i n w h i c h it is used. A n entirely n e w 
one is made each time one is needed; w h e n the rite is finished, it is stripped 
o f its ornaments, and the elements from w h i c h i t is made are scattered.
1 4 0 
134Spencer and Gülen, Northern Tribes, p. 342; NativeTribes, p. 309. 
135Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, p. 255. 
136Ibid., chaps. 10 and 11. 
I37Ibid., pp. 138-144. 
138See [James Owen] Dorsey, "[A Study of] Siouan Cults," BAE, Eleventh Report [Washington, Gov-
ernment Printing Office, 1894], p. 413, and "Omaha Sociology," p. 234. While it is true that there is only 
one sacred pole for the tribe, and yet one nurtunja for each clan, the principle is the same. 
139Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 232, 308, 313, 334, etc.; Northern Tribes, pp. 182, 186, etc. 
140Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 346. They do say, it is true, that the nurtunja represents the 
lance of the ancestor who, in Alcheringa 
times, 
was the head of each clan. But it is only a symbolic rep-


The Principal Totemic Beliefs 
125 
Thus it is no more than an image o f the totem—indeed a temporary image— 
and therefore plays its religious role i n this right and i n this right only. 
T h e churinga, the nurtunja, and the waninga owe their religious nature 
solely to the fact that they bear the totemic emblem. W h a t is sacred is the 
emblem. I t retains this sacredness whatever the object o n w h i c h i t is repre-
sented. It is sometimes painted o n rocks—these 
paintings being called 
churinga ilkinia, sacred designs.
1 4 1 T h e decorations i n w h i c h the celebrants 
and the congregation adorn themselves d u r i n g religious ceremonies have the 
same name, and i t is forbidden for children and w o m e n to see t h e m .
1 4 2 I n 
certain rites, the t o t e m is sometimes drawn o n the ground. T h e very tech-
nique o f doing so testifies to the feelings that the design elicits and to the 
high value that is i m p u t e d to it. T h e drawing is done o n ground that has 
been sprinkled and saturated beforehand w i t h h u m a n b l o o d ;
1 4 3 w e w i l l see 
below that the b l o o d itself is a sacred l i q u i d that is reserved exclusively for p i -
ous use. O n c e the image has been made, the faithful remain seated o n the 
ground i n front o f it, i n an attitude o f pure d e v o t i o n .
1 4 4 Provided we assign a 
sense appropriate to the mentality o f the primitive, one can say that they 
worship and glorify it. * This enables us to understand w h y the totemic e m -
blem has remained a very precious thing to the Indians o f N o r t h America: I t 
is always surrounded by a sort o f religious aura. 
It is not w i t h o u t interest to k n o w what totemic representations are made 
of, i n addition to understanding h o w i t happens that they are so sacred. 
A m o n g the Indians o f N o r t h America, totemic representations 
are 
painted, engraved, or sculpted images that attempt to reproduce the outward 
appearance o f the totemic animal as faithfully as possible. T h e techniques are 
those that we use today i n similar cases, except that i n general they are cruder 
than our o w n . B u t i t is not the same i n Australia, and o f course it is i n the 
Australian societies that we must seek the o r i g i n o f these representations. A l -
though the Australian may show himself to be fairly capable o f imitating the 
réservation of that; it is not a sort of relic, like the churinga, which is thought to emanate from the an-
cestor himself. Here the secondary character of the interpretation is especially apparent. 
*A condition de donner au mot un sense approprié à la mentalité du primitif, on peut dire qu'ils l'adorent. What 
it is about the verb adorer that must be specially understood is not made explicit. 
141Ibid., pp. 614ff., esp. p. 617; Northern Tribes, p. 749. 
u2NativeTribes, p. 624. 
143Ibid., p. 179. 
144Ibid., p. 181. [The reference does not describe their demeanor; it says that they chant. Trans.] 


126 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
forms o f things, at least i n a rudimentary way,
1 4 5 the sacred decorations seem 
to exhibit no preoccupations o f this kind: They consist chiefly o f geometric 
designs made o n the churingas or o n men's bodies. They are straight or 
curved lines painted i n various ways,
1 4 6 together having and only capable o f 
having a conventional meaning. T h e relation between the drawing and the 
thing drawn is so remote and indirect that the uninformed cannot see it. p n l y 
clan members can say what meaning they attach to this or that combination 
o f lines.
1 4 7 I n general, m e n and w o m e n are represented by semicircles; ani-
mals, by complete circles or by spirals;
1 4 8 the tracks o f a man or an animal, by 
lines o f points. T h e meanings o f the drawings thus produced are indeed so ar-
bitrary that the same drawing can have t w o different meanings for the people 
o f t w o totems—representing a certain animal i n one place and another animal 
or a plant elsewhere. This is perhaps even more apparent i n the case o f the 
nurtunjas and waningas; each o f w h i c h represents a different totem. B u t the 
few very simple elements that enter into their composition cannot lend them-
selves to very diverse combinations. As a result, t w o nurtunjas can l o o k ex-
actly the same and yet convey t w o things as different as a g u m tree and an 
e m u .
1 4 9 W h e n the nUrtunja is made, it is given a meaning that it retains dur-
ing the whole ceremony, but a meaning that ultimately is set by convention. 
As these facts prove, while the Australian has quite a strong inclination to 
represent his totem, he does not do so i n order to have a portrait before his eyes 
that perpetually renews the sensation o f it; he does so simply because he feels the 
need to represent the idea he has by means o f an outward and physical sign, no 
matter what that sign may be. W e cannot go further toward understanding what 
made the primitive write the idea he had o f his totem o n his person and o n var-
ious objects, but it has been important to note straightaway the nature o f the 
need that has given birth to these numerous representations.
1 5 0 
U3See some examples in Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, 
fig. 
131. Among the designs there, several 
are obviously intended to represent animals, plants, the heads of men, etc.—very schematically, of course. 
146Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 617; Northern Tribes, pp. 716ÎF. 
147[Spencer and Gillen], Native Tribes, p. 145; Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 80. 
148[Spencer and Gillen], NativeTribes, p. 151. 
,49Ibid., p. 346. 
1S0Moreover, these designs and paintings undoubtedly have an aesthetic quality as well; they are an 
early form of art. Since they are also, and even most of all, a written language, it 
follows 
that the origins 
of drawing and those of writing merge into one another. Indeed, it seems that man must have begun to 
draw less to fix onto wood or stone beautiful 
forms 
that charmed the senses than to express his thought 
materially (cf. Schoolcraft, Indian Tribes, vol. I, p. 405; Dorsey, Siouan Cults, pp. 394ff.). 


CHAPTER TWO 
THE PRINCIPAL TOTEMIC 
BELIEFS (CONTINUED) 
The Totemic Animal and Man 
B
ut totemic images are not the only sacred things. There are real beings 
that are also the object o f rites, because o f their relationship w i t h the 
totem. T h e y are, first and foremost, the creatures o f the totemic species and 
the members o f the clan. 
I 
Since the designs that represent the t o t e m stir religious feelings, i t is natural 
that the things represented should have the same property to some degree. 
T h e things represented are mainly animals and plants. Since the profane 
role o f plants and certainly that o f animals ordinarily is to serve as food, the 
sacredness o f the totemic animal or plant is signified by the prohibition 
against eating it. O f course, because they are holy things,* they can enter 
into the composition o f certain mystic meals, and we w i l l see i n fact that they 
sometimes serve as true sacraments; i n general, however, they cannot be used 
for ordinary eating. Anyone w h o violates that prohibition exposes himself to 
extremely grave danger. This is not to say that the group always intervenes to 
punish every such infraction artificially; the sacrilege is thought to b r i n g 
about death automatically. A dreaded principle that cannot enter into a pro-
fane body w i t h o u t disrupting or destroying it is thought to reside w i t h i n the 
* Choses saintes. I indicate Durkheim's alternation between sacré and saint. On these terms, see above p. 
bdx, n. 101, and p. 121n. 
127 


128 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
totemic plant or animal.
1 I n certain tribes at least, old m e n are exempted 
from that prohibition;
2 later, we w i l l see why. 
B u t although the prohibition is absolute i n a great many tribes
3 ( w i t h ex-
ceptions that w i l l be pointed out), unquestionably it tends to weaken as the 
old totemic organization breaks d o w n . B u t the very restrictions that persist 
even then show that these attenuations have not been easily accepted. For ex-
ample, where eating the totemic animal or plant is permitted, the eating is 
still not entirely free but is limited to small amounts at a time. To exceed this 
l i m i t is a ritual offense and has grave consequences.
4 Elsewhere, the restric-
tion remains intact for the parts that are considered the most precious, that is, 
the most sacred—for example, the eggs or the fat.
5 I n yet other places, unre-
stricted eating is tolerated only i f the animal eaten has not yet reached full 
maturity.
6 I n this case, the animal's sacredness is probably assumed to be as yet 
incomplete. Thus, the barrier that isolates and protects the totemic being 
gives way but slowly, and not w i t h o u t strong resistance—which is evidence 
o f what it must originally have been. 
It is true that Spencer and Gillen do not believe such restrictions are sur-
vivals o f a once-rigorous prohibition that is gradually weakening, but instead 
that they are the prelude to one just beginning to establish itself. Once u p o n 
'See the example in [Rev. George] Taplin, "The Narrinyeri Tribe" [in James Dominick Woods, The 
Native Tribes of 
South Australia, Adelaide, E. S. Wigg & Son, 1879], p. 63; [Alfred William] Howitt, Native 
Tribes [of South-East Australia, London, Macmillan, 1904], pp. 146, 769; [Lorimer] Fison and [Alfred 
William] Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kumai [Melbourne, G. Robertson, 1880], p. 169; [Walter Edmund] 
Roth, Superstition, Magic and Medicine [in North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin, no. 5, Brisbane, G. A. 
Vaughn, 1903], §150; [W.] Wyatt, "Adelaide and Encounter Bay Tribes" [in Woods, The NativeTribes of 
South Australia], p. 168 [H. E. A.] Meyer, "Manners and Customs of the Aborigines of Encounter Bay," 
[in Woods, The Native Tribes of South Australia], p. 186. 
2This is the case among the Warramunga. [Sir Baldwin Spencer and Francis James Gillen, Northern 
Tribes of Central Australia, London, Macmillan, 1904], p. 168. [That discussion does not concern dietary 
practices. Trans.] 
3For example, among the Warramunga, the Urabunna, the Wonghibon, the Yuin, the Wotjobaluk, 
the Buandik, the Ngeumba, and others. 
4Among the Kaitish, if a member of the clan eats too much of his totem, the members of the other 
phratry have recourse to a magical procedure that is thought to kill (ibid., p. 294; cf. [Sir Baldwin Spencer 
and Francis James Gillen], Northern Tribes, p. 294, and NativeTribes [of Central Australia, London, Macmil-
lan, 1899], p. 204 [The discussion does not concern dietary practices. Trans.]; Langloh Parker [Catherine 
Sommerville Field Parker], The Euahlayi Tribe, [London, A. Constable, 1905], p. 20). 
5Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 202n.; [Carl] Strehlow, DieAranda- und Loritja-Stamme in Zentral¬
Australien, vol. II [Frankfurt, J. Baer, 1907], p. 58. 
6[Spencer and Gillen], Northern Tribes, p. 173. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
129 
a time, according to these writers,
7 there was total freedom o f consumption, 
and the restrictions applied today are fairly recent. T h e y believe they have 
found p r o o f o f their thesis i n the t w o following facts. First, there are solemn 
occasions w h e n the m e n o f the clan or their chief not only may but must eat 
the totemic animal and plant, as I have just noted. Second, the myths report 
that the great founding ancestors o f the clans regularly ate their totem. These 
stories cannot be understood, say they, except as the echo o f a time w h e n re-
strictions d i d not exist. 
T h e fact that i t is ritually obligatory to partake o f the totem d u r i n g cer-
tain religious ceremonies (moderately, at that) i n no way implies that i t ever 
served as ordinary food. Q u i t e the contrary, the food eaten during mystical 
meals is sacred i n its essence and hence forbidden to the profane. As to the 
myths, to impute to t h e m the value o f historical documents so easily is to f o l -
l o w a rather slipshod critical method. As a rule, the object o f myths is to i n -
terpret the existing rites rather than to commemorate past events; they are 
more an explanation o f the present than they are a history. I n this case, those 
traditions i n w h i c h the legendary ancestors ate their t o t e m are i n perfect ac-
cord w i t h beliefs and rites that are still i n force. T h e o l d men, and others w h o 
have attained high religious status, are not b o u n d by the prohibitions as are 
ordinary m e n .
8 T h e y may eat o f the holy t h i n g * because they are holy t h e m -
selves; moreover, this rule is not peculiar to totemism alone but is found i n 
the most disparate religions. Since the ancestral heroes were virtually gods, i t 
must have seemed all the more natural that they should have been able to eat 
the sacred* food,
9 but that is no reason for the same privilege to have been 
conferred u p o n mere profane beings.
1 0 
* Chose sainte. 
^Aliment sacre. 
7Ibid., pp. 207ff. 
"See above p. 128. 
9It should also be borne in mind that in the myths, the ancestors are never represented as feeding on 
their totem routinely. Quite the contrary; this sort of consumption is the exception. According to 
Strehlow, their everyday fare was the same as that of the corresponding animal (Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, 
p. 4). 
'"Furthermore, this whole theory rests on a completely arbitrary hypothesis; Spencer and Gillen, like 
[James George] Frazer, concede that the tribes of Central Australia, including the Arunta, represent the 
most archaic and, consequendy, the purest form of totemism. I will say below why this conjecture seems 
to me to be contrary to all likelihood. It is in fact probable that these authors would not so easily have ac-
cepted the thesis they defend if they had not refused to see totemism as a religion and thus had not failed 
to recognize the sacredness of the totem. 


130 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
However, i t is neither certain nor even likely that the prohibition was 
ever absolute. I t seems always to have been superseded by necessity—for ex-
ample, w h e n the native is starving and has nothing else to eat.
1 1 A l l the more 
is this the case w h e n the totem is a k i n d o f food that man cannot do w i t h -
out. For example, many tribes have a water totem—a case i n point i n w h i c h 
strict prohibition clearly is impossible. B u t even i n this case, the concession 
is subject to restrictions, w h i c h goes to show that the concession deviates 
from an accepted principle. A m o n g the Kaitish and the Warramunga, a man 
o f this totem cannot d r i n k water freely, is prohibited from drawing i t himself, 
and can receive it only from the hands o f a third person, w h o must belong to 
the phratry o f w h i c h he is not a member.
1 2 T h e complexity and inconve-
nience o f this procedure are yet other ways o f recognizing that access to the 
sacred thing is not free. I n certain tribes o f the center, the same rule applies 
whenever the t o t e m is eaten, whether out o f necessity or for any other 
reason. I t should be reiterated that w h e n this formality itself cannot be exe-
cuted—that is, w h e n an individual is by himself or is surrounded by m e m -
bers o f his o w n phratry—he may do w i t h o u t any intermediary i f there is 
urgent need. I t is clear that the prohibition can be mitigated i n various ways. 
Still, the prohibition rests o n ideas that are so deeply rooted i n the m i n d 
that it often outlives its original reasons for being. W e have seen that, i n all 
probability, the various clans o f a phratry are subdivisions o f an original clan 
that broke up. Thus there was a time w h e n all the clans were but one and had 
the same totem; therefore, whenever the m e m o r y o f that c o m m o n o r i g i n is 
not completely erased, each clan continues to feel solidarity w i t h the others 
and to consider their totems as not foreign to it. For this reason, an i n d i v i d -
ual is not entirely free to eat the totems assigned to the various clans o f the 
phratry to w h i c h he belongs; he may touch the forbidden plant or animal 
only i f it has been presented to h i m by a member o f the other phratry.
1 3 
"Taplin, 'The Narrinyeri," p. 64; Howitt, NativeTribes, pp. 145, 147; Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, 
p. 202; [George] Grey, Journals of 
Two Expeditions in North-West and Western Australia, vol. II, London, T. 
and W. Boone, 1841; Curr, The Australian Race, vol. Ill, p. 462. 
12[Spencer and Gillen], Northern Tribes, pp. 160, 167. It is not enough for the intermediary to be of an-
other totem. As we will see, to some extent, any totem of a phratry is forbidden to other members of that 
phratry who are of different totems. 
13Ibid., p. 167. We can better understand now how it happens that, when the prohibition is not ob-
served, it is the other phratry that carries out punishment for the sacrilege (see p. 128, n. 4 above). It is 
because that phratry has the greatest interest in seeing that the rule is respected. It is believed likely, in fact, 
that when the rule is violated, the totemic species will not reproduce abundandy. Since the members of 
the other phratry are the ones who regularly eat it, they are the ones affected. This is why they avenge 
themselves. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
131 
Another survival o f the same k i n d relates to the maternal totem. There 
are good reasons for believing that totems were at first transmitted through 
the maternal line. A n d so, wherever descent through the paternal line has be-
come the custom, this most likely has occurred only after a long period dur-
ing w h i c h the opposite principle was i n use; hence the child had the totem 
o f its mother and was subject to all the prohibitions attached thereto. N o w 
although i n certain tribes today, the child inherits the totem o f its father, 
something remains o f the prohibitions that originally protected the mother's 
totem: It cannot be partaken o f freely.
14 Yet n o t h i n g else i n the present state 
o f things corresponds to that prohibition. 
A prohibition against killing the t o t e m (or picking it, i f it is a plant) is 
often added to the prohibition against eating.
1 5 But, here again, there are 
many exceptions and mitigations. For instance, there is the case o f neces-
sity—when, for example, the t o t e m is a dangerous animal
1 6 or w h e n one 
has n o t h i n g to eat. There are even tribes that prohibit hunting the animal 
whose name one bears for oneself, but nevertheless permit its killing for 
someone else.
1 7 I n general, though, the manner i n w h i c h the act is car-
ried out clearly indicates that there is something illicit about it. O n e says 
"excuse m e " as i f for an offense, displays sadness and repugnance,
1 8 
and 
14This is the case among the Loritja (Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, pp. 60, 61), the Worgaia, the Warra-
munga, the Walpari, the Mara, the Anula, the Binbinga (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 166, 171, 
173). Among the Warramunga and the Walpari, it may be eaten but only if it is offered by a member of 
the other phratry. Spencer and Gillen point out (p. 167 n.) that, in this respect, the paternal and maternal 
totems are apparently subject to different rules. It is true that, in either case, the offer must come from the 
other phratry. But when the totem in question is that of the father, the totem proper, that other phratry 
is the one to which the totem does not belong; the inverse applies when it is the totem of the mother. 
This is the case, most likely, because the principle was at 
first 
established for the father's, then extended 
automatically to the mother's, even though the situation was different. Once it was instituted, the rule that 
one could avoid the restriction protecting the totem only when the offer was made by someone of the 
other phratry was applied without modification to the mother's totem. 
15For example, among the Warramunga (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 166), the Wotjobaluk, 
the Buandik, and the Kurnai (Howitt, NativeTribes, pp. 146-147), and the Narrinyeri (Taplin, "The Nar-
rinyeri," p. 63). 
16And still not in all cases. The Arunta of the Mosquito totem must not kill that insect, even when it 
is inconvenient not to, but must settle for flicking it away (Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 58. Cf. [Rev. 
George] Taplin, "The Narrinyeri," p. 63). [It is possible that, in certain of his footnotes, Dürkheim con-
flated two articles by Taplin, one in Curr and the other in Woods. Trans.] 
,7Among the Kaitish and the Unmafjera (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 160). Indeed some-
times an elder gives one of his churingas to a young man of a different totem, to enable the young man 
to hunt the givers totemic animal more easily (ibid., p. 272). 
18Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 146; Grey,Journals ofTwo Expeditions, vol. II, p. 228. [Rev. Eugene Arnaud] 
Casalis, The Bassutos [Capetown, C. Struik, 1965], p. 211. Among these latter, "one must be purified af-
ter committing such a sacrilege." 


132 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
takes the necessary to ensure that the animal suffers as little as possible.
1 9 
I n addition to the basic prohibitions, there are examples o f a prohibition 
against contact between a man and his totem. Thus, among the Omaha, no 
one o f the E l k clan may touch any part o f the male elk; and i n a subclan o f 
the Buffalo, no one may touch this animal's head.
2 0 A m o n g the Bechuana, 
no one w o u l d dare to wear the skin o f the animal that is his t o t e m .
2 1 B u t 
these cases are rare; and i t is natural that they should be, since, normally a 
man must wear the image o f his t o t e m or something reminiscent o f it. Tat-
tooing and totemic costumes w o u l d be impractical i f contact was prohibited 
altogether. I t should be noticed, furthermore, that this prohibition is f o l -
lowed not i n Australia but only i n societies where totemism is already far 
from its original f o r m ; apparendy, then, i t is o f recent o r i g i n and due perhaps 
to the influence o f ideas that are not specifically totemic at a l l .
2 2 
I f we n o w compare these various prohibitions w i t h those applied to the 
totemic emblem, i t seems—contrary to what m i g h t be predicted—that those 
applied to the totemic emblem are the more numerous, strict, and rigorously 
imperative. A l l kinds o f figures representing the t o t e m are surrounded w i t h a 
markedly greater respect than the being itself, whose f o r m the figures i m i -
tate. Churingas, nurtunjas, and waningas must never be handled by w o m e n 
or uninitiated men, w h o are not permitted even to glimpse them except 
from a respectful distance and, at that, only o n rare occasions. O n the other 
hand, the plant or animal whose name the clan bears may be seen and 
"Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, pp. 58, 59, 61. 
20[James Owen] Dorsey, "Omaha Sociology," in Third Annual Report, BAE [Washington, Government 
Printing Office, 1881-1882], pp. 225, 231. 
21Casalis [The Bassutos, p. 211]. 
22Even among the Omaha, it is not certain that the prohibitions against contact, some examples of 
which I have just reported, are specifically totemic in nature. Several of them have no direct relations with 
the animal that serves as the clan's totem. Thus, in a subclan of the Eagle, the characteristic prohibition is 
that against touching the head of a buffalo (Dorsey, "Omaha Sociology," p. 239); in another subclan of the 
same totem, verdigris, charcoal, or something else must not be touched (p. 245). 
I do not mention other prohibitions noted by Frazer, such as naming or looking at an animal or plant, 
for those are even less clearly of totemic origin, except perhaps in the case of certain instances observed 
among the Bechuana ([James George] Frazer, Totemism and Exogamy, [London, Macmillan, 1910], pp. 
1
2
—
1
3
)
. Frazer once accepted too easily (and on this point he has had imitators) that every prohibition 
against eating or touching an animal necessarily arises 
from 
totemic beliefs. However, there is one case in 
Australia in which the sight of the totem appears to be forbidden. According to Strehlow (Aranda, vol. II, 
p. 59), among the Arunta and the Loritja, a man whose totem is the moon must not look at it very long; 
to do so would be to expose himself to death at the hands of an enemy. I believe this is a unique case. 
Moreover we should bear in mind that the astronomical totems are probably not primitive in Australia, so 
this prohibition might be the outcome of a complex elaboration. This hypothesis is supported by the fact 
that, among the Euahlayi, the prohibition against looking at the moon applies to all mothers and children, 
whatever their totems (Parker, Euahlayi, p. 53). 


The Priticipal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
133 
touched by everyone. Churingas are kept i n a sort o f temple, at the thresh-
old o f w h i c h the d i n o f profane life settles into silence; i t is the domain o f sa-
cred things. 
U n l i k e the churingas, totemic animals and plants live o n profane ground 
and are part and parcel o f everyday life. A n d since the number and i m p o r -
tance o f the restrictions that isolate a sacred thing, w i t h d r a w i n g i t from cir-
culation, correspond to the degree o f sacredness w i t h w h i c h it is invested, we 
arrive at the remarkable result that the images of the totemic being are more sacred 
than the totemic being itself Moreover, i t is the churunga and the nurtunja that 
hold the highest rank i n the ceremonies o f the cult; only o n extremely rare 
occasions does the animal appear i n them. I n one rite, o f w h i c h I w i l l have 
occasion to speak,
2 3 i t is the basis o f a religious meal but has no active role. 
T h e Arunta dance around the nurtunja, gathering before the image o f their 
totem and worshiping it; never is there a similar display before the totemic 
being itself. I f this being was the holy t h i n g * par excellence, then that being, 
the sacred plant or animal, w o u l d be the one the young novice must c o m -
mune w i t h w h e n brought into the sphere o f religious life; we have seen i n -
stead that the m o m e n t w h e n the novice enters the sanctuary o f the churingas 
is the most solemn o f the initiation. I t is w i t h t h e m and w i t h the nurtunja 
that he communes. So the representations o f the totem are more efficacious 
than the totem itself. 
II 
We must n o w determine the place o f man i n the system o f religious things. 
A w h o l e set o f received notions and the power o f language itself incline 
us to think o f ordinary men, the ordinary faithful, as essentially profane be-
ings. This conception may well not be literally true o f any religion;
2 4 i t cer-
tainly does not apply to totemism. Each member o f the clan is invested w i t h 
a sacredness that is not significandy less than the sacredness we just recog-
nized i n the animal. T h e reason for this personal sacredness is that the man 
believes he is b o t h a man i n the usual sense o f the w o r d and an animal or 
plant o f the totemic species. 
* Chose sainte. 
^See Bk. Ill, chap. 2, §2. 
24There is perhaps no religion that regards man as an exclusively profane being. For the Christian, 
there is something sacred about the soul that each of us carries within, and that constitutes the very 
essence of our personality. As we will see, this idea of the soul is as old as religious thinking. But man's 
own place in the hierarchy of sacred things is rather high. 


134 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
I n fact, he bears its name. A t that stage, identity i n name is presumed to 
entail an identity i n nature. H a v i n g the same name is not thought o f merely 
as an outward sign o f having the same nature but as logically presupposing it. 
For the primitive, the name is not simply a w o r d , a mere combination o f 
sounds; it is part o f the being and, indeed, an essential part. W h e n a member 
o f the Kangaroo clan calls himself a kangaroo, he is i n a sense an animal o f 
that species. " A man," say Spencer and Gillen, "regards the being that is his 
totem as the same thing as himself. A native w i t h w h o m w e were discussing 
the matter responded by showing us a photograph we had just taken o f h i m : 
' L o o k w h o is exacdy the same thing as I . Well! I t is the same w i t h the kan-
garoo.' T h e kangaroo was his t o t e m . "
2 5 Thus, each individual has a dual na-
ture: T w o beings coexist i n h i m , a man and an animal. 
To give a semblance o f intelligibility to this duality, w h i c h to us is so 
strange, the primitive has conceived myths that o f course explain n o t h i n g 
and only displace the difficulty, but that, i n displacing it, seem at least to d i -
minish the logical shock. W i t h variations o f detail, they are all constructed 
o n the same plan. T h e i r object is to establish genealogical relations between 
the man and the totemic animal that make the man the animal's k i n . B y that 
shared (and variously imagined) origin, people believe they are accounting 
for their shared nature. T h e Narrinyeri, for example, have conceived the idea 
that certain o f the first m e n had the power to transform themselves into an-
imals.
2 6 Other Australian societies place strange animals at the beginning o f 
humanity, animals from w h i c h m e n descended i n some way or other,
2 7 or 
they place m i x e d beings intermediate between the t w o realms there,
2 8 or else 
formless, barely representable creatures w i t h o u t defined organs or append-
ages, and whose various body parts are barely d r a w n .
2 9 M y t h i c a l powers, 
sometimes conceived i n the f o r m o f animals, intervened at that point, trans-
25Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 202. 
26Taplin, "The Narrinyeri," pp. 59—61. 
27Among certain Warramunga clans, for example (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 162). 
28Among the Urabunna (ibid., p. 147). Even when we are told that those 
first 
beings were men, in re-
ality they are only semihumans and participate in an animal nature at the same time. This is the case of 
certain Unmatjera (ibid., pp. 153—154). Here are ways of thinking whose blurred distinctions [confusions] 
unsettle us, but that must be accepted as they are. [Here and elsewhere in this text, the noun confusion and 
the corresponding verb, confondre, convey blending. They express a form of conceptual practice, not a state 
of mental disorder. See below, p. 241. Trans.] If we tried to introduce a tidiness that is alien to them, we 
would distort them (cf. Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 119). 
29Among certain Arunta (Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, pp. 388ff.); and among certain Unmatjera 
(Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 153). 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
135 
forming 
into m e n these ambiguous and unnameable beings that represent, as 
Spencer and Gillen say, "a transitional phase between man and animal."
3 0 
These transformations are presented to us as the outcome o f violent and 
quasi-surgical operations. I t is w i t h blows o f an axe or, w h e n the operator is 
a bird, w i t h pecks o f the beak that the human is thought to have been 
sculpted i n that amorphous mass, the arms and legs separated from one an-
other, the m o u t h and nostrils opened.
3 1 Similar legends crop up i n America, 
but because o f the more developed mentality o f those peoples, the represen-
tations they use are not confused and confusing i n the same way. Here, it is a 
legendary personage w h o , acting o n his o w n , metamorphosed the clan's 
eponymous animal into m a n .
3 2 There, the m y t h tries to explain how, by a se-
ries o f more or less natural events and a sort o f spontaneous evolution, the 
animal transformed itself little by little, finally taking o n human f o r m .
3 3 
, True, there are societies (Haida, T l i n g i t , Tshimshian) i n w h i c h the idea 
that man was b o r n o f an animal or plant is no longer accepted. Yet, the idea 
o f an affinity between the animals o f the totemic species and the members o f 
the clan has survived, and it is explained i n myths that differ from the pre-
ceding but are basically reminiscent o f them. Here, then, is one o f their fun-
damental themes. T h e eponymous ancestor is represented as a human being 
but one w h o , following various ups and downs, was induced to live for a 
more or less l o n g time among legendary animals o f the same species that gave 
30Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 389. Cf. Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, pp. 2-7. 
•"Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, p. 389. Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, pp. 2ff. This mythical theme is un-
doubtedly an echo of the initiation rites. The purpose of the initiation is to make of the young man a 
complete man, and it also implies surgical operations (circumcision, subincision, extraction of teeth, etc.). 
It must have been natural for them to conceive the processes used to make the 
first 
men according to the 
same model. 
32This is true for the nine clans of the Moqui ([Henry Rowe] Schoolcraft, [Historical and Statistical In-
formation Respecting the History, Condition, and Prospects of the] Indian Tribes [of the United States, vol. IV, 
Philadelphia, Lippincott, Grambo, 1851—1857], p. 86), the Crane clan of the Ojibway ([Lewis Henry] 
Morgan, Ancient Society [London, Macmillan, 1877], p. 180), and the clans of the Nootka ([Franz] Boas, 
"Second General Report on the Indians of British Columbia," in, BAAS, Vlth Rep. on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada [London, Offices of the Association, 1891], p. 43), etc. 
33Thus did the Turtle clan of the Iroquois take form. A group of tortoises had to leave the lake where 
they lived and 
find 
another habitat. The heat made it difficult for one of them, who was larger than the 
others, to endure the exercise. It struggled so violendy that it came out of its shell. Once begun, the 
process of transformation continued by itself, and the turtle became a man who was the ancestor of 
the clan (Erminnie A. Smith, "The Myths of the Iroquois," in Second Annual Report [BAE, Washington, 
Government Printing Office, 1883], p. 77). The Crawfish [Ecrevisse] clan of the Choctaw is said to have 
been formed in a similar way. Some men surprised a certain number of crawfish that lived in their vicin-
ity, took the crawfish home with them, taught them to speak and walk, and finally adopted them into 
their society ([George] Catlin, [Letters and Notes on the Manners, Customs and Condition of the] North Amer-
ican Indians, vol. II [London, Tosswil and Myers, 1841], p. 128. 


136 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
the clan its name. As a result o f these intimate and prolonged dealings, he be-
came so like his new companions that w h e n he returned to the c o m m u n i t y 
o f men, they no longer recognized h i m . H e was therefore given the name o f 
the animal he resembled. F r o m his sojourn i n the mythical land, he brought 
back the totemic emblem, together w i t h the powers and virtues thought to 
be attached to i t .
3 4 I n this case as i n the preceding, then, the man is thought 
to participate i n the nature o f the animal, even though that participation is 
imagined somewhat differendy
3 5 
Thus he too has something sacred about h i m . Diffused throughout the 
body, this quality is especially evident at certain sites. Some organs and tissues 
are especially identified w i t h it: most o f all, the b l o o d and the hair. 
To begin w i t h , human b l o o d is such a h o l y * thing that, among the tribes 
o f central Australia, i t is very often used to consecrate the most respected i n -
struments o f the cult. I n some cases, for example, the nurtunja is religiously 
anointed from top to b o t t o m w i t h human b l o o d .
3 6 A m o n g the Arunta, the 
m e n o f the E m u draw the sacred emblem o n ground that is thoroughly 
soaked w i t h b l o o d .
3 7 We w i l l see further on h o w streams o f blood are poured 
* Chose sainte. 
34Here, for example, is a legend of 
the Tsimshian. During a hunt, an Indian met a black bear who took 
him home and taught him to catch salmon and build canoes. The man stayed with the bear for two years, 
after which he returned to his native village. But because he was just like a bear, the people were afraid of 
him. He could not talk and could eat only raw foods. Then he was rubbed with magical herbs, after 
which he gradually regained his original form. Later, when he was in need, he called his friends the bears, 
who came to his aid. He built a house and painted a bear on its facade. His sister made a blanket for the 
dance, on which a bear was drawn. This is why the descendants of that sister had the bear as their emblem 
([Franz] Boas, ["The Social Organization and Secret Societies of the] Kwakiutl [Indians," in RNM for 
1895, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1897], p. 323. Cf. Boas, "First General Report on the 
Indians of British Columbia," in BAAS [Fifth] Report [of the Committee] on the North Western Tribes of [the 
Dominion of] Canada [London, Offices of the Association, 1890], pp. 23, 29ff.; [Charles] Hill Tout, "Re-
port on the Ethnology of the Stadumh of British Columbia," in JAI, vol. XXXV (1905), p. 150. 
From this, we see the drawback of making mystic kinship between man and animal the distinguishing 
feature of totemism, as M. Van Germep proposes ([A. Van Gennep], "Totémisme et méthode compara-
tive," RHR, vol. LVIII [juillet 1908], p. 55). Since this kinship is a mythical expression of facts that are 
deeply rooted for other reasons, the essential traits of totemism do not disappear in its absence. Doubtless, 
there are always close ties between the people of the clan and the totemic animal, but they are not neces-
sarily ties of blood, although they most commonly are conceived as such. 
3 5In some Tlingit myths, moreover, the relationship of descent between the man and the animal is af-
firmed more specifically. The clan is said to be the offspring of a mixed marriage, if such terms can be 
used—that is, one in which either the man or the woman was an animal of the species whose name the 
clan bears ([John Reed] Swanton, "Social Condition, Beliefs, [and Linguistic Relationship] of the Tlin-
git Indians," Twenty-Sixth Annual Report, BAE, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1908], pp. 
415^118. 
•^Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 284. 
37Ibid., p. 179. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
137 
on the rocks that represent the totemic plants or animals.
3 8 There is no reli-
gious ceremony i n w h i c h b l o o d does not have some role to play.
3 9 Some-
times i n the course o f initiation, adults open their veins and sprinkle the 
novice w i t h their blood, this b l o o d being such a sacred* thing that w o m e n 
are forbidden to be present w h i l e it is flowing. Like the sight o f a churinga,
4 0 
the sight o f this b l o o d is forbidden to them. T h e b l o o d that the y o u n g neo-
phyte loses d u r i n g the violent operations he has to undergo has altogether 
exceptional properties: I t is used i n various communions.
4 1 A m o n g the 
Arunta, the b l o o d that flows d u r i n g subincision is piously collected and 
buried i n a place o n w h i c h a piece o f w o o d is set to indicate to passersby the 
sacredness o f the spot; no w o m a n must approach i t .
4 2 I n the second place, the 
religious nature o f b l o o d also explains w h y red ochre has a religious role and 
is frequently used i n ceremonies. T h e churingas are rubbed w i t h i t , and it is 
used i n ritual decorations.
4 3 This is because ochre is regarded as a substance 
akin to blood, by virtue o f its color. Indeed, several deposits o f ochre that are 
found at different sites o n the territory o f the Arunta are thought to be co-
agulated b l o o d that certain heroines o f the mythical epoch allowed to 
flow 
onto the g r o u n d .
4 4 
Hair has similar properties. T h e natives o f central Australia wear sashes 
made o f human hair. T h e religious function o f those narrow bands, as already 
noted, is to wrap certain cult objects.
4 5 Has a man lent one o f his churingas 
to another? As a show o f gratitude, the borrower makes a present o f hair to 
the lender; the t w o sorts o f things are considered to be o f the same order and 
o f equivalent value.
4 6 Accordingly, the operation o f hair cutting is a ritual act 
* Chose sacrée. 
38See Bk. Ill, chap. 2. Cf. Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 184, 201. 
39Ibid., pp. 204, 262, 284. 
""Among the Dieri and the Parnkalla. See Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 658, 661, 668, 669-671. 
""Among the Warramunga, the blood of circumcision is drunk by the mother (Spencer and Gillen, 
Northern Tribes, p. 352). Among the Binbinga, the blood that soils the knife used in the subincision must 
be licked by the initiate (p. 368). In general, the blood that comes from the genitals is deemed to be ex-
ceptionally sacred (Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 464; Northern Tribes, p. 598). 
42Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 268. 
43Ibid„ pp. 144, 568. 
44Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 442, 464. And this myth is common in Australia. 
45Ibid., p. 627. 
46Ibid., p. 466. 


138 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
that is accompanied by special ceremonies. T h e individual having his hair 
cut must crouch o n the ground w i t h his face turned i n the direction o f the 
place where mythical ancestors from his mother's side are thought to have 
camped.
4 7 
For the same reason, as soon as a man dies, his hair is cut and put i n a se-
cluded place, for neither w o m e n nor uninitiated m e n should see it; and i t is 
there, far from profane eyes, that the sashes are made.
4 8 
O n e could point out other organic tissues that, to varying degrees, dis-
play similar properties—the sideburns, the foreskin, the fat o f the liver, and 
others.
4 9 B u t there is no point i n piling up examples. T h e foregoing are suf-
ficient to prove the existence i n man o f something that keeps the profane at 
a distance and has religious efficacy. I n other words, the human body c o n -
ceals i n its depths a sacred principle that erupts onto the surface i n particular 
circumstances. This principle is not different i n k i n d from the one that gives 
the totem its religious character. W e have just seen, i n fact, that the various 
substances i n w h i c h i t is incarnated to the highest degree enter into the r i t -
ual composition o f the instruments o f the cult (nurtunjas, totemic designs), 
or are used i n anointings for the purpose o f increasing the virtues o f either 
the churingas or the sacred rocks. These are things o f the same kind. 
T h e religious dignity that, i n this sense, is inherent i n each member o f 
the clan is not equal i n all. M e n possess i t to a higher degree than w o m e n , 
w h o are like profane beings i n comparison to m e n .
5 0 Thus, whenever there 
is an assembly o f either the totemic group or the tribe, the m e n f o r m a camp 
distinct from the women's camp and closed to them: T h e m e n are set apart.
5 1 
47Ibid. It is believed that if all these formalities are not stricdy observed, grave calamities for the indi-
vidual will result. 
""Ibid., p. 538; Northern Tribes, p. 604. 
49Once detached by circumcision, the foreskin is sometimes hidden from sight, like the blood, and it 
has special virtues—for example, ensuring the fertility of certain plant and animal species (Northern Tribes, 
pp. 353—354). The sideburns are assimilated to the hair and treated like it (pp. 544, 604). Moreover, they 
play a role in the myths (p. 158). The sacred character of fat arises from the use made of it in certain fu-
neral rites. 
50This is not to say that the woman is absolutely profane. In the myths, at least among the Arunta, she 
plays a far more important religious role than is hers in reality (Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes [pp. 
195—196]). Even now, she takes part in certain initiation rites. Finally, her blood has religious virtues (see 
NativeTribes, p. 464; cf. [Emile Durkheim], "La Prohibition de l'inceste et ses origines," AS, vol. I [1898], 
pp. 51ff.). 
The exogamic prohibitions derive from this complex situation of the woman. I will not speak of 
those 
here, because they are more direcdy relevant to the subject of family organization and marriage. 
51Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 460. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
139 
But men differ too i n the way the religious quality stands out. Since young, 
uninitiated m e n are totally w i t h o u t it, they are not admitted to the cere-
monies. I t reaches m a x i m u m intensity among o l d men. O l d m e n are so sa-
cred that they are permitted certain things that are forbidden to ordinary 
men: T h e y can eat the totemic animal more freely, and, as we have seen, 
there are even tribes i n w h i c h they are exempt from all dietary restrictions. 
Therefore we must be careful not to see totemism as a k i n d o f zoolatry. 
Since man belongs to the sacred w o r l d , his attitude toward the animals or 
plants whose name he bears is by no means the attitude a believer has toward 
his god. Rather, their relations are those o f t w o beings w h o are basically at 
the same level and o f equal value. T h e most one can say, at least i n some 
cases, is that the animal seems to occupy a slighdy higher rank among sacred 
things. Thus, the totem is sometimes called the father or grandfather o f the 
m e n o f the clan, w h i c h seems to indicate that they feel they are i n a state o f 
moral dependency u p o n i t .
5 2 Yet as often happens—and perhaps most often 
o f all—the phrases used denote a feeling o f equality instead. T h e totemic an-
imal is called the friend or the elder brother o f its human k i n .
5 3 To sum up, 
the ties between t h e m and h i m far more closely resemble those that b i n d 
members o f the same family: Animals and m e n are made o f the same flesh, 
as the Buandik say.
5 4 B y reason o f that kinship, man sees the animals o f the 
totemic species as k i n d l y associates, whose help he believes he can count on. 
H e calls t h e m to his a i d ,
5 5 and they come to guide his hand i n the hunt and 
to avert dangers that he may encounter.
5 6 I n exchange, he treats t h e m c o n -
siderately and does not brutalize t h e m ,
5 7 but the care w i t h w h i c h he treats 
them i n no way resembles a cult. 
52Among the Wakelbura, according to Howitt, NatiueTrihes, pp. [147—148]; among the Bechuana, ac-
cording to Casalis, The Basutos, p. [211]. 
"Among the Buandik and the Kurnai, Howitt, ibid., pp. 147-148; among the Arunta, Strehlow, 
Aranda, vol. II, p. 58. 
54Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. [147-148]. 
5 5On the Tully River, according to [Walter Edmund] Roth (Superstition, Magic and Medicine [Brisbane, 
G. A. Vaughn, Government Printer, 1903], North Queensland Ethnography [Bulletin] no. 5, §74), when a 
native goes to bed or rises in the morning, he pronounces the name of the animal after whom he himself 
is named in a rather soft voice. The aim of this practice is to make the man skillful or lucky in the hunt 
or to avoid the dangers associated with that animal. For example, a man who has a species of snake as his 
totem is protected 
from 
bites if this invocation has been consistendy done. 
56Taplin, "The Narrinyeri," p. 64; Howitt, NatiueTrihes, p. 147; Roth, "Superstition, Magic and Med-
icine," no. 5, §74. 
"Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 58. 


140 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
Sometimes man even appears to have a sort o f mystical property right 
over his totem. T h e prohibition against killing and eating i t o f necessity ap-
plies only to the members o f the clan; it cannot extend to outsiders w i t h o u t 
making life impossible as a practical matter. I n a tribe such as the Arunta, 
where there are a great many different totems, i f i t was forbidden to eat not 
only the animal or plant whose name one bears, but also all the animals and 
all the plants that serve other clans as totems, the food resources w o u l d be re-
duced to none. Still, there are tribes i n w h i c h unrestricted eating o f the 
totemic animal or plant is not allowed, even by outsiders. A m o n g the Wakel-
bura, this eating should not occur i n the presence o f people belonging to the 
t o t e m .
5 8 Elsewhere, their permission is required. For example, among the 
Kaitish and the Unmatjera, w h e n a man o f the E m u clan, finding himself i n 
a locality occupied by a grass-seed clan, gathers some o f these seeds, he must 
go find the chief before eating any, and say to h i m : " I have gathered these 
seeds i n your land." To w h i c h the chief replies: " I t is good; you may eat 
them." B u t i f the E m u man ate before asking permission, i t is believed that 
he w o u l d fall i l l and possibly even die.
5 9 I n some cases, the chief o f the group 
must take a small part o f the food and eat i t himself: I t is a k i n d o f tax that 
must be p a i d .
6 0 For the same reason, the churinga confers u p o n the hunter a 
certain power over the corresponding animal. B y rubbing his body w i t h a 
euro churinga, for example, he has a better chance o f bagging euros.
6 1 This 
proves that participating i n the nature o f a totemic being confers a sort o f 
eminent domain over it. Finally, there is a tribe i n N o r t h Queensland, the 
Karingbool, i n w h i c h the people o f the t o t e m have the exclusive right to k i l l 
the totemic animal or, i f the totem is a tree, to strip its bark. Their coopera-
t i o n is indispensable to any outsider w h o wants to use the flesh o f that ani-
mal or the w o o d o f that tree for personal ends.
6 2 Thus, they play the role o f 
owners, though, as is obvious, the property is o f a very particular sort, w h i c h 
we have difficulty imagining. 
^Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 148. 
"[Spencer and Gillen], Northern Tribes, pp. 159-160. 
MIbid. 
61Ibid., p. 255, and Native Tribes, pp. 202-203. 
6 2A. L. P. Cameron, "On Two Queensland Tribes," in Science of Man, Australasian Anthropological 
Jour-
nal, vol. VII, 1904, p. 28, col. 1. 


C H A P T E R T H R E E 
THE PRINCIPAL TOTEMIC 
BELIEFS (CONTINUED) 
The Cosmological System of Totemism 
and the Notion of Kind* 
e are beginning to see that totemism is a far more complex religion 
W 
than i t appeared at first glance to be. W e have already distinguished 
three categories o f things that i t recognizes as sacred i n varying degrees: the 
totemic emblem, the plant or animal whose appearance that emblem i m i -
tates, and the members o f the clan. B u t this list is not yet complete. A reli-
gion is not merely a collection o f disconnected beliefs about very special 
objects such as those just mentioned. To a greater or lesser degree, all k n o w n 
religions have been systems o f ideas that tend to embrace the universality o f 
things and to give us a representation o f the w o r l d as a whole. I f totemism is 
to be open to consideration as a religion comparable to others, i t too must 
offer a conception o f the universe. I t meets this criterion. 
T h e reason this aspect o f totemism has been widely neglected is that the clan 
has been too narrowly conceived. I n general, the clan has been viewed as 
merely a group o f human beings, merely a subdivision o f the tribe. As such, 
it seems, the clan could only be made up o f men. B u t w h e n we reason this 
way, we substitute our European ideas for those the primitive has about the 
w o r l d and society. For the Australian, things themselves—all o f the things 
that make up the universe—are part o f the tribe. Since they are constituents 
o f i t and, i n a sense, full-fledged members, they have a definite place i n the 
scheme o f society, just as m e n do. " T h e savage o f South Australia," M . Fison 
* Genre is here rendered as "kind" or "genus," according to context, but usually not as "class," so as to 
avoid confusion with other uses of that term, in biology and sociology. 
I 
141 


142 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
says, "considers the universe as a large tribe to one o f whose divisions he be-
longs; and all things that are classified i n the same group as he, both animate 
and inanimate, are parts o f the body o f w h i c h he himself is a part."
1 B y virtue 
o f this principle, w h e n the tribe is divided into t w o phratries, all k n o w n be-
ings are divided between them. " A l l o f nature," says Palmer o f the tribes o f 
the Bellinger River, "is divided according to the names o f phratries. . . . T h e 
sun, the m o o n and the stars. . . belong to this or that phratry just as the 
Blacks themselves do."
2 T h e Port M a c K a y tribe i n Queensland is made up o f 
two phratries that carry the names Yungaroo and Wootaroo, and it is the 
same i n the neighboring tribes. According to Bridgmann, " A l l animate and 
inanimate things are divided by these tribes into t w o classes called Yungaroo 
and Wootaroo."
3 B u t the classification does not stop there. T h e men o f each 
phratry are divided among a certain number o f clans; similarly, the things as-
signed to each phratry are divided i n t u r n among the clans that comprise it. 
Such and such tree, for example, w i l l be ascribed to the Kangaroo clan and 
to it alone, and thus, like the human members o f that clan, w i l l have the 
Kangaroo totem; such and such other w i l l belong to the Snake clan; the 
clouds w i l l be classified i n a particular totem, the sun i n another, and so on. 
Thus, the k n o w n beings w i l l be found to have their places o n a k i n d o f table, 
a systematic classification, that includes the w h o l e o f nature. 
I have reproduced a certain number o f these classification systems else-
where;
4 here I w i l l repeat only some o f those examples. O n e o f the best 
k n o w n is the system that has been studied i n the M o u n t Gambier tribe. This 
tribe has t w o phratries, one called K u m i t e and the other K r o k i , each divided 
into five clans. N o w , "Everything i n nature belongs to one or the other o f 
those ten clans."
5 Fison and H o w i t t say that all those things are "included" i n 
one. I n fact, they are classified under ten totems, like species o f the respec-
'[Lorimer Fison and Alfred William Howitt], Kamilaroi and Kurnai: [Group Marriage and Relationship, 
and Marriage by Elopement; Drawn Chiefly from the Usage of the Australian Aborigines; also The Kurnai Tribe; 
Their Customs in Peace and War, Melbourne, G. Robertson, 1880], p. 170. 
2[Edward Palmer], "Notes on Some Australian Tribes" [JAI], vol. XIII [1884], p. 300. 
3[Edward Micklethwaite] Curr, The Australian Race: [Its Origin, Languages, Customs, Place of Landing in 
Australia and the Routes by Which It Spread Itself over Tiiat Continent, vol. Ill, Melbourne, J. Ferres, 
1886-1887], p. 45; [Robert] Brough Smyth, The Aborigines of 
Victoria, vol. I [Melbourne, J. Ferres, 1878], 
p. 91 [The quoted material is not verbatim. The text reads this way: "Blacks seem to have an idea that 
these classes are universal laws of nature, so they divide everything among them." Trans.]; Fison and 
Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kumai, p. 168. 
4[Emile] Durkheim and [Marcel] Mauss, "De Quelques formes primitives de classification. [Contri-
bution a l'etude des representations collectives]" in AS, vol. VI [1903], pp. Iff. 
5Curr, The Australian Race, vol. Ill, p. 461. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
143 
PHRATRIES 
CLANS 
T H I N G S CLASSIFIED IN E A C H C L A N 
^Fish-hawk 
Smoke, honeysuckle, certain trees, etc. 
/ 
,-Pelican 
Blackwood trees, dogs, fire, frost, etc. 
Kumitei' 
\ \ 
"Crow 
Rain, thunder, lightning, clouds, hail, winter, 
\ \ 
etc. 
\
 
sBlack cockatoo 
Stars, moon, etc. 
VA nonvenomous snake 
Fish, seal, conger eel, stringy-bark tree, etc. 
^Tea tree 
Duck, crawfish, owl, etc. 
^ ' _ _ - - An edible root 
-Bustard, quail, a sort of kangaroo, etc. 
K r o k i ^ 
^ crestless white cockatoo- -Kangaroo, summer, sun, wind, autumn, etc. 
" - There are no details 
about the fourth and fifth 
Kroki clans. 
tive genera. This is shown by the above chart, constructed from data c o l -
lected by Curr, and by Fison and H o w i t t .
6 
T h e list o f things attached to each clan is, quite incomplete; C u r r h i m -
self warns us that he has confined himself to enumerating only some o f them. 
Today, however, thanks to the w o r k o f Mathews and H o w i t t ,
7 w e have more 
extensive information o n the classification adopted by the Wotjobaluk tribe, 
and that information enables us to understand better h o w a system o f this 
k i n d can embrace the w h o l e universe k n o w n to the natives. T h e Wotjobaluk 
themselves are divided into t w o phratries, called Gurogity and Gumaty 
(Krokitch and Gamutch, according to H o w i t t ) .
8 To avoid an overly long list, 
I w i l l enumerate (after Mathews) only the things classified i n each clan o f the 
Gurogity phratry. 
6Curr and Fison got their information from the same person, D. S. Stewart. 
'[Robert Hamilton] Mathews, ["Ethnological Notes on the] Aboriginal Tribes of New South Wales 
and Victoria," in RSNSW vol. XXXVIII (1904) [pp. 287-288]. [Alfred William] Howitt, Hie Native 
Tribes [of South-East Australia, New York, Macmillan, 1904], p. 121. 
8The feminine form of nouns given by Mathews is Gurogigurk and Gamatykurk. These are the forms 
that Howitt has rendered with a slighdy different spelling. Also, these names are equivalent to those in use 
in the Mount Gambier tribe (Kumite and Kroki). 


144 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
Classified i n the Yam clan are the plains turkey, the native cat, the 
mopoke, the dyim-dyim o w l , the mallee chicken, the rosella parrot, and the pee-
wee. I n the Mussel
9 clan: the gray emu, the porcupine, the curlew, the w h i t e 
cockatoo, the w o o d duck, the mallee lizard, the stinking turde, the 
flying 
squirrel, the ring-tailed opossum, the bronze-wing pigeon, and the wijuggia. 
I n the Sun clan: the bandicoot, the m o o n , the rat kangaroo, the black and 
w h i t e magpies, the ngurt hawk, the g u m tree grub, the u mimoisa (wattle tree) 
grub, and the planet Venus. I n the W a r m W i n d clan:
1 0 the gray-headed ea-
glehawk, the carpet snake, the smoker parrot, the shell parakeet, the murrakan 
hawk, the dikkomur snake, the ring-neck parrot, the mirudai snake, the 
shingle-back lizard. 
I f we imagine that there are many other clans ( H o w i t t names a dozen o f 
them, w h i l e Mathews names fourteen and warns that his list is very i n c o m -
plete),
1 1 we w i l l see h o w all the things that interest the native as a matter o f 
course find a place i n these classifications. 
Similar arrangements have been observed i n the most dissimilar parts o f 
the Australian continent: i n southern Australia, i n the state o f Victoria, and 
i n N e w South Wales (among the Euahlayi);
1 2 very obvious traces o f t h e m are 
found among the tribes o f the center.
1 3 I n Queensland, where the clans seem 
to have disappeared and where the marriage classes are the only subdivisions 
o f the phratry, things are distributed between the classes. Hence, the Wakel-
bura are divided into t w o phratries, Mallera and W u t a r u . T h e classes o f the 
first are called Kurgilla and Banbe; those o f the second, W u n g o and O b u . To 
the Banbe belong the opossum, the kangaroo, the dog, the honey o f the 
small bee, etc. To the W u n g o are ascribed the emu, the bandicoot, the black 
duck, the black snake, the b r o w n snake; to the O b u , the carpet snake, the 
9The indigenous name of this clan is Dyalup, which Mathews does not translate. This word seems to 
be identical to "Jallup," by which Howitt designates a subclan of that same tribe and which he translates 
a
s "mussel." For this reason, I think I can chance this translation. 
10This is Howitt s translation; Mathews translates this word (Wartwuri) as "heat of the midday sun." 
"Mathews's table and Howitt s disagree on more than one important point. It even appears that the 
clans ascribed by Howitt to the Kroki phratry are counted by Mathews in the Gamutch phratry, and vice 
versa. This is evidence of the very great difficulties that such studies present. However these discrepancies 
have no import for the question being treated. 
12Mrs. Langloh Parker [Catherine Sommerville Field Parker], 77ie Euahlayi Tribe [London, A. Consta-
ble, 1905], pp. 12ff. 
"These facts are to be found below. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
145 
honey o f stinging bees, etc.; to the Kurgilla, the porcupine, the plains turkey, 
water, rain, fire, thunder, etc.
1 4 
T h e same organization is found among the Indians o f N o r t h America. 
The Z u n i have a system o f classification whose basic outline is comparable i n 
every respect to those just described. That o f the Omaha rests o n the same 
principles as that o f the Wotiobaluk.
1 5 Echoes o f the same ideas persist even i n 
the more advanced societies. A m o n g the Haida, all the gods and mythical be-
ings that govern the various phenomena o f nature are also classified i n one o f 
the tribe's t w o phratries, just as m e n are. Some are Eagles and the others, 
Crows.
1 6 T h e gods that govern things are but another aspect o f the things they 
govern.
1 7 This mythological classification, then, is but a different f o r m o f 
the preceding ones. Hence, we can be confident that this way o f conceiving 
the w o r l d is quite independent o f ethnic or geographical particularity. A t the 
same time, however, it emerges quite clearly that this way o f conceiving the 
w o r l d is tightly b o u n d up w i t h the whole system o f totemic beliefs. 
II 
I n the w o r k to w h i c h I have already alluded several times, I showed h o w 
these facts illuminate the manner i n w h i c h the idea o f genus or class took 
f o r m among humans. These classifications are indeed the first that we meet 
in history. W e just saw that they are modeled o n social organization, or rather 
that they have taken the actual framework o f society as their o w n . I t was the 
phratries that served as genera and the clans as species. I t is because m e n 
formed groups that they were able to group things: A l l they did was make 
r o o m for things i n the groups they themselves already formed. A n d i f these 
various classes o f things were not simply juxtaposed to one another, but 
arranged instead according to a unified plan, that is because the same social 
groups to w h i c h they are assimilated are themselves unified and, through that 
14Curr [Australian Race], vol. Ill, p. 27. Howitt, NatiueTribes, p. 112.1 confine myself to citing the most 
characteristic facts. The paper already mentioned, "Classification primitive," can be referred to for details. 
15Durkheim and Mauss, "Classification primitive," pp. 34ff. 
16[John Reed] Swanton, [Contributions to the Ethnology of] the Haida [Leiden, E. J. Brill, 1905], pp. 
1
3
—
1
4
, 17, 22. [Actually, this English text says "raven." Since all ravens are crows but not all crows are 
ravens, I have rendered Durkheim's corbeau as "crow" throughout. Trans.] 
17This is particularly evident among the Haida. According to Swanton, every animal has two aspects. 
From one point of view, it is an ordinary creature that can be hunted and eaten, but at the same time, it 
is a supernatural being with the outward form of an animal, and to which man is subject. The mythical 
beings that correspond to various cosmic phenomena have the same ambiguity (ibid., pp. 14, 16, 25). 


146 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
union, f o r m an organic whole: the tribe. T h e unity o f these first logical sys-
tems merely reproduces that o f society. Thus we have our first opportunity 
to test the proposition put forward at the beginning o f this w o r k and to as-
sure ourselves that the fundamental notions o f the intellect, the basic cate-
gories o f thought, can be the product o f social factors. T h e preceding shows 
that this is indeed the case for the n o t i o n o f category itself. 
I do not mean to deny that the individual consciousness, even o n its o w n , 
has the capacity to perceive resemblances between the particular things i t 
conceives of. To the contrary, i t is clear that even the most primitive and sim-
ple classifications already presuppose that faculty. T h e Australian does not 
place things at random i n the same or different clans. I n h i m as i n us, similar 
images attract and opposite ones repel one another, and he classifies the cor-
responding things i n one or the other according to his sense o f these affinities. 
Moreover, we can see i n some cases the reasoning that inspires them. It 
is quite probable that the initial, and fundamental, frameworks for these 
classification systems were constituted by the t w o phratries and that c o n -
sequently they began as dichotomous. W h e n a classification has only t w o 
genera, they are almost necessarily conceived as antithetical. They are used 
first as a means o f clearly separating those things between w h i c h the contrast 
is most pronounced. Some are placed to the right, the others to the left. T h e 
Australian classifications are o f this kind. I f the w h i t e cockatoo is classified i n 
one phratry, the black cockatoo is i n the other; i f the sun is to one side, the 
m o o n and stars are o n the opposite side.
1 8 Very often, the beings that serve 
the t w o phratries as totems have opposite colors.
1 9 Some o f these oppositions 
are found even outside Australia. W h e r e one o f the phratries is i n charge o f 
peace, the other is i n charge o f w a r ;
2 0 i f one has water as its totem, the other 
has land.
2 1 This is probably w h y the t w o phratries have often been consid-
ered naturally antagonistic. It is accepted that a rivalry, even an innate hostil-
18See p. 142 above. This is the case among the Gournditch-mara (Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 124), among 
the tribes observed by Cameron near Mordake, and among the Wotjobaluk (Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 
125, 250). 
,9J[ohn] Mathew, Two Representative Tribes [of Queensland], London, T. F. Unwin, 1910, p. 139; 
[Northcote Whitridge] Thomas, Kinship [Organizations] and [Group] Marriage in [Australia], Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press, 1906, pp. 5
3
—
5
4
. 
20For example, among the Osage, see [James Owens] Dorsey, "Siouan Sociology," in XVth Annual 
Rep. [BAE, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1897], pp. 2332". 
21At Mabuiag, an island in the Torres Strait ([Alfred C] Haddon, Head Hunters [Black, White, and 
Brown, London, Methuen, 1901], p. 132). The same opposition is also to be found between the two phra-
tries of the Arunta: One comprises people of water, the other people of land ([Carl] Strehlow, [Die 
Aranda- und Loritja-Stamme in Zentral-Australien], vol. I [Frankfurt, J. Baer, 1907], p. 6). 


Tlie Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
147 
ity, exists between t h e m .
2 2 Once the logical contrast has replicated itself as a 
kind o f social conflict,
2 3 the opposition o f things is extended to persons. 
Inside each phratry, o n the other hand, the things that seem to have the 
greatest affinity w i t h the thing serving as the t o t e m have been classified w i t h 
it i n the same clan. For example, the m o o n has been placed w i t h the black 
cockatoo; the sun, by contrast, w i t h the w h i t e cockatoo, along w i t h the at-
mosphere and the w i n d . Here is another example: T h e totemic animal is 
grouped w i t h everything that serves as its f o o d ,
2 4 plus the animals w i t h 
w h i c h it is most closely associated.
2 5 O f course, w e cannot always understand 
the obscure psychology that has presided over many o f these joinings and 
separations. B u t the preceding examples are sufficient to show that a certain 
intuition o f the similarities and differences presented by things has played a 
role i n creating these classifications. 
B u t a feeling o f similarity is one thing; the n o t i o n o f k i n d is another. 
K i n d is the external framework whose content is formed, i n part, by objects 
perceived to be like one another. T h e content cannot itself provide the 
framework i n w h i c h i t is placed. T h e content is made up o f vague and fluctu-
ating images caused by the superimposition and partial fusion o f a definite 
number of individual images that are found to have elements i n c o m m o n . B y 
22Among the Iroquois, the two phratries hold tournaments of a sort ([Lewis Henry] Morgan, Ancient 
Society [London, Macmillan, 1877], p. 94). Among the Haida, Swanton says, the members of the two 
phratries of the Eagle and the Crow "are often regarded as avowed enemies. Husbands and wives (who 
must be of 
different phratries) do not hesitate to betray one another" (Swanton, The Haida, p. 62). In Aus-
tralia, this hostility is expressed in the myths. The two animals that serve a
s the totems of the two phra-
tries are often represented as being perpetually at war with one another (see J[ohn] Mathew, Eaglehawk 
and Crow: [A Study of 
Australian Aborigines, London, D. Nutt. 1899], pp. 14ff.). In games, each phratry is 
the natural competitor of the other (Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 770). 
23Thus, Mr. Thomas mistakenly criticized my theory on the origin of phratries a
s unable to explain 
their opposition (Kinship and Marriage in Australia, p. 69). Still, I do not think it necessary to relate that op-
position to the opposition between the profane and the sacred (see [Robert] Hertz, "La Prééminence de 
la main droite," in RP, vol. LXVIII (December 1909), p. 559). The things that belong to one phratry are 
not profane for the other; both are part of the same religious system (see p. 156 below). 
24For example, the Tea Tree clan includes the vegetation and consequendy herbivorous animals (see 
Fison and Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 169). Such, probably, is the explanation of a particularity that 
Boas notes in the totemic emblems of North America. "Among the Tlinkit," he says, "and in all the other 
tribes of the coast, the emblem of a group includes the animals that are food for the one whose name the 
group bears." ([Franz] Boas, ["First General Report on the Indians of British Columbia," in BA45], Fifth 
Report of the Committee [on the North-Westem Tribes of the Dominion of Canada, London, Offices of the As-
sociation, 1890], p. 25). 
25Thus, among the Arunta, the frogs are associated with the Gum Tree totem, because they are often 
found in the cavities of that tree; the water is connected with the water fowl; the kangaroo with a sort of 
parakeet that is commonly seen 
flying 
around it ([Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen, The 
NativeTribes [of Central Australia, London, Macmillan, 1899], pp. 146-147, 448). 


148 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
contrast, the framework is a definite f o r m having fixed contours, but can be 
applied to an indefinite number o f things, whether perceived or not and 
whether existing or possible. Indeed, the potential scope o f every genus is i n -
finitely 
greater than the circle o f objects whose resemblance we have become 
aware o f through direct experience. This is w h y a w h o l e school o f thinkers 
refuse to identify the idea o f k i n d w i t h that o f generic image, and not w i t h -
out reason. A generic image is only the residual representation that similar 
representations leave i n us w h e n they present themselves i n consciousness at 
the same time, and its boundaries are indeterminate; but a genus is a logical 
symbol by means o f w h i c h w e think clearly about these similarities and o t h -
ers like them. Besides, our best evidence o f the gulf between those notions is 
that the animal is capable o f f o r m i n g generic images, whereas it does not 
k n o w the art o f t h i n k i n g i n terms o f genera and species. 
T h e idea o f genus is a tool o f thought that obviously was constructed by 
men. B u t to construct it, we had to have at least a model, for h o w could that 
idea have been b o r n i f there had been nothing w i t h i n us or outside us that 
could have suggested it? To answer that it is given to us a p r i o r i is not to an-
swer; as has been said, that lazy solution is the death o f analysis. It is not clear 
where we w o u l d have found that indispensable model i f not i n the panorama 
o f collective life. A genus is i n fact an ideal, yet clearly defined, grouping o f 
things w i t h internal bonds among them that are analogous to the bonds o f 
kinship. T h e only groupings o f that k i n d w i t h w h i c h experience acquaints us 
are those that m e n f o r m by c o m i n g together. Material things can f o r m c o l -
lections, heaps, or mechanical assemblages w i t h o u t internal unity, but not 
groups i n the sense I have just given the w o r d . A heap o f sand or a pile o f 
stones is i n no way comparable to the sort o f well-defined and organized so-
ciety that is a genus. I n all probability, then, we w o u l d never have thought o f 
gathering the beings o f the universe into homogeneous groups, called genera, 
i f we had not had the example o f human societies before our eyes—if, 
indeed, we had not at first gone so far i n making things members o f the 
society o f men, that human and logical groupings were not at first distin-
guished.
2 6 
26One sign of that original distinction is the fact that, like the social divisions with which they were 
originally merged, genera sometimes have a territorial base assigned to them. Thus, among the 
Wotjobaluk in Australia, and among the Zufii in America, things are thought of as being distributed 
among the different regions of space, as are the clans. The regional division of things and that of clans co-
incide (see Durkheim and Mauss, "Classification primitive," pp. 34ff). Even up to and including relatively 
advanced peoples, for example in China, the classifications retain something of this spatial character (pp. 
55ff). 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
149 
F r o m another standpoint, a classification is also a system whose parts are 
arranged i n a hierarchical order. Some are dominant features, and others are 
subordinated to those. T h e species and their distinctive properties are sub-
sumed under genera having their o w n distinctive properties; and the differ-
ent species o f the same genus are conceived as being o n a par w i t h one 
another. Is the standpoint o f comprehensiveness the preferred one? I n that 
case, things are represented i n an inverse order, the most particular species 
and the richest i n reality being placed at the top, and at the b o t t o m the most 
general ones and the poorest i n detail. B u t conceiving o f them hierarchically 
is unavoidable either way. A n d we must guard against thinking that the w o r d 
has only metaphorical meaning here. T h e purpose o f a classification is to es-
tablish relations o f subordination and coordination, and man w o u l d not even 
have thought o f ordering his knowledge i n that way i f he had not already 
, k n o w n what a hierarchy is. Neither the panorama o f physical nature nor the 
mechanisms o f mental association could possibly give us the idea o f it. H i e r -
archy is exclusively a social thing. O n l y i n society do superiors, subordinates, 
and equals exist. Therefore, even i f the facts were not sufficiendy conclusive, 
the analysis o f those notions w o u l d be sufficient i n itself to reveal their 
origin. W e have taken t h e m from society and projected them into our rep-
resentation o f the w o r l d . Society furnished the canvas o n w h i c h logical 
thought has worked. 
Ill 
T h e relevance o f these primitive classifications to the origin o f religious 
thought is no less direct. T h e y i n fact i m p l y that all the things thereby classi-
fied i n the same clan or the same phratry are closely akin to one another and 
to that w h i c h serves as the t o t e m o f the clan or o f the phratry. W h e n the 
Australian o f the Port M a c K a y tribe says that the sun, snakes, etc. are o f the 
Yungaroo phratry, he does not simply mean to apply to all those disparate be-
ings a c o m m o n , but purely conventional, label; the w o r d has an objective 
meaning for h i m . H e believes that, really, "the alligators are Yungaroo, the 
m o o n Wootaroo and so o n for the constellations, the trees, the plants, and so 
f o r t h .
2 7 A n internal tie binds t h e m to the group i n w h i c h they are classified, 
and they are regular members o f it. T h e y are said to belong to that group,
2 8 
27[George] Bridgmann, in Brough Smyth, The Aborigines ofVictoria, vol. I, p. 91. 
28Fison and Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 168; Howitt, "Further Notes on the Australian Class Sys-
tems,"^/, vol. XVIII (1889), p. 60. 


150 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
just as do the human individuals w h o are part o f it, and so a relationship o f 
the same k i n d joins the human individuals. M a n sees the things o f his clan as 
relatives and associates; he calls t h e m friends and considers t h e m to be made 
o f the same flesh as he.
2 9 Hence, there are elective affinities and quite special 
relations o f compatibility between t h e m and h i m . Things and m e n attract 
one another, i n some sense understand one another, and are naturally at-
tuned. For example, w h e n a Wakelbura o f the Mallera phratry is buried, the 
scaffold o n w h i c h the body is exposed "must be made from the w o o d o f any 
tree belonging to the Mallera phratry."
3 0 T h e same applies to the branches 
that cover the corpse. I f the deceased is o f the Banbe class, a Banbe tree must 
be used. I n the same tribe, a magician can use i n his art only things that be-
long to his phratry.
3 1 Because the others are foreign to h i m , he cannot make 
t h e m obey. I n this way, a b o n d o f mystical sympathy joins each individual to 
other beings that are associated w i t h h i m , living or not. F r o m this arises the 
belief that he can infer what he w i l l do or is doing from what they do. 
A m o n g this same group, the Wakelbura, w h e n an individual dreams that he 
has killed an animal belonging to such and such a social division, he expects 
to meet a man o f that same division the next day.
3 2 Conversely, the things as-
signed to a clan or a phratry cannot be used against members o f that clan or 
phratry. A m o n g the Wotjobaluk, each phratry has its o w n trees. To hunt an 
animal o f the Gurogity, they can only use weapons made o f w o o d taken from 
trees o f the other phratry, and vice versa; otherwise the hunter is sure to miss 
his m a r k .
3 3 T h e native is convinced that the arrow w o u l d t u r n away from the 
target by itself and, i n a manner o f speaking, refuse to touch an animal w h o 
is a relative and a friend. 
B y their j o i n i n g , then, the people o f the clan and the things classified i n 
it f o r m a unified system, w i t h all its parts allied and vibrating sympathetically. 
This organization, w h i c h might at first have seemed to us purely logical, is 
moral at the same time. T h e same principle both animates it and makes it co-
here: That principle is the totem. Just as a man w h o belongs to the C r o w clan 
has something o f that animal i n h i m , so too the rain. Since rain is o f the same 
clan and belongs to the same totem, it is also and necessarily considered as 
"being the same thing as a crow." For the same reason, the m o o n is a black 
29Curr, Australian Race, vol. Ill, p. 461, concerning the Mount Gambier tribe. 
^[Alfred William] Howitt, "On Some Australian Beliefs," JAI, vol. XIII [1884], p. 191 n. 1. 
3 1 [Alfred William] Howitt, "Notes on Australian Message-Sticks and Messengers," JAI, vol. XVIII 
(1889), p. 326; "Further Notes," p. 61 n. 3. 
32Curr, Australian Race, vol. Ill, p. 28. 
33Mathews, "Aboriginal Tribes," p. 294. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
151 
cockatoo, the sun a w h i t e cockatoo, and every blackwood tree a pelican, and 
so forth. Thus, all the beings classified i n a single clan—men, animals, plants, 
inanimate objects—are only modalities o f the totemic being. This is the 
meaning o f the formula I have already reported. W h a t makes t h e m genuine 
k i n is this: A l l really are o f the same flesh, i n the sense that they all participate 
i n the nature o f the totemic animal. Moreover, the adjectives applied to them 
are the same as those applied to the t o t e m .
3 4 T h e Wotjobaluk call both the 
totem and the things subsumed under it by the same name, M i r .
3 5 A m o n g the 
Arunta, where, as we w i l l see, there are still traces o f classification, i t is true 
that different words designate the totem and the beings attached to it; h o w -
ever, the name given to these latter bespeaks the close relations that j o i n them 
to the totemic animal. T h e y are said to be its intimates, its associates, and its 
friends; they are thought to be inseparable from i t .
3 6 These things are felt to 
be closely akin. 
A t the same time, we k n o w that the totemic animal is a sacred being. 
Therefore, because they are i n a sense animals o f the same species, just as man 
is, so all the things that are classified i n the clan o f w h i c h i t is the emblem 
are o f the same character. T h e y themselves are also sacred, and the classifica-
tions that situate t h e m i n relation to the other things o f the universe at the 
same time assign t h e m a place w i t h i n the religious system as a whole. This 
is w h y the animals or plants among t h e m cannot be freely eaten by the 
human members o f the clan. Thus, i n the M o u n t Gambier tribe, the people 
whose totem is the nonvenomous snake must abstain not only from the flesh 
o f that snake; the meat o f seals, conger eels, etc. is also prohibited to t h e m .
3 7 
If, driven by necessity, they permit themselves to partake o f those things, 
they must at least diminish the sacrilege by expiatory rites, just as i f those 
things were the totem, proper.
3 8 A m o n g the Euahlayi,
3 9 where use but not 
abuse o f the totem is permitted, the same rule applies to the other things o f 
the clan. A m o n g the Arunta, the prohibition that protects the totemic ani-
mal extends to other animals associated w i t h i t ;
4 0 and i n any case, the latter 
3 4Cf. Curr, Australian Race, vol. Ill, p. 461, and Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 146. The terms Tooman and 
Wingo are applicable to both. 
35Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 123. 
-^Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 447ff.; cf. Strehlow, Aranda, vol. Ill, p. xiiff. 
37Fison and Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 169. 
38Curr, Australian Race, vol. Ill, p. 462. 
39Parker, Euahlayi, p. 20. 
40[Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen, Northern Tribes [of Central Australia, London, 
Macmillan, 1904], p. 151; Native Tribes, p. 447; Strehlow, Aranda, vol. Ill, p. xii. 


152 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
are owed special consideration.
4 1 T h e feelings inspired by b o t h are identi-
cal.
4 2 
B u t the fact that o n occasion they play the same role is even better evi-
dence that all the things we see attached to a t o t e m are not fundamentally 
different from i t and, i n consequence, have a religious nature. These are 
accessory and secondary totems, or subtotems, to use a w o r d that today is 
consecrated by usage.
4 3 W i t h i n a clan, smaller groups constandy f o r m under 
the influence o f friendships and personal affinities. W i t h their more limited 
membership, these smaller groups tend to live i n relative autonomy and to 
f o r m what amounts to a new subdivision or subclan w i t h i n the clan. To dis-
tinguish and individualize itself, this subclan has need o f its o w n t o t e m — 
voila, the subtotem.
4 4 T h e totems o f these secondary groups are chosen 
from 
among those various things that are classified under the principal totem, so 
they are virtual totems—literally, for the least circumstance is all i t takes to 
make t h e m become actual ones. T h e y have a latent totemic nature that be-
comes manifest as soon as circumstances permit or require it. I n this way, one 
individual sometimes has t w o totems: a principal t o t e m that is shared by the 
w h o l e clan and a subtotem that is specific to the subclan o f w h i c h he is part. 
These are somewhat analogous to the nomen and the cognomen o f the R o -
45 
mans.
 
3 
•"Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 449. 
42However, there are certain tribes of Queensland in which the things thus assigned to a social group 
are not forbidden to the members of that group. Such, for example, is the case of the Wakelbura. It should 
be borne in mind that the marriage classes serve in this society as frameworks for classification (see p. 144 
above). Not only can the people of a class eat the animals ascribed to that class, but they cannot eat others. 
All other food is forbidden to them (Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 113; Curr, Australian Race, vol. Ill, p. 27). 
Nonetheless, we must take care not to conclude that these animals are considered profane. To be 
noted is that the individual not only may but must eat them, since he is forbidden to eat anything else. 
This imperativeness of the prescription is a sure sign that we are in the presence of things that are religious 
in nature. But the religiousness that marks them has given birth to a positive obligation rather than to that 
negative obligation which is the prohibition. Perhaps, indeed, it is not impossible to see how that devia-
tion could have happened. We have seen above (see p. 140) that every individual is thought to have a sort 
of property right over his totem and, in consequence, over the things that come under it. If special cir-
cumstances influenced the development of that aspect of the totemic relation, then people would come 
naturally to believe that only the members of a clan could use their totem and all that is assimilated to it; 
that the others, by contrast, did not have the right to touch it. Under these circumstances, a clan could 
feed itself only with things ascribed to the clan. 
43Mrs. Parker uses the expression "multiplex totems." 
44As examples, see the Euahlayi tribe in the book of Mrs. Parker (pp. 15ff.) and the Worjobaluk 
(Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 121ff.); cf. the previously cited article of Mathews. 
45See examples in Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 122. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
153 
Sometimes, indeed, w e see that a subclan emancipates itself completely 
and becomes an autonomous group, an independent clan. T h e subtotem 
then becomes a t o t e m i n the full sense. O n e tribe i n w h i c h this process o f 
segmentation has been taken virtually to its outermost l i m i t is the Arunta 
tribe. T h e information contained i n the first b o o k o f Spencer and G ü l e n i n -
dicated back then that there were some 60 totems among the A r u n t a ,
4 6 but 
the more recent research o f Strehlow has established that the number is m u c h 
larger. H e counts not less than 442 totems.
4 7 Spencer and G ü l e n were i n no 
way exaggerating w h e n they said that " i n the land occupied by the natives, 
there is no object, animate or inanimate, that does not give its name to some 
totemic group o f individuals."
4 8 That multitude o f totems, w h i c h is prodi-
gious w h e n compared w i t h the size o f the population, comes o f the fact that, 
under the influence o f particular circumstances, the original clans have d i -
vided and subdivided infinitely; as a result, almost all the subtotems have 
gained the status o f totems. 
Strehlow's studies have definitively shown this. Spencer and G ü l e n cited 
only a few isolated cases o f allied totems.
4 9 Strehlow established that this was 
actually a universal f o r m o f organization. H e drew up a table o n w h i c h al-
most aU the totems o f the A r u n t a are classified according to this principle. A l l 
are attached to some sixty principal totems as either allies or auxdiaries.
5 0 
T h e allied totems are held to be at the service o f the principal one.
5 1 This 
state o f relative subordination is probably the echo o f a time w h e n today's 
"aUies" were only subtotems, and therefore a time w h e n the tribe had only a 
*See Durkheim and Mauss, "Classification primitive," p. 28 n. 2. 
"Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, pp. 61-72. 
48Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 112. 
49See especially ibid., p. 447, and Northern Tribes, p. 151. 
3°Strehlow, Aranda, vol. Ill, pp. xiii-[xvii]. Sometimes the same secondary totems are attached to two 
or three principal totems at once. This is probably because Strehlow could not establish with certainty 
which of those totems was truly the main one. 
Two interesting facts, which emerge from this table, confirm certain propositions I have already set 
forth. First, with very few exceptions, almost all the principal totems are animals. Next, the stars are never 
anything but secondary or allied totems. This is further evidence that originally the preference was to 
choose totems from the animal kingdom, and that the allied totems were not promoted to the status of 
totems until later. 
51According to myth, in legendary times the allied totems served as food for the people of the princi-
pal totem and, if they were trees, provided shelter (Strehlow, Aranda, vol. Ill, p. xii; Spencer and Gillen, 
Native Tribes, p. 403). However, the fact that the allied totem is thought to have been eaten does not im-
ply that it is considered profane. It is believed that, in mythical times, the principal totem was eaten by the 
ancestors who founded the clan. 


154 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
small number o f clans subdivided into subclans. Numerous survivals c o n f i r m 
that hypothesis. T h e t w o groups that are allied i n this way often have the 
same totemic emblem. T h e oneness o f that emblem is inexplicable unless the 
two groups were originally one.
5 2 Elsewhere, the kinship o f the t w o clans is 
shown by the role and interest that each o f t h e m takes i n the rites o f the 
other. T h e t w o cults are still not completely separate, most likely because i n i -
tially they were completely merged.
5 3 Tradition explains the tie that binds 
them by imagining how, l o n g ago, the t w o clans lived very near each other.
5 4 
I n other cases, m y t h even states explicitly that the one was derived from the 
other. They say that the allied animal once u p o n a time belonged to the 
species that is still the principal t o t e m and was not differentiated until a later 
epoch. I n this way, the chantunga birds, w h i c h n o w are associated w i t h the 
witchetty grub, were witchetty grubs i n legendary times and later trans-
formed themselves into birds. T w o species that are n o w attached to the t o t e m 
o f the honey ant were honey ants i n the past, and so f o r t h .
5 5 Further, that 
transformation o f a subtotem into a t o t e m happens imperceptibly, w i t h the 
result that the status is i l l defined i n some cases, and it is not easy to say 
whether one is dealing w i t h a principal or a secondary t o t e m .
5 6 As H o w i t t 
says regarding the Wotjobaluk, there are subtotems that are totems i n the 
process o f f o r m a t i o n .
5 7 I n this way, the various things classified i n a totem are 
like many nuclei around w h i c h new totemic cults can f o r m . This is the best 
evidence o f the religious feelings they inspire. I f they d i d not have this sa-
credness, they could not so easily be promoted to the same status as those sa-
cred things par excellence, the totems proper. 
Thus, the circle o f religious things extends well beyond what at first 
seemed to be its boundaries. N o t only are the totemic animals and the m e m -
bers o f the clan enclosed w i t h i n that circle; but since there is n o t h i n g k n o w n 
that is not classified w i t h i n a clan and under a totem, there is also n o t h i n g 
that does not receive a reflection o f that religiousness, to some degree. W h e n 
a2Thus, in the Wild Cat clan, the designs carved on the churinga represent the 
flowering 
tree called 
hakea, which today is a distinct totem (Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes [pp. 147—148]). Strehlow (Aranda, 
vol. Ill, p. xii n. 4) says that this is common. 
"Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 182; Native Tribes, pp. 151, 297. 
54Native Tribes, pp. 151, 158. 
55Ibid„ pp. 447-449. 
56lt is in this way that Spencer and Gillen speak to us of the pigeon called Inturita sometimes as a prin-
cipal totem (NativeTribes [p. 410]), and sometimes as an allied totem (p. 448). 
"Howitt, "Further Notes," pp. 63-64. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
155 
actual gods appear i n the religions that f o r m later, each o f them w i l l be set 
over a particular category o f natural phenomena—this one the sea, that one 
the air, another the fruit harvest, and so on, and each o f those provinces o f 
nature w i l l be thought o f as drawing the life that is w i t h i n i t from the god to 
w h i c h it is subject. Such a distribution o f nature among various deities is pre-
cisely what constitutes the representation o f the universe that religions give 
us. So l o n g as humanity has not moved beyond the phase o f totemism, the 
role the various totems o f the tribe play is precisely the one that w i l l later be-
long to divine personalities. I n the M o u n t Gambier tribe, w h i c h I have taken 
as the main example, there are ten clans, and so the w h o l e w o r l d is divided 
into ten classes, or rather into ten families, each originating i n a special 
totem. T h e things classified i n a clan take their reality from that origin, for 
they are conceived o f as various modes o f the totemic being—according to 
our example, rain, thunder, lightning, clouds, hail, and winter are regarded 
as various kinds o f crow. Taken together, these ten families o f things consti-
tute a systematic and complete representation o f the w o r l d , and that repre-
sentation is religious, since religious notions furnish the principle o f it. Far 
from being restricted to one or t w o categories o f beings, then, the domain o f 
totemic religion extends to the farthest limits o f the k n o w n universe. Like 
the religion o f Greece, it places the divine everywhere. T h e w e l l - k n o w n for-
mula IlavTa TrXirjpTi 8eiov* can serve as its m o t t o as well. 
To be i n a position to conceive totemism i n this way, we must modify the 
longstanding n o t i o n o f it o n one fundamental point. U n t i l the discoveries o f 
recent years, totemism was defined as the religion o f the clan and was thought 
to consist entirely i n the cult o f a particular totem. F r o m this point o f view, i t 
seemed that there were as many independent totemic religions as there were 
different clans. Moreover, that n o t i o n was i n harmony w i t h the c o m m o n l y 
held n o t i o n o f the clan: I t is seen as an autonomous society,
5 8 more or less 
closed to similar societies or having only external and superficial relations 
w i t h them. B u t the reality is more complex. Certainly the cult o f each totem 
has its home i n the corresponding clan; i t is celebrated there and only there; 
the members o f the clan are responsible for it; i t is transmitted by them 
from 
one generation to another, along w i t h the beliefs o n w h i c h it is based. 
O n the other hand, the various totemic cults that are practiced w i t h i n a 
single tribe do not develop i n parallel and i n ignorance o f one another, as 
*Everything is full of gods. Trans. 
58Thus it happens that the clan has often been confounded with the tribe. Curr especially has been 
guilty of this confusion, which often imports problems into ethnographers' descriptions ([The Australian 
Race], vol. I, pp. 61ff.). 


156 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
though each was a complete religion and sufficient unto itself. Instead, they 
imply one another. Each is only one part o f the same whole, an element o f 
the same religion. T h e m e n o f a clan i n no way regard the beliefs o f the 
neighboring clans w i t h the indifference, skepticism, or hostility that is o r d i -
narily inspired by a religion to w h i c h one is a stranger; they themselves share 
the beliefs. T h e C r o w people are also convinced that the Snake people have 
a mythical snake as their ancestor and owe special qualities and capacities to 
that origin. Have w e not seen that, under certain conditions at least, a man 
eats a t o t e m that is not his o w n only after having observed ritual formalities? 
For example, he requests permission from the individuals o f that totem, i f 
there are any present. This is so because that food is not merely profane for 
h i m either. He, too, accepts that there are affinities between the members o f 
a clan he is not part o f and the animal whose name they bear. Moreover, that 
commonality o f belief is sometimes manifested i n the cult. A l t h o u g h , i n 
principle, the rites that concern a totem can be performed only by people o f 
that totem, it is nonetheless very c o m m o n for representatives o f different 
clans to be present. Indeed, sometimes their role is not one o f mere spectat¬
ing. A l t h o u g h o f course they are not the celebrants, they decorate those w h o 
are, and they prepare the service. They, too, have an interest i n the rite's be-
ing conducted; hence, i n certain tribes i t is they w h o invite the proper clan 
to conduct the ceremony.
5 9 Indeed, there is a w h o l e cycle o f rites that must 
take place i n the presence o f the assembled tribe: the totemic ceremonies o f 
initiation.
6 0 
I n sum, totemic organization as just described clearly must result from a 
sort o f consensus among all the members o f the tribe, w i t h o u t distinction. 
Each clan cannot possibly have developed its beliefs i n an absolutely inde-
pendent manner; the cults o f the various totems complement one another 
exactly, and so they must necessarily have been i n some sense adjusted to one 
another. I n fact, as we have seen, a single totem d i d not ordinarily repeat i t -
self i n the same tribe, and the w h o l e universe was divided among the totems 
thus constituted i n such a way that the same object should not be found i n 
t w o different clans. So systematic a division w o u l d have been impossible to 
achieve w i t h o u t a tacit or concerted agreement i n w h i c h the whole tribe 
w o u l d have had to participate. T h e w h o l e set o f beliefs that was b o r n i n this 
way is i n part (but only i n part) an affair o f the tribe.
6 1 
59This is the case, 
for 
example, of the Warramunga (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 298). 
'"See, for example, Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 380 et passim. 
61One could even ask whether tribal totems do not sometimes exist. Thus, among the Arunta, the 
wild cat is the totem of a particular clan and yet is forbidden to the whole tribe; even the people of other 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (Continued) 
157 
To summarize: I n developing an adequate conception o f totemism, we 
must not enclose ourselves w i t h i n the boundaries o f the clan but consider the 
tribe as a whole. Each clan's o w n cult enjoys great autonomy. Indeed, we can 
anticipate even n o w that the active ferment o f religious life w i l l be found i n the 
clan. O n the other hand, all these cults are unified, and totemic religion is the 
complex system formed by that union, just as Greek polytheism was formed 
by the union o f all the cults that were addressed to the various deities. I have 
shown that w h e n totemism is understood i n this way, it too has a cosmology. 
clans may eat it only in moderation (Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 168). But I believe it would be 
an exaggeration to speak of a tribal totem in that instance, for it does not follow 
from 
the prohibition 
against eating it freely that the animal is a totem. A prohibition may have other causes. Undoubtedly, the 
religious unity of the tribe is real, but that unity is affirmed with the aid of other symbols. Further on, I 
will show what those symbols are (Bk. II, chap. 9). 


C H A P T E R F O U R 
THE PRINCIPAL TOTEMIC 
BELIEFS (END) 
The Individual Totem and the Sexual Totem 
T
hus far, I have examined totemism solely as a public institution. T h e only 
totems discussed have been those shared by a clan, a phratry, or, i n a sense, 
the tribe.
1 T h e individual had a part i n them only as a member o f the group. 
B u t we understand that there is no religion w i t h o u t an individual aspect. This 
general observation applies to totemism. Apart from the impersonal and c o l -
lective totems that are foremost, there are others that belong to each i n d i v i d -
ual, that express his personality, and whose cult he celebrates privately. 
I 
I n some Australian tribes and i n most o f the Indian societies o f N o r t h A m e r -
ica,
2 each individual maintains a personal relationship w i t h a particular o b -
ject, w h i c h is comparable to the relationship that each clan maintains w i t h its 
totem. That object is sometimes an inanimate being or something m a n -
made, but it is often an animal. I n some cases, only a particular part o f the 
body, such as the head, the feet, or the liver, has the same function.
3 
T h e name o f the thing also serves as the name o f the individual. It is his 
personal name, a first name that is added to his collective totem, just as the 
'The totems are the tribe's property in the sense that the tribe a
s a whole has an interest in the cult 
each clan owes to its totem. 
2Frazer has made a full compilation of the texts about individual totemism in North America ([James 
George Frazer], Totemism and Exogamy, vol. Ill [London, Macmillan, 1910], pp. 370—456). 
3For example, among the Hurons, the Iroquois, and the Algonquins ([Pierre François Xavier de] 
Charlevoix, Histoire [et description générale de la Nouvelle Frame], vol. VI [Paris, Chez la Veuve Ganeau, 
1744], pp. 6
7
—
7
0
; [Gabriel] Sagard, Le Grand voyage au pays des Hurons [Paris, Tross, 1865], p. 160), and 
among the Thompson Indians ([James Alexander] Teit, "The Thompson Indians of British Columbia," 
AMNH, vol. II (1900), p. 355). 
158 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (End) 
159 
praenomen o f the Romans is added to the nomen gentilicium. It is true that this 
is documented for only a certain number o f societies,
4 but i t is probably 
widespread. Indeed, I w i l l presently show that the thing and the individual 
are o f the same k i n d . Identity o f k i n d entails identity o f name. Being given 
i n the course o f especially important religious ceremonies, this forename has 
a quality o f sacredness. I t is not pronounced i n the ordinary circumstances o f 
profane life. Sometimes, indeed, the w o r d used i n everyday language to des-
ignate the thing is somewhat modified for that special use
5—this, because the 
words o f everyday language are excluded from religious life. 
I n the American tribes, at least, an emblem is added to this name, w h i c h 
belongs to each individual and i n various ways represents the thing designated 
by the name. For example, each Mandan wears the skin o f the animal whose 
namesake he is.
6 I f it is a bird, he adorns himself w i t h the bird's feathers.
7 T h e 
Hurons and the Algonquins tattoo its image o n their bodies.
8 It is represented 
o n his weapons.
9 A m o n g the tribes o f the Northwest, the individual emblem 
is carved or sculpted o n utensils, houses, and so forth, as is the collective e m -
blem o f the clan.
1 0 T h e individual emblem serves as a mark o f personal prop-
erty.
1 1 Often the t w o coats o f arms are combined, w h i c h partly explains w h y 
the totemic escutcheons show such variety among these peoples.
1 2 
There are the closest o f bonds between the individual and the animal 
4This is the case for the Yuin ([Alfred William] Howitt, The Native Tribes [of South-East Australia, New 
York, Macmillan, 1904], p. 133); the Kurnai (Native Tribes, p. 135); several tribes of Queensland ([Walter 
Edmund] Roth, Superstition, Magic and Medicine, North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin no. 5 [Brisbane, 
G. A. Vaughn, 1903], p. 19; [Alfred C] Haddon, Head-Hunters, [Black, White, and Brown, London, 
Methuen, 1901], p. 193); among the Delaware ([John Gottlieb Ernestus] Heckewelder, "An Account of 
the History [Manners and Customs] of the Indian Nations [Who Once Inhabited Pennsylvania"], 
HLCAPS, vol. I [1819], p. 238); among the Thompson Indians (Teit, "Thompson Indians," p. 355); and 
among the Salish Stadumh ([Charles] Hill Tout, "Report on the Ethnology of the Stadumh of British 
Columbia," _//17, vol. XXXV [1905], pp. 147ÎF.). 
5Hill Tout, "Ethnology of the Stadumh," p. 154. 
6[George] Cadin, Illustration of the Manners, Customs [and Condition of the North American Indians, 2 
vols.], London [H. G. Bohn], 1876, vol. I, p. 36. 
7[George] Cadin, [Nouvelles des missions dAmérique, extraits des] lettres édifiantes et curieuses, 6th ed. 
[Paris, Martial, 1883], pp. 172ff. 
8Charlevoix, Histoire de la nouvelle France, vol. VI, p. 69. 
'[James Owen] Dorsey, "A Study of Siouan Cults," in XIth Annual Report [BAE, Washington, Gov-
ernment Printing Office, 1894], p. 443. 
"'[Franz] Boas, ["The Social Organization and Secret Societies of the] Kwakiud [Indians," in RNMfor 
1895, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1897], p. 323. 
"Hill Tout, "Ethnology of the Stadumh," p. 154. 
12Boas, "Kwakiutl," p. 323. 


160 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
whose name he bears. T h e nature o f the animal is part and parcel o f the man, 
w h o has its qualities as well as its faults. For example, i t is thought that a man 
w i t h the eagle as his individual emblem possesses the gift o f seeing the future; 
i f he carries the name o f the bear, i t is said thakhe is likely to be wounded i n 
fights, the bear being slow, heavy, and easily trapped;
1 3 i f the animal is de-
spised, the m a n is the object o f the same contempt.
1 4 Indeed, the kinship be-
tween the t w o is so great that i n certain circumstances, especially danger, the 
man is thought capable o f assuming the animal's f o r m .
1 5 Inversely, the animal 
is regarded as the man's double, his alter ego.
1 6 T h e association between the 
t w o is so close that their destinies are often considered to be interdependent: 
N o t h i n g can happen to one w i t h o u t repercussions felt by the other.
1 7 I f the 
animal dies, the life o f the m a n is threatened. Hence a very c o m m o n rule is 
that one must neither k i l l the animal nor, especially, eat its flesh. W h e n ap-
plied to the clan, this prohibition carries w i t h i t all sorts o f allowances and 
compromises, but i n this case it is far more categorical and absolute.
1 8 
For its part, the animal protects the m a n and is a k i n d o f patron. I t alerts 
h i m to possible dangers and to means o f escaping t h e m ;
1 9 i t is said to be the 
man's 
friend.
20 I n fact, since it is often presumed to have miraculous powers, 
uMiss [Alice C] Fletcher, "The Import of the Totem, A Study 
from 
the Omaha Tribe, RSI [Wash-
ington, Government Printing Office], 1897, p. 583. Similar facts will be found in Teit, "Thompson In-
dians," pp. 354, 356; Peter Jones, History of the Ojibway Indians: [With Especial Reference to Their Conversion 
to Christianity, London, A. W. Bennet, 1869], p. 87. 
14This is, for example, the case of the dog among the Salish Stadumh because of the servile state in 
which he lives (Hill Tout, "Ethnology of the Stadumh," p. 153). 
15Langloh Parker [Catherine Sommerville Field Parker], [The] Euahlayi [Tribe] [London, A. Consta-
ble, 1905], p. 21. 
16"The spirit of a man," says Mrs. Parker (ibid.), "is in his Yunbeai (individual totem) and his Yunbeai 
is in him." 
"Parker, Euahlayi, p. 20. It is the same among certain Salish ([Charles] Hill Tout, "Ethnological Re-
port on the Stseelis and Skaulits Tribes [of the Halokmelem Division of the Salish of 
British Columbia]," 
JAI, vol. XXXIV [1904], p. 324). This is common among the Indians of Central America ([Daniel G.] 
Brinton, "Nagualism: A Study in Native American Folk-lore and History," APS, vol. XXXIII [1894], 
p. 32). 
18Parker, Euahlayi, p. 20; Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 147; Dorsey, "Siouan Cults," p. 443. Incidentally, 
Frazer has surveyed the American cases and has established the universality of this prohibition (Totemism 
and Exogamy, vol. Ill, p. 450). True, we have seen that in America the individual had to begin by killing 
the animal whose skin was used to make what the ethnographers call his "medicine bag." But this custom 
has been found only in 
five 
tribes; it is probably a late and altered form of the institution. 
19Howitt, NativeTribes, pp. 135, 147, 387, and "On Australian Medicine Men,"J,4i, vol. XVI (1887), 
p. 34; [James Alexander] Teit, "The Shuswap" [AMNH, Leiden, E.J. Brill, 1908], p. 607. 
20[Rev. A.] Meyer, "Manners and Customs of the Aborigines of the Encounter Bay Tribe," in [James 
Dominick] Woods [The Native Tribes of South Australia, Adelaide, E. S. Wigg. 1879], p. 197. 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (End) 
161 
it passes those o n to its human partner, w h o believes t h e m to be p r o o f against 
bullets, arrows, and every sort o f blow.
2 1 T h e individual has such confidence 
i n the efficacy o f his protector that he braves the greatest dangers and per-
forms the most breathtaking feats o f prowess w i t h serene fearlessness. Faith 
gives h i m the necessary courage and strength.
2 2 Nevertheless, the man's ties 
w i t h his patron are not ones o f dependency, pure and simple. T h e man, for 
his part, can act u p o n the animal. H e gives it orders and has power over it. A 
K u r n a i whose friend and ally is the shark believes that, w i t h an incantation, 
he can disperse sharks that threaten a boat.
2 3 I n other cases, the tie contracted 
i n this way is thought to bestow u p o n the man a special capacity for success 
i n h u n t i n g the animal.
2 4 
B y their very nature, these relations seem strongly to imply that the being 
w i t h w h i c h each individual is thus associated can itself be only an individual, 
not a species. N o one has a species as alter ego. I n some cases, i n fact it quite 
clearly is such and such a definite tree, rock, or stone that plays this role.
2 5 
Whenever i t is an animal, or whenever the lives o f the animal and the man are 
considered to be b o u n d up together, such is necessarily the case. I t is not pos-
sible to be j o i n e d w i t h a whole species i n an interdependence o f this kind, be-
cause there is no day, or for that matter no instant, i n w h i c h the species does 
not lose one o f its members. Still, the primitive has a certain inability to con-
ceive o f the individual apart from the species. T h e b o n d that unites h i m w i t h 
the one extends altogether naturally to the other; he has the same feeling for 
both. Thus i t comes about that the whole species is sacred to h i m .
2 6 
2 1 [Franz] Boas, "Second General Report on the Indians of British Columbia," in [ByL4S], Vlth Re-
port on the North- WesternTribes of Canada [London, Offices of the Association, 1891], p. 93; Teit, "Thomp-
son Indians," p. 336; Boas, "Kwakiud," p. 394. 
^Corroborating evidence is to be found in Hill Tout, "Ethnology of the Stadumh," pp. 144—145. Cf. 
Parker, Euahlayi, p. 29. 
"According to information given Frazer by Howitt in a personal letter (Totemism and Exogamy, vol. I, 
p. 495, n.2). 
24Hill Tout, "Stseelis and Skaulits Tribes," p. 324. 
25Howitt, "Australian Medicine Men," JAI, vol. XVI, p. 34; [Joseph François] Lafitau, Moeurs des 
sauvages américains, vol. I [Paris, Saugrain l'ainé, 1724], p. 370; Charlevoix, Histoire de la Nouvelle France, 
vol. VI, p. 68. The same is true of the atai and the tamaniu at Mota ([Robert Henry] Codrington, The 
Melanesians, [Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1891], pp. 250-251). 
26Consequendy, the line of demarcation that Frazer thought he could establish between these animal 
protectors and the fetishes does not exist. He thought fetishism would begin where the protector being is 
an individual object and not a class (Frazer, Totemism and Exogamy, p. 56); a
s we know from as early a
s the 
tribes of Australia, however, a specific animal sometimes plays this role (see Howitt, "[On] Australian 
Medicine Men; [or Doctors and Wizards of Some Australian Tribes], JAI, vol. XVI, [1887], p. 34). The 
truth is that the notions of fetish and fetishism do not correspond to anything definite. 


162 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
This protector being is called by different names i n different societies: 
nagual among the Indians o f M e x i c o ,
2 7 manitou among the Algonquins, okki 
among the H u r o n s ,
2 8 snam among certain Salish
2 9 and sulia among others,
3 0 
budjan among the Y u i n ,
3 1 yunbeai among the Euahlayi,
3 2 and so on. Because 
o f the importance these beliefs and practices have among the Indians o f 
N o r t h America, some have proposed to create the w o r d nagualism or mani-
touism to designate t h e m .
3 3 B u t by giving t h e m a special and distinctive 
name, w e may well misconstrue their relationship w i t h totemism. I n fact, the 
same principles are applied, i n one case to the clan, i n the other to the i n d i -
vidual. I n both, the belief is the same: There are living ties between things 
and men, and the things are endowed w i t h special powers from w h i c h the 
human allies benefit. T h e custom is also the same: G i v i n g the man the name 
o f the thing w i t h w h i c h he is associated, and adding an emblem to this name. 
T h e totem is the patron o f the clan, just as the patron o f the individual is a 
personal totem. So there is good reason for the terminology to make this 
kinship between the t w o systems visible. This is why, w i t h Frazer, I w i l l call 
the cult that each individual renders to his patron individual totemism. Use o f 
this terminology is further justified by the fact that i n some cases the p r i m i -
tive himself uses the same w o r d to designate the t o t e m o f the clan and the an-
imal protector o f the individual.
3 4 Tylor and Powell have rejected it and 
called for different terms for the t w o sorts o f religious institutions because, 
i n their view, the collective t o t e m is only a name, a shared label w i t h o u t re-
2 7 Brinton, "Nagualism," APS, vol. XXXIII [1894], p. 32. 
28Charlevoix, Histoire de la Nouvelle France, p. 67. 
29Hill Tout, "Ethnology of the Statlumh," p. 142. 
30Hill Tout, "Stseelis and Skaulits Tribes," pp. 31 Iff. 
31Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 133. 
32Parker, Euahlayi, p. 20. 
33[Edwin Sidney Hardand], "An American View of Totemism, [A Note on Major Powell's Article] in 
Man, vol. II (1902), 84, pp. 1
1
3
—
1
1
5 [This does not mention "nagualism," and says "manitu," not "man-
ituism." Trans.]; [Edward Burnett] Tylor, "Note on the Haida Totem-Post Lately Erected in the Pitt River 
Museum at Oxford," Man, vol. II, (1902), pp. 1
—
3
, [Again, there is no mention of "nagualism." Trans.]; 
[Andrew] Lang expressed similar ideas in Social Origins [London, Longmans, 1903], pp. 133—135. Finally, 
in a revision of his earlier view, Frazer himself now believes that it is best to designate collective totems 
and guardian spirits by different names until the relationship that exists between them is better known 
(Totemism and Exogamy, vol. Ill, p. 456). 
34This is the case in Australia among the Yuin (Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 81) and among the Narrinyeri 
(Meyer, "The Encounter Bay Tribe," in Woods, Native Tribes of South Australia, pp. 197ff.). 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (End) 
163 
ligious characteristics.
3 5 B u t to the contrary, we k n o w that it is a sacred thing 
to an even greater degree than the animal protector. As this study develops, 
the extent to w h i c h the t w o sorts o f totemism are inseparable 
w i l l be 
s h o w n .
3 6 
Nonetheless, however great the kinship between these two institutions, 
there are important differences between them. Whereas the clan considers i t -
self to be the offspring o f the totemic animal or plant, the individual does not 
believe he has any relation o f descent w i t h his personal totem. It is a friend, a 
partner, and a protector, but it is not a relative. T h e individual makes use o f the 
virtues it is held to possess, but he is not o f the same blood. Second, the m e m -
bers o f a clan permit neighboring clans to eat the animal whose name they col-
lectively bear, provided that the necessary formalities are observed. B y contrast, 
the individual not only respects the species to w h i c h his personal totem be-
longs but also does his utmost to defend it against strangers, at least wherever 
the destinies o f the man and the animal are thought to be bound up together. 
These t w o kinds o f totems differ most i n the manner by w h i c h they are 
acquired. 
T h e collective totem belongs to the legal status o f every individual. G e n -
erally speaking, it is hereditary; at any rate, i t is b i r t h that designates it and 
men's w i l l has no role. T h e child sometimes has the totem o f its mother 
(Kamilaroi, D i e r i , Urabunna, etc.), sometimes that o f its father (Narrinyeri, 
Warramunga, etc.), and sometimes the totem that is most important at 
the place where his mother conceived (Arunta, Loritja). B u t the individual 
totem is acquired by a deliberate act:
3 7 D e t e r m i n i n g it requires a series o f 
rites. T h e m e t h o d most widely used among the Indians o f America is the 
following: Toward puberty, as the time o f initiation approaches, the young 
35"The totem no more resembles the patron of the individual," says Tylor, "than an escutcheon re-
sembles an image of a saint." ("The Haida Totem-Post," p. 2.) Likewise, today Frazer rallies to Tylor's 
opinion, because he now denies that the totem of the clan is in any way religious (Totemism and Exogamy, 
vol. HI, p. 452). 
36See below, Bk. 2, chap. 9. 
"However, according to a passage in Mathews, the individual totem is hereditary among the 
Wotjobaluk. "Each individual," he says, "lays claim to an animal, a plant, or an inanimate object as its spe-
cial and personal totem, which he inherits from his mother" ([Robert Hamilton] Mathews, ["Ethnolog-
ical Notes on the Aboriginal Tribes of New South Wales and Victoria"], RSNSW, vol. XXXVIII (1904), 
p. 291). But it is obvious that if all the children of the same family had the totem of their mother as their 
personal totem, neither they nor their mother would have personal totems. Mathews probably means that 
each individual chooses his individual totem from among a group of 
things attributed to the mother's clan. 
We will see, in fact, that each clan has its own individual totems that are its exclusive property and that the 
members of other clans cannot use them. In this sense, birth in some measure (but in that measure only) 
defines the personal totem. 


164 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
man withdraws to a place apart—a forest, for example. There, d u r i n g a pe-
r i o d that varies from a few days to several years, he submits to all kinds o f ex-
ercises that are exhausting and contrary to his nature. H e fasts, mortifies 
himself, and mutilates himself. Sometimes he wanders, uttering terrible 
screams and howls; sometimes he stays still, stretched out o n the ground, 
groaning. H e dances sometimes, prays sometimes, and sometimes calls out to 
his ordinary deities. Proceeding i n this way, he finally works himself into a 
state o f intense super-excitement that is very close to delirium. W h e n he has 
reached this paroxysm, his mental representations easily take o n a hallucina-
tory character. " W h e n , " says Heckewelder, "a boy is o n the eve o f being i n i -
tiated, 
he is subjected to an alternating regime o f fasting and medical 
treatment; he abstains from all food, he swallows the most powerful and re-
pulsive drugs; o n occasion, he drinks intoxicating concoctions until his m i n d 
is genuinely i n a state o f confusion. A t that moment, he has or believes he has 
visions, extraordinary dreams to w h i c h the entire exercise has naturally pre-
disposed h i m . H e imagines himself flying through the air, m o v i n g under the 
ground, j u m p i n g over valleys from one summit to the other, fighting and de-
feating giants and monsters."
3 8 U n d e r these conditions, i f w h i l e dreaming or 
awake he sees (or thinks he sees, w h i c h amounts to the same thing) an ani-
mal appearing to h i m that seems to show friendly intentions, he w i l l imag-
ine he has discovered the patron that he has been waiting for.
3 9 
This process is rarely used i n Australia.
4 0 There, the personal totem seems 
instead to be imposed by a third person, either at b i r t h
4 1 or at initiation.
4 2 It is 
usually a relative w h o plays this role, or it can be a person w i t h special powers, 
such as an old man or a magician. Divination is sometimes used for this pur-
pose. A t Charlotte Bay, at Cape Bedford, or o n the Proserpine River, for 
example, the grandmother or another old w o m a n takes a small part o f the 
38Heckewelder, "Manners and Customs of the Indian Nations," HLCAPS, vol. I, p. 238. 
39See Dorsey, "Siouan Cults," p. 507; Catlin, North American Indians, vol. I, p. 37; Fletcher, "The Im-
port of the Totem," in Smithsonian Rep. for 1897, p. 580; Teit, "Thompson Indians," pp. 317—320; Hill 
Tout, "Ethnology of the Stadumh," p. 144. 
40Still, one finds examples. The Kurnai magicians see their personal totems revealed in dreams 
(Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 387, and "Australian Medicine Men," p. 34). The men of Cape Bedford believe 
that when an old man dreams of something during the night, that thing is the personal totem of the first 
person he will meet the next day (Roth, Superstition, Magic, and Medicine, p. 19). But it is probable that only 
complementary and accessory personal totems are acquired by this method; for, as I say in the text, within 
that same tribe, a different process is used at initiation. 
4 1In certain tribes about which Roth speaks (Superstition, Magic and Medicine); and in certain tribes in 
the vicinity of Maryborough (Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 147). 
42Among the Wiradjuri (Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 406, and "Australian Medicine Men," p. 50). 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (End) 
165 
umbilical cord attached to the placenta and whirls it quite forcefully. D u r i n g 
this time, other o l d w o m e n seated i n a circle propose different names, one af-
ter the other. T h e name that is pronounced just at the moment the cord 
breaks is adopted.
4 3 A m o n g the Yaraikanna o f Cape York, the young novice is 
given a httle water to rinse his m o u t h after his tooth has been pulled, and he 
is asked to spit into a bucket filled w i t h water. T h e old men carefully examine 
the k i n d o f clot that is formed by the blood and saliva he has spat out, and the 
natural object o f w h i c h its shape reminds them becomes the personal totem o f 
the young m a n .
4 4 I n other cases, the totem is transmitted direcdy from one i n -
dividual to another, for example, from father to son or uncle to nephew.
4 5 
This method is also used i n America. I n an example that H i l l Tout reports, the 
operator was a shaman
4 6 w h o wanted to transmit his totem to his nephew: 
The uncle took the symbolic emblem o f his snam (personal totem), which 
in this case was the dried skin of a bird. He asked his nephew to blow on it, 
then he himself did likewise and pronounced some secret words. It then 
seemed to Paul (which was the nephew's name) that the skin became a liv-
ing bird that began to fly around them for several moments before disap-
pearing. Paul received instructions to procure the skin o f a bird o f the same 
species that very day, and to wear it; this he did. The following night, he 
had a dream in which the snam appeared to him in the form of a human be-
ing who revealed to him the secret name by which it might be summoned, 
and who promised him its protection.
4 7 
N o t only is the individual t o t e m acquired, not given, but more than that, 
the acquisition o f one is not obligatory everywhere. There are many Aus-
tralian tribes i n w h i c h that custom seems to be completely u n k n o w n .
4 8 A n d 
"Ibid. 
44Haddon, Head Hunters, pp. 193ff. 
45Among the Wiradjuri, [Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 406, and "On Australian Medicine Men," in JAI, 
vol. XVI, p. 50], 
•"In general, it seems clear that these transmissions from father to son occur only when the father is a 
shaman or a magician. This is also the case among the Thompson Indians (Teit, "The Thompson Indi-
ans," p. 320) and among the Wiradjuri, to whom reference has been made. 
47Hill Tout ("Ethnology of the Stadumh," pp. 146—147). The basic rite is the one that consists of 
blowing on the skin. If it had not been done correcdy, the transmission would not have occurred because 
the breath is the soul. When both blow on the skin of the animal, the magician and the recipient exhale 
parts of their souls, and these parts interpenetrate one another while communing with the nature of the 
animal, which is also (in the form of its symbol) a participant in the ceremony. 
48[Northcote Whitridge] Thomas, "Further Remarks on Mr. Hill Tout's Views on Totemism," in 
Man, vol. IV (1904), 53, p. 85. 


166 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
even where it does exist, i t is often optional. A m o n g the Euahlayi, all the ma-
gicians have individual totems from w h i c h they get their powers, but a great 
many laymen have none at all. I t is a favor the magician can dispense but one 
he reserves for his friends and favorites and for those w h o aspire to become 
his colleagues.
4 9 Likewise, among certain Salish, only individuals w h o want 
to excel i n war or hunting, or w h o aspire to become shamans, equip t h e m -
selves w i t h protectors o f this sort.
5 0 Thus, at least among certain peoples, the 
individual totem seems to be regarded more as an advantage or a conve-
nience than as a necessity. I t is good to obtain one, but there is no obligation 
to do so. O n the other hand, there is no obligation to settle for only one. I f 
one wants to be better protected, n o t h i n g stands i n the way o f trying to o b -
tain several;
5 1 and inversely, i f the protector one has played its role poorly, it 
can be replaced.
5 2 
B u t w h i l e there is something more optional and free about individual 
totemism, it has staying power that the totemism o f the clan cannot match. 
O n e o f H i l l Tout's main informants was a baptized Salish. A l t h o u g h he had 
sincerely abandoned all the beliefs o f his ancestors and had become a model 
catechist, his faith i n the efficacy o f personal totems remained unshakable.
5 3 
Similarly, although no visible traces o f collective totemism are left i n the civ-
ilized countries, a n o t i o n o f solidarity between each individual and an ani-
mal, plant, or some other external object is the basis o f customs that can still 
be observed i n several European countries.
5 4 
II 
Between individual and collective totemism, there is an intermediate f o r m 
that has something o f both: sexual totemism. Found only i n Australia and i n 
a small number o f tribes, it has been reported mainly i n Victoria and i n N e w 
49Langloh Parker, Euahlayi, pp. 20, 29. 
50Hill Tout, "Ethnology of the Statlumh," pp. 143, 146; "Stseelis and Skaulits Tribes," p. 324. 
51Parker, Euahlayi, p. 30; Teit, "The Thompson Indians," p. 320; Hill Tout, "Ethnology of the 
Statlumh," p. 144. 
"Charlevoix, Histoire de la Nouvelle France, vol. VI, p. 69. 
"Hill Tout, "Ethnology of the Stadumh," p. 145. 
54Thus, at the birth of a child, people plant a tree on which they lavish pious care, for they believe that 
its fate and the infant's are conjoined. In his Golden Bough, Frazer reported numerous customs or beliefs 
that express the same idea in various ways (Cf. [Edwin Sidney] Hartland, Legend of Perseus, vol. II [Lon-
don, D. Nutt, 1894-1896], pp. 1-55). 


The Principal Totemic Beliefs (End) 
167 
South Wales.
5 5 True, Mathews claims to have observed it i n every part o f 
Australia he visited but w i t h o u t providing specifics to support his claim.
5 6 
A m o n g these different peoples, all the m e n o f the tribe, o n the one hand, 
and, o n the other, all the w o m e n f o r m what amounts to t w o distinct and 
even antagonistic societies, no matter what clan they belong to. Each o f these 
t w o sexual corporations believes itself to be j o i n e d by mystical ties to a spe-
cific animal. A m o n g the Kurnai, all the m e n consider themselves as brothers 
o f the e m u - w r e n (Yeerung), all the w o m e n as sisters o f the linnet (Djeetgun); 
all the m e n are Yeerung and all the w o m e n Djeetgun. A m o n g the W o t -
jobaluk and the W i r a d j u r i , respectively, this role is played by the bat and the 
nightjar (a sort o f screech o w l ) . I n other tribes, the woodpecker replaces the 
nightjar. Each sex sees the animal to w h i c h i t is k i n as a protector that must 
be treated w i t h great respect. To k i l l or eat it is therefore forbidden.
5 7 
This animal protector plays the same role w i t h respect to each sexual so-
ciety that the totem o f the clan plays w i t h respect to the clan. Hence the 
phrase "sexual totemism," w h i c h I take from Frazer,
5 8 is warranted. I n par-
ticular, this new sort o f totem resembles that o f the clan as well, i n the sense 
that i t too is collective. I t belongs w i t h o u t distinction to all individuals o f the 
same sex. I t resembles the clan totem also i n that i t implies a relationship o f 
descent and c o m m o n b l o o d between the animal patron and the correspond-
ing sex. A m o n g the Kurnai, all the m e n are said to be descended 
from 
Yeerung and all the w o m e n from Djeetgun.
5 9 T h e first observer to have de-
scribed that curious institution, as early as 1834, used the following terms: 
" T i l m u n , a small bird the size o f a thrush (a sort o f woodpecker), is consid-
ered by the w o m e n as having been the first to make w o m e n . These birds are 
55Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 148ff. [Lorimer] Fison and [Alfred William] Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kurnai 
[Melbourne, G. Robertson, 1880], pp. 194, 201ff. [James] Dawson, Australian Aborigines [Melbourne, G. 
Robertson, 1881], p. 52. Petrie reports it also in Queensland ([Constance Campbell Petrie], Tom Petrie's 
Reminiscences of Early Queensland [Ferguson, Watson, 1904], pp. 62, 118). 
56Mathews, "Aboriginal Tribes," p. 339. Should one see a trace of sexual totemism in the following 
custom of the Warramunga? Before a dead person is buried, a bone from the arm is kept. If it is a woman's, 
feathers of the emu are added to the bark in which it is shrouded; if a man's, the feathers of an owl ([Sir 
Baldwin Spencer and F.James Gillen, Northern Tribes of Central Australia, London, Macmillan, 1904], p. 
169). 
"There is even a case cited in which each sexual group H
a
s two sexual totems; in this way would the 
Wiradjuri have joined the sexual totems of the Kurnai (emu-wren and linnet) with those of the 
Wotjobaluk (bat and nightjar wood owl). See Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 150. 
58Frazer, Totemism and Exogamy, p. 51. 
59Fison and Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 215. 


168 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
held i n veneration by w o m e n only."
6 0 Thus it was a great ancestor. Seen 
from 
another point o f view, this totem resembles the individual totem, i n that each 
member o f the sexual group is believed to be personally allied w i t h a definite 
individual o f the corresponding animal species. T h e t w o lives are so closely 
linked that the death o f the animal brings about that o f the human. " T h e life 
o f a bat," say the Wotjobaluk, "is the life o f a man."
6 1 This is w h y each sex 
not only honors its t o t e m but also forces the members o f the other sex to do 
so as well. A n y violation o f this prohibition gives rise to real and bloody bat-
des between men and w o m e n .
6 2 
I n sum, what is truly unique about these totems is that, i n a sense, they 
amount to tribal totems. Indeed, they arise from the fact that people c o n -
ceive o f the w h o l e tribe as being the offspring o f a legendary couple. Such a 
belief seems to i m p l y that the sense o f tribe has become strong enough to 
overcome the particularism o f the clans to some extent. As to the reasons that 
separate origins are assigned to m e n and w o m e n , one must probably l o o k to 
the fact that the sexes live apart.
6 3 
It w o u l d be interesting to k n o w how, i n the m i n d o f an Australian, sex-
ual totems are related to clan totems—what relations there are between the 
t w o ancestors that are placed at the o r i g i n o f the tribe and those from w h i c h 
each particular clan is thought to descend. B u t the ethnographic data we 
have at present do not permit us to resolve that question. Furthermore, the 
natives may never have asked that question o f themselves, however natural 
and even necessary i t may seem to us, for they do not feel the need to coor-
dinate and systematize their beliefs to the same extent we d o .
6 4 
^hrelkeld, cited by Mathews, "The Aboriginal Tribes," p. 339. 
"Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 148, 151. 
62Fison and Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kurnai, pp. 200-203; Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 149; Petrie, Reminis-
cences, p. 62. Among the Kurnai, these bloody struggles often end in marriages, to which they are a kind 
of ritual prologue. Sometimes the battles become mere games (Tom Petrie's Reminiscences). 
6 3On this point, see my study [Emile Durkheim] "La Prohibition de l'inceste et ses origines," in AS, 
vol. I (1898), pp. 44ff. 
"However we will see below (Chap. 9) that there is a relationship between sexual totems and the high 
gods. 


C H A P T E R FIVE 
ORIGINS OF THESE BELIEFS 
Critical Examination of the Theories 
T
he beliefs I have just reviewed are clearly religious i n nature, for they i n -
volve a classification o f things as sacred and profane. Spiritual beings are 
doubdess not at issue. I n the course o f m y exposition, I have had no need 
even to say the words "spirits," "genies," or "divine personages." However, if, 
for this reason, some writers (about w h o m I shall have more to say) have re-
fused to see totemism as a religion, it is because they have been operating 
w i t h a mistaken idea o f the religious phenomenon. 
A t the same time, religion is guaranteed to be the most primitive that can 
be observed n o w and i n all probability the most primitive that has ever ex-
isted, for it is inseparable from social organization based u p o n clans. I have 
shown that totemism can only be defined i n terms o f that social organization 
and, furthermore, that clans, i n the f o r m they take i n a great many Australian 
societies, could not have come into being w i t h o u t the totem. T h e members 
o f a single clan are j o i n e d to one another by neither c o m m o n residence nor 
c o m m o n blood, since they are not necessarily consanguineous and are often 
scattered throughout the tribal territory. T h e i r unity arises solely from hav-
ing the same name and the same emblem, from believing they have the same 
relations w i t h the same categories o f things, and from practicing the same 
rites—in other words, from the fact that they commune i n the same totemic 
cult. Thus, at least insofar as the clan is not identical w i t h the local group, 
totemism and the clan i m p l y one another. Organization based o n clans is the 
simplest we know, for it exists i n all its essentials the m o m e n t a society has 
t w o primary clans. It follows that there cannot be a simpler society, so l o n g 
as none w i t h only a single clan has yet been found—and I believe no trace o f 
that has been up to now. A religion so closely allied w i t h the social system 
that is simpler than all others can be regarded as the most elementary we can 
know. I f we can find out the o r i g i n o f the beliefs just analyzed, we may well 
discover by the same stroke what kindled religious feeling i n humanity. 
169 


170 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
It is useful, before addressing this problem, to examine the most author-
itative solutions that have been offered. 
I 
We start w i t h a group o f scholars w h o believe they can explain totemism by 
deriving it from an earlier religion. For Tylor
1 and for W i l k e n ,
2 totemism is 
a special f o r m o f the ancestor cult. For them, transmigration o f souls—wide-
spread, to be sure—is the doctrine that served as a transition between these 
t w o religious systems. A great many peoples believe that the soul does not re-
main eternally disembodied after death but comes again to animate some l i v -
ing body. Besides, "as the psychology o f the inferior races establishes no 
clear-cut line o f demarcation between the souls o f m e n and those o f animals, 
it has no trouble accepting the transmigration o f human souls into the b o d -
ies o f animals."
3 Tylor cites a number o f such cases.
4 U n d e r these circum-
stances, the religious respect inspired by the ancestor is quite naturally 
transferred to the animal w i t h w h i c h it is thenceforth assimilated. T h e ani-
mal thus serving all that ancestor's descendants as the vessel o f a revered be-
ing becomes a sacred thing and the object o f a c u l t — i n short, a totem for the 
clan that is the ancestor's issue. 
Facts reported by W i l k e n about the societies o f the Malay Archipelago 
w o u l d tend to prove that this is indeed the way i n w h i c h totemic beliefs de-
veloped there. I n Java and Sumatra, crocodiles are especially honored; people 
v i e w t h e m as benevolent protectors and make offerings to them. T h e cult 
that is also rendered to them stems from the belief that they incarnate the 
souls o f ancestors. T h e Malays o f the Philippines consider the crocodile to be 
their grandfather. T h e tiger is treated i n the same way, for the same reasons. 
Similar beliefs have been found among the Bantu peoples.
5 I n Melanesia, an 
'[Edward Burnett Tylor], Primitive Culture, vol. I [New York, Henry Holt, 1874], [vol. I,] p. 402, vol. 
II, p. 237, and "Remarks on Totemism, with Special Reference to Some Modern Theories [Respecting] 
It," in JAI, vol. XXVIII [1899, pp. 133-148], and vol. I, new series, p. 138. 
2[Albertus Christian Kruijt Wilken], HetAnimisme bij den Volken van den indischen Archipel [
'
s Graven-
hage, M. Nijhoff, 1906], pp. 69-75. 
3Tylor, Primitive Culture [vol. II, p. 6]. 
"Ibid. [vol. II, pp. 6-18]. 
5G. McCall Theal, Records of South-Eastern Africa, vol. VII. I know this work only through an article 
by James George] Frazer, "South African Totemism," which appeared in Man [vol. I], 1901, no. I l l [pp. 
135-136]. 


Origins of These Beliefs 
171 
influential man w h o is at the point o f death sometimes announces his desire 
to be reincarnated i n such and such an animal or plant. I t is easy to see that 
some particular object chosen for his posthumous residence thereafter be-
comes sacred for his w h o l e family.
6 Far indeed from being a primitive fact, 
then, totemism w o u l d then be merely the product o f a more complex pre-
decessor religion.
7 
T h e societies from w h i c h these examples are drawn have already attained 
a relatively high level o f culture; at any rate, they have gone beyond the phase 
o f pure totemism. I n those societies, there are families, not totemic clans.
8 
Indeed, the majority o f the animals that are given religious honors are ven-
erated not by specific family groups but by entire tribes. Thus, even i f these 
beliefs and practices may be related to the ancient totemic cults, they are 
hardly well suited to revealing the origins o f those cults to us,
9 since n o w 
they represent those cults only i n altered forms. I t is not by considering an 
institution w h e n i t is i n full decline that w e can gain an understanding o f 
h o w i t was formed. I f we wish to k n o w h o w totemism was b o r n , it must be 
observed neither i n Java nor i n Sumatra nor i n Melanesia, but i n Australia. 
Here w e find neither the cult o f the dead
1 0 nor the doctrine o f transmigra-
tion. O f course, the mythical heroes w h o founded the clan are believed to be 
regularly reincarnated—but in human bodies only. As we w i l l see, each b i r t h is 
the result o f such a reincarnation. Thus, i f the animals o f the totemic species 
are the objects o f rites, it is not because ancestral spirits are held to reside i n 
them. W h i l e it is true that these first ancestors are often depicted i n animal 
f o r m (and this representation, w h i c h is very c o m m o n , is an important fact 
that w i l l have to be explained), belief i n metempsychosis could not have 
given rise to i t i n the societies o f Australia, since that belief is u n k n o w n there. 
Moreover, far from being able to explain totemism, the belief itself pre-
supposes one o f the fundamental principles o n w h i c h totemism rests; that is, 
6[Robert Henry] Codrington, The Melanesians [Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1891], pp. 32-[33], and a 
personal letter of the same author cited by Tylor in "Remarks on Totemism," p. 147. 
7Such also, with minor differences, is the solution adopted by [Wilhelm] Wundt (Mythus und Religion 
[3 vols., as vol. II, parts 1-3 of Völkerpsychologie, Eine Untersuchung der Entwicklungsgesetze von Sprache, 
Mythus und Sitte, Leipzig, W. Englemann, 1900-1909], vol. II, p. 269). 
8It is true that, for Tylor, the clan is but an enlarged family, so in his way of thinking, what can be said 
of the one group applies to the other ("Remarks on Totemism," p. 157). But this idea is highly question-
able. Only the clan presupposes the totem, which has its full meaning only in and through the clan. 
9In the same vein, [Andrew] Lang, Social Origins [London, Longmans, 1903], p. 150. 
10See above, p. 59. 


172 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
it assumes the very thing that must be explained. I n fact, i t implies, just as 
totemism implies, a concept o f m e n as being closely akin to animals. I f these 
t w o realms were clearly distinguished i n people's minds, the soul w o u l d not 
be thought capable o f passing so easily from one into the other. Indeed, the 
body o f the animal w o u l d have to be considered its true homeland, because 
the human soul is presumed to go there the m o m e n t i t regains its freedom. 
T h e doctrine o f transmigration indeed postulates this singular affinity but by 
no means explains it. T h e only explanation Tylor offers is that o n occasion 
certain traits o f the man's anatomy and psychology remind people o f the an-
imal. " T h e savage," he says, "observes the half-human traits, actions, and 
characteristics o f animals w i t h sympathetic wonderment. Is the animal not 
the very incarnation, we m i g h t say, o f qualities that are familiar to man; and 
w h e n we apply epithets like lion, bear, fox, o w l , parrot, viper, and w o r m to 
certain men, are we not epitomizing i n a w o r d certain traits characteristic o f 
a human life?"
1 1 B u t i f one does come u p o n any o f these resemblances, they 
are ambiguous and rare. M a n looks like his relatives and his friends most o f 
all, not like plants or animals. Such rare and dubious similarities could not 
defeat such consistent and obvious ones, nor could they encourage man to 
imagine himself and his ancestors i n forms that fly i n the face o f all his every-
day experience. So the question remains, and since i t is not solved, totemism 
cannot be said to have been explained.
1 2 
Finally, this w h o l e theory rests o n a fundamental misunderstanding. For 
Tylor as for W u n d t , totemism is n o t h i n g more than a special case o f animal 
"Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. II, p. 17. [Cf. Tylor's English text: "The half-human features and actions 
and characters of animals are watched with wondering sympathy by the savage, as by the child. The beast 
is the very incarnation of familiar qualities of man: and such names as lion, bear, fox, owl, parrot, viper, 
worm, when we apply them as epithets to men, condense into a word some leading features of a human 
life." Trans.] 
12[Wilhelm] Wundt, who took up Tylor's theory in its basic outlines, tried to explain this mysterious 
relation of man and animal otherwise—with sight of the decomposing corpse supposedly suggesting the 
idea of it. Having seen the worms that come out of the body, they believed that the soul was incarnated 
in them and departed with them. So the worms and by extension the reptiles (snakes, lizards, etc.) would 
be the first animals to have served as vessels for the souls of the dead; consequendy, they would also have 
been the first to be venerated and to play the role of totems. Only later would other animals, and even 
plants and inanimate objects, have been elevated to the same rank. But this hypothesis does not rest on 
even the beginnings of a proof. Wundt claims (Mythus und Religion, vol. II, p. 269) that the reptiles are 
much more common totems than the other animals, from which he concludes that they are the most 
primitive. But it is impossible for me to see what can justify that assertion, in support of 
which the author 
does not adduce a single fact. It in no way emerges 
from 
the lists of totems collected, whether in Australia 
or in America, that any animal species, anywhere, has had a preponderant role. Totems vary 
from 
one re-
gion to another with the state of the 
flora 
and fauna. Moreover, if the original set of totems had been so 
narrowly restricted, it is not clear how totemism would have been able to satisfy the fundamental princi-
ple that two clans or subclans of a single tribe must have different totems. 


Origins of These Beliefs 
173 
worship.
1 3 W e know, quite to the contrary, that i t must be seen as something 
entirely different from a sort o f zoolatry.
1 4 T h e animal is not worshipped. 
A n d far from being subordinated to i t as a believer is to his god, the man is 
almost its equal and sometimes even treats i t as his property. I f the animals o f 
the totemic species really were thought o f as incarnating the ancestors, m e m -
bers o f other clans w o u l d not be allowed to eat their flesh freely. I n reality, 
the cult is not addressed to the animal itself but to the emblem, that is, to the 
image o f the totem. I n fact, there is no connection between this religion o f 
the emblem and the cult o f the ancestors. 
Whereas Tylor reduces totemism to the cult o f the ancestors, Jevons ties 
it to the cult o f nature.
1 5 This is h o w he does so. 
I n the grip o f confusion brought u p o n h i m by irregularities i n the course 
o f natural phenomena, man supposedly populated the w o r l d w i t h supernat-
ural beings.
1 6 H a v i n g done this, he felt the need to come to terms w i t h the 
awesome forces w i t h w h i c h he had surrounded himself. H e understood that 
the best way to avoid being crushed by t h e m was to ally himself w i t h certain 
o f them, thereby garnering their help. A t that m o m e n t i n history, he k n e w 
no other f o r m o f alliance and association than that created by kinship. A l l the 
members o f the same clan help one another because they are k i n or (what 
amounts to the same thing) because they consider one another as k i n ; o n the 
other hand, different clans treat one another as enemies because they are o f 
different blood. So the only way to arrange the support o f supernatural be-
ings was to adopt t h e m and to have oneself adopted by t h e m as k i n . T h e 
w e l l - k n o w n procedures o f blood covenant enabled man to obtain this result 
easily. B u t since, at that moment, the individual d i d not yet have his o w n per-
sonality, because he was viewed only as a certain part o f his group—that is, 
his clan—it was not the individual but the clan as a unit that contracted the 
kinship jointly. For the same reason, the individual d i d not contract i t w i t h a 
particular object but w i t h the natural group, that is, w i t h the species to w h i c h 
the object belonged. M a n thinks o f the w o r l d as he thinks o f himself and, just 
as he does not think o f himself as being separate from his clan, so he cannot 
""Certain animals are sometimes worshipped," says Tylor, "because they are regarded as the incarna-
tion of the divine soul of 
the ancestors; this belief constitutes a sort of common denominator between the 
cult rendered to the shades and the cult rendered to the animals" (Primitive Culture, vol. II, p. 305; cf. 309 
in 
fine). Similarly, Wundt presents totemism as a branch of animalism (Mythus und Religion, vol. II, p. 234). 
14See above, p. 139. 
15[Frank Byron] Jevons, Introduction to the History of Religion [London, Methuen, 1902, pp. 96ff.]. 
16See above, p. 25. 


174 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
think o f a thing as being separate from the species to w h i c h it belongs. A c -
cording to Jevons, a species o f things that is united w i t h a clan by ties o f k i n -
ship is a totem. 
It is certain that totemism involves a close association between a clan and 
a definite category o f objects. B u t the n o t i o n Jevons puts forward—that such 
an association was contracted deliberately, i n full awareness o f the goal 
sought—seems i n little accord w i t h what history teaches us. Religions are 
complex things, and the needs they satisfy are so numerous and so obscure 
that they cannot possibly have originated i n a well-considered act o f w i l l . 
Moreover, this hypothesis b o t h sins by oversimplification and abounds i n u n -
likelihoods. M a n is said to have tried to garner the help o f the supernatural 
beings to w h i c h things are subordinate. B u t i n that case, he ought to have ad-
dressed himself to the most powerful among them, to those whose protec-
tion was likely to produce the m a x i m u m result.
1 7 Instead, the beings w i t h 
w h i c h he has cemented this mystical kinship most often include the h u m -
blest that exist. Furthermore, i f i t truly was only a matter o f creating allies 
and defenders, man w o u l d have tried to have as many as possible; there is no 
such thing as being too well protected. Yet each clan routinely contents itself 
w i t h a single totem—that is, w i t h a single protector—leaving the other clans 
to enjoy their o w n i n perfect freedom. Each group stricdy encloses itself 
w i t h i n its o w n religious domain, never trying to encroach u p o n that o f its 
neighbors. W i t h i n the terms o f the hypothesis w e are examining, such dis-
cretion and restraint are unintelligible. 
II 
Further, all o f these theories wrongly o m i t a question that is central to the 
subject as a whole. W e have seen that there are t w o sorts o f totemism: that o f 
the individual and that o f the clan. T h e close links between them are too o b -
vious for them to be unrelated. So, it is appropriate to ask whether the one is 
not derived from the other and, i f the answer is yes, to ask w h i c h is the more 
primitive. According to the solution adopted, the problem o f h o w totemism 
originated w i l l be framed i n different terms. This question is all the more 
pressing since i t is o f very general interest. Individual totemism is the i n d i v i d -
ual aspect o f the totemic cult. Thus, i f it came first, w e must say that religion 
1
7Jevons himself recognizes this. "There is good reason to presume," he says, "that in the choice of an 
ally, man would have preferred . . . the species that possessed the greatest power" (History of Religions, p. 
101). 


Origins of These Beliefs 
175 
was b o r n i n the individual consciousness, that i t responds above all to i n d i -
vidual aspirations, and that it has taken a collective f o r m only secondarily. 
T h e simplistic reasoning that still too often guides ethnographers and so-
ciologists, i n this case as i n others, was b o u n d to lead a number o f scholars to 
explain the complex by the simple and the totem o f the group by that o f the 
individual. A n d indeed, the theory argued by Frazer i n his Golden 
Bough,
18 
by H i l l T o u t ,
1 9 Miss Fletcher,
2 0 Boas,
2 1 and Swanton,
2 2 is o f this k i n d . M o r e -
over, since religion is widely viewed as an altogether private and personal 
thing, this theory has the advantage o f being i n accord w i t h the idea many 
people have o f religion. W i t h i n this perspective, the totem o f the clan can 
only be an individual totem that has spread. A prominent man w h o has ex-
perienced the value o f a totem he freely chose for himself transmits it to his 
descendants. M u l t i p l y i n g as time goes o n , these descendants eventually f o r m 
the extended family that is the clan; thus does the totem become collective. 
H i l l Tout thought he found support for that theory i n the way totemism 
is understood i n certain societies o f the American Northwest, notably by the 
Salish and the T h o m p s o n River Indians. B o t h individual totemism and the 
totemism o f the clan are found among these peoples, but they either do not 
coexist i n the same tribe or are unequally developed w h e n they do. They 
vary i n inverse proportion w i t h one another. W h e r e the clan totem tends to 
be the general rule, individual totem tends to disappear, and vice versa. Is this 
not to say that the first is a more recent f o r m o f the second, w h i c h replaces 
and thus excludes i t ?
2 3 M y t h o l o g y appears to c o n f i r m this interpretation. I n 
the same societies, i t turns out, the ancestor o f the clan is not a totemic ani-
mal, but the founder o f the group is usually depicted as a human being w h o 
1
8Qames George Frazer, The Golden Bough:A Study in Magic and Religion, 2d ed., vol. Ill, New York, 
Macmillan, 1894], pp. 416ff.; see esp. p. 419 n. 5. In more recent articles, to be analyzed below, Frazer has 
put forward a different theory that nevertheless does not completely exclude from his thinking the one 
presented in the Golden Bough. 
"[Charles Hill Tout], "The Origin of the Totemism of the Aborigines of British Columbia," RSC, 
vol. VII, §2 (2d series), (1901) pp. 3ff. Similarly, "Report on the Ethnology of the Statlumh," JAI, vol. 
XXXV (1905), p. 141. Hill Tout has answered various objections that have been made against his theory 
in volume IX of the RSC, pp. 61-99. 
2 0 Alice C. Fletcher, "The Import of the Totem: [A Study from the Omaha Tribe]," RSI for 1897 
(Washington, Government Printing Office, 1898), pp.- 577-586. 
21Franz Boas, "The Social Organization and Secret Societies of the Kwakiud Indians" [in RNMfor 
1895, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1897], pp. 323ff., 336-338, 393. 
22[John Reed Swanton], "The Development of the Clan System [and of Secret Societies among the 
North-Western Tribes]," in AA, vol. VI (new ser., 1904), pp. 477-864. 
23Hill Tout, "Ethnology of the Stadumh," p. 142. 


176 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
at some point entered into relations and close dealings w i t h a mythical ani-
mal, 
from w h i c h he is held to have acquired his totemic emblem. This 
emblem, w i t h the special powers that are attached to i t , is then passed by i n -
heritance to the descendants o f the mythical hero. Hence these peoples 
themselves appear to see the collective t o t e m as an individual one that was 
passed o n i n a single family.
2 4 Furthermore, even today a father sometimes 
transmits his o w n totem to his children. So to imagine that the collective 
totem has had this same o r i g i n universally is no more than to state that some-
thing still observable i n the present was the same i n the past.
2 5 
Still to be explained is the o r i g i n o f individual totemism. T h e response 
to this question varies among authors. 
H i l l Tout views i t as a special case o f fetishism. For h i m , it is the i n d i v i d -
ual w h o , feeling himself surrounded by dreaded spirits, feels the same e m o -
t i o n that Jevons attributed to the clan: To sustain himself, he seeks some 
powerful protector i n the hidden w o r l d . Thus is the custom o f the personal 
totem established.
2 6 For Frazer, this same institution is a subterfuge, a m i l i -
tary ruse m e n invent to escape certain dangers. W e k n o w that, according to 
a very c o m m o n belief i n a great many lower societies, the human soul can 
temporarily leave the body i n w h i c h i t lives, w i t h o u t i l l effects; no matter 
h o w far away from the body i t may go, i t goes o n animating that body by a 
k i n d o f action at a distance. B u t at certain critical moments w h e n life is 
thought to be particularly threatened, there may be something to gain by 
w i t h d r a w i n g the soul from the body and depositing i t i n a place or thing 
where i t w o u l d be safer. There are, i n fact, various methods o f extracting the 
soul, thereby removing i t from some real or imaginary danger. 
For example, w h e n people are o n the point o f entering a newly built 
house, a magician extracts their souls and places t h e m i n a bag, for return to 
the owners once the threshold has been crossed. This is done because the 
m o m e n t o f entering a n e w house is exceptionally critical. There is a risk o f 
disturbing and thus offending the spirits that live i n the ground, especially 
under the door sill, and i f a man d i d not take precautions, they could make 
h i m pay dearly for his boldness. O n c e the danger is past, once he has been 
able to prevent their anger, and even garner their support by conducting cer-
24Ibid., p. 150. Cf. [Franz Boas, "First General Report on the Indians of 
British Columbia," in BAAS, 
Fifth Report of the Committee on the North-Western Tribes of the Dominion of Canada (London, Offices of the 
Association, 1890),] p. 24. I have reported a myth of this sort above. 
25Hill Tout, "Ethnology of the Stadumh," p. 147. 
26Hill Tout, "Totemism of the Aborigines," p. 12. 


Origins of These Beliefs 
177 
tain rites, the souls can safely return to their usual place.
2 7 This same belief, 
H i l l Tout thinks, gave rise to the individual totem. To protect themselves 
from magical charms, m e n thought it prudent to hide their souls i n the 
anonymous crowd o f an animal or plant species. B u t having set up such deal-
ings, each individual found himself closely j o i n e d w i t h the animal or plant i n 
w h i c h his life-principle presumably resided. T w o beings so closely j o i n e d 
ended up by being considered more or less indistinguishable: They were 
thought to participate i n one another's nature. Once accepted, this belief 
eased and activated the transformation o f the personal totem into a heredi-
tary totem and, thereafter, into a collective one, for i t seemed altogether o b -
vious that this kinship o f nature must be transmitted by heredity from father 
to children. 
I w i l l not tarry l o n g i n discussing these t w o explanations o f the i n d i v i d -
ual totem. T h e y are ingenious intellectual constructions, but they are totally 
w i t h o u t empirical support. For totemism to be reducible to fetishism, i t 
w o u l d have to be established that fetishism preceded totemism. N o t only is 
no evidence given to prove this hypothesis, but i t is also contradicted by all 
we know. T h e ill-defined collection o f rites that are given the name fetishism 
seems to appear only among peoples w h o have already arrived at a certain 
level o f civilization; i t is a k i n d o f cult that is u n k n o w n i n Australia. T h e 
churinga has been called a fetish,
2 8 true enough, but even i f that character-
ization was warranted, i t could not demonstrate the p r i o r i t y that is assumed. 
Quite to the contrary, the churinga presupposes totemism, since i n its very 
essence it is an instrument o f the totemic cult and since it owes the virtues 
ascribed to it to totemic beliefs alone. 
T u r n i n g n o w to Frazer's theory, this author assumes a k i n d o f thorough-
going idiocy o n the part o f the primitive that the facts do not allow us to as-
cribe to h i m . H e does have a logic, strange though i t may sometimes seem to 
us. Short o f being utterly w i t h o u t logic, he could not be guilty o f the rea-
soning that is imputed to h i m . N o t h i n g was more natural than for h i m to 
have believed that he could ensure the survival o f his soul by hiding i t i n a se-
cret and inaccessible place, as so many heroes o f myths and legends are said 
to have done. B u t h o w could he have j u d g e d his soul to be safer i n an ani-
mal's body than i n his own? O f course, the chances are that i t could more 
27Frazer, The Golden Bough vol. Ill, pp. 351fF. Wilken had already noted similar facts in "De Simon-
sage," in De Gids, 1890; "De Betrekking tusschen Menschen-Dieren en Plantenleve," in Indische Gids, 
1884, 1888; Ueber das Haaropfer, in Revue coloniale Internationale, pp. 1886-1887. 
28For example, [Erhard] Eylmann in Die Eingeborenen der Kolonie Sudaustralien [Berlin, D. Reimer, 
1908], p. 199. 


178 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
easily have escaped the spells o f the magician by being lost i n the species, but 
it thereby found itself at the same time a sitting duck for hunters. H i d i n g it 
i n a physical f o r m that exposed i t to danger at all times was an odd way to 
shelter i t .
2 9 M o s t o f all, it is inconceivable that whole peoples should have 
been able to give themselves over to such an eccentricity.
3 0 Finally, i n a great 
many cases, the function o f the individual totem is manifesdy very different 
from the function Frazer ascribes to it. First and foremost, i t is a means o f 
conferring unusual powers u p o n magicians, hunters, and warriors.
3 1 So far as 
the solidarity o f the man w i t h the thing is concerned (given all the drawbacks 
o f solidarity), i t is accepted as an unavoidable consequence o f the rite, but is 
not desired i n and o f itself. 
Another reason not to tarry over this controversy is that i t is beside the 
point. W h a t is important to know, above all, is whether the individual totem 
really is the primitive fact from w h i c h the collective t o t e m derives. Depend-
ing u p o n our answer, we w i l l have to l o o k i n t w o opposite directions for the 
seat o f religious life. 
There is such a confluence o f decisive facts against the hypothesis o f H i l l 
Tout, Miss Fletcher, Boas, and Frazer that one wonders h o w it could have 
been accepted so easily and so widely. 
First, we k n o w that man often has a pressing interest not only i n re-
specting the animals o f the species that serves as his personal totem but also 
i n having it respected by his fellow men: His o w n life is at stake. Thus, even 
29Mrs. Parker says of the Euahlayi that if the Yunbeai "confers exceptional power, it also exposes one 
to exceptional dangers, for all that injures the animal injures the man" ([Catherine Somerville Field 
Parker, The Euahlayi Tribe, London, A. Constable, 1905], p. 29). 
^In an earlier work ("The Origin of Totemism," in FR (May, 1899), pp. 844—845), Frazer raises the 
objection himself. He says, "If I left my soul in the body of a rabbit, and if my brother John (member of 
a different clan) kills, roasts, and eats that rabbit, what happens to my soul? To prevent this danger, my 
brother John has to know this situation of my soul, and in consequence, when he kills a rabbit, he must 
be careful to take that soul out of it and give it back to me before cooking the animal and making it his 
dinner." Frazer believes he finds this practice customary in the tribes of central Australia. Each year, dur-
ing a rite that I will describe below, when the animals of the new generation reach maturity, the first game 
killed is presented to the men of the totem, who eat a little; and it is only afterward that the men of the 
other clans may eat it freely. This, says Frazer, is a means of returning to the men of the totem the soul 
that they may have entrusted to those animals. But apart from the fact that this interpretation of the rite 
is completely arbitrary, it is difficult not to find this method of protection extraordinary. The ceremony is 
annual, allowing many days to pass after the moment the animal was killed. During this 
time, 
what has 
become of 
the soul it guarded and of the individual whose life-principle of 
life that soul is? But it is point-
less to emphasize all that is unlikely about that explanation. 
31Parker, Euahlayi, p. 20; [Alfred William] Howitt, "Australian Medicine Men," in JAI, vol. XVI 
(1887), 34, [49-50]; Hill Tout, "Ethnology of the Statlumh," p. 146. 


Origins of These Beliefs 
179 
i f collective totemism was not the generalized f o r m o f the individual totem, 
it should rest o n the same principle. N o t only should the people o f a clan ab-
stain from killing and eating their totemic animal themselves, but they should 
also do everything i n their power to impose this same restriction u p o n o t h -
ers. As it turns out, far from imposing any such privation o n the w h o l e tribe, 
each clan (by means o f the rites that I w i l l later describe) takes steps to ensure 
that the plant or animal whose name it bears increases and prospers, so as to 
provide abundant food to the other clans. Thus it should at least be granted 
that individual totemism profoundly transformed itself i n becoming collec-
tive and that this transformation must be explained. 
Second, h o w can this hypothesis explain why, except where totemism is 
i n decline, t w o clans o f the same tribe always have different totems? N o t h i n g 
w o u l d seem to prevent t w o or several members o f a single tribe from choos-
ing personal totems from the same animal species, despite their having no tie 
o f kinship, and then passing i t o n to their descendants. Does i t not happen 
today that t w o distinct families bear the same name? T h e strictly regulated 
manner i n w h i c h totems and subtotems are distributed between the t w o 
phratries first, and then among the various clans o f each phratry, obviously 
presupposes a societal consensus and a collective organization. I n other 
words, totemism is something other than an individual practice that has 
spontaneously generalized itself. 
Furthermore, collective totemism can be reduced to individual totemism 
only i f the differences between t h e m are misconstrued. T h e one is assigned 
to the child by b i r t h and is an element o f his civil status. T h e other is ac-
quired i n the course o f life and presupposes the performance o f a specific rite 
as well as a change o f state. Some t h i n k they are lessening this distance by i n -
serting between them, as a k i n d o f middle term, the right that anyone w h o 
has a totem supposedly has to transmit i t to whomever he pleases. B u t w h e r -
ever one observes them, such transfers are rare and relatively exceptional; 
they can be done only by magicians or other persons gifted w i t h special 
powers,
3 2 and, i n any event, they can take place only by means o f ritual cer-
emonies that effect the change. So i t w o u l d then be necessary to explain h o w 
something that was the prerogative o f certain people later became the right 
o f all; h o w something that implied a profound change i n the religious and 
moral constitution o f the individual could have become an element o f that 
32According to Hill Tout himself, "The gift or transmission (of a personal totem) can only be effectu-
ated by certain persons like shamans or men who possess great mystical power" ("Ethnology of the 
Statlumh," p. 146). Cf. Parker, Euahlayi, pp. 29-30. 


180 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
constitution; and, finally, h o w a transmission that at first was the outcome o f 
a rite, was considered thereafter to produce itself, inescapably and w i t h o u t 
the intervention o f any human w i l l . 
I n support o f his interpretation, H i l l Tout alleges that certain myths i m -
pute an individual o r i g i n to the t o t e m o f the clan. T h e y tell h o w the totemic 
emblem was acquired by a particular individual w h o then transmitted it to 
his descendants. These myths, however, are taken from Indian tribes i n 
N o r t h America, that is, from societies that have attained a rather high level 
o f culture. H o w could a mythology so far removed from its origins enable us 
to reconstruct the original f o r m o f an institution w i t h any confidence? T h e 
likelihood is that intervening causes gready distorted the m e m o r y that these 
m e n could have kept. M o r e than that, i t is very easy to set against these myths 
other myths that seem more primitive and whose meaning is entirely differ-
ent. I n the myths, the totem is represented as the very being from w h i c h the 
clan is descended. Hence i t constitutes the substance o f the clan; individuals 
carry i t from birth, and, far from having come to t h e m from outside t h e m -
selves, i t is part o f their flesh and b l o o d .
3 3 Furthermore, the very myths o n 
w h i c h H i l l Tout relies themselves echo that ancient idea. T h e eponymous 
founder o f the clan does indeed have the f o r m o f a man, but i t is a man 
thought to have ended up resembling a definite species o f animals after hav-
ing lived among them. This probably happened because there came a time 
w h e n minds became too sophisticated to go o n accepting, as they had i n the 
past, that m e n could be an animal's offspring. T h e y therefore substituted a 
human being for the animal ancestor, the idea o f w h i c h had become unten-
able; but they imagined the man as having acquired certain animal features 
by imitation or by other means. Thus, even this recent mythology bears the 
mark o f a more distant epoch w h e n the t o t e m o f the clan was not at all c o n -
ceived o f as a sort o f individual creation. 
But this hypothesis does not merely raise serious logical difficulties; i t is 
also directly contradicted by the facts that follow. 
I f individual totemism was the primitive fact, then the more primitive 
the societies, the more developed and more apparent it should be; and i n -
versely, we w o u l d expect to see it lose ground to the collective totem among 
the more advanced peoples and then disappear. T h e opposite is true. T h e 
Australian tribes are far more backward than those o f N o r t h America, but 
Australia is the classic locale o f collective totemism. In the great majority of 
3 3Cf. [Edwin Sidney] Hardand, "Totemism and Some Recent Discoveries," Folklore, vol. XI [1900], 
pp. 59ff. 


Origins of These Beliefs 
181 
tribes, it reigns alone, whereas there is none, to my knowledge, in which individual 
totemism is practiced alone.
34 Individual totemism i n its characteristic 
form is 
found 
i n an infinitesimal number o f tribes.
3 5 A n d where it is found, i t is most 
often i n only a rudimentary state, consisting o f individual and optional prac-
tices w i t h o u t wider scope. O n l y magicians k n o w the art o f creating mystical 
relationships w i t h the animal species to w h i c h they are not naturally related. 
Ordinary folk do not enjoy this privilege.
3 6 I n America, o n the other hand, 
the collective totem is i n full decline, and i n the societies o f the Northwest 
particularly, i t no longer has anything more than a rather unobtrusive reli-
gious character. Inversely, the individual totem plays a large role among these 
same peoples, where i t is credited w i t h great efficacy and has become an au-
thentically public institution. This is so because i t is characteristic o f a more 
advanced civilization. This, no doubt, is h o w the inversion between these 
t w o forms o f totemism that H i l l Tout thought he saw is to be understood. I f 
individual totemism is almost entirely absent where collective totemism is 
fully developed, it is not because the second gave way to the first but the 
other way around: because not all the conditions necessary to its existence 
have been met. 
Still more conclusive is the fact that individual totemism, far from hav-
i n g given rise to the totemism o f the clan, presupposes the clan. Individual 
totemism was b o r n i n and moves w i t h i n the framework o f collective t o t e m -
ism, f o r m i n g an integral part o f it. I n fact, i n the very societies where it is 
preponderant, the novices may not take just any animal as their personal 
totem; they are not permitted to make their choices outside a certain n u m -
ber o f particular species assigned to each clan. O n the other hand, the species 
that belong to each clan thus become its exclusive property; the members o f 
a foreign clan may not usurp t h e m .
3 7 Those species are thought o f as having 
close ties o f dependence w i t h the one that serves as the totem o f the entire 
clan. Indeed, i n some cases, these relationships are detectable, such as those 
MExcept perhaps among the Kurnai, but in that tribe, there are sexual as well a
s personal totems. 
55Among the Wotjobaluk, the Buandik, the Wiradjuri, the Yuin and the tribes neighboring Mary-
borough (Queensland). See [Alfred William] Howitt, Native Tribes [of South-East Australia, New York, 
Macmillan, 1904], pp. 114-147; [Robert Hamilton] Mathews, "Ethnological Notes on the Aboriginal 
Tribes of New South Wales and Victoria", RSNSW vol. XXXVIII (1904), p. 291. Cf. [Northcote 
Whitridge] Thomas, "Further Notes on Mr. Hill Tout's Views of Totemism," in Man [vol. IV], 1904, 53, 
p. 85. 
''This is true for the Euahlayi and for phenomena of personal totemism noted by Howitt in "Aus-
tralian Medicine Men," pp. 34, 45, 4
9
—
5
0
. 
"Fletcher, "The Import of the Totem," p. 586; Boas, "The Kwakiud Indians," p. 322. Similarly, Boas, 
"First Report on the Indians of 
British Columbia," p. 25; Hill Tout, "Ethnology of 
the Stadumh," p. 148. 


182 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
i n w h i c h the individual totem represents a part or a particular aspect o f the 
collective t o t e m .
3 8 A m o n g the Wotjobaluk, each member o f the clan c o n -
siders the personal totems o f his fellows as being somewhat his o w n ;
3 9 hence 
these are most probably subtotems. Just as the species presupposes the genus, 
so the subtotem presupposes the totem. Therefore, the first f o r m o f i n d i v i d -
ual religion that we meet i n history appears to us not as the active principle 
o f the public religion but as merely an aspect o f it. Far from being the seed 
o f the collective cult, the cult that the individual organizes for himself, and 
w i t h i n his inner self, is i n a sense the collective cult adapted to the needs o f 
the individual. 
Ill 
I n a more recent b o o k ,
4 0 w h i c h was suggested to h i m by the books o f 
Spencer and Gillen, Frazer tried to replace the explanation o f totemism that 
he originally proposed (and that I have just discussed) w i t h a new one. This 
new explanation rests o n the postulate that the totemism o f the Arunta is the 
38The proper names of different gentes, says Boas of the Tlinkit, are derived from their respective 
totems, each .
g
e
n
s having its special names. The connection between the name and the totem (collective) 
is sometimes not very apparent, but it always exists (Boas, "First Report on the Indians of British Co-
lumbia," p. 25). The phenomenon of individual names' being the property of the clan, and distinctive to 
it a
s surely as its totem, is also observed among the Iroquois ([Lewis Henry] Morgan, Ancient Society: [Or 
Researches in the Lines of 
Human Progress 
from Savagery through Barbarism to Civilization, London, Macmillan, 
1877], p. 78); among the Wyandot ([John Wesley] Powell, "Wyandot Government," First Annual Report, 
[1879-1880], BAE, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1881], p. 59); among the Shawnee, the 
Sauk, the Fox (Morgan, Ancient Society, pp. 72, 76—77); among the Omaha ([James Owen] Dorsey, 
"Omaha Sociology," in Third Annual Report [(1881-1882)] [BAE, Washington, Government Printing Of-
fice, 1884]L pp. 227ff.). We know what relation exists between given names and personal totems (see 
above, p. 159.) 
39"For example," says Mathews, "if 
you ask a Wartwurt man what his totem is, he will 
first 
tell you his 
personal totem, but, most likely, he will then enumerate the other personal totems of his clan" ("The 
Aboriginal Tribes," p. 291). 
"
•
"
[
J
a
m
e
s George] Frazer, "The Beginnings of Religion and Totemism among the Australian Aborig-
ines," in FR [vol. LXXXIV, old series, vol. LXVIII, new series] (July 1905), pp. 162ff., and (September 
1905), p. 452. Cf. Frazer "The Origin of Totemism," FR, vol. LXXI, old series, vol. LXV, new series 
(April 1899), pp. 648ff. and (May 1899), pp. 835ff. These latter articles, which are a little older, differ from 
the more recent on one point, but the core is not fundamentally different. Both are reproduced in 
Totemism and Exogamy, vol. I [London, Macmillan, 1910], pp. 89—172. See, in the same vein, [Sir Bald-
win] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen, "Some Remarks on Totemism as Applied to Australian Tribes," 
JAI, vol. XXVIII (1899), pp. 275—280, and the comments of Frazer on the same subject, Totemism and Ex-
ogamy, London, Macmillan, 1910, pp. 281—286. 


Origins of These Beliefs 
183 
most primitive we know. Frazer even goes so far as to say that it barely differs 
from the truly and absolutely original type.
4 1 
W h a t is noteworthy about this explanation is that the totems are attached 
neither to persons nor to definite groups o f persons but to places. Each totem 
does indeed have its center i n a particular place. It is there that the souls o f 
the first ancestors w h o formed the totemic group at the beginning o f time 
are thought to have their preferred residence. There is the sanctuary where 
the churingas are kept; there, the cult is celebrated. This geographic distri-
bution o f totems also determines the manner i n w h i c h the clans recruit their 
members. T h e child's totem is thus neither its father's nor its mother's but the 
one whose center is at the place where its mother believes she felt the first 
symptoms o f her c o m i n g motherhood. T h e Arunta does not k n o w the pre-
cise relations that connect the fact o f begetting to the sexual act,
4 2 it is said, 
but attributes every conception to a k i n d o f mystic impregnation. According 
to h i m , conception implies that an ancestral soul has gone into the body o f a 
w o m a n , there to become the principle o f a new life. Thus, w h e n the w o m a n 
feels the first stirrings o f the infant, she imagines that she has just been en-
tered by one o f the souls whose primary residence is at the place where she 
finds herself. A n d since the child b o r n thereafter is none other than that an-
cestor reincarnate, it necessarily has the same totem, w h i c h is to say that its 
clan is determined by the locality where he is held to have been mystically 
conceived. 
This local totemism w o u l d then be the original f o r m o f totemism, or at 
most but a very short step away from it. Frazer explains its o r i g i n thus. 
A t the precise instant w h e n the w o m a n feels she is pregnant, she must be 
t h i n k i n g that the spirit w i t h w h i c h she believes herself possessed has come to 
her from the objects surrounding her, and i n particular from one that was at-
tracting her attention at that instant. I f she has been busy collecting some 
plant or l o o k i n g after an animal, she w i l l believe that the soul o f this animal 
or that plant has passed into her. First among the things to w h i c h she w o u l d 
be especially inclined to attribute her pregnancy are the foods she has just 
eaten. I f she has recendy had emu or yam, she w i l l be i n no doubt that an 
emu or a yam has been b o r n and is developing i n her. That being the case, 
•""Perhaps we may... say that it is but one remove 
from 
the original pattern, the absolutely primi-
tive type of totemism" (Frazer, "The Beginnings," p. 455). 
4 2On this point, the testimony of [Carl] Strehlow confirms that of Spencer and Gillen ([Die Aranda-
und Loritja-Stamme in Zentral-Australien], vol. 1
1 [New York, Dover, 1968], p. 52). In the opposite vein, see 
[Andrew] Lang, The Secret of the Totem [London, Longmans, 1905], p. 190. 


184 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
one understands why, i n turn, the baby should be considered a k i n d o f yam 
or emu, w h y he should regard himself as a kinsman o f animals or plants o f the 
same species, w h y he should show t h e m friendship and consideration, w h y 
he should bar himself from eating them, and so f o r t h .
4 3 F r o m then on, 
totemism exists i n its fundamental features. Since, supposedly, the native's 
idea o f conception gave b i r t h to totemism, Frazer calls this primeval totem-
ism "conceptional." 
A l l the other forms o f totemism w o u l d then derive from this first type. 
" I f several w o m e n , one after another, perceive the first signs o f maternity i n 
the same place and the same circumstances, that place w i l l be regarded as be-
ing haunted by spirits o f a particular sort; and so, i n time, the region w i l l be 
endowed w i t h totemic centers and divided into totemic districts."
4 4 This is 
how, o n Frazer's account, the local totemism o f the Arunta was born. For the 
totems to become detached from their territorial base, all it w i l l take is to 
imagine that instead o f remaining immutably fixed i n one place, the ances-
tral souls can move freely over the w h o l e territory and follow the travels o f 
the m e n and w o m e n w h o are o f the same t o t e m as they. I n that fashion, it 
w i l l be possible for a w o m a n to be impregnated by a spirit o f her o w n totem 
or her husband's, even though she is living i n a different totemic district. D e -
pending o n whether it is the husband's t o t e m or the wife's that is imagined 
to be trading the young couple, o n the lookout for opportunities to reincar-
nate itself, the child's t o t e m w i l l be that o f its father or mother. I n fact, the 
Gnanji and the Umbaia, o n the one hand, and the Urabunna, o n the other, 
do indeed explain their systems o f descent i n this way. 
But like Tylor's, this theory begs the question. I f i t is to be imaginable 
that human souls are the souls o f animals or plants, i t must already be believed 
that man takes what is most fundamental to h i m from either the animal or 
plant w o r l d . This belief is precisely one o f those o n w h i c h totemism is based, 
so to put it forward as self-evident is to assume what must be explained. 
Moreover, the religious character o f the t o t e m is w h o l l y unexplainable 
i n terms o f this view, for the vague belief i n an obscure kinship o f man and 
animal is not enough to found a cult. This merging o f distinct realms cannot 
lead to dividing the w o r l d between the sacred and the profane. I t is true that 
4 3A closely related idea had already been expressed by [Alfred C] Haddon in his "Address to the An-
thropological Section" (BAAS, 1902, 8ff.). He assumes that each local group originally had a food that 
was especially its own. The plant or animal that thus served as the principal item of consumption would 
have become the totem of the group. All these explanations imply that the prohibitions against eating the 
totemic animal were not original and were even preceded by the opposite prescription. 
44Frazer, "The Beginnings," p. 458. 


Origins of These Beliefs 
185 
Frazer is self-consistent and refuses to see totemism as a religion—on the 
grounds that there are neither spiritual beings nor prayers nor invocations nor 
offerings, and so on. According to h i m , i t is only a system o f magic, by w h i c h 
he means a crude and erroneous sort o f science, a first try at discovering the 
laws o f things.
4 5 B u t we k n o w what is w r o n g w i t h this idea o f religion and 
magic. There is religion as soon as the sacred is distinguished from the pro-
fane, and we have seen that totemism is a vast system o f sacred things. So to 
explain it is to show h o w those things came to acquire that trait.
4 6 Tylor does 
not even set this problem. 
W h a t brings about the downfall o f this system is that the postulate o n 
w h i c h it rests is untenable. A l l o f Frazers argumentation assumes that the l o -
cal totemism o f the A r u n t a is the most primitive k n o w n , and i n particular 
that i t is distinctly prior to hereditary totemism, whether matrilineal or pa-
trilineal. B y following only the facts available i n the first w o r k o f Spencer and 
Gillen, I have been able to conjecture that there must have been a m o m e n t 
i n the history o f the Arunta people w h e n the totems were transmitted by i n -
heritance from the mother to the children instead o f being attached to local-
ities.
4 7 This conjecture is definitively proved by the new facts that Strehlow
4 8 
discovered and that c o n f i r m previous observations by Schulze.
4 9 I n fact, these 
t w o authors i n f o r m us that, even now, i n addition to his local totem, each 
A r u n t a has another that is independent o f any geographic condition and be-
longs to h i m by birth: that o f his mother. Like the first, this second t o t e m is 
considered by the natives as a friendly and protective power that provides for 
their food, warns t h e m o f possible dangers, and so forth. They are permitted 
to take part i n its cult. W h e n they are buried, the body is so arranged that the 
45Frazer, "The Origin of Totemism," p. 835, and "The Beginnings," pp. 162ff. 
4 6All the while seeing totemism as nothing but a system of magic, Frazer recognizes that one some-
times finds in magic the first seeds of religion properly so called ("The Beginnings," p. 163). On the way 
in which he thinks religion developed out of magic, see Golden Bough, 2d ed., vol. I, pp. 75-78 n. 2. 
47[Emile Durkheim], "Sur le totémisme," AS, vol. V (1902), pp. 82—121. Cf. on this same question, 
[Edwin Sidney] Hartland, "Presidential Address [Totemism and Some Recent Discoveries,]" Folklore, vol. 
XI [(1900)] p. 75; [Andrew] Lang, "A Theory of Arunta Totemism," Man [vol. IV] (1904), no. 44, [pp. 
67-69]; Lang, "Conceptional Totemism and Exogamy," Man, vol. VII, 1907, 55, pp. 8
8
—
9
0
; Lang, The 
Secret of the Totem, ch. IV; [Northcote W.] Thomas, "Arunta Totemism [a Note on Mr. Lang's Theory]," 
Man, vol. IV, (1904), 68, pp. 99—101; P. W. Schmidt, "Die Stellung der Aranda unter den australischen 
Stammen, in ZE, vol. XL (1908), pp. 866ff. 
48Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, pp. 57-58. 
49[Rev. Louis] Schulze, "Aborigines of the Upper and Middle Finke River," RSSA, vol. XVI, 1891, 
pp. 238-239. 


186 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
face is turned toward the region where the mother's totemic center is this, 
because the center is also i n some respect that o f the deceased. A n d thus, i t is 
given the name tmara altjira, w h i c h means, "camp o f the t o t e m that is associ-
ated w i t h me." Hence i t is certain that, among the Arunta, hereditary 
totemism i n the maternal line d i d not come later than local totemism but, 
quite the contrary, must have preceded it. Today the maternal totem has no 
more than an accessory and complementary role; it is a second totem, and 
this explains w h y i t could have escaped such careful and well-informed o b -
servers as Spencer and Gillen. B u t for that t o t e m to have been able to m a i n -
tain itself i n this second rank, used side by side w i t h the local totem, there 
must have been a time w h e n i t occupied the first rank i n religious life. I t is 
i n part a t o t e m that has lapsed, but one that harks back to an era w h e n the 
totemic organization o f the Arunta was very different from today's. Thus is 
Frazer's entire construction undermined at its foundation.
5 0 
IV 
A l t h o u g h A n d r e w Lang has vigorously attacked Frazer's theory, his o w n , as 
proposed i n recent w o r k s ,
5 1 is close to i t o n more than one point. Indeed, 
like Frazer, he takes the w h o l e o f totemism to consist o f belief i n a sort o f 
consubstantiality between man and animal, but he explains i t differently. 
H e derives it entirely from the fact that the t o t e m is a name. According 
to h i m , from the m o m e n t organized h u m a n groups come into existence,
5 2 
each feels the need to distinguish itself from the neighboring groups w i t h 
w h i c h i t is i n contact and, to this end, gives t h e m different names. Names 
taken from the environing flora and fauna are preferred, because animals and 
plants can easily be designated by means o f gestures or represented by draw-
5 0It is true that Frazer says, in the conclusion of Totemism and Exogamy (vol. IV, pp. 58—59), that there 
exists a soil more ancient totemism than that of the Arunta. It is that which [W. H. R.] Rivers observed 
on the Banks Islands ("Totemism in Polynesia and Melanesia," JAI vol. XXXIX [1909], p. 172. Among 
the Arunta, it is an ancestor spirit that is held to impregnate the mother; on the Banks Islands, it is an an-
imal or plant spirit, as the theory supposes. But as the ancestral spirits of the Arunta have an animal or 
plant form, the difference is upheld. Hence, I have not treated it in my exposition. 
51Lang, Social Origins, esp. chap. 8, "The Origin of Totem Names and Beliefs"; and The Secret of the 
Totem. 
"Especially in his Social Origins, Lang uses conjecture to try to reconstruct the form these original 
groups must have had. It seems unnecessary to restate those hypotheses, which do not affect his theory of 
totemism. 


Origins of These Beliefs 
187 
ings.
5 3 T h e more or less exact resemblances that m e n can have w i t h one or 
another o f those objects defines the manner i n w h i c h these collective nam-
ings are distributed among the groups.
5 4 
It is well k n o w n that "for primitive minds, names and the things desig-
nated by those names are j o i n e d i n a mystic and transcendental relation-
ship."
5 5 For example, the name an individual bears is not regarded simply as 
a w o r d or a conventional sign but as an essential part o f the individual h i m -
self. Thus, w h e n i t is the name o f an animal, the man w h o bears it must nec-
essarily believe that he possesses the most characteristic traits o f that animal. 
This idea gained credence the more easily as the historical origins o f these 
namings receded into the past and gradually disappeared from people's m e m -
ories. M y t h s formed to make this strange ambiguity o f human nature easier 
to envisage. To explain it, people thought o f the animal as the man's ances-
tor or o f b o t h as descendants o f a c o m m o n ancestor. Thus were conceived 
the bonds o f kinship that are said to j o i n each clan w i t h the species whose 
name it bears. Once the origins o f that mythical kinship are explained, i t 
seems to our author that the mystery o f totemism is gone. 
But, then, from what does the religious character o f totemic beliefs and 
practices arise? Man's belief that he is an animal o f some species does not ex-
plain w h y he imputes amazing virtues to that species or, most o f all, w h y he 
renders a genuine cult to the images that symbolize it. To this question Lang 
offers the same response as Frazer: H e denies that totemism is a religion. " I 
find i n Australia," he says, "no example o f religious practices such as praying 
to, feeding, or b u r y i n g the t o t e m . "
5 6 O n l y i n a later age and after i t was al-
ready organized was totemism, so to speak, attracted to and absorbed into a 
system o f properly religious ideas. According to an observation by H o w i t t ,
5 7 
w h e n the natives set out to explain the totemic institutions, they attribute 
t h e m neither to the totems themselves, nor to a man, but to some supernat-
ural being such as B u n j i l or Baiame. " I f , " says Lang, "we accept this testi-
mony, one source o f the religious character o f totemism stands revealed to us. 
5 3On this point, Lang is close to the theory of 
Julius Pikler (see [Julius] Pikler and [Felix] Szomlo, Der 
Urspmng des Totemismus. Ein Beitrag zur materialistischen Geschichtstheorie [Berlin, K. Hoffmann, 1900], p.
36). The difference between the two hypotheses is that Pikler ascribes greater importance to the picto-
graphic representation of the name than to the name itself. 
54Lang, Social Origins, p. 166. 
55Lang, The Secret of the Totem, pp. 116-117, 121. 
56Ibid., p. 136. 
"Howitt, "Further Notes on the Australian Class Systems," JAI [vol. XVIII, 1889], pp. 53-54; cf. Na-
tive Tribes, pp. 89, 488, 498. 


188 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
Totemism obeys the decrees o f Bunjil, as the Cretans obeyed the decrees o f 
Zeus at Minos." According to Lang, the n o t i o n o f h i g h gods was formed 
outside the totemic system. Therefore this system is not i n itself a religion; 
it became colored w i t h religiousness only through contact w i t h a religion, 
properly so called. 
B u t those very myths are i n conflict w i t h Lang's idea o f totemism. I f the 
Australians had seen the totem as n o t h i n g more than a human and profane 
thing, they w o u l d not have imagined m a k i n g a divine institution out o f it. If, 
o n the other hand, they felt the need to relate the totem to a deity, they did 
so because they acknowledged its sacredness. These mythological interpreta-
tions thus display, but do not explain, the religious nature o f totemism. 
Besides, Lang himself realizes that this solution cannot possibly do. H e 
admits that totemic things are treated w i t h religious respect
5 8 and that, i n 
particular, the b l o o d o f the animal (like that o f the man, incidentally) is the 
object o f multiple prohibitions or o f taboos, as he says, that this more or less 
late mythology cannot explain.
5 9 Where, then, do they come from? Lang an-
swers the question i n these terms: "As soon as the groups w i t h names o f an-
imals had developed universally held beliefs about wakan and mana, or about 
the mystical and sacred quality o f the blood, the various totemic taboos must 
also have made their appearance."
6 0 As we w i l l see i n the next chapter, the 
words wakan and mana i m p l y the idea o f sacred itself (the first is taken 
from 
the language o f the Sioux, the second from that o f the Melanesian peoples). 
To explain this sacredness o f totemic things by postulating i t is to answer the 
question w i t h the question. W h a t should be shown is where this n o t i o n o f 
wakan comes from, and h o w i t is applied to the totem and to all that derives 
from the totem. So l o n g as these t w o problems go unsolved, nothing is ex-
plained. 
V 
I have reviewed these principal explanations o f totemic beliefs,
6 1 trying to do 
justice to each one individually. N o w that this examination is completed, I 
can note that all are subject to the same criticism. 
58"With reverence," as Lang says (The Secret of the Totem, p. 111). 
59To these taboos, Lang adds those that are at the basis of the practices of exogamy. 
60Lang, ibid., pp. 136-137. 
6 1I have not spoken about Spencer's theory. This is because it is only a special case of the general the-
ory by which he explains the transformation of the cult of the dead into a cult of nature. Having already 
set it forth, I would be repeating myself here. 


Origins of These Beliefs 
189 
I f w e restrict our inquiry to what these formulas literally say, they seem 
to fall into t w o categories. Some (Frazer's and Langs) deny the religious 
character o f totemism, but that amounts to denying the facts. Others ac-
knowledge this religious character but believe they can explain it by deriving 
it from an earlier religion, treating totemism as its offspring. I n reality, this 
distinction is more apparent than real, the first category being contained 
w i t h i n the second. Neither Frazer nor Lang has been able to h o l d o n to his 
principle entirely and explain totemism as i f it was not a religion. T h e nature 
o f the facts forced t h e m to slide notions o f a religious nature into their ex-
planations. W e have just seen h o w Lang had to b r i n g i n the idea o f the sa-
cred, the bedrock idea o f any religion. For his part, Frazer overdy calls o n the 
ideas o f soul and spirit i n the t w o theories he proposed, one after the other. 
I n his view, totemism arises either from the fact that m e n believed they could 
safely place their souls i n external objects or f r o m the fact that they attributed 
conception to a k i n d o f disembodied impregnation, the agent o f w h i c h is a 
spirit. Since the soul and, even more, the spirit are sacred things and objects 
o f rites, the ideas that express t h e m are fundamentally religious. I n conse-
quence, i t is i n vain that Frazer makes totemism out to be merely a system o f 
magic, for he too manages to explain i t only i n terms o f another religion. 
B u t I have shown the inadequacies o f naturism and animism. O n e can-
not use them, as Tylor and Jevons did, w i t h o u t exposing oneself to the same 
objections. A n d yet neither Frazer nor Lang seems even to glimpse the pos-
sibility o f another hypothesis.
6 2 F r o m another standpoint, we see that t o -
temism is closely allied w i t h the most primitive social organization that is 
k n o w n and even, i n all probability, that is conceivable. Therefore, to assume 
it to have been preceded by another religion different from i t only i n degree 
is to leave behind the data o f observation and enter the domain o f arbitrary 
and unverifiable conjectures. I f we wish to stay i n accord w i t h the results pre-
viously obtained, w e must, w h i l e affirming the religious nature o f totemism, 
refrain from reducing it to a religion different from it. This is not because 
there could be any question o f designating nonreligious ideas as its causes. 
B u t among the representations that are part o f its origin, and o f w h i c h it is 
the result, there may be some that by themselves invoke its religious charac-
ter, and invoke it direcdy. These are the ones we must look for. 
62Except that Lang derives the idea of high gods from another source. It is supposedly due, as I have 
said, to a sort of primitive revelation. But Lang does not include this idea in his explanation of totemism. 


C H A P T E R SIX 
ORIGINS OF THESE BELIEFS 
(CONTINUED) 
The Notion of Totemic Principle, or Mana, 
and the Idea of Force* 
S
ince individual totemism comes after that o f the clan and i n fact seems to 
be derived from it, clan totemism must be taken up first. Before going 
further, however, since m y analysis thus far has broken i t d o w n into a m u l t i -
plicity o f beliefs that may appear disparate, I must try to visualize its internal 
coherence. 
I 
We have seen that totemism places figurative representations o f the t o t e m i n 
the first rank o f the things it considers sacred; then come the animals or 
plants whose name the clan bears, and finally the members o f the clan. Since 
all these things are sacred i n the same right, albeit unequally so, their reli-
giousness cannot arise from any o f the particular traits that distinguish them 
from one another. I f a given animal or plant is the object o f reverent fear, that 
reverence is not evoked by its particular traits. T h e members o f the clan have 
the same status, albeit to a slighdy lesser degree, and the mere image o f this 
same plant or animal evokes even more marked respect. Obviously the simi-
lar feelings that these dissimilar kinds o f things evoke i n the consciousness o f 
the faithful, and that constitute their sacredness, can derive only from a p r i n -
ciple that is shared by all alike—totemic emblems, people o f the clan, and i n -
dividuals o f the totemic species. This is the c o m m o n principle to w h i c h the 
*It may be that, here, the shift 
from 
notion to idée connotes a difference in clarity and distinctness. It 
may also be that Dürkheims shifts among those terms, plus conception and concept, sometimes amount to 
no more than stylistic variation. I have left the question open in this chapter by rendering each with its 
English counterpart. 
190 


Origins of These Beliefs (Continued) 
191 
cult is i n reality addressed. I n other words, totemism is not the religion o f 
certain animals, certain men, or certain images; it is the religion o f a k i n d o f 
anonymous and impersonal force that is identifiable i n each o f these beings 
but identical to none o f them. N o n e possesses i t entirely, and all participate 
i n it. Such is its independence from the particular subjects i n w h i c h it is i n -
carnated that i t b o t h precedes and outlives them. T h e individuals die; the 
generations pass o n and are replaced by others; but this force remains always 
present, alive, and the same. I t animates the generations o f today as it ani-
mated those o f yesterday and w i l l animate those o f tomorrow. Taking the 
w o r d " g o d " i n a very broad sense, one could say that i t is the god that each 
totemic cult worships. B u t it is an impersonal god, w i t h o u t name, w i t h o u t 
history, immanent i n the w o r l d , diffused i n a numberless multitude o f things. 
A n d yet we still have only an incomplete idea o f the true ubiquity that 
quasi-divine entity has. I t does not merely pervade the whole totemic species, 
the whole clan, and all the objects that symbolize the totem; the scope o f its 
influence is wider still. W e have seen that, above and beyond those eminently 
sacred things, all the things that are ascribed to the clan as dependents o f the 
principal totem have some measure o f the same sacredness. Because certain o f 
them are protected by restrictions and others have definite functions i n the cult 
ceremonies, they too are to some degree religious. This quality o f religiousness 
does not differ i n k i n d from that o f the totem under w h i c h they are classified; 
it necessarily derives from the same principle. This is so because—to repeat the 
metaphorical expression I just used—the totemic god is i n them, just as it is i n 
the totemic species and i n the people o f the clan. That i t is the soul o f so many 
different beings shows h o w different it is from the beings i n w h i c h it resides. 
B u t the Australian does not conceive o f this impersonal force abstractly. 
Influences that w e w i l l have to seek out led h i m to conceive o f it i n the f o r m 
o f an animal or plant, that is, i n the f o r m o f a material thing. Here, i n reality, 
is what the totem amounts to: It is the tangible f o r m i n w h i c h that intangi-
ble substance is represented i n the imagination; diffused through all sorts o f 
disparate beings, that energy alone is the real object o f the cult. We are n o w 
i n a better position to comprehend what the native means w h e n he affirms, 
for example, that the people o f the C r o w phratry are crows. H e does not ex-
actly mean that they are crows i n the everyday empirical sense o f the w o r d , 
but that the same principle is found i n all o f them. That principle constitutes 
what they all most fundamentally are, is shared between people and animals 
o f the same name, and is conceptualized as having the outward f o r m o f the 
crow. I n this way the universe, as totemism conceives it, is pervaded and en-
livened by a number o f forces that the imagination represents i n forms that, 
w i t h only a few exceptions, are borrowed from either the animal or the plant 


192 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
k i n g d o m . There are as many o f these forces as there are clans i n the tribe, and 
each o f t h e m pervades certain categories o f things o f w h i c h i t is the essence 
and the life-principle. 
W h e n I speak o f these principles as forces, I do not use the w o r d i n a 
metaphorical sense; they behave like real forces. I n a sense, they are even 
physical forces that b r i n g about physical effects mechanically. Does an i n d i -
vidual come into contact w i t h t h e m w i t h o u t having taken proper precau-
tions? H e receives a shock that has been compared w i t h the effect o f an 
electrical charge. T h e y sometimes appear to be conceived o f more or less as 
fluids that escape via the extremities.
1 W h e n they enter into a body that is 
not meant to receive them, they cause sickness and death by a w h o l l y m e -
chanical reaction.
2 Outside man, they play the role o f life-principle; as we 
w i l l see,
3 by acting u p o n them, the reproduction o f species is ensured. A l l life 
is based o n them. 
A n d i n addition to their physical nature, they have a moral nature. W h e n 
a native is asked w h y he follows his rites, he replies that ancestors have always 
done so and that he must follow their example.
4 I f he conducts himself w i t h 
totemic beings i n this or that way, i t is not only because the forces that reside 
i n them are inaccessible and forbidding i n a physical sense, but also because he 
feels morally obligated so to conduct himself; he feels he is obeying a sort o f 
imperative, fmfilling a duty. H e not only fears but also respects the sacred be-
ings. Moreover, the totem is a source o f the clan's moral life. A l l the beings 
that participate i n the same totemic principle consider themselves, by that 
very fact, to be morally b o u n d to one another; they have definite obligations 
o f assistance, vengeance, and so on, toward each other, and it is these that c o n -
stitute kinship. Thus, the totemic principle is at once a physical force and a 
moral power, and w e w i l l see that it is easily transformed into divinity proper. 
This is by no means specific to totemism. Even i n the most advanced re-
ligions, there is perhaps no god that has failed to retain some o f this ambigu-
ity and that does not perform b o t h cosmic and moral functions. A t the same 
time as it is a spiritual discipline, every religion is a sort o f technique that 
'In a Kwakiutl myth, for example, an ancestor hero pierces the head of an enemy by stretching forth 
his 
fingers 
([Franz] Boas, ["First General Report on the Indians of British Columbia,"] in BAAS, Vth Re-
port of the Committee on the Northern Tribes of the Dominion of Canada [London, Offices of the Association, 
1890], p. 30). 
2References in support of this assertion will be found on p. 128, n. 1, and p. 325, n. 98. 
3See Bk III, chap. 2. 
4See, for example, [Alfred William] Howitt, Native Tribes, [of 
South-East Australia, New York, Macmil-
lan, 1904], p. 482; [C. W.] Schvirmann, "The Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln," in [James Dominick] 
Woods, [The] NativeTribes of S.Australia [Adelaide, E. S. Wigg, 1879], p. 231. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Continued) 
193 
helps man to confront the w o r l d more confidently. Even for the Christian, is 
G o d the Father not the guardian o f physical order, as well as the legislator and 
judge o f h u m a n conduct? 
II 
Perhaps some w i l l ask whether, by interpreting totemism i n this way, I am 
not i m p u t i n g ideas to the primitive that are beyond his intellect. I n truth, I 
am not i n a position to state positively that he imagines these forces w i t h the 
relative clarity that I have had to give t h e m i n m y analysis. I can show quite 
clearly that this idea is implicit i n the beliefs taken as a whole and that it is 
central to them, but I cannot say to what extent it is explicitly conscious or, 
o n the other hand, only implicit and vaguely felt. There is no way to specify 
the degree o f clarity that an idea such as this one can have i n consciousnesses 
obscure* to us. A t any rate, what shows quite well that the idea is i n no way 
beyond the primitive, and even confirms the result I have just arrived at, is 
this: W h e t h e r i n societies akin to the Australian tribes or i n those very tribes, 
we find—and i n explicit form—conceptions that differ only i n degree and 
nuance from the foregoing. 
T h e native religions o f Samoa have certainly passed the totemic phase. 
T h e y have genuine gods w i t h names o f their o w n and, to some degree, dis-
tinctive 
personal traits. Yet the relics o f totemism are hard to dispute. I n fact, 
each god is attached to a territorial or familial group, just as the totem has its 
clan.
5 Each o f these gods is conceived o f as immanent i n a definite animal 
species. I t certainly does not reside i n any particular subject. I t is i n all at the 
same time, pervasive throughout the species. W h e n an animal dies, the peo-
ple o f the group that venerate i t m o u r n and render it their pious respects be-
cause a god inhabits it, but the god has not died. Like the species, i t is eternal. 
N o r , indeed, is the god confused w i t h the preceding generation, for i t was 
already the soul o f the one that preceded, just as as it w i l l be the soul o f the 
one to follow.
6 Thus, i t has all the characteristics o f the totemic principle but 
* Consciences obscures. Whether the obscurity is in the mind of the observed or the observer is ambigu-
ous. Swain, who says "obscure minds" (p. 219), seems to have opted for the mind of the observed. I opted 
for the observer's, in light of the next sentence and the general context provided by the chapter. 
5 [James George] Frazer even takes up 
from 
Samoa many facts that he presents as characteristically 
totemic (see Totemism [and Exogamy, London, Macmillan, 1910], pp. 6, 1
2
—
1
5
, 24, etc.). True enough, I 
have said that Frazer was not always sufEciendy critical in his choice of examples. But obviously such nu-
merous borrowings would have been impossible if in Samoa there really had not been important survivals 
from totemism. 
6See [George] Turner, Samoa [London, Macmillan, 1884], p. 21, and chaps. IV and V. 


194 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
a totemic principle that the imagination has developed i n somewhat personal 
forms. Even so, this personal quality should not be overblown, as i t is hardly 
compatible w i t h the qualities o f pervasiveness and ubiquity. I f the contours 
o f the totemic principle were clearly defined, it w o u l d not be able to spread 
as it does and infuse a multitude o f things. 
I n this case, the n o t i o n o f impersonal religious force is unquestionably 
beginning to change. I n other cases, however, it is maintained i n its abstract 
purity and even achieves distincdy greater generality than i n Australia. A l -
though the totemic principles to w h i c h the various clans o f the same tribe 
address themselves are distinct from one another, they remain fundamentally 
comparable to one another, for they all play the same role i n their respective 
domains. There are societies that attained the sense o f this shared nature and 
then advanced to the idea o f a single religious force that unifies the universe, 
all that is; all the other sacred principles are but modalities o f that force. A n d 
since those societies are still thoroughly i m b u e d w i t h totemism and b o u n d to 
a social organization identical to that o f the Australian peoples, totemism 
may be said to have carried that idea i n its w o m b . 
This can be observed i n many American tribes, especially i n those be-
longing to the great family o f the Sioux: Omaha, Ponka, Kansas, Osage, 
Assiniboin, Dakota, Iowa, Winnebago, Mandan, Hidatsa, and the others. 
Several o f these societies, such as the O m a h a
7 and the Iowa,
8 are still orga-
nized i n clans; others were not l o n g ago and, Dorsey says, "all the foundations 
o f the totemic system, just as i n other societies o f the Sioux,"
9 are still identi-
fiable i n them. A m o n g these peoples, there is a preeminent power above all 
the particular gods m e n worship, w h i c h they call wakan
w—all 
the rest being, 
i n a sense, derivations o f it. Because o f the preeminent status assigned to this 
principle i n the Sioux pantheon, it has sometimes been seen as a k i n d o f sov-
ereign god, a Jupiter or a Yahweh, and travelers have often translated wakan as 
"great spirit." This was a profound misunderstanding o f its true nature. 
Wakan is not i n any way a personal being; the natives do not imagine it 
i n definite forms. " T h e y say," reports an observer cited by Dorsey, "that they 
7Alice [C] Fletcher, "A Study of the Omaha Tribe: [The Import of the Totem"], in RSI for 1897 
[Washington, Government Printing Office, 1898], pp. [582-583]. 
8[James Owen] Dorsey, "Siouan Sociology," in Fifteenth Annual Report, BAE [Washington, Govern-
ment Printing Office, 1897], p. 238. 
9Ibid., p. 221. 
1
0P>jggs and [James Owen] Dorsey, Dakota English Dictionary, in CNAE, vol. VII [Washington, Gov-
ernment Printing Office, 1890], p. 508. Several observers cited by Dorsey identify the word wakan with 
the words wakanda and wakanta, which are derived from it but have a more precise meaning. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Continued) 
195 
have never seen wakanda, so they cannot pretend to personify i t . "
1 1 I t cannot 
even be defined by specific attributes and qualities. " N o term," says Riggs, 
"can express the meaning o f the w o r d among the Dakota. It embraces all 
mystery, all secret power, all divinity."
1 2 A l l the beings that the Dakota revere, 
"the earth, the four winds, the sun, the m o o n , the stars, are manifestations o f 
that mysterious life and power" that circulates through all things. I t is imag-
ined as the w i n d , as a breath that has its seat at the four cardinal points and 
moves everything.
1 3 I t is the voice that is heard w h e n the thunder resounds;
1 4 
the sun, m o o n , and stars are w a k a n .
1 5 B u t enumeration cannot exhaust this 
infinitely complex notion. I t is not a defined or definable power, the power 
to do this or that; it is Power i n the absolute, w i t h o u t qualification or limita-
t i o n o f any k i n d . T h e various divine powers are only particular manifesta-
tions and personifications; each o f t h e m is this power seen i n one o f its many 
aspects.
1 6 This led one observer to say that " i t is basically a protean god, 
changing its attributes and functions according to circumstance."
1 7 A n d the 
gods are not the only beings i t animates. I t is the principle o f all that lives, all 
that acts, all that moves. " A l l life is wakan. A n d so i t is for all that manifests 
any power—whether i t be positive action, like the winds and the clouds 
gathering i n the sky, or passive resistance, like the rock at the side o f the path."
1 8 
T h e same idea is found among the Iroquois, whose social organization is 
still more markedly totemic. T h e w o r d orenda that is used to express it is ex-
acdy equivalent to the wakan o f the Sioux. " I t is a mystic power," says H e -
w i t t , "that the savage conceives o f as inherent i n all the objects that make up 
the environment i n w h i c h he lives. . . , i n rocks, streams, plants and trees, 
"[James Owen] Dorsey, "A Study of Siouan Cults," in Eleventh Annual Report, [vol. XI], §21, BAE 
[Washington, Government Printing Office, 1893], p. 372. Miss Fletcher, while no less clearly recognizing 
the impersonal character of wakanda, adds that a certain anthropomorphism has slowly become grafted 
on to this idea. But this anthropomorphism concerns the various manifestations of wakanda. The rock or 
tree where they think they feel the presence of wakanda are addressed as if they were personal beings, but 
the wakanda itself is not personified (RSI for 1897, p. 579). 
12[Stephen Return] Riggs, Tah-Koo Wah-Kon [or the Gospel among the Dakotas, Boston, Congregational 
Publishing Society, 1869], pp. 5
6
—
5
7
, cited after Dorsey "Siouan Cults," §95, p. 433. 
13Dorsey, "Siouan Cults," §33, p. 380. 
14Ibid„ §35 [p. 381]. 
15Ibid., §28, p. 376; §30, p. 378; cf. §138, p. 449. 
16Ibid., §95, p. 432. 
17Ibid., §92, p. 431. 
18Ibid., §95, p. 433. 


196 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
animals and man, winds and storms, clouds, thunder, flashes o f lightning, 
etc."
1 9 This power is "regarded by the undeveloped intellect o f man as the ef-
ficient cause o f all the phenomena and o f all the activities that are occurring 
around h i m . "
2 0 A sorcerer or a shaman has orenda, as does a man w h o is suc-
cessful i n his affairs. Basically n o t h i n g i n the w o r l d is w i t h o u t its o w n share 
o f orenda, but the shares are unequal. Some beings—men or things—are fa-
vored, and others are relatively disadvantaged; all o f life is made up o f strug-
gles among these orenda o f unequal intensity. T h e most intense subjugate the 
weakest. Does a man w i n out over his competitors i n the hunt or i n war? I t 
is because he has more orenda. I f an animal escapes the hunter w h o chases 
h i m , it is because the animal's orenda was greater than the hunter's. 
T h e same idea is found among the Shoshone, w i t h the name pokunt; 
among the Algonquins, manitou;
21 mauala among the K w a k i u d ;
2 2 yek among 
the T l i n g i t ;
2 3 and sgdna among the H a i d a .
2 4 B u t it is not peculiar to the I n -
dians o f America; i t was first studied i n Melanesia. O n certain Melanesian is-
lands, i t is true, the social organization is no longer based o n totemism, but 
totemism is still visible o n all o f them
2 5—notwithstanding what C o d r i n g t o n 
has said o n the subject. W e 
find among these peoples, under the name 
"mana," a notion that is exacdy equivalent to the wakan o f the Sioux and the 
orenda o f the Iroquois. Here is Codrington's definition o f it: 
The Melanesians believe in the existence of a force absolutely distinct from 
any physical force, that works in all kinds o f ways, for good or evil, and that 
it is in man's best interest to take in hand and control: That force is mana. I 
19[J. N. B. Hewitt], "Orenda and a Definition of Religion," in AA, vol. IV (1903), p. 33. 
20lbid., p. 36. 
21Tesa, Studi delThavenet,p. 17. 
22[Franz] Boas, ["The Social Organization and Secret Societies of the] Kwakiud [Indians," in RNMfor 
1895, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1897], p. 695. 
23[John Reed] Swanton, "Social Condition, Beliefs [and Linguistic Relationship] of the Tlingit Indi-
ans," Twenty-Sixth Report BAE [Washington, Government Printing Office, 1905], p. 451 n. 3. 
24[John Reed] Swanton, Contributions to the Ethnology of the Haida [Leiden, E.J. Brill, 1905], p. 14. Cf. 
Tlingit Indians, p. 479. 
2 5In certain Melanesian societies (Banks Islands, northern New Hebrides), the two exogamic phratries 
that characterize Australian organization crop up again ([R. H. Codrington, 77ie Melanesians [Oxford, 
Clarendon Press, 1891], pp. 23ff.). In Florida, there are true totems, called butos (p. 31). An interesting dis-
cussion on this point is to be found in A. Lang, Social Origins [London, Longmans, 1903], pp. 176ff. Cf. 
on the same subject, and in the same vein, W. H. R. Rivers, "Totemism in Polynesia and Melanesia," in 
JAI, vol. XXXIX [1909], pp. 156ff. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Continued) 
197 
believe I understand the meaning this term has for the natives. . . . It is a 
force, a nonmaterial and, in a sense, supernatural influence; but it reveals i t -
self by physical force, or else by any kind of power and superiority that man 
possesses. Mana is by no means fixed on a definite object; it can be carried 
by any sort o f thing. . . . The whole religion o f the Melanesian consists in 
procuring mana for himself, for his own benefit or someone else's.
26 
Is this not the same n o t i o n o f a diffuse and anonymous force whose seed i n 
Australian totemism we were uncovering a m o m e n t ago? The impersonality 
is the same. As C o d r i n g t o n says, we must avoid seeing i t as a k i n d o f supreme 
being; such an idea "is absolutely alien" to Melanesian thought. T h e u b i q -
uity is the same. Mana has no definite location and is everywhere. A l l forms 
o f life, and all the active potencies o f men, living things, or mere minerals are 
ascribed to its influence.
2 7 
Therefore, i t is by no means reckless to impute to the Australian societies 
an idea such as the one I have drawn from m y analysis o f totemic beliefs: T h e 
same idea is to be found, though at a higher level o f generalization and ab-
straction, i n religions whose roots go back to Australian thought and that vis-
ibly bear its mark. T h e t w o conceptions are obviously akin, differing only i n 
scale. Whereas mana is diffused throughout the w h o l e universe, what I have 
called the god (or more accurately, the totemic principle) is localized i n a 
broad but nonetheless more limited circle o f creatures and things o f various 
species. I t is mana, but a rather more specialized mana—even though, i n the 
end, this specialization may only be quite relative. 
There are cases, moreover, i n w h i c h this k i n relation becomes especially 
apparent. A m o n g the Omaha, all kinds o f individual and collective totems 
exist;
2 8 b o t h are forms o f wakan. " T h e Indian's faith i n the efficacy o f the 
totem," says Miss Fletcher, "was based o n his conception o f nature and life. 
That conception was complex and involved t w o key ideas. First, all things, 
animate and inanimate, are i m b u e d w i t h a c o m m o n life-principle; and sec-
ond, this life is continuous."
2 9 This c o m m o n life-principle is wakan. T h e 
totem is the means by w h i c h the individual is put i n touch w i t h that source 
o f energy. I f the totem has powers, i t has t h e m because it incarnates wakan. 
26Codrington, The Melanesians, p. 118 n. 1; [Richard Heinrich Robert] Parkinson, Dreissigjahre in der 
Siidsee [Stuttgart, Strecker und Schroeder, 1907], pp. 178, 392, 394, etc. 
2 7An analysis of this idea is to be found in [Henri] Hubert and [Marcel] Mauss, ["Esquisse d'une] 
théorie générale de la magie," AS, vol. VII [1904], p. 108. 
28There are totems not only of clans but also of brotherhoods (Fletcher, "Import of the Totem," 
pp. 581ff.). 
29Ibid. [pp. 578-579]. 


198 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
I f the man w h o has violated the prohibitions that protect his t o t e m is stricken 
by illness or death, it is because the mysterious force that he ran afoul of, 
wakan, reacted against h i m w i t h an intensity proportionate to the shock it 
suffered.
3 0 Inversely, just as the totem is wakan, so the manner i n w h i c h 
wakan is conceived sometimes recalls its totemic origins. As Say tells us, 
among the Dakota, the wahconda is manifested sometimes i n the f o r m o f a 
gray bear, sometimes a bison, a beaver, or other animal.
3 1 This formulation 
cannot, o f course, be unreservedly accepted. Since wakan resists all personi-
fication, it is unlikely to have been conceived o f i n its abstract generality by 
means o f precise symbols. However, Say's observation probably is applicable 
to the particular forms i t takes as i t becomes specialized amid the concrete re-
ality o f life. I f there truly was a time w h e n those specializations o f wakan ev-
idenced such a marked affinity w i t h animal f o r m , that w o u l d be further 
p r o o f o f the close ties between that n o t i o n and totemic beliefs.
3 2 
Besides, one can explain w h y the idea o f mana could not attain the de-
gree o f abstraction and generalization i n Australia that i t did i n more ad-
vanced societies. T h e reason is not merely some insufficient capacity o f the 
Australian to think abstractly and generalize; it is above all the nature o f the 
social milieu that imposed this particularism. As l o n g as totemism remains 
the basis o f cult organization, the clan maintains an autonomy w i t h i n the re-
ligious society that, although not absolute, nonetheless remains very p r o -
nounced. Undoubtedly, one can say i n a sense that each totemic group is 
only a chapel o f the tribal C h u r c h , * but a chapel that enjoys broad indepen-
dence. A l t h o u g h the cult that is celebrated w i t h i n the clan does not f o r m a 
w h o l e sufficient unto itself, the relations i t has w i t h the others are merely ex-
ternal. T h e cults are juxtaposed but not interpenetrating. T h e totem o f a clan 
is fully sacred only for that clan. As a result, the group o f things assigned to 
each clan, and that are part o f the clan i n the same right as the men, has the 
same individuality and the same autonomy. Each o f them is imagined as be-
ing irreducible to similar groups that are radically discontinuous w i t h i t and 
as constituting what amounts to a distinct realm. U n d e r these conditions, it 
w o u l d occur to no one that these heterogeneous worlds were only different 
*Here again, Dürkheim capitalizes. 
'"Ibid., p. 583. Among the Dakota, the totem is called wakan. See Riggs and Dorsey, Dakota Texts and 
Grammar, in CNAE [vol. IX, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1893], p. 219. 
'"'James's Account of Long's Expedition in the Rocky Mountains," vol. I, p. 268 (cited by Dorsey in 
"Siouan Cults," §92, p. 431). 
3 2I do not mean to argue that in principle every theriomorphic representation of religious forces is the 
mark of a preexisting totemism. But in terms of societies where totemism is still apparent, a
s in the case 
of the Dakota, it is natural to think that these conceptions are not unknown to it. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Continued) 
199 
manifestations o f one and the same fundamental force. I t must have been as-
sumed instead that a specifically different mana corresponded to each o f 
them, the power o f w h i c h could not extend beyond the clan and the things 
assigned to it. T h e n o t i o n o f one universal mana could be b o r n only w h e n a 
religion o f the tribe developed above the clan cults and absorbed t h e m more 
or less completely. I t is only w i t h the sense o f tribal unity that a sense o f the 
world's unity arose. I w i l l show later o n
3 3 that the societies o f Australia were 
already acquainted w i t h a cult shared by the entire tribe. B u t although that 
cult represents the highest f o r m o f the Australian religions, i t did not succeed 
i n r u p t u r i n g the principles o n w h i c h they rest and transforming them. 
Totemism is basically a federative religion that cannot go beyond a certain 
level o f centralization w i t h o u t ceasing to be itself. 
O n e characteristic fact illuminates the profound reason w h y the notion 
o f mana has been kept so specialized i n Australia. T h e religious forces 
proper—those thought o f as totems—are not the only ones the Australian 
believes he must reckon w i t h . There are also the forces that the magician es-
pecially has at his disposal. Whereas the religious forces are considered to be 
salutary and beneficent i n principle, the function o f magic forces is above all 
to cause death and illness. T h e y differ b o t h i n the nature o f their effects and 
i n the relations they have w i t h social organization. A totem always belongs to 
a clan; magic, o n the other hand, is a tribal and even an intertribal institution. 
Magical forces do not particularly belong to any definite group o f the tribe. 
To use those forces, i t is enough to have the efficacious recipes. Similarly, 
everyone is vulnerable to their effects and so must try to guard against them. 
These are nebulous forces that are not attached to any definite social division 
and can even extend their influence beyond the tribe. I t is noteworthy that, 
among the Arunta and the Loritja, they are conceived o f simply as aspects 
and particular forms o f one and the same force, called i n Arunta Amngquiltha 
or Arunkulta.
34 
" I t is," say Spencer and Gillen, "a t e r m o f rather vague mean-
ing; but, basically, one always finds the idea o f a supernatural power endowed 
w i t h an evil nature. . . . This w o r d is applied indiscriminately either to the 
evil influence that comes from an object or to the very object i n w h i c h it 
temporarily or permanendy resides."
3 5 " B y Arunkulta," says Strehlow, "the 
"See Bk. II, chap. 9 §4, pp. 288-298. 
34The first spelling is that of [Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen; the second, [Carl] 
Strehlow's. 
35Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes [of Central Australia, London, Macmillan, 1899], p. 548, n. 1. 
Granted, Spencer and Gillen add, "The best way of rendering the idea would be to say that the 
arungquiltha object is possessed by an evil spirit." But that 
free 
translation is an unwarranted interpreta-
tion by them. The notion of arungquiltha in no way implies the existence of spiritual beings. This point 
emerges 
from 
Strehlow's context and definition. 


200 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
native means a force that suddenly suspends life and brings death 
to 
whomever i t enters."
3 6 This t e r m is applied to bones, to the pieces o f w o o d 
that give o f f evil spells, and to animal or plant poisons. I t is very definitely a 
harmful mana. Grey mentions a completely identical n o t i o n i n the tribes he 
has observed.
3 7 A m o n g these dissimilar peoples, then, the properly religious 
forces do not manage to break free o f a certain heterogeneity, but the magi-
cal forces are conceived o f as being all o f the same nature; they are conceived 
o f generically. The reason is this: Since the magical forces hover above the d i -
visions and subdivisions o f the social organization, they move i n a homoge-
neous and continuous space where they do not encounter anything to 
differentiate them. O n the other hand, since religious forces are localized 
w i t h i n definite and distinct social settings, they become differentiated and 
specialized according to the setting i n w h i c h they happen to be. 
F r o m this we see to what extent the n o t i o n o f impersonal religious force 
is i n the letter and spirit o f Australian totemism, for it constitutes itself dis-
tincdy 
as soon as no contrary cause opposes it. Granted, the arungquiltha is 
a purely magical force. B u t magic forces and religious forces are not different 
i n their essence.
3 8 Indeed, they are sometimes designated by the same w o r d . 
I n Melanesia, the magician and his charms have mana just as do the agents 
and rites o f the regular c u l t .
3 9 A m o n g the Iroquois,
4 0 the w o r d "orenda" is 
used i n the same way. Therefore, we can legitimately infer the nature o f each 
from that o f the other.
4 1 
36Strehlow, Die Aranda- [und Loritja-Stamme in Zentral-Australien], vol. II [Frankfurt, J. Baer, 1907], 
p. 76n. 
37With the name Boyl-ya ([George] Grey, Journals of Two Expeditions [in North- West and Western 
Australia], vol. II [London, T. W. Boone, 1841], pp. 337-338). 
38See above, p. 400. Moreover, Spencer and Gillen implicidy recognize this when they say that the 
arungquiltha is "a supernatural force." Cf. Hubert and Mauss, "Théorie générale," p. 119. 
39Codrington, The Melanesians, pp. 191ff. 
""Hewitt, "Orenda," p. 38. 
41One may even ask whether a concept analogous to wakan or mana is altogether lacking in Australia. 
As it happens, the word "churinga" (or Tjurunga, in Strehlow's spelling) has closely related meaning 
among the Arunta. Spencer and Gillen say that this term designates "all that is secret or sacred. It is ap-
plied as much to an object as to the quality it possesses" (Native Tribes, p. 648). This is almost the defini-
tion of mana. Sometimes, indeed, Spencer and Gillen use that word to designate religious power or force 
in general. In describing a ceremony among the Kaitish, they say that the celebrant is "full of churinga," 
that is, they continue, full of "the magical power that emanates from the objects called churingas." How-
ever, it does not seem that the notion of churinga is constituted in Australia with the clarity and precision 
that the notion of mana has in Melanesia or that wakan has among the Sioux. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Continued) 
201 
III 
T h e result to w h i c h the preceding analysis has led us is relevant not only to the 
history o f totemism but also to the formation o f religious thought generally. 
O n the grounds that man is at first ruled mainly by his senses and by sen-
suous representations, i t has often been argued that he began by imagining 
the divine i n the concrete f o r m o f definite and personal beings. T h e facts do 
not c o n f i r m that presumption. I have just described a logically unified set o f 
religious beliefs that I have good reason to consider very primitive, and yet I 
have not encountered personalities o f this k i n d . T h e totemic cult proper is 
addressed neither to such and such definite animals nor to such and such def-
inite plants but to a sort o f diffuse power that permeates things.
4 2 Even i n the 
advanced religions that have arisen out o f totemism, like those we see ap-
pearing among the Indians o f N o r t h America, that idea, far from being ef-
faced, becomes more conscious o f itself, expressing itself w i t h a clarity i t did 
not previously have, and at the same time taking o n greater generality. That 
idea dominates the w h o l e religious system. 
Such is the basic material from w h i c h were made the various beings that 
religions o f all times have worshipped and sanctified. T h e spirits, demons, 
genies, and gods o f every degree are only the concrete forms taken by this 
energy (this "potentiality," as H e w i t t calls i t
4 3 ) as i t became individualized 
and fixed u p o n some definite object or point i n space, and condensed around 
some being that is ideal or legendary, yet conceived o f as real i n popular 
imagination. A Dakota interviewed by Miss Fletcher described this essential 
consubstantiality i n language full o f b o l d images: 
All that moves stops at one place or another, at one moment or another. 
The bird that flies stops somewhere to make its nest, somewhere else to rest 
from flight. The man who walks stops when he pleases. The same is true 
for the deity. The sun, so bright and magnificent, is one place where the 
deity has stopped. The trees and the animals are others. The Indian thinks 
of these places and sends his prayers there, that they may reach the place 
where god has stopped and thus obtain succor and benediction.
4 4 
I n other words, wakan (for that is what he was talking about) goes and comes 
through the w o r l d , and the sacred things are the places where it has alighted. 
42Certainly, we will see below (Bk. II, chaps. 8 and 9) that the idea of mythic personality is not alto-
gether foreign to totemism. But I will show that these conceptions result from secondary formations. Far 
from being the basis of the beliefs just analyzed, they derive from those beliefs. 
"Hewitt, "Orenda," p. 38. 
44"Report of the Peabody Museum," vol. Ill, p. 276n. (cited by Dorsey, "Siouan Cults," p. 435). 


202 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
Here w e find ourselves far from naturism and animism alike. I f the sun, 
m o o n , and stars have been worshipped, they have not owed this honor to 
their inherent nature or distinctive properties but to the fact that they were 
conceived o f as participating i n that force w h i c h alone gives things their sa-
credness and is found i n many other beings, even the very smallest. T h e souls 
o f the dead have been objects o f rites not because they are considered to be 
made o f some fluid and ethereal substance and not because they resemble the 
shadow o f a body or its reflection o n the face o f the deep. Lightness and 
flu-
idity are not enough to confer sacredness o n them; they have been invested 
w i t h that h o n o r only insofar as they possessed some o f that very force, the 
fount o f all that is religious. 
W h y we could not define religion by the idea o f mythical personalities, 
gods, or spirits n o w becomes clearer. That way o f imagining religious things 
is by no means inherent i n their nature. A t the o r i g i n and basis o f religious 
thought, we find not definite and distinct objects or beings that i n themselves 
possess sacredness but indefinite powers and anonymous forces. T h e y are 
more or less numerous i n different societies (sometimes, indeed, they are 
only one force), and their impersonality is exactly comparable to that o f the 
physical forces whose manifestations are studied by the sciences o f nature. 
T u r n i n g to particular sacred things, those are but individualized forms o f this 
basic principle. Thus, it is not surprising that even i n religions i n w h i c h gods 
indisputably exist, there are rites that are efficacious by themselves, indepen-
dent o f divine action. This is so because that force can attach to words spoken 
and gestures made, as well as to material substances. Voice and movement can 
serve as its vehicle, and i t can produce its effects through t h e m w i t h o u t help 
from any god or spirit. Indeed, let that force become primarily concentrated 
i n a rite, and through it that rite w i l l become the creator o f deities.
4 5 This is 
also w h y there is perhaps no divine personality w i t h o u t an impersonal ele-
ment. Even those w h o most clearly imagine divine personality i n a concrete 
and tangible f o r m imagine i t at the same time as an abstract power that can 
be defined only by the nature o f its effects, as a force that deploys itself i n 
space and that is i n each o f its effects, at least i n part. I t is the power to pro-
duce the rain or the w i n d , the harvest or the light o f day; Zeus is i n each drop 
o f rain that falls, just as Ceres is i n each sheaf o f the harvest.
4 6 Indeed, more 
often than not, this efficacy is so incompletely defined that the believer can 
45See above, p. 33. 
"'Expressions such as Zeus uei, or Ceres succiditur, show that this conception lived on in Greece and 
in Rome. Moreover [Hermann] Usener, in his Gottemamen: [Versuch einer Lehre von der religiosen De-
briffebildung, Bonn, F. Cohen, 1896], has clearly shown that the gods of Greece, as of Rome, were origi-
nally impersonal forces that were only thought of in terms of their attributes. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Continued) 
203 
have only a very vague n o t i o n o f it. Moreover, this vagueness has made pos-
sible the unions and divisions i n the course o f w h i c h the gods were frag-
mented, dismembered, and combined i n all sorts o f ways. There is perhaps 
not a single religion i n w h i c h the original mana, whether unitary or c o m -
pound, has fully evolved into a well-defined number o f discrete beings that 
are sealed o f f from one another. Each o f those beings retains a nebulous sort 
o f impersonality that enables i t to enter into new combinations—it has that 
capacity not simply because i t remains as a relic but because it is i n the nature 
o f religious forces to be incapable o f full individualization. 
This conception, w h i c h the study o f totemism alone suggested to me, is 
further recommended by the fact that, o f late, several scholars have been led 
to i t independently, i n the course o f quite different research. There is an 
emerging tendency toward spontaneous agreement o n this point, w h i c h is 
w o r t h n o t i n g for i t creates a presumption o f objectivity. 
As early as 1899,1 was arguing the necessity o f not putting any n o t i o n o f 
mythical personality into the definition o f r e l i g i o n .
4 7 I n 1900, Marrett called 
attention to the existence o f a phase i n religion that he called preanimist, i n 
w h i c h the rites were addressed to impersonal forces, such as Melanesian 
mana or the wakan o f the Omaha and the D a k o t a .
4 8 Nevertheless, Marrett 
did not go so far as to h o l d that, always and i n all cases, the n o t i o n o f spirit 
logically or chronologically comes after that o f mana or is derived from it. 
Indeed, he seemed disposed to allow that it is sometimes formed indepen-
dently, and hence that religious thought flows from a double source.
4 9 O n 
the other hand, he conceived mana as a property inherent i n things, as an el-
ement o f their specific character. According to h i m , mana is simply the trait 
we impute to anything that departs from the ordinary, to everything that 
makes us feel admiration or fear.
5 0 This was tantamount to rehabilitating the 
naturist theory.
5 1 
A short time later, H u b e r t and Mauss, setting out to devise a general the-
47[Emile Durkheim, "De la] Définition des phénomènes religieux," AS, vol. II [1897-1898], 
pp. 14-16. 
4 8[R. R. Marrett], "Preanimistic Religion," in Folk-lore, vol. XI (1900), pp. 162-182. 
49Ibid., p. 179. In a more recent work, "The Conception of Mana" (in TICHR, vol. II [Oxford, 
Clarendon Press, 1908], pp. 54£F), Marrett tends even more to subordinate the animist conception to the 
notion of mana. However, his thought remains hesitant and reserved on this point. 
50Ibid„ p. 168. 
51This return of preanimism to naturism is still more marked in a communication by Clodd at the 
Third Congress on the History of Religions ("Preanimistic Stages in Religion," in TICHR, vol. I, 
pp. 33). 


204 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
ory o f magic, established that magic as a w h o l e is based o n the notion o f 
mana.
5 2 Given the close kinship o f magical rites w i t h religious ones, we 
might expect the same theory to be applicable to religion. Preuss argued this 
i n a series o f articles that appeared i n Globus
53 the same year. R e l y i n g o n facts 
he had drawn mainly from A m e r i c a n civilizations, Preuss set out to show that 
the ideas o f soul and spirit were formed only after those o f impersonal power 
and force, that soul and spirit are only transformations o f impersonal power 
and force, and that until fairly recent times, those latter retained the mark o f 
their original impersonality. H e did indeed show that, even i n the advanced 
religions, spirit and soul are conceived o f i n the f o r m o f vague discharges 
spontaneously emitted from the things i n w h i c h the mana resides, and some-
times tending to escape using all available routes: m o u t h , nose, and every 
other body opening, breath, gaze, speech, and so on. A t the same time, 
Preuss showed their protean quality, the extreme plasticity that enables t h e m 
to serve the most varied uses, i n succession and almost simultaneously.
5 4 True 
enough, i f that author's terminology was taken literally, one might t h i n k 
those forces are, for h i m , o f a magical and not a religious nature. H e calls 
t h e m charms (Zauber, Zauberkräfte). 
B u t since he shows t h e m to be active i n 
rites that are fundamentally religious, for example, the great M e x i c a n cere-
monies
5 5, i t is evident that, by using such terms, he does not mean to place 
those forces outside religion. I f he uses them, i t is probably for want o f o t h -
ers that better indicate their impersonality and the sort o f mechanism by 
w h i c h they operate. 
Thus, the same idea is tending to appear from all quarters.
5 6 T h e i m -
pression increasingly is that the mythological constructions, even the most 
elementary ones, are secondary
5 7 products overgrowing a substratum o f be-
liefs—simpler and more obscure, vaguer and more fundamental—that c o n -
52Hubert and Mauss, "Théorie générale de la magie," pp. 108ff. 
53[Konrad Theodor] Preuss, "Der Ursprung der Religion und Kunst," in Globus, vol. LXXXVI 
(1904), pp. 321, 355, 376, 389; vol. LXXXVII, pp. 333, 347, 380, 394, [419]. 
54Ibid., vol. LXXXVII, p. 381. 
55He clearly opposes them to all influences that are profane in nature (ibid., vol. LXXXVI, p. 379a). 
''They are found even in the recent theories of Frazer. If this scholar refuses to ascribe a religious char-
acter to totemism so as to make it a kind of magic, he does so precisely because the forces that the totemic 
cult puts into operation are impersonal, like those the magician manipulates. Frazer recognizes the fun-
damental fact I have just established, but he draws a different conclusion from it than I do, because, ac-
cording to him, there is religion only if there are mythical personalities. 
"However, I do not take this word in the same sense as Preuss and Marrett. According to them, there 
was a definite moment in religious evolution when men knew neither souls nor spirits, a preanimist phase. 
This hypothesis is highly questionable. I will offer further explanation on this point below (Bk. II, chaps. 
8 and 9). 


Origins of These Beliefs (Continued) 
205 
stitute the firm foundations o n w h i c h the religious systems were built. This 
is the primitive stratum that the analysis o f totemism has enabled us to reach. 
T h e various writers whose research I have just mentioned arrived at that 
conception using facts taken from quite disparate religions, some o f w h i c h 
correspond to an already well-advanced civilization—the religions o f M e x -
ico, for example, w h i c h Preuss used a great deal. It might then be asked 
whether the theory was applicable to the simplest religions as well. B u t since 
one can descend no further than totemism, we r u n no risk o f error. A t the 
same time, we may possibly have found the original n o t i o n from w h i c h the 
ideas o f wakan and mana are derived: the n o t i o n o f the totemic principle.
5 8 
IV 
T h e role that n o t i o n has played i n the development o f religious ideas is not 
the only reason for its primary importance. I t has a secular aspect that gives 
it relevance for the history o f scientific thought as well. I t is the n o t i o n o f 
force i n its earliest f o r m . 
I n the w o r l d as the Sioux conceive it, wakan plays the same role as the 
forces by w h i c h science explains the varied phenomena o f nature. This is not 
to say that i t is thought o f i n the f o r m o f an exclusively physical energy; we 
w i l l see i n the next chapter that, instead, the elements used to f o r m an idea 
o f i t are taken from the most disparate realms. B u t precisely that composite 
nature enables i t to be used as a principle o f universal explanation. T h e w h o l e 
o f life comes from i t ;
5 9 "all life is wakan"; and by the w o r d "life" must be u n -
derstood all that acts and reacts and all that moves and is moved, as m u c h i n 
the mineral k i n g d o m as i n the biological one. Wakan is the cause o f all the 
movement that takes place i n the universe. W e have also seen that the orenda 
o f the Iroquois is "the efficient cause o f all the phenomena, and all the activ-
ities, that manifest themselves around man." I t is a power "inherent i n all 
bodies and all things."
6 0 I t is orenda that makes the w i n d blow, the sun shine 
and w a r m the earth, the plants grow, the animals multiply, and that makes 
5 8On this same question, see the article of Alessandro Bruno, "Sui fenomeni magico-religiosi delle 
comunita primitive," in Rivista italiana di Sociotogia, vol. XII, fasc. IV-V, pp. 568ff., and an unpublished pa-
per by W. Bogoras at the XlVth Congress of Americanists, held at Stuttgart in 1904. This paper is ana-
lyzed by Preuss in Globus, vol. LXXXVI, p. 201. 
5
9"A11 things," says Miss Fletcher, "are pervaded by a common principle of life." "Import of the 
Totem," p. 579. 
""Hewitt, "Orenda," p. 36. 


206 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
man strong, skillful, and intelligent. W h e n the Iroquois says that the life o f all 
nature is the product o f conflicts between the unequally intense orenda o f 
different beings, he is expressing i n his language the m o d e r n idea that the 
w o r l d is a system o f forces that limit, contain, and equilibrate one another. 
T h e Melanesian imputes the same sort o f efficacy to mana. I t is thanks to 
his mana that a man succeeds i n h u n t i n g or i n war, that his gardens produce 
a good yield, that his herds prosper. Because it is full o f mana, the arrow 
reaches its mark, a net takes many fish, a canoe holds the sea w e l l ,
6 1 and so 
on. I t is true that i f certain o f Codrington's phrases were taken literally, mana 
w o u l d be the cause to w h i c h people specifically ascribe "all that exceeds the 
power o f man, all that is outside the ordinary course o f nature."
6 2 B u t i t 
emerges from the very examples he cites that the sphere o f mana is a good 
deal broader than that. I n reality, i t serves to explain usual and everyday phe-
nomena. There is nothing superhuman or supernatural i n the fact that a boat 
sails or a hunter takes game. A m o n g those events o f everyday life, there are 
some so insignificant and so familiar that they go by unperceived: N o one 
takes note o f them, and, consequendy, no one feels a need to explain them. 
T h e concept o f mana is applied only to those that are important enough to 
provoke reflection, to awaken a m o d i c u m o f interest and curiosity. For all 
that, however, they are not miraculous. A n d what is true o f mana as well as 
orenda or wakan is equally true o f the totemic principle. B y that principle 
are maintained the lives o f the clan's people, the lives o f the animals or plants 
o f the totemic species, the lives o f all things that are classified under the 
totem and participate i n its nature. 
Thus the idea o f force is o f religious origin. F r o m religion, philosophy 
first and later the sciences borrowed it. Such is the i n t u i t i o n C o m t e already 
had w h e n he called metaphysics the heir o f "theology." B u t his conclusion 
was that, because o f its metaphysical origins, the idea o f force was fated to 
disappear from science, and he denied it any objective meaning. I w i l l show, 
to the contrary, that religious forces are real, no matter h o w imperfect the 
symbols w i t h whose help they were conceived of. F r o m this i t w i l l follow 
that the same is true for the concept o f force i n general. 
61Codrington, The Melanestans, pp. 118—120. 
62Ibid., p. 119. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 
ORIGINS OF THESE BELIEFS 
(CONCLUSION) 
Origin of the Notion of Totemic Principle, or Mana 
T
he proposition established i n the preceding chapter defines the terms i n 
w h i c h the problem o f h o w totemism originated must be posed. The 
central n o t i o n o f totemism is that o f a quasi-divine principle that is i m m a -
nent i n certain categories o f m e n and things and thought o f i n the f o r m o f 
an animal or plant. I n essence, therefore, to explain this religion is to explain 
this belief-—that is, to discover what could have led m e n to construct i t and 
w i t h what building blocks. 
I 
It is manifestly not w i t h the feelings the things that serve as totems are capa-
ble o f arousing i n men's minds. I have shown that these are often insignifi-
cant. I n the sort o f impression lizards, caterpillars, rats, ants, frogs, turkeys, 
breams, p l u m trees, cockatoos, and so forth make u p o n man (to cite only the 
names that come up frequently on lists o f Australian totems), there is n o t h -
ing that i n any way resembles grand and powerful religious emotions or 
could stamp u p o n t h e m a quality o f sacredness. T h e same cannot be said o f 
stars and great atmospheric phenomena, w h i c h do have all that is required to 
seize men's imaginations. As it happens, however, these serve very rarely as 
totems; indeed, their use for this purpose was probably a late development.
1 
Thus i t was not the intrinsic nature o f the thing whose name the clan bore 
that set it apart as the object o f worship. Furthermore, i f the emotion elicited 
by the thing itself really was the determining cause o f totemic rites and be-
liefs, then this thing w o u l d also be the sacred being par excellence, and the 
'See above, p. 102. 
207 


208 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
animals and plants used as totems w o u l d play the leading role i n religious life. 
B u t we k n o w that the focus o f the cult is elsewhere. I t is symbolic represen-
tations o f this or that plant or animal. I t is totemic emblems and symbols o f 
all kinds that possess the greatest sanctity. A n d so it is i n totemic emblems and 
symbols that the religious source is to be found, w h i l e the real objects repre-
sented by those emblems receive only a reflection. 
The totem is above all a symbol, a tangible expression o f something else.
2 
B u t o f what? 
It follows from the same analysis that the totem expresses and symbolizes 
t w o different kinds o f things. F r o m one point o f view, it is the outward and 
visible f o r m o f what I have called the totemic principle or god; and from an-
other, i t is also the symbol o f a particular society that is called the clan. I t is 
the flag o f the clan, the sign by w h i c h each clan is distinguished from the 
others, the visible mark o f its distinctiveness, and a mark that is borne by 
everything that i n any way belongs to the clan: men, animals, and things. 
Thus, i f the totem is the symbol o f b o t h the god and the society, is this not 
because the god and the society are one and the same? H o w could the e m -
blem o f the group have taken the f o r m o f that quasi-divinity i f the group and 
the divinity were t w o distinct realities? Thus the god o f the clan, the totemic 
principle, can be none other than the clan itself, but the clan transfigured and 
imagined i n the physical f o r m o f the plant or animal that serves as totem. 
H o w could that apotheosis have come about, and w h y should i t have 
come about i n that fashion? 
II 
Society i n general, simply by its effect o n men's minds, undoubtedly has all 
that is required to arouse the sensation o f the divine. A society is to its m e m -
bers what a god is to its faithful. * A god is first o f all a being that man c o n -
ceives o f as superior to himself i n some respects and one o n w h o m he 
believes he depends. W h e t h e r that being is a conscious personality, like Zeus 
or Yahweh, or a play o f abstract forces as i n totemism, the faithful believe 
*Le fidèle. To avoid translating this term, which connotes loyal adherence, as "the believer," thereby 
leaving no room for a contrast with le croyant, which connotes belief, I have usually rendered it as "the 
faithful." Durkheim analyzes the stance of what one might call the "unbelieving faithful." See Bk. Ill, 
chap. 3, §2. 
2In the small book cited above, [Julius] Pikler, [Der Ursprung der Totemismus. Ein Beitrag zur materialis¬
chen Geschichtheorie, Berlin, K. Hoffmann, 1900] has already expressed, in a somewhat dialectical fashion, 
the belief that this fundamentally is what the totem is. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
209 
they are b o u n d to certain ways o f acting that the nature o f the sacred p r i n c i -
ple they are dealing w i t h has imposed u p o n them. Society also fosters i n us 
the sense o f perpetual dependence. Precisely because society has its o w n spe-
cific nature that is different from our nature as individuals, i t pursues ends 
that are also specifically its o w n ; but because it can achieve those ends only 
by w o r k i n g through us, it categorically demands our cooperation. Society 
requires us to make ourselves its servants, forgetful o f our o w n interests. A n d 
it subjects us to all sorts o f restraints, privations, and sacrifices w i t h o u t w h i c h 
social life w o u l d be impossible. A n d so, at every instant, w e must submit to 
rules o f action and thought that we have neither made nor wanted and that 
sometimes are contrary to our inclinations and to our most basic instincts. 
I f society could exact those concessions and sacrifices only by physical 
constraint, it could arouse i n us only the sense o f a physical force to w h i c h 
we have no choice but to yield, and not that o f a moral power such as reli-
gions venerate. I n reality, however, the h o l d society has over consciousness 
owes far less to the prerogative its physical superiority gives i t than to the 
moral authority w i t h w h i c h i t is invested. ,We defer to society's orders not 
simply because i t is equipped to overcome our resistance but, first and fore-
most, because i t is the object o f genuine respect. 
A n individual or collective subject is said to inspire respect w h e n the rep-
resentation that expresses it i n consciousness has such power that it calls forth 
or inhibits conduct automatically, irrespective of any utilitarian calculation of help-
ful or harmful results. W h e n w e obey someone out o f respect for the moral au-
thority that we have accorded to h i m , we do not follow his instructions 
because they seem wise but because a certain psychic energy intrinsic to the 
idea we have o f that person bends our w i l l and turns i t i n the direction i n d i -
cated. W h e n that inward and w h o l l y mental pressure moves w i t h i n us, respect 
is the emotion we feel. W e are then moved not by the advantages or disad-
vantages o f the conduct that is recommended to us or demanded o f us but by 
the way we conceive o f the one w h o recommends or demands that conduct. 
This is w h y a command generally takes o n short, sharp forms o f address that 
leave no r o o m for hesitation. I t is also why, to the extent that command is 
command and works by its o w n strength, it precludes any idea o f deliberation 
or calculation, but instead is made effective by the very intensity o f the m e n -
tal state i n w h i c h i t is given. That intensity is what we call moral influence. 
T h e ways o f acting to w h i c h society is strongly enough attached to i m -
pose t h e m o n its members are for that reason marked w i t h a distinguishing 
sign that calls forth respect. Because these ways o f acting have been w o r k e d 
out i n c o m m o n , the intensity w i t h w h i c h they are thought i n each i n d i v i d -
ual m i n d finds resonance i n all the others, and vice versa. T h e representations 


210 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
that translate t h e m w i t h i n each o f us thereby gain an intensity that mere p r i -
vate states o f consciousness can i n no way match. Those ways o f acting gather 
strength from the countless individual representations that have served to 
f o r m each o f them. It is society that speaks through the mouths o f those w h o 
affirm t h e m i n our presence; it is society that we hear w h e n w e hear them; 
and the voice o f all itself has a tone that an individual voice cannot have.
3 T h e 
very forcefulness w i t h w h i c h society acts against dissidence, whether by 
moral censure or physical repression, helps to strengthen this dominance,
4 
and at the same time forcefully proclaims the ardor o f the shared conviction. 
I n short, w h e n something is the object o f a state o f opinion, the representa-
tion o f the thing that each individual has draws such power from its origins, 
from the conditions i n w h i c h it originated, that i t is felt even by those w h o 
do not yield to i t . * T h e mental representation o f a thing that is the object o f 
a state o f o p i n i o n has a tendency to repress and h o l d at bay those representa-
tions that contradict it; it commands instead those actions that fulfill it. I t ac-
complishes this not by the reality or threat o f physical coercion but by the 
radiation o f the mental energy i t contains. T h e hallmark o f moral authority 
is that its psychic properties alone give i t power. O p i n i o n , eminendy a social 
thing, is one source o f authority. Indeed, the question arises whether au-
thority is not the daughter o f o p i n i o n .
5 Some w i l l object that science is of-
ten the antagonist o f opinion, the errors o f w h i c h i t combats and corrects. 
But science can succeed i n this task only i f it has sufficient authority, and it 
can gain such authority only from o p i n i o n itself. A l l the scientific d e m o n -
strations i n the w o r l d w o u l d have no influence i f a people had no faith i n sci-
ence. Even today, i f i t should happen that science resisted a very powerful 
current o f public opinion, i t w o u l d r u n the risk o f seeing its credibility 
eroded.
6 
Tor example, the thief acknowledges a "state of opinion" by taking precautions not to be discovered. 
As this example suggests, once upon a time Durkheim's term opinion could have been translated as "pub-
lic opinion" without confusion, but not in America today. Our present usage connotes the discrete bits 
of "opinion" that pollsters elicit through replies to questionnaires. Trans. 
3See my [De la] Division du travail social: Etude sur l'organisation de sociétés supérieures, 3d ed. [Paris, F. Al-
can, 1902], pp. 64ff. 
4Ibid., p. 76. 
5This is the case at least for all moral authority that is recognized as such by a group. 
61 hope this analysis and those that follow will put an end to an erroneous interpretation of my ideas, 
which has more than once led to misunderstanding. Because I have made constraint the external 
feature by 
which social facts can be most easily recognized and distinguished 
from 
individual psychological ones, 
some have believed that I consider physical constraint to be the entire essence of social life. In reality, I 
have never regarded constraint as anything more than the visible, tangible expression of an underlying, in-
ner fact that is wholly ideal: moral authority. The question for sociology—if there can be said to be one so-


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
211 
Because social pressure makes itself felt through mental channels, i t was 
b o u n d to give man the idea that outside h i m there are one or several powers, 
moral yet mighty, to w h i c h he is subject. Since they speak to h i m i n a tone 
o f command, and sometimes even tell h i m to violate his most natural inch-
nations, man was b o u n d to imagine t h e m as being external to h i m . T h e 
mythological interpretations w o u l d doubdess not have been b o r n i f man 
could easily see that those influences u p o n h i m come from society. B u t the 
ordinary observer cannot see where the influence o f society comes from. It 
moves along channels that are too obscure and circuitous, and uses psychic 
mechanisms that are too complex, to be easily traced to the source. So l o n g 
as scientific analysis has not yet taught h i m , man is well aware that he is acted 
u p o n but not by w h o m . Thus he had to build out o f nothing the idea o f 
those powers w i t h w h i c h he feels connected. F r o m this we can begin to per-
ceive h o w he was led to imagine those powers i n forms that are not their 
o w n and to transfigure t h e m i n thought. 
A god is not only an authority to w h i c h we are subject but also a force 
that buttresses our o w n . T h e man w h o has obeyed his god, and w h o for this 
reason thinks he has his god w i t h h i m , approaches the w o r l d w i t h confidence 
and a sense o f heightened energy. I n the same way, society's workings do not 
stop at demanding sacrifices, privations, and efforts from us. T h e force o f the 
collectivity is not w h o l l y external; it does not move us entirely from outside. 
Indeed, because society can exist only i n and by means o f individual minds,
7 
it must enter into us and become organized w i t h i n us. That force thus be-
comes an integral part o f our being and, by the same stroke, uplifts it and 
brings i t to maturity. * 
This stimulating and invigorating effect o f society is particularly apparent 
i n certain circumstances. I n the midst o f an assembly that becomes worked 
ciological question—is to seek, throughout the various 
forms 
of external constraint, the correspondingly 
various kinds of moral authority and to discover what causes have given rise to the latter. Specifically, the 
main object of the question treated in the present work is to discover in what form the particular kind of 
moral authority that is inherent in all that is religious was born, and what it is made of. Further, it will be 
seen below that in making social pressure one of the distinguishing features of sociological phenomena, I 
do not mean to say that this is the only one. I will exhibit another aspect of collective life, virtually the 
opposite of this one, but no less real. (See p. 213.) 
* L'élève et le grandit. This phrase can also mean "uplifts and enlarges" it. Swain chose the verbs "ele-
vate" and "magnify." Dürkheim may have intended both the physical and the moral meanings: "to lift" as 
well as "to bring up" or "rear"; to "enlarge" as well as to "raise in stature" or "bring to maturity." 
7Which does not mean, of course, that collective consciousness does not have specific traits (Dürk-
heim, "Représentations individuelles et représentations collectives," RMM, vol. VI ([1898]), pp. 273ff.). 


212 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
up, w e become capable o f feelings and conduct o f w h i c h we are incapable 
w h e n left to our individual resources. W h e n it is dissolved and we are again 
o n our o w n , we fall back to our ordinary level and can then take the full 
measure o f h o w far above ourselves we were. History abounds w i t h exam-
ples. Suffice i t to think about the night o f August 4*, w h e n an assembly was 
suddenly carried away i n an act o f sacrifice and abnegation that each o f its 
members had refused to make the night before and by w h i c h all were sur-
prised the m o r n i n g after.
8 For this reason all parties—be they political, eco-
nomic, or denominational—see to i t that periodic conventions are held, at 
w h i c h their followers can renew their c o m m o n faith by making a public 
demonstration o f i t together. To strengthen emotions that w o u l d dissipate i f 
left alone, the one thing needful is to b r i n g all those w h o share them into 
more intimate and more dynamic relationship. 
I n the same way, w è can also explain the curious posture that is so char-
acteristic o f a man w h o is speaking to a c r o w d — i f he has achieved c o m m u -
nion w i t h it. His language becomes high-flown i n a way that w o u l d be 
ridiculous i n ordinary circumstances; his gestures take o n an overbearing 
quality; his very thought becomes impatient o f limits and slips easily into 
every k i n d o f extreme. This is because he feels filled to overflowing, as though 
w i t h a phenomenal oversupply o f forces that spill over and tend to spread 
around h i m . Sometimes he even feels possessed by a moral force greater than 
he, o f w h i c h he is only the interpreter. This is the hallmark o f what has often 
been called the demon o f oratorical inspiration. This extraordinary surplus o f 
forces is quite real and comes to h i m from the very group he is addressing. 
T h e feelings he arouses as he speaks return to h i m enlarged and amplified, re-
inforcing his o w n to the same degree. T h e passionate energies that he arouses 
reecho i n t u r n w i t h i n h i m , and they increase his dynamism. I t is then no 
longer a mere individual w h o speaks but a group incarnated and personified. 
Apart from these passing or intermittent states, there are more lasting 
ones i n w h i c h the fortifying action o f society makes itself felt w i t h longer-
t e r m consequences and often w i t h more striking effect. U n d e r the influence 
'Dürkheim is probably alluding to the night of 4 August 1789, when Frances new National Assem-
bly ratified the total destruction of the feudal regime. 
8The proof of this is the length and passion of the debates at which legal form was given to the reso-
lutions in principle that were taken in a moment of collective enthusiasm. More than one, among clergy 
and nobility alike, called that famous night "dupes' night," or, with Rivarol, the "Saint Bartholomew's of 
the landed estates." [This apparendy alludes to two events. The Journée des Dupes was the day, not the 
night, of 30 November 1630, when Cardinal Richelieu's enemies came to believe the cardinal had lost 
the king's ear for good and had fallen in disgrace; they were proved wrong. La St. Barthélémy was a mas-
sacre of Protestants 23-24 August 1527, which led to civil war. Trans.] See [Otto] Stoll, Suggestion und 
Hypnotismus in der Völkerpsychologie, 2d ed. [Leipzig, Veit, 1904], p. 618 n. 2. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
213 
o f some great collective shock i n certain historical periods, social interactions 
become m u c h more frequent and active. Individuals seek one another out 
and come together more. T h e result is the general effervescence that is char-
acteristic o f revolutionary or creative epochs. T h e result o f that heightened 
activity is a general stimulation o f individual energies. People live differently 
and more intensely than i n normal times.* T h e changes are not simply o f 
nuance and degree; man himself becomes something other than what he 
was. H e is stirred by passions so intense that they can be satisfied only by v i -
olent and extreme acts: by acts o f superhuman heroism or bloody barbarism. 
This explains the Crusades,
9 for example, as w e l l as so many sublime or sav-
age moments i n the French R e v o l u t i o n .
1 0 W e see the most mediocre or 
harmless bourgeois transformed by the general exaltation into a hero or an 
executioner.
1 1 A n d the mental processes are so clearly the same as those at the 
root o f religion that the individuals themselves conceived the pressure they 
yielded to i n explicidy religious terms. T h e Crusaders believed they felt G o d 
present among them, calling o n t h e m to go forth and conquer the H o l y 
Land, and Joan o f Arc believed she was obeying celestial voices.
1 2 
This stimulating action o f society is not felt i n exceptional circumstances 
alone. There is virtually no instant o f our lives i n w h i c h a certain rush o f en-
ergy fails to come to us from outside ourselves. I n all kinds o f acts that ex¬
- press the understanding, esteem, and affection o f his neighbor, there is a lift 
that the man w h o does his duty feels, usually w i t h o u t being aware o f it. B u t 
that lift sustains h i m ; the feeling society has for h i m uplifts the feeling he has 
for himself. Because he is i n moral harmony w i t h his neighbor, he gains new 
confidence, courage, and boldness i n action—quite like the man o f faith 
w h o 
believes he feels the eyes o f his god turned benevolendy toward h i m . 
Thus is produced what amounts to a perpetual uplift o f our moral being. 
Since it varies according to a multitude o f external conditions—whether our 
relations w i t h the social groups that surround us are more or less active and 
what those groups are—we cannot help but feel that this moral t o n i n g up has 
an external cause, though w e do not see where that cause is or what i t is. So 
we readily conceive o f it i n the f o r m o f a moral power that, while immanent 
i n us, also represents something i n us that is other than ourselves. This is 
*On vitplus et autrement qu'en temps normal. 
'Ibid., pp. 353ff. 
'"Ibid., pp. 619, 635. 
"Ibid., pp. 622S". 
12Feelings of fear or sadness can also develop and intensify under the same influences. As we will see, 
those feelings correspond to a whole aspect of 
religious 
life (Bk. Ill, chap. 5). 


214 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
man's moral consciousness and his conscience.* A n d i t is only w i t h the aid 
o f religious symbols that most have ever managed to conceive o f it w i t h any 
clarity at all. 
I n addition to those free forces that continuously renew our o w n , there 
are other forces congealed i n the techniques we use and i n traditions o f all 
kinds. W e speak a language we d i d not create; w e use instruments we d i d not 
invent; we claim rights we d i d not establish; each generation inherits a trea-
sury o f knowledge that it d i d not itself amass; and so on. W e owe these var-
ied benefits o f civilization to society, and although i n general w e do not see 
where they come from, we k n o w at least that they are not o f our o w n mak-
ing. I t is these things that give man his distinctiveness among all creatures, for 
man is man only because he is civilized. Thus he could not escape the sense 
o f mighty causes existing outside h i m , w h i c h are the source o f his character-
istic nature and w h i c h , like benevolent forces, help and protect h i m and 
guarantee h i m a privileged fate. H e naturally accorded to those powers a re-
spect commensurate w i t h the great value o f the benefits that he attributed to 
t h e m .
1 3 
Thus the environment i n w h i c h we live seems populated w i t h forces at 
once demanding and helpful, majestic and kind, and w i t h w h i c h w e are i n 
touch. Because we feel the weight o f them, w e have no choice but to locate 
them outside ourselves, as w e do for the objective causes o f our sensations. 
B u t from another point o f view, the feelings they provoke i n us are qualita-
tively different from those we have for merely physical things. So long as these 
perceptions are no more than the empirical characteristics that ordinary ex-
perience makes manifest, and so long as the religious imagination has not yet 
transfigured them, we feel n o t h i n g like respect for them, and they have n o t h -
ing o f what it takes to lift us above ourselves. Therefore the representations 
that express t h e m seem to us very different from those that collective i n f l u -
ences awaken i n us. T h e t w o sorts o f representation f o r m t w o kinds o f m e n -
tal state, and they are as separate and distinct as the t w o forms o f life to w h i c h 
they correspond. As a result, we feel as though we are i n touch w i t h t w o dis-
tinct sorts o f reality w i t h a clear line o f demarcation between them: the w o r l d 
o f profane things o n one side, the w o r l d o f sacred things o n the other. 
* Conscience. To bring out that the French conscience refers simultaneously to intellectual cognition 
and moral obligation, I have used both "conscience" and "consciousness." 
"Such is the other aspect of society, which seems to us demanding as well as good and kindly. It dom-
inates us; it helps us. If I have defined social fact more by the 
first 
characteristic than by the second, it is 
because the dominance is more easily observable and because it is expressed by external and visible signs; 
but I am far from ever having intended to deny the reality of the second. ([Emile Durkheim,] Les Règles 
de la méthode sociologique, 2d ed. [Paris, Alcan, 1901], preface, p. xx n.l). 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
215 
Furthermore, n o w as i n the past, we see that society never stops creating 
new sacred things. I f society should happen to become infatuated w i t h a man, 
believing it has found i n h i m its deepest aspirations as w e l l as the means o f ful-
filling them, then that man w i l l be put i n a class by himself and virtually de-
ified. O p i n i o n w i l l confer o n h i m a grandeur that is similar i n every way to 
the grandeur that protects the gods. This has happened to many sovereigns i n 
w h o m their epochs had faith and w h o , i f not deified outright, were looked 
upon as direct representatives o f the godhead. A clear indication that this 
apotheosis is the w o r k o f society alone is that society has often consecrated 
men whose personal w o r t h d i d not warrant it. Moreover, the routine defer-
ence that m e n invested w i t h high social positions receive is not qualitatively 
different from religious respect. T h e same movements express it: standing at 
a distance from a high personage; taking special precautions i n approaching 
h i m ; using a different language to speak w i t h h i m and gestures other than 
those that w i l l do for ordinary mortals. One's feeling i n these circumstances 
is so closely akin to religious feeling that many do not distinguish between 
them. Sacredness is ascribed to princes, nobles, and political leaders i n order 
to account for the special regard they enjoy. I n Melanesia and Polynesia, for 
example, people say that a man o f influence possesses mana and impute his 
influence to this mana.
1 4 It is clear, nonetheless, that his position comes to 
h i m only from the importance that opinion gives h i m . Thus, b o t h the moral 
power conferred by opinion and the moral power w i t h w h i c h sacred beings 
are invested are o f fundamentally the same o r i g i n and composed o f the same 
elements. For this reason, one w o r d can be used to designate both. 
Just as society consecrates men, so i t also consecrates things, including 
ideas. W h e n a belief is shared unanimously by a people, to touch it—that is, 
to deny or question it—is forbidden, for the reasons already stated. T h e pro-
hibition against critique is a prohibition like any other and proves that one is 
face to face w i t h a sacred thing. Even today, great though the freedom we al-
l o w one another may be, i t w o u l d be tantamount to sacrilege for a man 
w h o l l y to deny progress or to reject the h u m a n ideal to w h i c h m o d e r n soci-
eties are attached. Even the peoples most enamored o f free thinking tend to 
place one principle above discussion and regard i t as untouchable, i n other 
words, sacred: the principle o f free discussion itself. 
N o w h e r e has society's ability to make itself a god or to create gods been 
more i n evidence than d u r i n g the first years o f the R e v o l u t i o n . I n the gen-
eral enthusiasm o f that time, things that were by nature purely secular were 
14[Robert Henry] Codrington, The Melanesians [Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1891], pp. 50, 103, 120. 
Moreover, it is generally believed that in the Polynesian languages, the word mana originally meant "author-
ity." (See [Edward] Tregear, Maori Polynesian Comparative Dictionary, s.v. [Wellington, Lyon and Blair, 1891].) 


216 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
transformed by public o p i n i o n into sacred things: Fatherland, Liberty, Rea-
son.
1 5 A religion tended to establish itself spontaneously, 
w i t h its o w n 
dogma,
1 6 symbols,
1 7 altars,
1 8 and feast days.
1 9 I t was to these spontaneous 
hopes that the C u l t o f Reason and the Supreme Being tried to give a k i n d o f 
authoritative fulfillment. Granted, this religious novelty d i d not last. T h e pa-
triotic enthusiasm that originally stirred the masses died away,
2 0 and the cause 
having departed, the effect could not hold. B u t b r i e f though i t was, this ex-
periment loses none o f its sociological interest. I n a specific case, we saw so-
ciety and its fundamental ideas becoming the object o f a genuine cult 
directly—and w i t h o u t transfiguration o f any k i n d . 
A l l these facts enable us to grasp h o w it is possible for the clan to awaken 
i n its members the idea o f forces existing outside them, b o t h dominating and 
supporting t h e m — i n sum, religious forces. There is no other social group to 
w h i c h the primitive is more direcdy or tighdy bound. T h e ties that b i n d h i m 
to the tribe are looser and less strongly felt. A l t h o u g h the tribe is certainly 
not foreign to h i m , it is w i t h the people o f his clan that he has most i n c o m -
m o n , and it is the influence o f this group that he feels most immediately, and 
so it is also this influence, more than any other, that was b o u n d to find ex-
pression i n religious symbols. 
This first explanation is too general, though, since i t can be applied i n -
discriminately to any k i n d o f society and hence to any k i n d o f religion. Let 
us try to specify what particular f o r m collective action takes i n the clan and 
h o w i n the clan i t brings about the sense o f the sacred, for collective action 
is nowhere more easily observable or more obvious than i n its results. 
Ill 
Life i n Australian societies alternates between t w o different phases.
2 1 I n one 
phase, the population is scattered i n small groups that attend to their occupa-
15See Albert Mathiez, Les Origines des cultes révolutionnaires 1789-1792 [Paris, G. Bellais, 1904]. 
16Ibid., p. 24. 
"Ibid., pp. 29, 32. 
18Ibid., p. 30. 
,9Ibid, p. 46. 
20See [Albert] Mathiez, La Théophilanthropie et le culte décadaire [Paris, F. Alcan, 1903], p. 36. 
21See [Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen, Northern Tribes [of Central Australia, London, 
Macmillan, 1904], p. 33. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
217 
tions independently. Each family lives to itself, hunting, fishing—in short, 
striving by all possible means to get the food i t requires. I n the other phase, 
by contrast, the population comes together, concentrating itself at specified 
places for a period that varies from several days to several months. This con-
centration takes place w h e n a clan or a p o r t i o n o f the t r i b e
2 2 is summoned to 
come together and o n that occasion either conducts a religious ceremony or 
holds what i n the usual ethnographic terminology is called a corroboree.
23 
These t w o phases stand i n the sharpest possible contrast. T h e first phase, 
i n w h i c h economic activity predominates, is generally o f rather l o w intensity. 
Gathering seeds or plants necessary for food, hunting, and fishing are not oc-
cupations that can stir truly strong passions.
2 4 T h e dispersed state i n w h i c h 
the society finds itself makes life monotonous, slack, and h u m d r u m .
2 5 Every-
thing changes w h e n a corroboree takes place. Since the emotional and pas-
sionate faculties o f the primitive are not fully subordinated to his reason and 
w i l l , he easily loses his self-control. A n event o f any importance immediately 
puts h i m outside himself. Does he receive happy news? There are transports 
o f enthusiasm. I f the opposite happens, he is seen r u n n i n g hither and y o n like 
a madman, giving way to all sorts o f chaotic movements: shouting, scream-
ing, gathering dust and t h r o w i n g it i n all directions, b i t i n g himself, brandish-
ing his weapons furiously, and so o n .
2 6 T h e very act o f congregating is an 
exceptionally powerful stimulant. Once the individuals are gathered t o -
gether, a sort o f electricity is generated 
from their closeness and quickly 
launches t h e m to an extraordinary height o f exaltation. Every e m o t i o n ex-
pressed resonates w i t h o u t interference i n consciousnesses that are w i d e open 
22Indeed there are ceremonies, notably those that take place for initiation, to which members of for-
eign tribes are summoned. A system of messages and messengers is organized for the purpose of giving 
the notice that is indispensable for the grand ceremonies. (See [Alfred William] Howitt, "Notes on Aus-
tralian Message-Sticks and Messengers," JAI, vol. XVIII (1889) [pp. 314-334]; Howitt, Native Tribes [of 
South-East Australia, New York, Macmillan, 1904], pp. 83, 678-691; Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes [of 
Central Australia, London, Macmillan, 1899], p. 159; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 551. 
23The corroboree is distinguished from a religious rite proper in that it is accessible to women and the 
uninitiated. But although these two sorts of collective celebrations must be distinguished, they are closely 
related. I will return to and explain this relationship. 
24Except in the case of the large bush-beating hunts. 
25"The peaceful monotony of this part of his life," say Spencer and Gillen (Northern Tribes, p. 33). 
^Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 683. Here it is the demonstrations that take place when an embassy sent to 
a foreign group returns to camp with news of a favorable result. [Durkheim will not be the one to report 
that the embassy in question had been entrusted to women. Howitt does not say what the women's mis-
sion was about. Trans.] Cf. [Robert] Brough Smyth, [The Aborigines of Victoria], vol. 1 [Melbourne, J. Fer¬
res, 1878], p. 138; [Reverend Louis] Schulze, "Aborigines of the Upper and Middle Finke River," RSSA, 
vol. XVI [1891], p. 222. 


218 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
to external impressions, each one echoing the others. T h e initial impulse is 
thereby amplified each time i t is echoed, like an avalanche that grows as it 
goes along. A n d since passions so heated and so free from all control cannot 
help but spill over, from every side there are n o t h i n g but w i l d movements, 
shouts, d o w n r i g h t howls, and deafening noises o f all kinds that further i n -
tensify the state they are expressing. Probably because a collective emotion 
cannot be expressed collectively w i t h o u t some order that permits harmony 
and unison o f movement, these gestures and cries tend to fall into r h y t h m 
and regularity, and from there into songs and dances. B u t i n taking o n a more 
regular f o r m , they lose none o f their natural fury. A regulated c o m m o t i o n is 
still a c o m m o t i o n . T h e human voice is inadequate to the task and is given ar-
tificial reinforcement: Boomerangs are knocked against one another; bull 
roarers are whirled. T h e original function o f these instruments, used widely 
i n the religious ceremonies o f Australia, probably was to give more satisfying 
expression to the excitement felt. A n d by expressing this excitement, they 
also reinforce it. T h e effervescence often becomes so intense that i t leads to 
oudandish behavior; the passions unleashed are so torrential that nothing can 
h o l d them. People are so far outside the ordinary conditions o f life, and so 
conscious o f the fact, that they feel a certain need to set themselves above and 
beyond ordinary morality. T h e sexes come together i n violation o f the rules 
governing sexual relations. M e n exchange wives. Indeed, sometimes inces-
tuous unions, i n normal times judged loathsome and harshly condemned, are 
contracted i n the open and w i t h i m p u n i t y .
2 7 I f it is added that the ceremonies 
are generally held at night, i n the midst o f shadows pierced here and there by 
firelight, we can easily imagine the effect that scenes like these are b o u n d to 
have o n the minds o f all those w h o take part. T h e y b r i n g about such an i n -
tense hyperexcitement o f physical and mental life as a whole that they can-
not be borne for very long. T h e celebrant w h o takes the leading role 
eventually falls exhausted to the g r o u n d .
2 8 
To illustrate and flesh out this unavoidably sketchy tableau, here is an ac-
count o f scenes taken from Spencer and Gillen. 
O n e o f the most important religious celebrations among the Warra-
27See Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 96—97, Northern Tribes, p. 137; Brough Smyth, Aborigines of 
Victoria, vol. II, p. 319. This ritual promiscuity is practiced especially during initiation ceremonies 
(Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 267, 381; Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 657) and in totemic ceremonies 
(Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 214, 237, 298). The ordinary rules of exogamy are violated dur-
ing totemic ceremonies. Nevertheless, among the Arunta, unions between father and daughter, son and 
mother, brothers and sisters (all cases of 
blood kinship) remain forbidden (Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes 
[pp. 96-97]). 
2sHowitt, Native Tribes, pp. 535, 545. This is extremely common. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
219 
munga concerns the snake Wollunqua. I t is a series o f rites that unfold over 
several days. W h a t I w i l l describe takes place o n the fourth day. 
According to the protocol i n use among the Warramunga, representa-
tives o f the t w o phratries take part, some as celebrants and others as organiz-
ers and participants. A l t h o u g h only the people o f the U l u u r u phratry are 
authorized to conduct the ceremony, the members o f the K i n g i l h phratry 
must decorate the participants, prepare the site and the instruments, and 
serve as the audience. I n this capacity, they are responsible for m o u n d i n g 
damp sand ahead o f time, o n w h i c h they use red d o w n to make a drawing 
that represents the snake Wollunqua. T h e ceremony proper, w h i c h Spencer 
and Gillen attended, d i d not begin until nightfall. A r o u n d ten or eleven o'-
clock, U l u u r u and K i n g i l l i arrived o n the scene, sat o n the m o u n d , and be-
gan to sing. A l l were i n a state o f obvious excitement ("every one was evidently 
very excited"). A short time later i n the evening, the U l u u r u brought their 
wives and handed t h e m over to the K i n g i l l i ,
2 9 w h o had sexual relations w i t h 
them. T h e recently initiated y o u n g m e n were brought i n , and the ceremony 
was explained to them, after w h i c h there was uninterrupted singing until 
three i n the m o r n i n g . T h e n came a scene o f truly w i l d frenzy ("a scene of the 
wildest excitement"). W i t h fires flickering o n all sides, b r i n g i n g out starkly the 
whiteness o f the g u m trees against the surrounding night, the U l u u r u knelt 
i n single file beside the m o u n d , then moved around it, rising i n unison w i t h 
both hands o n their thighs, kneeling again a little farther along, and so on. A t 
the same time, they moved their bodies left and then right, at each move-
ment letting out an echoing scream—actually a h o w l — a t the top o f their 
voices, Yrrsh! Yrrsh! Yrrsh! M e a n w h i l e the K i n g i l h , i n a high state o f excite-
ment, sounded their boomerangs, their chief appearing to be even more ex-
cited than his companions. W h e n the procession o f the U l u u r u had circled 
the m o u n d twice, they rose from their kneeling position, seated themselves, 
and took to singing again. F r o m time to time, the singing w o u l d flag and al-
most die, then break out suddenly again. A t the first sign o f day, everyone 
j u m p e d to their feet; the fires that had gone out were relit; urged o n by the 
K i n g i l h , the U l u u r u furiously attacked the m o u n d w i t h boomerangs, lances, 
and sticks, and i n a few minutes i t was i n pieces. T h e fires died and there was 
profound silence.
3 0 
T h e same observers were present at a yet wilder scene among the War-
ramunga d u r i n g the fire rituals. A l l sorts o f processions, dances, and songs 
had been underway by torchlight since nightfall, and the general efferves-
29Since the women were also Kingilli, these unions violated the rule of exogamy. 
'"Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 237. [This account begins at p. 231. Trans.] 


220 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
cence was increasingly intense. A t a certain moment, twelve o f those present 
each took i n hand a large lighted torch; and, holding his o w n torch like a 
bayonette, one o f t h e m charged a group o f natives. T h e blows were parried 
w i t h staves and lances. A general m ê l é e followed. M e n j u m p e d , kicked, 
reared, and let out w i l d screams. T h e torches blazed and crackled as they hit 
heads and bodies, showering sparks i n all directions. " T h e smoke, the 
flam-
ing torches, the rain o f sparks, the mass o f m e n dancing and screaming—all 
that, say Spencer and Gillen, created a scene whose wildness cannot be c o n -
veyed i n words."
3 1 
It is not difficult to imagine that a man i n such a state o f exaltation 
should no longer k n o w himself. Feeling possessed and led o n by some sort o f 
external power that makes h i m t h i n k and act differendy than he normally 
does, he naturally feels he is no longer himself. I t seems to h i m that he has 
become a new being. T h e decorations w i t h w h i c h he is decked out, and the 
masklike decorations that cover his face, represent this inward transformation 
even more than they help b r i n g it about. A n d because his companions feel 
transformed i n the same way at the same moment, and express this feeling by 
their shouts, movements, and bearing, i t is as i f he was i n reality transported 
into a special w o r l d entirely different from the one i n w h i c h he ordinarily 
lives, a special w o r l d inhabited by exceptionally intense forces that invade and 
transform h i m . Especially w h e n repeated for weeks, day after day, h o w 
w o u l d experiences like these not leave h i m w i t h the conviction that t w o het-
erogeneous and incommensurable worlds exist i n fact? I n one w o r l d he lan-
guidly carries o n his daily life; the other is one that he cannot enter w i t h o u t 
abrupdy entering into relations w i t h extraordinary powers that excite h i m to 
the point o f frenzy. T h e first is the profane w o r l d and the second, the w o r l d 
o f sacred things. 
It is i n these effervescent social milieux, and indeed from that very effer-
vescence, that the religious idea seems to have been b o r n . That such is i n -
deed the origin tends to be confirmed by the fact that what is properly called 
religious activity i n Australia is almost entirely contained w i t h i n the periods 
w h e n these gatherings are held. To be sure, there is no people among w h o m 
the great cult ceremonies are not more or less periodical, but i n the more ad-
vanced societies, there is virtually no day o n w h i c h some prayer or offering 
is not offered to the gods or o n w h i c h some ritual obligation is not fulfilled. 
I n Australia, by contrast, the time apart from the feasts o f the clan and the 
31Ibid., p. 391. Other examples of collective effervescence during religious ceremonies are found in 
Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 244-246, 356-366, 374, 509-510. (The last occurs during a funeral 
rite.) Cf. Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 213, 351. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
221 
tribe is taken up almost entirely w i t h secular and profane activities. Granted, 
even d u r i n g the periods o f secular activity, there are prohibitions that must be 
and are observed. Freely killing or eating the totemic animal is never per-
mitted, at least where the prohibition has kept its original strictness, but 
hardly any positive rite or ceremony o f any importance is conducted. T h e 
positive rites and ceremonies take place only among assembled groups. Thus, 
the pious life o f the Australian moves between successive phases—one o f ut-
ter colorlessness, one o f hyperexcitement—and social life oscillates to the 
same r h y t h m . This brings out the l i n k between the t w o phases. A m o n g the 
peoples called civilized, o n the other hand, the relative continuity between 
them partially masks their interrelations. Indeed, we may well ask whether 
this starkness o f contrast may have been necessary to release the experience 
o f the sacred i n its first f o r m . B y compressing itself almost entirely into cir-
cumscribed periods, collective life could attain its m a x i m u m intensity and 
power, thereby giving man a more v i v i d sense o f the twofold existence he 
leads and the twofold nature i n w h i c h he participates. 
B u t this explanation is still incomplete. I have shown h o w the clan awak-
ens i n its members the idea o f external forces that dominate and exalt it by 
the way i n w h i c h it acts u p o n its members. B u t I still must ask h o w i t hap-
pens that those forces were conceived o f i n the f o r m o f the totem, that is, i n 
the f o r m o f an animal or plant. 
T h e reason is that some animal or plant has given its name to the clan 
and serves as the clan's emblem. I t is, i n fact, a w e l l - k n o w n law that the feel-
ings a thing arouses i n us are spontaneously transmitted to the symbol that 
represents it. Black is for us a sign o f m o u r n i n g ; therefore i t evokes sad 
thoughts and impressions. This transfer o f feelings takes place because the 
idea o f the thing and the idea o f its symbol are closely connected i n our 
minds. As a result, the feelings evoked by one spread contagiously to the 
other. This contagion, w h i c h occurs i n all cases to some extent, is m u c h 
more complete and more pronounced whenever the symbol is something 
simple, w e l l defined, and easily imagined. B u t the thing itself is difficult for 
the m i n d to comprehend—given its dimensions, the number o f its parts, and 
the complexity o f their organization. W e cannot detect the source o f the 
strong feelings we have i n an abstract entity that we can imagine only w i t h 
difficulty and i n a j u m b l e d way. W e can comprehend those feelings only i n 
connection w i t h a concrete object whose reality we feel intensely. Thus i f 
the thing itself does not meet this requirement, i t cannot serve as a m o o r i n g 
for the impressions felt, even for those impressions i t has itself aroused. T h e 
symbol thus takes the place o f the thing, and the emotions aroused are trans-
ferred to the symbol. I t is the symbol that is loved, feared, and respected. I t 


222 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
is to the symbol that one is grateful. A n d i t is to the symbol that one sacri-
fices oneself. T h e soldier w h o dies for his flag dies for his country, but the 
idea o f the flag is actually i n the foreground o f his consciousness. Indeed, the 
flag sometimes causes action directly. A l t h o u g h the country w i l l not be lost 
i f a solitary flag remains i n the hands o f the enemy or w o n i f i t is regained, 
the soldier is killed retaking it. H e forgets that the flag is only a symbol that 
has no value i n itself but only brings to m i n d the reality i t represents. T h e flag 
itself is treated as i f it was that reality. 
T h e totem is the flag o f the clan, so it is natural that the impressions the 
clan arouses i n individual consciousness—impressions o f dependence and o f 
heightened energy—should become more closely attached to the idea o f the 
totem than to that o f the clan. T h e clan is too complex a reality for such u n -
formed minds to be able to b r i n g its concrete unity into clear focus. Besides, 
the primitive does not see that these impressions come to h i m from the 
group. H e does not even see that the c o m i n g together o f a certain number o f 
men participating i n the same life releases new energies that transform each 
one o f them. A l l he feels is that he is lifted above himself and that he is par-
ticipating i n a life different from the one he lives ordinarily. H e must still 
connect those experiences to some external object i n a causal relation. N o w 
what does he see around him? W h a t is avadable to his senses, and what at-
tracts his attention, is the multitude o f totemic images surrounding h i m . H e 
sees the waninga and the nurtunja, symbols o f the sacred being. H e sees the 
bull roarers and the churingas, o n w h i c h combinations o f lines that have the 
same meaning are usually engraved. T h e decorations o n various parts o f his 
body are so many totemic marks. Repeated everywhere and i n every f o r m , 
how 
could that image not fail to stand out i n the m i n d w i t h exceptionally 
sharp relief? Thus placed at center stage, i t becomes representative. To that 
image the felt emotions attach themselves, for it is the only concrete object 
to w h i c h they can attach themselves. 
T h e image goes o n calling forth and recalling those emotions even after 
the assembly is over. Engraved o n the cult implements, o n the sides o f rocks, 
on shields, and so forth, i t lives beyond the gathering. B y means o f it, the 
emotions felt are kept perpetually alive and fresh. I t is as though the image 
provoked them directly. I m p u t i n g the emotions to the image is all the more 
natural because, being c o m m o n to the group, they can only be related to a 
thing that is equally c o m m o n to all. O n l y the totemic emblem meets this 
condition. B y definition, i t is c o m m o n to all. D u r i n g the ceremony, all eyes 
are u p o n it. A l t h o u g h the generations change, the image remains the same. 
It is the abiding element o f social life. So the mysterious forces w i t h w h i c h 
men 
feel i n touch seem to emanate from it, and thus we understand h o w 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
223 
men were led to conceive t h e m i n the f o r m o f the animate or inanimate be-
ing that gives the clan its name. 
Having laid this foundation, we are i n a position to grasp the essence o f 
totemic beliefs. Because religious force is none other than the collective and 
anonymous force o f the clan and because that force can only be conceived o f 
i n the f o r m o f the totem, the totemic emblem is, so to speak, the visible body 
o f the god. F r o m the totem, therefore, the beneficial or fearsome actions that 
the cult is intended to provoke or prevent w i l l seem to emanate. So it is to 
the totem that the rites are specifically addressed. This is w h y the totem 
stands foremost i n the ranks o f sacred things. 
Like any other society, the clan can only live i n and by means o f the i n -
dividual consciousnesses o f w h i c h it is made. Thus, insofar as religious force 
is conceived o f as embodied i n the totemic emblem, i t seems to be external 
to individuals and endowed w i t h a k i n d o f transcendence; and yet, from an-
other standpoint, and like the clan it symbolizes, i t can be made real only 
w i t h i n and by them. So i n this sense, i t is immanent i n individual members 
and they o f necessity imagine i t to be. T h e y feel w i t h i n themselves the active 
presence o f the religious force, because i t is this force that lifts t h e m up to a 
higher life. This is h o w man came to believe that he had w i t h i n h i m a p r i n -
ciple comparable to the one residing i n the totem, and thus h o w he came to 
impute sacredness to himself-—albeit a sacredness less pronounced than that 
o f the emblem. This happens because the emblem is the preeminent source 
o f religious life. M a n participates i n i t only indirecdy, and he is aware o f that; 
he realizes that the force carrying h i m into the realm o f sacred things is not 
inherent i n himself but comes to h i m from outside. 
For another reason, the animals or plants o f the totemic species had to 
have the same quality to an even greater degree. For i f the totemic principle 
is none other than the clan, it is the clan thought o f i n the physical f o r m de-
picted by the emblem. N o w , this is also the f o r m o f the real beings whose 
name the clan bears. Because o f this resemblance, they could not fail to 
arouse feelings similar to those aroused by the emblem itself. Because this 
emblem is the object o f religious respect, they too should inspire respect o f 
the same k i n d and appear as sacred. Given forms so perfecdy identical, the 
faithful were b o u n d to impute forces o f the same k i n d to both. This is w h y 
it is forbidden to k i l l or eat the totemic animal and w h y the flesh is deemed 
to have positive virtues that the rites put to use. T h e animal looks like the 
emblem o f the clan—like its o w n image, i n other words. A n d since it looks 
more like the emblem than the man does, its place i n the hierarchy o f sacred 
things is superior to man's. Clearly there is a close kinship between these t w o 
beings; both share the same essence, and b o t h incarnate something o f the 


224 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
totemic principle. B u t because the principle itself is conceived o f i n animal 
f o r m , the animal seems to incarnate i t more conspicuously than the man 
does. This is why, i f the man respects the animal and treats i t as a brother, he 
gives i t at least the respect due an older brother.
3 2 
B u t although the totemic principle has its chief residence i n a specific 
animal or plant species, i t cannot possibly remain localized there. Sacredness 
is highly contagious,
3 3 and i t spreads from the totemic being to everything 
that direcdy or remotely has to do w i t h it. T h e religious feelings inspired by 
the animal passed into the substances it ate, thereby m a k i n g or remaking its 
flesh and blood; those feelings passed into the things that resemble it and into 
the various creatures w i t h w h i c h i t is i n constant contact. Thus, httle by l i t -
de, subtotems attached themselves to totems, and the cosmological systems 
expressed by the primitive classifications came into being. I n the end, the 
whole w o r l d was divided up among the totemic principles o f the same tribe. 
We n o w understand the source o f the ambiguity that religious forces dis-
play w h e n they appear i n h i s t o r y — h o w they come to be natural as well as 
human and material as well as moral. T h e y are moral powers, since they are 
made entirely from the impressions that moral collectivity as a moral being 
makes o n other moral beings, the individuals. Such moral powers do not ex-
press the manner i n w h i c h natural things affect our senses but the manner i n 
w h i c h the collective consciousness affects individual consciousnesses. T h e i r 
authority is but one aspect o f the moral influence that society exerts o n its 
members. F r o m another standpoint, they are b o u n d to be regarded as closely 
akin to material things
3 4 because they are conceived o f i n tangible forms. 
Thus they bestride the t w o worlds. T h e y reside i n m e n but are at the same 
time the life-principles o f things. I t is they that enliven and discipline c o n -
sciences; i t is also they that make the plants g r o w and the animals multiply. 
Because o f its double nature, religion was able to be the w o m b i n w h i c h the 
3 2It can be seen that this brotherhood, far from being the premise of totemism, is its logical conse-
quence. Men did not come to believe they had duties toward the animals of the totemic species because 
they believed them to be kin; instead, they imagined that kinship in order to explain the nature of the be-
liefs and rites of which the animals were the object. The animal was considered man's relative because it 
was a sacred being like man; it was not treated like a sacred being because people saw him as a relative. 
33See below, Bk. Ill, chap. 1, §3. 
34Furthermore, at the basis of this idea is a well-founded and lasting awareness. Modern science also 
tends more and more to allow that the duality of man and nature does not preclude their unity, and that, 
while distinct, physical forces and moral ones are closely akin. We certainly have a different idea of this 
unity and kinship than the primitive's, but beneath the different symbols, the fact affirmed is the same for 
both. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
225 
principal seeds o f h u m a n civilization have developed. Because religion has 
borne reality as a w h o l e w i t h i n itself, the material w o r l d as well as the moral 
w o r l d , the forces that move b o t h bodies and minds have been conceived o f 
i n religious f o r m . Thus i t is that the most disparate techniques and prac-
tices—those that ensure the continuity o f moral life (law, morals, fine arts) 
and those that are useful to material life (natural sciences, industrial tech-
niques)—sprang from religion, direcdy or indirecdy.
3 5 
IV 
T h e first religious ideas have often been attributed to feelings o f weakness 
and subjection or fear and misgiving, w h i c h supposedly gripped man w h e n 
he came into contact w i t h the w o r l d . T h e v i c t i m o f a sort o f nightmare fab-
ricated by none other than himself, man imagines himself surrounded by 
those same hostile and fearsome powers, and appeasing them is the point o f 
the rites. I have just shown that the first religions have an altogether different 
origin. T h e famous formula Primus in orbe deos fecit timor* is i n no way war-
ranted by the facts. T h e primitive d i d not see his gods as strangers, enemies, 
or beings w h o were fundamentally or necessarily evil-minded or whose fa-
vor he had to w i n at all costs. Q u i t e the contrary, to h i m the gods are friends, 
relatives, and natural protectors. Are these not the names he gives to the be-
ings o f the totemic species? As he imagines it, the power to w h i c h the cult is 
addressed does not l o o m far above, crushing h i m w i t h its superiority; instead, 
it is very near and bestows u p o n h i m useful abilities that he is not b o r n w i t h . 
Never, perhaps, has divinity been closer to m a n t h a n at this m o m e n t i n his-
tory, w h e n i t is present i n the things that inhabit his immediate surroundings 
and, i n part, is immanent i n man himself. I n sum, joyful confidence, rather 
than terror or constraint, is at the root o f totemism. 
I f we set aside funeral rites, the melancholy aspect o f any religion, the 
totemic cult is celebrated w i t h songs, dances, and dramatic performances. 
Cruel expiations are relatively rare i n it, as we w i l l see; even the painful and 
obligatory mannings that attend initiation are not o f this character. T h e jeal-
ous and terrible gods do not make their appearance until later i n religious 
* First in the world, fear created the gods. 
3 5I say that this derivation is sometimes indirect, because of techniques that, in the great majority of 
cases, seem to be derived from religion only via magic (see [Henri] Hubert and [Marcel] Mauss, [Esquisse 
d'une] Théorie générale de la magie,AS, vol. VII [1904], pp. 144ff; magie forces are, I think, only a special 
form of religious forces. I will have occasion to return more than once to this point. 


226 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
evolution. This is so because primitive societies are not Leviathans that over-
w h e l m man w i t h the e n o r m i t y o f their power and subject h i m to harsh dis-
cipline;
3 6 he surrenders to t h e m spontaneously and w i t h o u t resistance. Since 
the social soul is at that time made up o f only a small number o f ideas and 
feelings, the w h o l e o f i t is incarnated w i t h o u t difficulty i n each individual's 
consciousness. Each individual carries the w h o l e i n himself. I t is part o f h i m , 
so w h e n he yields to its promptings, he does not think he is yielding to co-
ercion but instead doing what his o w n nature tells h i m to d o .
3 7 
This way o f understanding the o r i g i n o f religious thought escapes the 
objections that the most respected classical theories are open to. 
We have seen that the naturists and the animists purported to construct 
the notion o f sacred beings from the sensations that various physical or b i o -
logical phenomena evoke i n us. I have shown what was impossible and even 
contradictory about this enterprise. N o t h i n g comes out o f nothing. T h e sen-
sations that the physical w o r l d evokes i n us cannot, by definition, contain 
anything that goes beyond that w o r l d . F r o m something tangible one can 
only make something tangible; from extended substance one cannot make 
unextended substance. * So to be i n a position to explain how, under those 
conditions, the n o t i o n o f the sacred could have been formed, most theorists 
were forced to assume that man has superimposed an unreal w o r l d u p o n re-
ality as reality is available to observation. A n d this unreal w o r l d is constructed 
entirely w i t h the phantasms that agitate his spirit during dreams, or w i t h the 
often monstrous derangements that, supposedly, the mythological imagina-
t i o n spawned under the deceptive, i f seductive, influence o f language. B u t i t 
then became impossible to understand w h y humanity should have persisted 
for centuries i n errors that experience w o u l d very quickly have exposed as 
such. 
F r o m m y standpoint, these difficulties disappear. R e l i g i o n ceases to be 
an inexplicable hallucination o f some sort and gains a foothold i n reality. I n -
deed, we can say that the faithful are not mistaken w h e n they believe i n the 
existence o f a moral power to w h i c h they are subject and from w h i c h they 
* L'étendu and l'inétendu. Literally, "something extended" and "something unextended," which corre-
spond to Descartes' opposition between res externa and res inextensa, classically the opposition between 
mind (or soul) and body. 
^In any case, once he is adult and fully initiated. The rites of initiation, which introduce the young 
man into social life, in themselves constitute a harsh discipline. 
"Concerning the specific nature of primitive societies, see [Dürkheim,] Division du travail social, 
pp. 123, 149, 173ff. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
227 
receive what is best i n themselves. That power exists, and it is society. W h e n 
the Australian is carried above himself, feeling inside a life overflowing w i t h 
an intensity that surprises h i m , he is not the dupe o f an illusion. That exalta-
tion is real and really is the product o f forces outside o f and superior to the 
individual. O f course, he is mistaken to believe that a power i n the f o r m o f 
an animal or plant has brought about this increase i n vital energy. B u t his 
mistake lies i n taking literally the symbol that represents this being i n the 
m i n d , or the outward appearance i n w h i c h the imagination has dressed it up, 
not i n the fact o f its very existence. B e h i n d these forms, be they cruder or 
more refined, there is a concrete and living reality. 
I n this way, religion acquires a sense and a reasonableness that the most 
militant rationalist cannot fail to recognize. T h e main object o f religion is not 
to give man a representation o f the natural universe, for i f that had been its es-
sential task, h o w i t could have held o n w o u l d be incomprehensible. I n this re-
spect, i t is barely more than a fabric o f errors. B u t religion is first and foremost 
a system o f ideas by means o f w h i c h individuals imagine the society o f w h i c h 
they are members and the obscure yet intimate relations they have w i t h it. 
Such is its paramount role. A n d although this representation is symbolic and 
metaphorical, i t is not unfaithful. It fully translates the essence o f the relations 
to be accounted for. I t is true w i t h a truth that is eternal that there exists out-
side us something greater than we and w i t h w h i c h we commune. 
That is w h y w e can be certain that acts o f worship, whatever they may 
be, are something other than paralyzed force, gesture w i t h o u t m o t i o n . B y 
the very act o f serving the manifest purpose o f strengthening the ties be-
tween the faithful and their god—the god being only a figurative represen-
tation o f the society—they at the same time strengthen the ties between the 
individual and the society o f w h i c h he is a member. W e can even understand 
h o w the fundamental t r u t h that religion thus contained might have been 
enough to offset the secondary errors that i t almost necessarily entailed and 
therefore how, despite the unpleasant surprises those errors caused, the faith-
ful were prevented from setting religion aside. M o r e often than not, the pre-
scriptions i t counseled for man's use u p o n things must surely have proved 
ineffective. B u t these setbacks could not have profound influence, because 
they d i d not strike at what is fundamental to r e l i g i o n .
3 8 
Nonetheless, i t w i l l be objected that even i n terms o f this hypothesis, re-
ligion is still the product o f a certain delusion. B y what other name can one 
38Since I will return to this idea and will argue the case more explicidy in treating the rites (Bk. Ill), 
for now I confine myself to this general indication. 


228 
THE ELEMENTARY BELLEFS 
call the state i n w h i c h m e n find themselves w h e n , as a result o f collective ef-
fervescence, they believe they have been swept up into a w o r l d entirely dif-
ferent from the one they have before their eyes? 
It is quite true that religious life cannot attain any degree o f intensity and 
not carry w i t h i t a psychic exaltation that is connected to delirium. I t is for 
this reason that m e n o f extraordinarily sensitive religious consciousness— 
prophets, founders o f religions, great saints—often show symptoms o f an ex-
citability that is extreme and even pathological: These physiological defects 
predisposed t h e m to great religious roles. T h e ritual use o f intoxicating 
liquors is to be understood i n the same way.
3 9 T h e reason is certainly not that 
ardent faith is necessarily the 
fruit o f drunkenness and mental disorders. 
However, since experience quickly taught people the resemblances between 
the mentalities o f the delusive and o f the seer, they sought to open a path to 
the second by producing the first artificially. If, for this reason, i t can be said 
that religion does not do w i t h o u t a certain delirium, i t must be added that a 
delirium w i t h the causes I have attributed to i t is well 
founded. T h e images o f 
w h i c h i t is made are not pure illusions, and unlike those the naturists and the 
animists put at the basis o f religion, they correspond to something real. 
Doubdess, i t is the nature o f moral forces expressed merely by images that 
they cannot affect the human m i n d w i t h any forcefulness w i t h o u t p u t t i n g it 
outside itself, and plunging i t into a state describable as "ecstatic" (so l o n g as 
the w o r d is taken i n its etymological sense [eKo-Totais, "stand" plus "out 
o f " ] ) . B u t i t by n o means follows that these forces are imaginary. Quite the 
contrary, the mental excitement they b r i n g about attests to their reality. I t 
provides further evidence that a very intense social life always does a sort o f 
violence to the individual's body and m i n d and disrupts their normal func-
tioning. 
This is w h y i t can last for only a l i m i t e d t i m e .
4 0 
W h a t is more, i f the name " d e l i r i u m " is given to any state i n w h i c h the 
m i n d adds to whatever is immediately given through the senses, projecting its 
o w n impressions onto it, there is perhaps no collective representation that is 
not i n a sense delusive; religious beliefs are only a special case o f a very gen-
eral law. T h e w h o l e social w o r l d seems populated w i t h forces that i n reality 
exist only i n our minds. W e k n o w what the flag is for the soldier, but i n i t -
self it is only a bit o f cloth. H u m a n b l o o d is only an organic liquid, yet even 
3 9On this point see [Thomas] Achelis, Die Ekstase [in ihrer kulturellen Bedeutung, Berlin, J. Rade, 1902], 
esp. chap. 1. 
""Cf. [Marcel] Mauss, "Essai sur les variations saisonnières des sociétés eskimos," in AS, vol. IX, 
[1906], p. 127. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
229 
today w e cannot see it flow w i t h o u t experiencing an acute emotion that its 
physicochemical properties cannot explain. F r o m a physical point o f view, 
man is n o t h i n g but a system o f cells, and from the mental point o f view, a sys-
tem o f representations. F r o m b o t h points o f view, he differs from the animal 
only i n degree. A n d yet society conceives h i m and requires that we conceive 
h i m as being endowed w i t h a sui generis character that insulates and shields 
h i m from all reckless infringement—in other words, that imposes respect. 
This status, w h i c h puts h i m i n a class by himself, seems to us to be one o f his 
distinctive attributes, even though no basis for i t can be found i n the empir-
ical nature o f man. A cancelled postage stamp may be w o r t h a fortune, but 
obviously that value is i n no way entailed by its natural properties. There is a 
sense, o f course, i n w h i c h our representation o f the external w o r l d is itself 
nothing but a fabric o f hallucinations. T h e odors, tastes, and colors that w e 
place i n bodies are not there, or at least are not there i n the way we perceive 
them. Nevertheless, our sensations o f smell, taste, and sight do correspond to 
certain objective states o f the things represented. After a fashion, they do ex-
press the properties o f particular materials or movements o f the ether that re-
ally do have their o r i g i n i n the bodies we perceive as being fragrant, tasty, or 
colorful. B u t collective representations often impute to the things to w h i c h 
they refer properties that do not exist i n t h e m i n any f o r m or to any degree 
whatsoever. F r o m the most commonplace object, they can make a sacred and 
very powerful being. 
However, even though purely ideal, the powers thereby conferred o n 
that object behave as i f they were real. T h e y determine man's conduct w i t h 
the same necessity as physical forces. T h e A r u n t a w h o has properly rubbed 
himself w i t h his churinga feels stronger; he is stronger. I f he has eaten the 
flesh o f an animal that is prohibited, even through i t is perfecdy wholesome, 
he w i l l feel i l l from it and may die. T h e soldier w h o falls defending his flag 
certainly does not believe he has sacrificed himself to a piece o f cloth. Such 
things happen because social thought, w i t h its imperative authority, has a 
power that individual thought cannot possibly have. B y acting o n our minds, 
it can make us see things i n the light that suits it; according to circumstances, 
it adds to or takes away from the real. Hence, there is a realm o f nature i n 
w h i c h the formula o f idealism is almost literally applicable; that is the social 
realm. There, far more than anywhere else, the idea creates the reality. Even 
i n this case, idealism is probably not true w i t h o u t qualification. W e can never 
escape the duality o f our nature and w h o l l y emancipate ourselves from phys-
ical necessities. As I w i l l show, to express our o w n ideas even to ourselves, we 
need to attach those ideas to material things that symbolize them. But, here, 
the role o f matter is at a m i n i m u m . T h e object that serves as a prop for the 


230 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
idea does not amount to m u c h as compared to the ideal superstructure u n -
der w h i c h i t disappears, and, furthermore, it has n o t h i n g to do w i t h that su-
perstructure. F r o m all that has been said, w e see what the pseudo-delirium 
met w i t h at the basis o f so many collective representations consists of: I t is 
only a f o r m o f this fundamental idealism.
4 1 So i t is not properly called a delu-
sion. T h e ideas thus objectified are well founded—not, to be sure, i n the na-
ture o f the tangible things onto w h i c h they are grafted but i n the nature o f 
society. 
We can understand n o w h o w it happens that the totemic principle and, 
more generally, h o w any religious force comes to be external to the things i n 
w h i c h i t resides:
4 2 because the idea o f it is not at all constructed from the i m -
pressions the thing makes directly o n our senses and minds. Religious force 
is none other than the feeling that the collectivity inspires i n its members, but 
projected outside the minds that experience them, and objectified. To be-
come objectified, i t fixes o n a thing that thereby becomes sacred; any object 
can play this role. I n principle, none is by nature predestined to i t , to the ex-
clusion o f others, any more than others are necessarily precluded from i t .
4 3 
W h e r e religious force becomes objectified depends entirely u p o n what cir-
cumstances cause the feeling that generates religious ideas to settle here or 
there, i n one place rather than another. T h e sacredness exhibited by the thing 
is not implicated i n the intrinsic properties o f the thing: It is added to them. 
T h e w o r l d o f the religious is not a special aspect o f empirical nature: It is su-
perimposed upon nature. 
Finally, this idea o f the religious enables us to explain an important p r i n -
ciple found at the root o f many myths: W h e n a sacred being is subdivided, it 
remains w h o l l y equal to itself i n each o f its parts. I n other words, from the 
standpoint o f religious thought, the part equals the whole; the part has the 
same powers and the same efficacy. A fragment o f a relic has the same virtues 
4,One can see all that is wrong in theories like the geographic materialism of [Friedrich] Ratzel (see 
especially his "Der Raum im Geist der Völker" in Politische Geographie, [Leipzig, R. Oldenbourg, 1897]), 
which aim to derive all of 
social life 
from 
its material substrate (either economic or territorial). Their mis-
take is comparable to Maudsley's in individual psychology. Just as Maudsley reduced the psychic life of the 
individual to a mere epiphenomenon of its physiological base, they want to reduce all of the psychic life 
of the collectivity to its physical base. This is to forget that ideas are realities—forces—and that collective 
representations are forces even more dynamic and powerful than individual representations. On this point, 
see [Dürkheim], "Représentations," RMM, 1898. 
42See pp. 191, 196-197. 
43Even excrement has a religious quality. See [Konrad Theodor] Preuss, "Der Ursprung der Religion 
und Kunst," esp. chap. 2, "Der Zauber der Defakation, Globus, vol. LXXXVI [1904], pp. 325ff. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
231 
as the w h o l e relic. T h e smallest drop o f b l o o d contains the same active p r i n -
ciple as all the blood. As we w i l l see, the soul can be broken up into almost 
as many parts as there are organs or tissues i n the body; each o f these partial 
souls is equivalent to the entire soul. This conception w o u l d be inexplicable 
i f sacredness depended o n the constitutive properties o f the thing serving as 
its substrate, for sacredness w o u l d have to change w i t h that thing, increasing 
and decreasing w i t h it. B u t i f the virtues the thing is deemed to have are not 
intrinsic to i t , i f they come to it from certain feelings that it calls to m i n d and 
symbolizes (even though such feelings originate outside it), it can play an 
evocative role whether it is w h o l e or not, since i n that role it does not need 
specific dimensions. Since the part evokes the whole, i t also evokes the same 
feelings as the whole. A mere scrap o f the flag represents the country as m u c h 
as the flag itself; moreover, i t is sacred i n the same right and to the same de-
44 
gree. 
V 
This theory o f totemism has enabled us to explain the most characteristic be-
liefs o f the religion, but i t rests o n a fact that is not yet explained. Given the 
idea o f the totem, the emblem o f the clan, all the rest follows, but we must 
still find out h o w that idea was formed. T h e question is twofold and can be 
broken d o w n i n this way: (1) W h a t caused the clan to choose an emblem? (2) 
W h y were those emblems taken from the w o r l d o f animals and plants, but es-
pecially from the w o r l d o f animals? 
That an emblem can be useful as a rallying point for any sort o f group re-
quires no argument. B y expressing the social unit tangibly, it makes the unit 
itself more tangible to all. A n d for that reason, the use o f emblematic sym-
bols must have spread quickly, as soon as the idea was born. Furthermore, 
this idea must have arisen spontaneously from the conditions o f life i n c o m -
m o n , for the emblem is not only a convenient m e t h o d o f clarifying the 
awareness the society has o f itself: I t serves to create—and is a constitutive el-
ement of-—that awareness. 
B y themselves, individual consciousnesses are actually closed to one 
another, and they can communicate only by means o f signs i n w h i c h their 
inner states come to express themselves. For the communication that is 
opening up between t h e m to end i n a c o m m u n i o n — t h a t is, i n a fusion o f all 
""This principle has passed from religion into magic. It is the alchemists' Totum ex parte [the whole 
from the part. Trans.]. 


232 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
the individual feelings into a c o m m o n one—the signs that express those feel-
ings must come together i n one single resultant.* T h e appearance o f this re-
sultant notifies individuals that they are i n unison and brings home to them 
their moral unity. I t is by shouting the same cry, saying the same words, and 
performing the same action i n regard to the same object that they arrive at 
and experience agreement. Granted, individual representations also b r i n g 
about repercussions i n the body that are not unimportant; still, these effects 
can be treated as analytically distinct from physical repercussions that come 
w i t h or after t h e m but that are not their basis. 
Collective representations are quite another matter. T h e y presuppose 
that consciousnesses are acting and reacting o n each other; they result 
from 
actions and reactions that are possible only w i t h the help o f tangible inter-
mediaries. Thus the function o f the intermediaries is not merely to reveal 
the mental state associated w i t h them; they also contribute to its making. 
T h e individual minds can meet and commune only i f they come outside 
themselves, but they do this only by means o f movement. I t is the h o m o -
geneity o f these movements that makes the group aware o f itself and that, i n 
consequence, makes it be. Once this homogeneity has been established 
and these movements have taken a definite f o r m and been stereotyped, they 
serve to symbolize the corresponding representations. B u t these movements 
symbolize those representations 
only because they have helped to 
f o r m 
them. 
W i t h o u t symbols, moreover, social feelings could have only an unstable 
existence. Those feelings are very strong so l o n g as m e n are assembled, m u -
tually influencing one another, but w h e n the gathering is over, they survive 
only i n the f o r m o f memories that gradually d i m and fade away i f left to 
themselves. Since the group is no longer present and active, the individual 
temperaments 
quickly take over again. W i l d passions that could unleash 
themselves i n the midst o f a c r o w d cool and die d o w n once the crowd has 
dispersed, and individuals wonder w i t h amazement 
h o w they could let 
themselves be carried so far out o f character. B u t i f the movements by w h i c h 
these feelings have been expressed eventually become inscribed o n things 
that are durable, then they too become durable. These things keep b r i n g i n g 
the feelings to individual minds and keep t h e m perpetually aroused, just as 
* Since Dürkheim said "resultant" (résultante) and not "result" (résultat), he may have had in mind the 
mathematical notion of a vector sum of forces. A resultant may be defined as the single force, measured as 
velocity or acceleration, to which several forces taken together are equivalent. The term also has an anal-
ogous literary sense. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
233 
w o u l d happen i f the cause that first called t h e m forth was still acting. Thus, 
w h i l e emblematizing is necessary i f society is to become conscious o f itself, 
so is it no less indispensable i n perpetuating that consciousness. 
Hence, we must guard against seeing those symbols as mere artifices—a 
variety o f labels placed o n ready-made representations to make them easier 
to handle. T h e y are integral to those representations. T h e fact that collective 
feelings find themselves j o i n e d i n this way to things that are alien to t h e m is 
not purely conventional. It tangibly portrays a real feature o f social p h e n o m -
ena: their transcendence o f individual consciousnesses. We know, i n fact, that 
social phenomena are b o r n not i n the individual but i n the group. N o mat-
ter what part we may play i n their genesis, each o f us receives t h e m 
from 
w i t h o u t .
4 5 Thus, w h e n we imagine t h e m as emanating from a material o b -
ject, we are not entirely w r o n g about their nature. A l t h o u g h they certainly 
do not come from the specific thing to w h i c h we attribute them, still i t is 
true that they originate outside us. A n d although the moral force that sus-
tains the worshipper does not come from the i d o l he worships or the emblem 
he venerates, still it is external to h i m ; and he feels this. T h e objectivity o f 
the symbol is but an expression o f that externality. 
Thus, i n all its aspects and at every m o m e n t o f its history, social life is 
only possible thanks to a vast symbolism. T h e physical emblems and figura-
tive representations w i t h w h i c h I have been especially concerned i n the pre-
sent study are one f o r m o f it, but there are a good many others. Collective 
feelings can just as well be incarnated i n persons as i n formulas. Some for-
mulas are flags; some real or mythic personages are symbols. B u t there is one 
sort o f emblem that must have appeared very quickly, quite apart from any 
reflection or calculation, and i t is this one that we have seen playing a c o n -
siderable role i n totemism: tattooing. W e l l - k n o w n facts demonstrate, i n fact, 
that under certain conditions, it is produced by a sort o f automatic action. 
W h e n m e n o f an inferior culture share i n a c o m m o n life, they are often led, 
almost instinctively, to paint themselves or to i m p r i n t images o n their bodies 
that remind t h e m o f their c o m m o n life. According to a text by Procope, the 
first Christians had the name o f Christ or the sign o f the cross i m p r i n t e d on 
their s k i n .
4 6 For a l o n g time, groups o f pilgrims w h o went to Palestine also 
had themselves tattooed o n their arms or wrists w i t h designs representing the 
4 5On this point, see [Durkheim], Règles de la méthode sociologique, pp. 5ff. 
^Procopius of Gaza, Commentarii in Isaiam, p. 496. [It may be that Durkheim drew this fifth-century 
reference from Procopii Gazaei. . . Opera omnia in unum corpus adunata, Petit Montrouge, J. P
. Migne, 1861. 
Trans.] 


234 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
cross or the m o n o g r a m o f Christ.
4 7 T h e same custom is reported for p d -
grimages to certain holy places i n Italy.
4 8 Lombroso reported a curious ex-
ample o f spontaneous tattooing. W h e n twenty y o u n g m e n from an Italian 
high school were about to separate, they had themselves decorated w i t h tat-
toos that i n various ways recorded the years they had just spent together.
4 9 
T h e same practice has often been observed among soldiers o f the same camp, 
sailors o n the same ship, and prisoners i n the same house o f detention.
5 0 I n 
fact, i t is understandable, especially where technology is still undeveloped, 
that tattooing is the most direct and expressive means by w h i c h the c o m m u -
n i o n o f minds can be affirmed. T h e best way o f testifying to oneself and o t h -
ers that one is part o f the same group is to place the same distinctive mark o n 
the body. Proof that such is indeed the raison d'être o f the totemic image is 
that, as I have shown, it does not try to copy the appearance o f the thing it is 
considered to represent. I t is made o f lines and points that are given an en-
tirely conventional meaning.
5 1 T h e purpose o f the image is not to represent 
or evoke a particular object but to testify that a certain number o f i n d i v i d u -
als share the same moral life. 
T h e clan is a society that is less able than any other to do w i t h o u t an e m -
blem and a symbol, for there are few societies so lacking i n cohesion. T h e 
clan cannot be defined by its leader, for although not absent altogether, cen-
tral authority i n it is at best shifting and unstable.
5 2 N o r can it be any better 
defined by the territory i t occupies for, being nomadic,
5 3 the clan's popula-
tion is not closely tied to any definite locality. Furthermore, given the rule o f 
exogamy, the husband and wife must be o f different totems. Thus, where the 
totem is transmitted i n the maternal line—and today this descent system is 
47See Thevenot, [Suite de] voyage [de M. de Thévenot] au Levant, Paris, 1689, p. 638. This phenomenon 
was observed again in 1862: cf. Berchon, "Histoire médicale du tatouage," Archives de Médiane Navale, vol. 
XI (1869), p. 377 n. 
•^[Alexandre] Lacassagne, Les Tatouages: [Étude anthropologique et médico légale, Paris, Baillière, 1881], 
p. 10. 
49[Césare] Lombroso, L'Homme criminel, vol. I [Paris, Alcan, 1885], p. 292. 
50Ibid., vol. I, pp. 268, 285, 291-292; Lacassagne, Tatouages, p. 97. 
5 1 See above, p. 126. 
5 2On the authority of the chiefs, see Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 10; Spencer and Gillen, 
Northern Tribes, p. 25; Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 295ff. 
53At least in Australia. In America, the population is most often sedentary, but the clan in America is 
a relatively advanced form of organization. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
235 
still the most widespread
5 4—the children are o f a different clan from their fa-
ther, even w h e n living w i t h h i m . For all these reasons, we find all sorts o f dif-
ferent clans represented w i t h i n the same family and even w i t h i n the same 
locality. T h e unity o f the group can be felt only because o f the collective 
name borne by all the members and because o f the equally collective e m -
blem representing the thing designated by that name. A clan is essentially a 
company o f individuals w h o have the same name and rally around the same 
symbol. Take away the name and the symbol that gives it tangible f o r m , and 
the clan can no longer even be imagined. Since the clan was possible only o n 
condition o f being imaginable, b o t h the institution o f the emblem and its 
place i n the group's life are thus explained. 
Still, we must find out w h y these names and emblems were taken almost 
exclusively from the animal and plant kingdoms, though mainly from the first. 
It seems plausible that the emblem has played a more important role than 
the name. I n any event, today the w r i t t e n sign still holds a more central place 
i n the life o f the clan than the spoken one. N o w , the emblematic image called 
for a subject representable by a design. A n d besides, the things had to be from 
among those w i t h w h i c h the m e n o f the clan were most closely and habitu-
ally i n contact. Animals met this condition best. For these hunting and 
fish-
ing populations, animals were i n fact the essential element o f the economic 
environment. I n this respect, plants took second place, for they are o f only 
secondary importance as food so long as they are not cultivated. Besides, 
animals have a closer relationship to man's life than do plants, i f only because 
o f the kindred nature that joins these t w o creatures to one another. B y c o n -
trast, the sun, m o o n , and stars were too far away and seemed to belong to 
a different w o r l d .
5 5 Further, since the constellations were not differentiated 
and classified, the starry sky d i d not present objects different enough 
from 
one another to be serviceable i n designating all the clans and subclans o f a 
tribe. O n the other hand, the variety o f the flora, and especially the fauna, 
54To be convinced of this, it is enough to look at the map prepared by [Northcote Whitridge] Thomas 
in Kinship [Organization and Group] Marriage in Australia [Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1906], 
p. 40. To evaluate this map properly, we must take into account the fact that, for reasons unknown, the 
author has extended the system of totemic descent through the paternal Une as far as the west coast of 
Australia, even though we have virtually no information about the tribes of this region (and which, be-
sides, is mainly desert). 
55As I will show in the next chapter, the stars are often considered, even by the Australians, as coun-
tries of souls or mythic personages—that is, they seem to constitute a world very different from that of the 
living. 


236 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
was almost inexhaustible. For these reasons, the heavenly bodies were u n -
suited to the role o f totems, notwithstanding their brilliance and the power-
ful impression they make u p o n the senses. Animals and plants were perfect 
for it. 
A n observation by Strehlow permits us to specify the manner i n w h i c h 
these emblems were probably chosen. H e reports having noticed that the 
totemic centers are most often situated near a mountain, spring, or gorge 
where the animals that serve as the groups t o t e m are found i n abundance, 
and he cites various examples.
5 6 These totemic centers are certainly the c o n -
secrated places where the clan held its meetings. I t therefore seems likely that 
each group took as its emblem the animal or plant that was the most plenti-
ful i n the neighborhood o f the place where i t usually assembled.
5 7 
VI 
This theory o f totemism w i l l provide us the key to a curious trait o f the h u -
man m i n d that, although more pronounced long ago than now, has not dis-
appeared and i n any case has played a significant role i n the history o f 
thought. This w i l l be yet another opportunity to observe that logical evolu-
tion 
is closely interconnected w i t h religious evolution and, like religious 
evolution, depends u p o n social conditions.
5 8 
I f there is a truth that today seems to us completely self-evident, i t is this: 
Beings that differ not only i n outward appearance but also i n their most fun-
damental properties—such as minerals, plants, animals, and men—cannot be 
regarded as equivalent and interchangeable. Long-established practice, w h i c h 
scientific culture has rooted even more deeply i n our minds, taught us to set 
up barriers between realms o f nature, barriers whose existence even trans-
56[Carl Strehlow, DieAranda- und Loritja-Stamme in Zentral 
Australien], vol. 1 [Frankfurt, J. Baer, 1907], 
p. 4. Cf. along the same lines Schulze, "Aborigines of the . .. Finke River," p. 243. 
5 7Of course, as I have already had occasion to show (see p. 156, above), this choice is not made with-
out a more or less well-thought-out agreement among the different groups, since each of them had to 
adopt a different emblem from that of its neighbors. 
58The turn of mind treated in this paragraph is identical to the one that [Lucien] Lévy-Bruhl calls the 
law of participation (Les Fonctions mentales dans les sociétés inférieures [Paris, Alcan, 1910], pp. 76ff.). These 
pages were already written when that work appeared; I publish them in their original form without any 
change but confine myself to adding certain explanations that indicate where I differ with Lévy-Bruhl in 
the evaluation of the evidence. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
237 
formism* does not deny. For although transformism grants that life could 
have been b o r n from nonliving matter, and m e n from animals, it recognizes 
nonetheless that, once formed, living beings are different from minerals, and 
m e n from animals. W i t h i n each realm, the same barriers separate different 
classes. W e cannot imagine h o w one mineral could have the distinctive char-
acteristics o f another mineral—or one animal species, those o f another 
species. B u t these distinctions, w h i c h seem to us so natural, are not at all 
primitive. Originally, all the realms are merged. T h e rocks have a sex; they 
have the ability to procreate; the sun, m o o n , and stars are men and w o m e n , 
w h o feel and express h u m a n feelings, w h i l e humans are pictured as animals 
or plants. This merging is found again and again at the basis o f all m y t h o l o -
gies. F r o m i t arises the ambiguous nature o f the beings that figure i n myths. 
Those beings cannot be placed i n any definite genus because they simultane-
ously participate i n the most dissimilar ones. Moreover, it is conceded w i t h -
out difficulty that they can move from one into another, and i t is through 
transmutations o f this k i n d that m e n l o n g believed they could explain the 
origins o f things. 
That the anthropomorphic instinct, w i t h w h i c h the animists have en-
dowed the primitive, cannot account for this t u r n o f m i n d is shown by the na-
ture o f the errors that are typical o f it. These errors arise not from man's 
having w i l d l y expanded the human realm to the point o f encompassing all the 
others but from his having merged the most disparate realms w i t h one an-
other. H e has no more imagined the w o r l d i n his o w n image than he has 
imagined himself i n the image o f the world. H e has done both at once. I n the 
way he thought about things, he o f course included human elements, but i n 
the way he thought about himself, he included elements that came to h i m 
from 
things. 
However there was n o t h i n g i n experience that could have suggested 
these mergers and mixtures to h i m . F r o m the standpoint o f observation 
*The 1992 Petit Robert dictionary indicates a "scientific" term, transformisme, and a "philosophical" 
term, evolutionnisme, dating them, respectively, from 1867 and 1878. Both terms come after Charles Dar-
win's The Origin of 
Species (1859). According to André Lalande (Vocabulaire technique et critique de la philoso-
phie, Paris, Alcan, 1902, p. 909), the difference between the two terms is as follows. In one sense, 
transformisme is a more general term in biology than evolutionnisme, because it also includes such notions as 
Lamarck's inheritance of acquired characteristics. In another sense, it is more specific than evolutionism 
because it is limited to biology, whereas evolutionism became a far more general philosophical notion 
considered to be applicable to all phenomena. It is clear from the context of the book as a whole that, in 
these terms, Durkheim had evolutionnisme in mind. But I have preserved his "transformism" so as not to 
obliterate the memory of two overlapping terms that had somewhat different, and no doubt contested, 
meaning in his day. 


238 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
through the senses, everything is disparate and discontinuous. N o w h e r e i n 
reality do we observe beings that merge their natures and change into one 
another. A n exceptionally powerful cause w o u l d have had to intervene and 
so transfigure the real as to make i t appear i n a f o r m not its o w n . 
It is religion that carried out this transformation; it is religious beliefs that 
replaced the w o r l d as the senses perceive it w i t h a different one. This, the case 
o f totemism shows very well. W h a t is fundamental to totemism is that the 
people o f the clan, and the various beings whose f o r m the totemic emblem 
represents, are held to be made o f the same essence. Once that belief was ac-
cepted, the disparate realms were bridged. M a n was conceived o f as a k i n d o f 
animal or plant, and the plants and animals as man's k i n — o r , rather, all these 
beings, so different according to the senses, were conceived o f as participat-
ing i n the same nature. Hence, the o r i g i n o f that remarkable capacity to c o n -
found what seems to us so obviously distinct: T h e first forces w i t h w h i c h the 
h u m a n intellect populated the universe were elaborated through religion. 
Since these forces were made o f elements taken from different kingdoms, 
they became the principle c o m m o n to the most disparate things, w h i c h were 
thereby endowed w i t h one and the same essence. 
We k n o w furthermore that these religious ideas are the outcome o f def-
inite social causes. Because the clan cannot exist w i t h o u t a name and an e m -
blem, and because that emblem is everywhere before the eyes o f individuals, 
the feelings that society arouses i n its members are directed toward the e m -
blem and toward the objects whose image i t is. I n this way, m e n had no 
choice but to conceive the collective force, whose workings they felt, i n the 
f o r m o f the thing that served as the flag o f the group. Therefore, the most 
disparate realms found themselves merged i n the idea o f this force. I n one 
sense, the force was fundamentally human, since it was made o f human ideas 
and feelings; at the same time, it could not but appear as closely akin to the 
animate or inanimate being that gave i t outward f o r m . T h e cause we are cap-
t u r i n g at w o r k is not exclusive to totemism; there is no society i n w h i c h i t is 
not at w o r k . N o w h e r e can a collective feeling become consciousness o f itself 
w i t h o u t fixing u p o n a tangible object;
5 9 but by that very fact, i t participates 
i n the nature o f that object, and vice versa. Thus, it is social requirements that 
have fused together ideas that at first glance seem distinct, and through the 
great mental effervescence that it brings about, social life has promoted that 
fusion.
6 0 This is further evidence that logical understanding is a function o f 
59See above, p. 231. 
60Another cause accounts for a large part of this fusion: the extreme contagiousness of religious forces. 
They invade every object in their reach, whatever it may be. Hence the same religious force can animate 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
239 
society, since logical understanding adopts the conventions and viewpoints 
that society imprints u p o n it. 
This logic is unsettling, to be sure. Still, we must be careful not to de-
preciate it: However crude it may seem to us, i t was a momentous c o n t r i b u -
t i o n to the intellectual development o f humanity. For through that logic, a 
first explanation o f the w o r l d became possible. O f course, the mental habits 
it implies prevented man from seeing reality as his senses show it to h i m ; but 
as the senses show i t to h i m , reality has the grave disadvantage o f being resis-
tant to all explanation. For to explain is to connect things to other things; it 
is to establish relationships between things that make t h e m appear to us as 
functions o f one another and as vibrating sympathetically i n accordance w i t h 
an internal law that is rooted i n their nature. Sense perception, w h i c h sees 
only from the outside, could not possibly cause us to discover such relation-
ships and internal ties; only the intellect can create the notion o f them. 
W h e n I learn that A regularly precedes B , m y knowledge is enriched w i t h a 
new piece o f knowledge, but m y intelligence is i n no way satisfied by an o b -
servation that does not carry a reason w i t h it. I begin to understand only i f it 
is possible for me to conceive o f B i n some way that makes it appear to me 
as not foreign to A but as united w i t h A i n some relation o f kinship. T h e 
great service that religions have rendered to thought is to have constructed a 
first representation o f what the relations o f kinship between things m i g h t be. 
Given the conditions i n w h i c h it was tried, that enterprise could obviously 
lead only to makeshift results. But, then, are the results o f any such enterprise 
ever definitive, and must it not be taken up again and again? Furthermore, i t 
was less important to succeed than to dare. W h a t was essential was not to let 
the m i n d be dominated by what appears to the senses, but instead to teach 
the m i n d to dominate it and to j o i n together what the senses put asunder. As 
soon as man became aware that internal connections exist between things, 
science and philosophy became possible. R e l i g i o n made a way for them. It is 
because religion is a social thing that i t could play this role. To make m e n 
take control o f sense impressions and replace t h e m w i t h a new way o f imag-
i n i n g the real, a new k i n d o f thought had to be created: collective thought. 
I f collective thought alone had the power to achieve this, here is the reason: 
Creating a w h o l e w o r l d o f ideals, through w h i c h the w o r l d o f sensed reali-
ties seemed transfigured, w o u l d require a hyperexcitation o f intellectual 
forces that is possible only i n and through society. 
the most dissimilar things, which by that very fact find themselves closely connected and classified in the 
same genus. I will return to this contagion below, while showing that it is related to the social origins of 
the idea of the sacred (Bk. Ill, chap. 1, end). 


240 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
Hence, that mentality is far from being unrelated to our o w n . O u r o w n 
logic was b o r n i n that logic. T h e explanations o f contemporary science are 
more certain o f being objective, because they are more systematic and based 
o n more rigorously controlled observations, but they are not different i n na-
ture from those that satisfy primitive thought. Today as i n the past, to explain 
is to show h o w a thing participates i n one or several other things. It has been 
said that the participations whose existence mythologies presuppose violate 
the principle o f contradiction and, o n those grounds, are antithetical to the 
participations that scientific explanations involve.
6 1 Is not postulating that a 
man is a kangaroo and the sun a bird identifying one thing w i t h another? W e 
do not think any differendy w h e n we say o f heat that i t is a movement, and 
o f light that it is a vibration o f the ether, and so on. Every time we j o i n het-
erogeneous terms by an internal tie, w e o f necessity identify contraries. T h e 
terms we j o i n i n this way are not, o f course, the ones the Australian joins. W e 
choose t h e m according to different criteria and for different reasons, but the 
procedure by w h i c h the m i n d places t h e m into relationship is not essentially 
different. 
Granted, i f primitive thought had the sort o f universal and abiding indif-
ference to contradiction that has been ascribed to i t ,
6 2 o n this point it w o u l d 
contrast—and contrast very m a r k e d l y — w i t h m o d e r n thought, w h i c h is al-
ways careful to remain internally consistent. B u t I do not believe it possible 
to characterize the mentality o f the lower societies by a sort o f one-sided and 
exclusive inclination not to make distinctions. I f the primitive puts together 
things that we keep separate, inversely, he separates other things that w e put 
together, and he actually conceives o f those distinctions as abrupt and p r o -
nounced oppositions. Between t w o beings that are classified i n t w o different 
phratries, there is not only separation but also antagonism.
6 3 For this reason, 
the same Australian w h o puts the sun and the w h i t e cockatoo together o p -
poses the black cockatoo to the w h i t e as to its opposite. T h e t w o seem to 
h i m to belong to t w o separate genera w i t h n o t h i n g i n c o m m o n . There is an 
even more pronounced opposition between sacred and profane things. T h e y 
repel and contradict one another so forcefully that the m i n d refuses to think 
o f t h e m at the same time. T h e y expel one another from consciousness. 
Hence, there is no g u l f between the logic o f religious thought and the 
logic o f scientific thought. B o t h are made up o f the same essential elements, 
61Levy-Bruhl, Les Fonctions mentales, pp. 77fF. 
62Ibid., p. 79. 
63See above, p. 146. 


Origins of These Beliefs (Conclusion) 
241 
although these elements are unequally and differendy developed. W h a t ap-
pears above all to typify the logic o f religious thought is a natural taste as m u c h 
for unrestrained assimilations as for clashing contrasts. I t is given to excess i n 
both directions. W h e n i t brings things together, it mixes them together; w h e n 
it distinguishes between things, i t makes them opposites. I t knows neither 
moderation nor nuance but seeks the extremes. As a result, i t employs logical 
mechanisms w i t h a certain gaucheness, but none o f them are u n k n o w n to it. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
THE NOTION OF 
SOUL* 
I
n the preceding chapters, we have studied the fundamental principles o f 
totemic religion. W e have found that the notions o f soul, spirit, and 
mythic personage are absent from it. Yet although the n o t i o n o f spiritual be-
ings is not fundamental to totemism or, consequently, to religion i n general, 
there is no religion from w h i c h it is absent—hence the importance o f trying 
to discover h o w i t came to be formed. To be sure that n o t i o n is i n fact the 
result o f a secondary formation, I must show h o w i t is derived from the more 
fundamental ideas I have previously set forth and explained. 
O f all the spirit beings, there is one that must claim our attention first 
and foremost, since it is the prototype from w h i c h the others have been built, 
and that is the soul. 
I 
Just as there is no k n o w n society w i t h o u t religion, there is no religion, h o w -
ever crudely organized, i n w h i c h we do not find a system o f collective rep-
resentations dealing w i t h soul—its o r i g i n and its destiny. So far as can be 
judged from the ethnographic data, the idea o f soul seems to be contempo-
raneous w i t h humanity. Indeed, it seems to have had all its basic features 
from 
the beginning, and to such an extent that the w o r k o f the more advanced re-
ligions and philosophy has only been to refine it rather than to add anything 
truly fundamental. A l l the Australian societies allow that every human body 
harbors an interior being, a life-principle that animates it; and that principle 
is the soul. True, w o m e n are sometimes the exception to that general rule: 
*The French reads la notion d'âme but could have read "la notion de l'âme'' Dürkheim treats "soul" a
s 
both a thing and a generic substance that becomes thinglike when it becomes part of an individual. Cf. 
in this chapter, "the idea of mana" and "the idea of personality." 
242 


The Notion of Soul 
243 
There are tribes i n w h i c h they are considered to have no such thing as a 
soul.
1 I f Dawson is to be believed o n this subject, the same is true o f young 
children i n the tribes he observed.
2 B u t such cases are unusual, and probably 
late developments.
3 I n fact, the latter case seems suspect and could well be 
the result o f a misinterpretation o f the facts.
4 
To determine what idea the Australian has o f the soul is not easy, since 
his idea is vague and variable. B u t this should by n o means surprise us. I f we 
asked our o w n contemporaries h o w they imagine the soul, even those w h o 
believe the most f i r m l y i n its existence, the responses we w o u l d get w o u l d 
not have m u c h greater coherence and precision. This is because the idea i n 
question is very complex, containing a multitude o f poorly analyzed impres-
sions elaborated over centuries w i t h o u t men's having been fully conscious o f 
that elaboration. Here, nonetheless, are the most basic, i f often contradictory, 
features by w h i c h it is defined. 
I n some cases, we are t o l d that the soul has the external appearance o f the 
body.
5 I n others, it is imagined as being the size o f a grain o f sand, so small 
that it can pass through the narrowest crevices and the tiniest cracks.
6 W e w i l l 
see that it is also thought o f i n the f o r m o f animals. I n other words, its f o r m 
'This is the case of the Gnanji; see [Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen, Northern Tribes [of 
Central Australia, London, Macmillan, 1904], pp. 170, 546; cf. a similar case, in [Robert] Brough Smyth 
[The Aborigines of Victoria, Melbourne, J. Ferres, 1878], vol. II, p. 269. 
2[James] Dawson, Australian Aborigines [Melbourne, G. Robertson, 1881], p. 51. 
3Among the Gnanji, there surely was a time when women had souls, for today a large number of 
women's souls still exist, but they never reincarnate themselves; and since, among this people, the soul that 
animates a newborn is an old one incarnated, it follows from the fact that the souls of 
women are not rein-
carnated that women cannot have souls. Incidentally, we can explain that absence of reincarnation. De-
scent among the Gnanji, which was once matrilineal, now follows the paternal line. The mother does not 
transmit her totem to her child. Thus the woman never has descendants who perpetuate her; she is finis 
familiae suae [the end of her family. Trans], To explain that situation, there are only two possible hypothe-
ses: either women do not have souls, or the souls of women are destroyed after death. The Gnanji have 
adopted the 
first 
of those two explanations. Certain peoples of Queensland have preferred the second (see 
[Walter Edmund] Roth, [Superstition] Magic and Medicine in North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin no. 5, 
§68 [Brisbane, G. A. Vaughn, 1903]). 
••"Children below four or 
five 
years of age have neither soul nor future life," says Dawson. But what 
Dawson translates in this way is simply the absence of funeral rites for very young children. We will see 
the true meaning of this later on. 
5[James] Dawson, "Australian Aborigines," p. 51; [Langloh] Parker, [Catherine Sommerville Field 
Parker], 77ie Euahlayi [Tribe] [London, A. Constable, 1905], p. 35; [Richard] Eylmann, [Die] Eingeborenen 
[derKolonie SudAustralien, Berlin, D. Reumer, 1908], p. 188. 
6[Spencer and Gillen], Northern Tribes, p. 542; Schiirmann, "The Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln," 
in [James Dominick] Woods [The NativeTribes of South Australia Adelaide, E. S. Wigg, 1879], p. 235. 


244 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
is essentially unstable and indefinite;
7 it changes from m o m e n t to moment to 
suit circumstances and according to the demands o f m y t h and rite. T h e sub-
stance o f w h i c h i t is made is no less undefinable. Since i t has form, however 
vague, it is not immaterial. A n d i n fact, d u r i n g this life, i t even has physical 
needs: I t eats and, inversely, can be eaten. Sometimes it leaves the body and 
feeds o n foreign souls d u r i n g its travels.
8 Once i t has become completely 
emancipated from the body, it is presumed to lead a life w h o l l y similar to the 
one i t led o n this earth: I t drinks, eats, hunts, and so f o r t h .
9 W h e n it flits 
about i n tree branches, i t makes rusdings and cracklings that even profane 
ears can hear.
1 0 A t the same time, i t is held to be invisible to the ordinary per-
son.
1 1 To be sure, magicians or o l d m e n possess the faculty o f seeing souls, 
but this is because they see things that escape our senses, by virtue o f special 
powers they owe to either age or special knowledge. W h e n it comes to or-
dinary individuals, however, that privilege is enjoyed at only one time i n 
their lives: w h e n they are o n the eve o f premature death. That near-
miraculous vision is therefore regarded as a sinister portent. N o w , invisibility 
is widely regarded as one among the signs o f spiritualness. * Thus, the soul is 
conceived o f as being immaterial, to a certain extent, since it does not affect 
the senses i n the way bodies do; it has no bones, say the tribes o f the Tully 
R i v e r .
1 2 To reconcile all these contradictory traits, it is imagined as being 
made o f an infinitely more rarified and subde material, as something ethe-
real,
1 3 comparable to shadow or w i n d .
1 4 
*Durkheim says de la spiritualité, but the English "spirituality" would mislead. 
7This is the phrase Dawson uses. 
8Strehlow [DieAranda- und Loritja-Stamme in Zentral-Australien], vol. I [Frankfurt, J. Baer, 1907], p. 15 
n. 1; [Reverend Louis] Schulze, "Aborigines of the Upper Middle Finke River," RSSA, vol. XVI [1891], 
p. 246. This is the theme of the vampire myth. 
9[Strehlow], Aranda, vol. I, p. 15; Schulze, "Aborigines," p. 244; Dawson, "Australian Aborigines," 
p. 51. True, souls are sometimes said to have nothing corporeal about them. According to certain accounts 
collected by Eylmann (p. 188), they are said to be ohne Fleisch und Blut [without flesh and blood. Trans.]. 
But these radical negatives leave me skeptical. The fact that offerings are not made to the souls of the dead 
in no way implies, as Roth thinks (Superstition, Magic, etc., §65), that they do not eat. 
10Roth, Superstition, Magic, §65; Northern Tribes, p. 500. Hence the soul sometimes emits odors (Roth, 
§68). 
"Roth, Superstition, Magic, §67; Dawson, p. 51. 
12Roth, Superstition, Magic, §65. 
13Schurmann, "Aborigines," p. 235. 
"Parker, The Euahlayi, pp. 29, 35; Roth, Superstition, Magic, §65, 67, 68. 


The Notion of Soul 
245 
T h e soul is distinct from and independent o f the body because from the 
beginning o f life, i t can leave the body for short periods. It leaves the body 
during sleep, d u r i n g a faint, and so f o r t h .
1 5 Indeed, i t can remain absent for 
a time w i t h o u t death's resulting. Even so, life is lessened d u r i n g those ab-
sences, and i n fact ends i f the soul does not return h o m e .
1 6 B u t it is above all 
at death that this distinctness and independence are most manifest. Whereas 
the body is n o more, w i t h n o visible traces remaining, the soul continues to 
live, having an autonomous existence i n a w o r l d apart. 
B u t as real as this duality may be, it is i n no way absolute. I t w o u l d be a 
misunderstanding to conceive the body as a k i n d o f lodging i n w h i c h the 
soul resides but w i t h w h i c h i t has only external relations. Quite the contrary, 
it is b o u n d to the body w i t h the closest o f ties; indeed, i t can be separated 
from the body only w i t h difficulty, and incompletely. W e have already seen 
that i t can take at least its external appearance from the body. Therefore, 
whatever harms the one harms the other; every w o u n d o f the body is prop-
agated all the way to the soul.
1 7 T h e soul is so intimately connected w i t h the 
life o f the body that i t matures and perishes w i t h it. This is w h y the man 
w h o has reached a certain age enjoys privileges denied to young men. As 
he has advanced i n years, the religious principle that is i n h i m has gained 
capacity and power. B u t w h e n there is actual senility, w h e n the old man has 
become unable to play a useful role i n the great religious ceremonies or i n 
the vital interests o f the tribe that are at stake, he is no longer shown respect. 
T h e feebleness o f his body is considered to have spread to the soul. N o 
longer having the same powers, the subject is no longer entided to the same 
status.
1 8 
There is not only close interdependence between the soul and the body 
but also partial assimilation. Just as there is something o f the body i n the soul, 
since it sometimes reproduces the body's f o r m , so there is something o f the 
soul i n the body. Certain regions and products o f the body are thought to 
have a special affinity w i t h the soul: the heart, the breath, the placenta,
1 9 the 
15Roth, Superstition, Magic, §65; Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, p. 15. 
16Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, p. 14 n. 1. 
17[James George] Frazer, "On Certain Burial Customs, as Illustrative of the Primitive Theory of the 
Soul," in JAI, vol. XV [1886], p. 66. 
18This is the case among the Kaitish and the Unmatjera. See Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, 
p. 506, and Native Tribes, p. 512. 
"Roth, Superstition, Magic, §65-68. 


246 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
b l o o d ,
2 0 the shadow,
2 1 the liver, the fat o f the liver, and the kidneys,
2 2 and so 
forth. These various physical substrates are not mere lodgings for the soul; 
they are the soul itself viewed from outside. W h e n the b l o o d flows, the soul 
escapes w i t h it. T h e soul is not i n the breath; it is the breath. It is inseparable 
from the body part i n w h i c h i t resides—hence the idea that man has m u l t i -
ple souls. Diffused throughout the body, the soul became differentiated and 
fragmented. I n a sense, each organ has individualized the bit o f soul it con-
tains, and each bit o f soul has thereby become a distinct entity. That o f the 
heart could not be identical w i t h that o f the breath, the shadow, or the pla-
centa. A l l are related, yet they must be distinguished—and they have differ-
ent names.
2 3 
Moreover, w h i l e the soul is most likely to be localized i n certain parts o f 
the body, it is not absent from the others. To varying degrees, it is diffused 
throughout the w h o l e body. Funeral rites show this quite well. Once the last 
breath has been exhaled and the soul presumed to have departed, it w o u l d 
seem that the soul should make immediate use o f the freedom it has just re-
gained to move at w i l l and return as quickly as possible to its true homeland, 
w h i c h is elsewhere. A n d yet it stays near the corpse, its b o n d w i t h the corpse 
having stretched but not broken. A w h o l e set o f rites is necessary to make it 
go away once and for all. B y gestures and expressive movements, it is invited 
to depart.
2 4 A way is opened for it, and exits are prepared so that it can fly 
away the more easily.
2 5 This is done because i t has not come out o f the body 
i n one piece; i t pervaded the body too completely to be able to leave it all at 
once. Here originates the c o m m o n rite o f funeral anthropophagy: T h e flesh 
o f the deceased is eaten because a sacred principle is held to reside i n it, that 
20Ibid., §68. This passage says that when there is fainting 
from 
loss of blood, it is because the soul has 
left. Cf. Parker, The Euahlayi Tribe, p. 38. 
21Parker, The Euahlayi Tribe, pp. 29, 35; Roth, Superstition, Magic, §65. 
22Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, pp. 12, 14. These several passages speak of evil spirits that kill small children 
and eat their souls, livers, and liver fat, or eke their souls, livers, and kidneys. The fact that the soul is 
thereby placed on the same footing as various 
tissues 
and viscera, constituting a food of the same sort, 
clearly shows its close relationship with them. Cf. Schulze, p. 246. 
23For example, among the people of the Pennefather River (Roth, Superstition, Magic, §68), there is 
one name for the soul that resides in the heart (ngai), another for the one that resides in the placenta (choi), 
a third for the one that mingles with the breath hvanji). Among the Euahlayi, there are three or even four 
souls (Parker, The Euahlayi Tribe, p. 35). 
2+See the description of the Urpmilchima rite, among the Arunta (Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, 
pp. 503ff.). 
25Ibid., pp. 497, 508. 


The Notion of Soul 
247 
sacred principle being none other than the soul.
2 6 T h e flesh is melted i n or-
der to uproot the soul for good, by subjecting i t to heat, either o f the sun
2 7 
or o f man-made fire.
2 8 T h e soul flows out w i t h the liquids that result. B u t 
since the dried bones retain some part o f it still, they are used as sacred o b -
jects or as instruments o f magic.
2 9 I f the principle they enclose is to be freed 
completely, the bones are b r o k e n .
3 0 
A m o m e n t comes w h e n the irrevocable separation has been made, and 
the freed soul takes flight. T h e soul is by nature so intimately connected w i t h 
the body that this tearing away does not happen w i t h o u t a profound trans-
formation o f its condition. Consequendy, it then takes another name.
3 1 A l -
though it retains all the distinctive traits o f the individual it animated—his 
humor, his good and bad qualities
3 2—still i t has become a new being. F r o m 
that moment, its n e w existence begins. 
T h e soul goes to the land o f souls. This land is conceived differendy from 
tribe to tribe, and sometimes different ideas are found coexisting i n the same 
society. For some, that land is underground, each t o t e m having its o w n . I t is 
the place where the first ancestors, the founders o f the clan, at a certain m o -
ment vanished deep into the earth and where they went to live after death. 
Thus, i n the subterranean w o r l d , there is a geographic distribution o f the 
dead corresponding to that o f the living. There shines a perpetual sun; there 
flow 
rivers that never r u n dry. Such is the conception that Spencer and 
G ü l e n attribute to the tribes o f the center, A r u n t a ,
3 3 Warramunga,
3 4 and o t h -
ers. I t is shared by the W o t j o b a l u k .
3 5 Elsewhere, all the dead, whatever their 
totems, are thought to live together i n the same place, w h i c h is rather 
26Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 547, 548. 
27Ibid., pp. 506, 527ff. 
28Meyer, "The Encounter Bay Tribe," in Woods, p. 198. 
^Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 551, 463; Native Tribes, p. 553. 
•""Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 540. 
3,For example, among the Arunta and the Loritja (Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, p. 15 n. 2; vol. II, p. 77). 
During life, the soul is called guruna and after death liana. The itana of Strehlow is identical to the ulthana 
of Spencer and Gillen (Native Tribes, pp. 514ff.). The same is true among the Bloomfield River people 
(Roth, Superstition, Magic, §66). 
32Eylmann, "Die Eingeborenen," p. 188. 
"Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 524, 491, 496. 
MSpencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 542, 508. 
35[Robert Hamilton] Mathews, "Ethnological Notes on the Aboriginal Tribes of 
N.S. Wales and Vic-
toria," in RSNSW, vol. XXXVIII, 1904, p. 287. 


248 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
vaguely localized: beyond the sea, o n an island,
3 6 or o n the shores o f a lake.
3 7 
Finally, the dead are sometimes thought to go into the sky, beyond the 
clouds. "There," says Dawson, "is found a magnificent country, abounding 
i n kangaroos and i n game o f every kind, and where a joyful life is led. The 
souls meet there and recognize one another."
3 8 Certain features included i n 
this tableau were probably taken from the paradise o f Christian missionar-
ies.
3 9 However the idea that the souk, or at least certain souls, go to the sky 
after death w o u l d seem to be indigenous, for it recurs i n other parts o f the 
continent.
4 0 
I n general, all the souls have the same fate and lead the same life. H o w -
ever, sometimes a different treatment is applied to t h e m according to their 
conduct o n earth, and one can see m a k i n g its appearance something that ap-
proximates a first sketch o f those distinct and even opposite 
compartments 
between w h i c h the w o r l d o f the beyond w i l l later be divided. T h e souls o f 
those w h o excelled i n life as hunters, fighters, dancers, and so forth do not 
melt into the crowd o f the others. A special place is assigned to t h e m ,
4 1 
sometimes the sky.
4 2 Indeed, Strehlow reports that, according to one myth, 
the souls o f the mean are devoured by dreadful spirits and annihilated.
4 3 
Nonetheless, these conceptions are still quite vague i n Australia;
4 4 they begin 
to acquire a m o d i c u m o f definition and clarity only i n more advanced soci-
eties, such as those o f A m e r i c a .
4 5 
36Strehlow, vol. I, pp. 15ff. Thus, according to Strehlow, among the Arunta the dead live on an is-
land—but, according to Spencer and Gillen, in an underground place. It is probable that the two myths 
coexist and are not the only ones. We will see that there is even a third. On that conception of the island 
of the dead, cf. Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 498; C. W. Schiirmann, "Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln," in 
Woods, p. 235; Eylmann, p. 189. 
37Schultze, "Aborigines of. . . Finke River," p. 244. 
38Dawson [The Australian Aborigines], p. 51. 
39Among these same tribes, there are obvious traces of a more ancient myth, according to which the 
souls lived in an underground place (ibid.). 
*Taplin, "The Narrinyeri" [in James Dominick Woods, The Native Tribes of South Australia, Adelaide, 
E. S. Wigg, 1879], pp. 18-19; Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 473; Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, p. 16. 
41Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 498. 
42Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, p. 16; Eylmann, "Die Eingeborenen," p. 189; Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 473. 
43These are the spirits of the ancestors of a special clan, the Venom Pouch clan (Gifidrusenmanner). 
"Sometimes the missionaries' influence is obvious. Dawson tells us of an authentic hell opposed to 
the paradise. He himself tends to regard this idea as a European import. 
45See Dorsey, "Siouan Cults," in Xlth Rep., pp. 419—420, 422, 485; cf. Marillier, La Survivance de l'âme 
et l'idée de justice chez les peuples non civilisés, Rapport de l'Ecole des Hautes Etudes, 1893. 


The Notion of Soul 
249 
II 
Such, i n their most elementary f o r m and stripped d o w n to their most basic 
traits, are the beliefs relative to the nature o f the soul and its destiny. W e must 
now try to account for them. W h a t is it that could have led man to think that 
there were t w o beings i n h i m , one having characteristics as special as those 
just enumerated? To answer this question, let us begin by trying to find out 
what o r i g i n the primitive ascribes to the spirit principle that he thinks he 
feels w i t h i n himself. I f properly analyzed, his o w n idea w i l l set us o n the road 
to the answer. 
Following the m e t h o d I set out to use, I w i l l study the ideas i n question 
i n a group o f societies where they have been observed w i t h exceptional pre-
cision: the tribes o f central Australia. Therefore, although it is broad, the area 
o f our observation w i l l be limited. Still, there is reason to believe that the 
same ideas i n various forms are or have been widespread, even outside Aus-
tralia. Furthermore, and above all, the idea o f soul is not distincdy different 
i n these central tribes than i n the other Australian societies, but has the same 
basic features everywhere. Since the same effect always has the same cause, 
there are grounds for t h i n k i n g that this idea, w h i c h is the same everywhere, 
does not have different causes i n different places. So the o r i g i n that the study 
o f the tribes specifically i n question w i l l lead us to attribute to i t should be 
regarded as true o f the others as well. These tribes w i l l provide the occasion 
to make a sort o f experiment, the results o f w h i c h , like those o f any w e l l -
made experiment, w i l l be generalizable. T h e homogeneity o f Australian civ-
dization w o u l d suffice i n itself to warrant this generalization, but I w i l l take 
the precaution o f testing it against facts taken from among other peoples, i n 
both Australia and America. 
Since the ideas that are to provide the basis o f our demonstration have 
been reported differendy b y Spencer and Gillen than by Strehlow, I w i l l set 
forth these t w o versions, one after the other. Proper interpretation w i l l show 
that they differ more i n f o r m than i n substance and i n the end have the same 
sociological import. 
According to Spencer and Gillen, the souls that come i n each generation 
to animate the bodies o f the n e w b o r n do not result from special and original 
creations. A l l these tribes w o u l d agree that there is a finite stock o f souls that 
are reincarnated periodically, the number o f w h i c h cannot be increased by 
even a single one.
4 6 W h e n an individual dies, his soul leaves the body i n 
"They can temporarily duplicate themselves, as we will see in the next chapter, but these doubles do 
not add even one to the number of souls capable of being reincarnated. 


250 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
w h i c h it resided and, once the m o u r n i n g is over, goes to the land o f souls. 
After a certain period, the soul comes back to reincarnate itself, and i t is these 
reincarnations that b r i n g about conceptions and births. These fundamental 
souls are the ones that animated the founding ancestors o f the clan at the very 
beginning o f things. I n a certain epoch beyond w h i c h the imagination does 
not go, and w h i c h is considered the very beginning o f time, beings existed 
that were descended from none. For this reason, the Arunta calls these the Al-
tjirangamitjina,
47 
the uncreated ones—the ones that, from all eternity, are. A c -
cording to Spencer and Gillen, the A r u n t a gives the name Alcheringa
49 to the 
period i n w h i c h these mythic beings are thought to have lived. Organized i n 
totemic clans like the m e n o f today, they spent their time traveling, i n the 
course o f w h i c h they performed all kinds o f prodigious deeds, w h i c h are rec-
ollected i n myths. B u t a time came w h e n that terrestrial life ended. Sepa-
rately or i n groups, they vanished into the ground. T h e i r bodies changed 
into trees or rocks, still seen i n the places where they are thought to have dis-
appeared. * B u t their souls endure; they are immortal. T h e y even continue to 
frequent the same places where the existence o f their first hosts came to an 
end. Because o f the memories attached to them, these places too have a qual-
ity o f sacredness; to be found there are the oknanikilla, those sanctuaries i n 
w h i c h the churingas o f the clan are kept and w h i c h are like centers for the 
various totemic cults. W h e n one o f the souls that wander about one o f these 
sanctuaries enters the body o f a w o m a n , conception results and later a 
b i r t h .
4 9 Thus each individual is considered a n e w avatar o f a definite ances-
tor. T h e individual is this very ancestor, reborn i n a new body and w i t h new 
features. B u t w h o were those ancestors? 
First, they were endowed w i t h infinitely greater capacities than those 
possessed by the m e n o f today, including the most respected o l d men and the 
most renowned magicians. Virtues that may be called miraculous are attrib-
uted to them: " T h e y could travel o n the ground, under the ground, and i n 
the air; by opening a vein, each o f t h e m could flood w h o l e regions or, i n -
*This sentence is absent from Swain's translation. 
47Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, p. 2. 
^Native Tribes, p. 73 n. 1. 
"On that body of ideas, see Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, pp. 119, 123-127, 387tT.; Northern Tribes, 
pp. 145-174. Among the Gnanji, conception does not necessarily occur near the oknanikilla. But they be-
lieve that each couple is accompanied on its peregrinations about the continent by a swarm of souls from 
the husbands totem. When the occasion comes, one of these souls goes into the body of the woman and 
impregnates her, wherever she may be (Northern Tribes, p. 169). 


The Notion of Soul 
251 
versely, cause n e w lands to emerge; i n a wall o f rocks, they w o u l d cause a lake 
to appear, or open a gorge as a passage-way; where they planted their nur-
tunja, rocks or trees came out o f the ground."
5 0 I t is they w h o gave the land 
its present f o r m and w h o created all sorts o f beings, m e n and animals. They 
are almost gods. Hence their souls also have a godlike quality. A n d since the 
souls o f m e n are these ancestral souls reincarnated i n human bodies, the souls 
themselves are sacred beings. 
Second, these ancestors were not m e n i n the true sense o f the w o r d , but 
animals or plants, or else mixed beings i n w h i c h the animal or plant element 
predominated. " T h e ancestors w h o lived i n those legendary times," say 
Spencer and Gillen, "were, i n the o p i n i o n o f the natives, so closely allied 
w i t h the animals and plants whose names they bore that an Alcheringa per-
sonage w h o belongs to the Kangaroo totem, for example, is often portrayed 
i n the myths as a man-kangaroo or a kangaroo-man. Its human personality is 
often absorbed by that o f the plant or animal from w h i c h i t is thought to be 
descended."
5 1 T h e i r souls, w h i c h still endure, are necessarily o f the same na-
ture. T h e h u m a n and animal elements are j o i n e d inside them, w i t h the ani-
mal having a certain tendency to predominate. So they are made o f the same 
substance as the totemic principle, for we k n o w that the defining character-
istic o f the totemic principle is that it possesses this dual aspect, synthesizing 
and amalgamating these t w o kingdoms w i t h i n itself. 
Since no other souls but these exist, we arrive at the conclusion that, i n 
general terms, the soul is none other than the totemic principle incarnated 
i n each individual. N o t h i n g about this derivation should surprise us. W e al-
ready k n o w that this principle is immanent i n each member o f the clan, and 
that by permeating individuals, i t inevitably becomes individualized. Since 
consciousnesses ( o f w h i c h i t thereby becomes an integral element) differ 
from one another, the principle becomes differentiated i n their image. Since 
each consciousness has its o w n f o r m , the soul i n each takes a distinct f o r m . 
I n itself, i t undoubtedly remains a force external to and foreign to the man, 
but the p o r t i o n o f it that each is thought to possess cannot help but develop 
close affinities w i t h the individual subject i n w h i c h i t resides. T h e soul par-
ticipates i n the nature o f that subject, becoming i n some measure the sub-
ject's o w n property. I n this way, it comes to have t w o contradictory features, 
but their coexistence is among the distinguishing traits o f the idea o f soul. 
Today, as at other times, the soul is that w h i c h is best and most profound i n 
50[Spencer and Gillen], NativeTribes, pp. 512-513; cf. chaps. X andXI. 
51Ibid.,p. 119. 


252 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
us, o n the one hand, and the eminent part o f our being; o n the other, it is a 
temporary guest that has come to us from outside, that lives a life inside us 
that is distinct from the body's, and that must one day regain its complete i n -
dependence. I n short, just as society exists only through individuals, the 
totemic principle lives only i n and through the individual consciousnesses 
whose c o m i n g together forms the clan. I f they d i d not feel the totemic p r i n -
ciple w i t h i n them, i t w o u l d not be; i t is they w h o put it into things. A n d so 
it must subdivide and fragment among individuals. Each o f these 
fragments 
is a soul. 
A m y t h that is found i n a rather large number o f societies o f the center 
(and that, by the way, is but a special f o r m o f the preceding) shows even bet-
ter that the raw material from w h i c h the idea o f soul is made is o f this kind. 
I n these tribes, tradition places at the o r i g i n o f each clan not several ances-
tors but only t w o ,
5 2 or even only one.
5 3 So long as i t remained alone, this sin-
gle being contained w i t h i n itself the w h o l e totemic principle, for at that 
m o m e n t there was as yet n o t h i n g to w h i c h that principle could have been 
passed on. According to the same tradition, all the human souls that exist, 
b o t h those n o w animating the bodies o f m e n and those n o w unused but i n 
reserve for the future, issued from that one personage and are made from the 
same substance. I n m o v i n g o n the surface o f the earth, i n stirring and shak-
ing itself, i t brought t h e m out o f its body and sowed t h e m i n the various 
places i t is said to have traversed. Is this not to say, symbolically, that these are 
portions o f the totemic deity? 
Such a conclusion, however, presupposes that the tribes discussed accept 
the doctrine o f reincarnation. Yet, according to Strehlow, that doctrine is u n -
k n o w n among the Arunta—that is, the society that Spencer and Gillen stud-
ied longest and best. I f i n this case these t w o observers were so mistaken, the 
whole o f their study w o u l d have to be considered suspect, so it is important 
to determine the real scope o f this divergence. 
Once the rites o f m o u r n i n g free i t from the body for good, the soul is 
not reincarnated, according to Strehlow. I t goes to the island o f the dead, 
where i t spends its days sleeping and its nights dancing, until i t rains o n earth. 
It returns at that m o m e n t to the milieu o f the living and plays the role o f p r o -
tective genie for y o u n g sons or, i n the absence o f the sons, among the grand-
sons left behind; i t enters their bodies and assists their growth. So i t remains 
52Among the Kalish (Northern Tribes, pp. 154), and among the Urabunna (Northern Tribes, p. 146). 
"This is the case among the Warramunga and related tribes, Walpari, Wulmala, Worgaia, Tjingilli 
(Northern Tribes, p. 161), and also among the Umbaia and the Gnanji (Northern Tribes, p. 170). 


The Notion of Soul 
253 
i n the midst o f its former family for a year or two, then returns to the land o f 
souls. After a certain period, i t leaves yet again to make a new sojourn o n 
earth—moreover, its last. T h e time comes w h e n i t must again travel the road 
to the island o f the dead, this time irrevocably; and there, after various i n c i -
dents that need not be reported i n detail, a storm occurs during w h i c h i t is 
struck by lightning. Its career is finally over.
5 4 
Thus, i t cannot reincarnate itself, and thus, conceptions and births are 
not due to the reincarnation o f souls that periodically begin new existences 
i n new bodies. To be sure, Strehlow, like Spencer and Gillen, declares that, 
for the Arunta, sexual intercourse is by no means the sufficient condition o f 
procreation,
5 5 w h i c h instead is the outcome o f mystic operations—different 
operations, however, from those Spencer and Gillen made k n o w n to us. It 
comes about i n one o f the t w o following ways. 
Everywhere the Alcheringa ancestor
5 6 is thought to have sunk into the 
ground, there is a rock or a tree representing the body. According to Spencer 
and G i l l e n ,
5 7 the tree or rock that has this mystic relation w i t h the departed 
heroes is called nanja and, according to Strehlow, ngarra.
5S Sometimes i t is a 
water hole that is said to have been formed i n this way. O n each o f these trees 
and rocks, and i n each o f these water holes, live the embryos o f babies, called 
ratapa,
59 w h i c h belong to the very same totem as the corresponding ancestor. 
For example, o n a g u m tree that represents an ancestor o f the Kangaroo clan, 
there are ratapas that are all o f the Kangaroo totem. I f a w o m a n belonging to 
the marriage class to w h i c h mothers o f these ratapas must ordinarily belong 
54Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, pp. 15-16. For the Lorirja, see Strehlow, [Aranda], vol. II, p. 7. 
55Strehlow goes so far as to say that sexual relations are not even considered a necessary condition, a 
sort of preparation for conception (vol. II, p. 52 n. 7). It is true that he adds, a few lines further on, that 
the old men know perfecdy well the relationship between physical intercourse and procreation—and that, 
so far as animals are concerned, even children know. This is bound to dilute somewhat the import of the 
first statement. 
5 6I generally use the terminology of Spencer and Gillen, rather than that of Strehlow, because it has 
been sanctioned by long usage. 
^Native Tribes, pp. 124, 513. 
58[Strehlow, Aranda], vol. I, p. 5. According to Strehlow, ngarra means "eternal." Among the Loritja, 
only rocks have this function. 
^Strehlow translates it as Kinderkeime ("seeds of children"). However, Spencer and Gillen are far from 
having ignored the myth of the ratapa and the customs connected to them. They speak of it explicidy in 
Native Tribes, pp. 366ff. and 552. They note the existence of rocks called Erathipa in various parts of the 
Arunta territory, from which emanate "spirit children," souls of children, that enter into the bodies of 
women and impregnate them. According to Spencer and Gillen, Erathipa means "child," although they 
go on to say that this word is rarely used in this sense in everyday conversation (ibid., p. 338). 


254 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
should happen to pass by,
6 0 one o f t h e m w i l l be able to enter her through the 
hip. T h e w o m a n learns o f this possession through the characteristic pains that 
are the first signs o f pregnancy. T h e child conceived i n this way w i l l naturally 
be from the same ancestor o n whose mystical body it resided before incar-
nating itself.
6 1 
I n other cases, the procedure used is slighdy different, w i t h the ancestor 
acting i n person. A t a given moment, the ancestor leaves its underground re-
treat and throws at the w o m a n a small churinga o f a special shape, called a na-
matuna.
62 
The churinga enters the body o f the w o m a n and there takes 
human f o r m , w h i l e the ancestor disappears again into the earth.
6 3 
These t w o modes o f conception are held to be equally c o m m o n . The 
shape o f the child's face reveals the manner i n w h i c h i t was conceived. A c -
cording to the w i d t h or narrowness o f the face, conception is said to be due 
to the incarnation o f a ratapa or a namatuna. Strehlow also notes a third 
method o f impregnation, i n addition to these t w o , but one that is said to be 
m u c h rarer. After its namatuna has entered the body o f the w o m a n , the an-
cestor itself enters and voluntarily submits to a n e w birth. I n this case, c o n -
ception w o u l d result from a true reincarnation o f the ancestor. B u t this case 
is highly unusual, and furthermore, w h e n the man so conceived dies, the an-
cestral soul that animated h i m departs, as do ordinary souls, for the island o f 
the dead, where i t is finally destroyed after the usual period. I t does not u n -
dergo new reincarnations.
6 4 
Such is Strehlow's version.
6 5 I n his view, i t is radically opposed to that o f 
Spencer and Gillen. I n reality, however, it differs only i n the literal detail o f 
the formulas and symbols, and, variations o f f o r m aside, the mythical theme 
is the same i n b o t h cases. 
I n the first place, all these observers agree i n viewing every conception as 
the result o f an incarnation. According to Strehlow, what is incarnated is not a 
"The Arunta are divided sometimes into four, sometimes into eight marriage classes. The class of a 
child is determined by that of its father; inversely, the father's can be deduced from the child's. (See 
Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 70ff.; Strehlow [Aranda], vol. I, pp. 6ff.) We must still 
find 
out how 
the ratapa acquires a definite class; I will return to this point. 
61Strehlow [Aranda], vol. II, p. 52. Sometimes, albeit seldom, conflicts do arise over which is the 
child's totem. Strehlow cites a case (p. 53). 
62This is the same word as namatwinna, which is found in Spencer and Gillen (Native Tribes, p. 541). 
"Strehlow [Aranda], vol. II, p. 53. 
64Ibid., vol. II, p. 56. 
65Mathews ascribes a similar theory of conception to the Tjingilli (also known as Chingalee). [Possi-
bly, Proceedings and Transactions of the Queensland Branch of the Royal Geographic Society of Australasia, Bris-
bane], vol. XXII (1907), pp. 7
5
—
7
6
. [This source remains obscure to me. Trans.] 


The Notion of Soul 
255 
soul but a ratapa or a namatuna. What, then, is a ratapa? It is, says Strehlow, a 
complete embryo, made o f both a soul and a body, but the soul is always con-
ceived o f i n physical forms. Since it sleeps, dances, hunts, eats, and so forth, it 
has a corporeal element as well. Inversely, the ratapa is invisible to ordinary 
men; no one sees it entering the woman's body;
6 6 it is made o f material quite 
comparable to that o f the soul. I n this respect, therefore, it does not seem pos-
sible to differentiate clearly between the two. These are, i n sum, mythical be-
ings that are conceived more or less o n the same model. Schulze calls them 
child-souls.
6 7 Moreover, like the soul, the ratapa has the closest relations w i t h 
the ancestor o f w h i c h the sacred tree or rock is a materialized form. It is o f the 
same totem, the same phratry, and the same marriage class as that ancestor.
6 8 Its 
place i n the social organization o f the tribe is exacdy the one the ancestor is 
said to have held once u p o n a time. I t has the same name.
6 9 This is proof that 
these t w o personalities are very closely related to one another. 
There is more: This kinship goes as far as complete identification. I t is 
actually o n the mystical body o f the ancestor that the ratapa took f o r m ; i t 
comes from this body and is like a bit that detached itself. I n sum, therefore, 
what enters the w o m b o f the mother and becomes the child is part o f the an-
cestor. A n d by this route, w e come back to the idea o f Spencer and Gillen: 
B i r t h is due to the incarnation o f an ancestral personage. O f course, what is 
incarnated is not the w h o l e personage but only an emanation o f it. However, 
this difference is o f entirely secondary interest, for this reason: W h e n a sacred 
being divides and replicates itself, i t is found again, and w i t h all its funda-
mental traits, i n each o f the fragments into w h i c h it has been divided. Basi-
cally, then, the Alcheringa ancestor is w h o l l y w i t h i n the element o f itself that 
becomes a ratapa.
7 0 
66Sometimes the ancestor who is thought to have thrown the namatuna shows itself to the woman in 
the form of 
an animal or a man. This is further proof of the affinity the ancestral soul has for physical form. 
67Schulze, "Aborigines of. . . Finke River," p. 237. 
68This arises 
from 
the fact that the ratapa can only incarnate itself in the body of a woman who be-
longs to the same marriage class as the mother of the mythical ancestor. Thus I do not understand how 
Strehlow could say (Aranda, vol. I, p. 42, Anmerkung) that, except in this case, the myths do not assign the 
Alcheringa ancestors to definite marriage classes. His own theory of conception presupposes just the op-
posite (cf. II, pp. 53ff.). 
69Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 58. 
70The difference between the two versions narrows even more and diminishes almost to nothing if we 
notice that when Spencer and Gillen tell us that the ancestral soul is incarnated in the body of the woman, 
their mode of expression must not be taken literally. It is not the whole soul that comes to impregnate the 
mother but only an emanation of that soul. Indeed, on their own avowal, a soul equal and even superior 
in power to the one that is incarnated continues to reside in the nanja tree or rock (see Native Tribes, 
p. 514). I will have occasion to return to this point (cf. below, p. 277). 


256 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
T h e second mode o f conception that Strehlow distinguishes has the 
same meaning. I n fact, the churinga, and especially the particular churinga 
that is called the namatuna, is considered an avatar o f the ancestor: It is the 
ancestor's body, according to Strehlow,
7 1 just as the nanja tree is. I n other 
words, the personality o f the ancestor, its churinga, and its nanja tree are sa-
cred things, w h i c h elicit the same feelings, and to w h i c h the same religious 
value is ascribed. Therefore, they change into one another: A sacred tree or 
rock came out o f the ground i n the place where the ancestor lost a churinga, 
just as i n the places where he himself sank into the g r o u n d .
7 2 There is a 
mythical equivalence between an Alcheringa personage and his churinga, 
then; so w h e n the personage throws a namatuna into a woman's body, it is as 
i f that very personage entered her. I n fact, we have seen that i t sometimes en-
ters i n person, following the namatuna; and, according to other accounts, the 
personage enters before the namatuna, as i f opening a way for i t .
7 3 T h e fact 
that these themes coexist i n the same m y t h shows definitively that the one is 
only a duplicate o f the other. 
Furthermore, no matter h o w conception occurs, there is no doubt that 
each individual is b o u n d to a definite Alcheringa ancestor by extremely close 
ties. First, each man has his recognized ancestor; t w o persons cannot simul-
taneously have the same one. I n other words, an Alcheringa being never has 
more than one representative among the l i v i n g .
7 4 W h a t is more, the one is 
only an aspect o f the other. I n fact, as we already know, the churinga left by 
the ancestor expresses his personality. I f w e adopt the interpretation that 
Strehlow reports, w h i c h is perhaps the more satisfactory, w e w i l l say that i t is 
the ancestor's body. B u t this same churinga is related i n the same way to the 
individual w h o is thought to have been conceived under the influence o f 
the ancestor, that is, the one w h o is the fruit o f his mystical labors. W h e n 
the young neophyte is brought into the sanctuary o f the clan, he is shown the 
churinga o f his ancestor w i t h the words: " Y o u are this body; you are the 
''Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, pp. 76, 81. According to Spencer and Gillen, the churinga is not the body 
of the ancestor but the object in which the ancestors soul resides. These two mythical interpretations are 
basically identical, and it is easy to see how one was able to pass over into the other: The body is the place 
where the soul resides. 
72Ibid., vol. I, p. 4. 
73Ibid., vol. I, pp. 5
3
—
5
4
. In these accounts, the ancestor begins by entering the womb of the woman, 
bringing on the characteristic discomforts of pregnancy. Then he exits and only afterward leaves the na-
matuna. 
74Ibid., vol. II, p. 76. 


The Notion of Soul 
257 
same thing as this."
7 5 Thus, i n Strehlow's phrase, the churinga is "the c o m -
m o n body o f the individual and his ancestor."
7 6 F r o m one point o f view, at 
least, their t w o personalities have to be merged i n order for them to have the 
same body. Strehlow explicitly recognizes this. H e says: " B y the Tjurunga 
(churinga), the individual is j o i n e d w i t h his personal ancestor."
7 7 
To summarize, for Strehlow as well as for Spencer and Gillen, there is a 
religious and mystical principle i n each n e w b o r n that emanates from an 
Alcheringa ancestor. I t is this principle that forms the essence o f each i n d i -
vidual. So this principle is the individual's soul; or, i n any case, the soul is 
made o f the same matter and substance. I have relied o n this fundamental fact 
only to determine the nature and o r i g i n o f the idea o f soul. T h e different 
metaphors by means o f w h i c h this could have been expressed are o f entirely 
secondary interest to m e .
7 8 
Far from contradicting the data o n w h i c h m y thesis rests, the recent o b -
servations o f Strehlow b r i n g us new evidence that confirms it. M y reasoning 
consisted o f inferring the totemic nature o f the human soul from the totemic 
nature o f the ancestral soul, o f w h i c h the human one is an emanation and a 
k i n d o f replica. Certain o f the new facts that we owe to Strehlow d e m o n -
strate this characteristic o f both, even more unequivocally than those relied 
u p o n until now. First, like Spencer and Gillen, Strehlow insists o n "the i n t i -
mate relations that j o i n each ancestor to an animal, a plant or another natural 
object." Certain o f these Altjirangamitjina (these are the Alcheringa o f 
Spencer and Gillen), he says, "must be direcdy manifested i n the f o r m o f an-
imals; others take animal f o r m temporarily."
7 9 Even now, they are continu-
ally transforming themselves into animals.
8 0 I n any case, and whatever their 
75Ibid., p. 81. Here is the word-for-word translation of the terms used, as Strehlow gives them to us: 
Dies du Körper bist; dies du der ähnliche. In one myth, a civilizing hero, Mangarkunjerkunja, presents to each 
man the churinga of his ancestor, telling him, "You were born from this churinga" (ibid., p. 76). 
76Ibid. 
77Ibid. 
78Basically, the only real divergence between Strehlow, on the one hand, and Spencer and Gillen, on 
the other, is the following. For Spencer and Gillen, after death the soul of the individual returns to the 
nanja tree where it is again assimilated into the soul of the ancestor (Native Tribes, p. 513); for Strehlow, it 
leaves for the island of the dead, where it is eventually destroyed. In neither myth does it survive individ-
ually. I make no attempt to determine the cause of this divergence. Possibly Spencer and Gillen, who do 
not speak of the island of the dead, made an error of observation. Possibly also, the myth is not the same 
among the eastern Arunta, which Spencer and Gillen mainly observed, and in the other parts of the tribe. 
79Strehlow [Aranda], vol. II, p. 51. 
'»Ibid., vol. II, p. 56. 


258 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
outward appearance, " i n each o f them, the special and distinctive qualities o f 
the animal are quite evident." For example, the ancestors o f the Kangaroo 
clan eat grass and flee the hunter, like real kangaroos; those o f the E m u clan 
feed and flee like emus,
8 1 and so on. A n d consider this: Those o f the ances-
tors w h o had a plant totem became the same plant at death.
8 2 Furthermore, 
this close kinship o f the ancestor and the totemic being is so strongly felt by 
the native that i t affects terminology. A m o n g the Arunta, the child calls altjira 
the totem o f its mother, w h i c h serves as its secondary t o t e m .
8 3 Since descent 
was at first reckoned i n the maternal line, there was a time w h e n each i n d i -
vidual had no totem other than its mother's; thus, quite probably, the t e r m 
"altjira" designated the totem, period. N o w i t obviously enters into the 
composition o f the w o r d that means "great ancestor," altjirangamitjina.
8 4 
T h e ideas o f totem and ancestor are so close, indeed, that they apparently 
are sometimes interchangeable. I n this way, after having told us about the 
mother's totem or altjira, Strehlow adds: "This altjira appears to the blacks i n 
dreams and utters warnings, just as i t takes news o f t h e m to their sleeping 
friends."
8 5 This altjira that speaks, that is personally attached to each i n d i v i d -
ual, is obviously an ancestor, and yet i t is also an incarnation o f the totem. A 
text by R o t h that discusses invocations addressed to the totem must no doubt 
be interpreted i n this way.
8 6 I t seems, then, that the totem is sometimes imag-
ined as a collection o f ideal beings, mythic personages that are more or less 
distinct from the ancestors. I n other words, the ancestors are the totem d i -
vided into parts.
8 7 
B u t i f the ancestor is merged w i t h the totemic being to this extent, it 
cannot be otherwise for the individual soul that is so closely related to the an-
cestral soul. Moreover, this also emerges from the close bonds that j o i n each 
man to his churinga. W e k n o w that the churinga expresses the personality o f 
the individual w h o is thought to have been b o r n o f i t ;
8 8 but i t also expresses 
81Ibid., vol. I, pp. 3-4. 
82Ibid., vol. II, p. 61. 
83See above, p. 185. 
84Strehlow [Aranda], vol. II, p. 57, and vol. I, p. 2. 
85Ibid„ vol. II, p. 57. 
^Roth, Superstition, Magic, §74. 
8 7In other words, the totemic species is constituted more by the group of ancestors and by the mythic 
species than by the animal or plant species themselves. 
'"'See above, p. 256. 


The Notion of Soul 
259 
the totemic animal. W h e n the civilizing hero Mangakunjerkunja gave a per-
sonal churinga to each member o f the Kangaroo clan, he spoke these words: 
"Here is the body o f a kangaroo."
8 9 I n this way, the churinga is the body o f 
the ancestor, the actual individual, and the totemic animal, all at once: The 
three beings f o r m , i n the strong and apt phrase o f Strehlow, "an indissoluble 
unity."
9 0 These terms are partially equivalent and interchangeable. That is, 
they are conceived o f as different aspects o f one and the same reality, w h i c h 
is also defined by the distinctive attributes o f the totem. Their shared essence 
is the totemic principle. Language itself expresses this identification. T h e 
words ratapa and, i n the language o f the Loritja, aratapi designate the m y t h i -
cal embryo that detaches itself from the ancestor and becomes the child. B u t 
the same words also designate the totem o f this same child, as determined by 
the place where the mother thinks she conceived.
9 1 
Ill 
I n the preceding, the doctrine o f reincarnation was studied only i n the tribes 
o f central Australia; the bases o n w h i c h m y inference rests might therefore be 
judged too narrow. B u t i n the first place, for the reasons already given, the 
scope o f the experiment extends beyond the societies we have studied d i -
rectly. Furthermore, abundant facts establish that the same or similar ideas are 
to be found i n the most disparate parts o f Australia or, at least, have left visi-
ble traces there. T h e y are also to be found i n America. 
I n southern Australia, H o w i t t reports t h e m among the D i e r i .
9 2 T h e 
w o r d Mura-mura, w h i c h Gason translated as Good-Spirit (and i n w h i c h he 
thought he saw belief i n a creator god expressed
9 3), is i n reality a collective 
name that denotes the multitude o f ancestors placed at the o r i g i n o f the tribe. 
T h e y continue to exist today, as i n the past. " I t is believed that they inhabit 
trees, w h i c h are sacred for this reason." Certain features o f the ground, rocks, 
89Strehlow [Aranda], vol. II, p. 76. 
'"Ibid. 
91Ibid., pp. 57, 60, 61. Strehlow calls the list of the totems the list of the ratapas. 
92Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 475ff. 
93[Gason], "The Manners and Customs of the Dieyerie Tribe of Australian Aborigines," in [Edward 
M.] Curr [The Australian Race, Its Origin, Languages, Customs, Place of Landing in Australia, and the Routes by 
Which It Spread Itself over That Continent, Melbourne, J. Ferres, 1886-1887], vol. II, p. 47. 


260 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
and springs are identified w i t h these M u r a - m u r a ,
9 4 w h i c h , consequendy, are 
-remarkably like the Altjirangamitjina o f the Arunta. Even though only ves-
tiges o f totemism still exist among them, the K u r n a i o f Gippsland also believe 
i n the existence o f ancestors called Muk-Kurnai, 
conceived o f as beings m i d -
way between m e n and animals.
9 5 A m o n g the N i m b a l d i , Taplin has found a 
theory o f conception like the one Strehlow ascribes to the A r u n t a .
9 6 I n the 
state o f Victoria, among the Wotjobaluk, we find i n full the belief i n rein-
carnation. According to Mathews: " T h e spirits o f the dead gather i n the 
miyur
97 o f their respective clans; they come out i n order to be b o r n again i n 
human f o r m , w h e n a favorable opportunity presents itself."
9 8 Mathews even 
states that "the belief i n reincarnation or i n the transmigration o f souls is 
deeply rooted i n all the Australian tribes."
9 9 
I f we move o n to the northern regions, we find i n the northwest, among 
the N i o l - N i o l , the pure doctrine o f the Arunta: Every b i r t h is attributed to 
the incarnation o f a preexisting soul that is introduced into the body o f the 
w o m a n .
1 0 0 I n N o r t h Queensland, myths that differ from the preceding only 
i n f o r m translate exactiy the same ideas. I n the tribes o f the Pennefather 
River, each man is believed to have t w o souls: one, called ngai, resides i n the 
heart; the other, choi, remains i n the placenta. R i g h t after birth, the placenta 
is buried i n a consecrated place. A personal genie named Anje-a, w h i c h is i n 
charge o f the phenomenon o f procreation, comes to collect this choi, and to 
keep i t until, having reached adulthood, the child marries. W h e n the time 
has come to give h i m a son, Anje-a gathers a bit o f that man's choi and i n -
serts i t into the embryo, w h i c h Anje-a makes and puts i n the w o m b o f the 
mother. Thus the child is made w i t h the soul o f its father. It is true that the 
child does not receive its full paternal soul right away, for the ngai remains i n 
the father's heart for as l o n g as he lives. B u t w h e n he dies, the freed ngai also 
94Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 482. 
95Ibid., p. 487. 
%[George] Taplin, Folklore, Customs, Manners, etc. [Customs and Languages] of South Australian Aborigines, 
Adelaide, E. Spiller, 1879], p. 88. 
97Each clan of ancestors has its special camp under the ground; the miyur is this camp. 
98Mathews, "Aboriginal Tribes" in RSNSVV vol. XXXVIII, p. 293. Mathews reports the same belief 
in other tribes of Victoria (ibid., p. 197). 
"Ibid., p. 349. 
100[P. Jos.] Bischofs, "Die Niol-Niol, [ein Eingeborenenstamm in Nordwest Australien"] in Anthropos, 
vol. Ill [1908], p. 35. 


The Notion of Soul 
261 
goes to incarnate itself i n the bodies o f children; i f there are several, it divides 
itself equally among them. So there is perfect spiritual continuity between 
the generations: T h e same soul is transmitted from father to cfuldren and 
from t h e m to their children; and this single soul, always identical to itself de-
spite its successive divisions and subdivisions, is the one that animated the 
first ancestor, at the beginning o f things.
1 0 1 There is only one difference o f 
any importance between this theory and that o f the central tribes: that rein-
carnation is not the w o r k o f the ancestors themselves but o f a special genie, 
professionally assigned to that function. B u t i t seems, actually, that this genie 
is the product o f a syncretism that caused the multiple figures o f the first an-
cestors to merge into one and the same figure. T h e fact that the words 
"Anje-a" and " A n j i r " are apparendy related quite closely makes this h y p o t h -
esis at least plausible; now, " A n j i r " designates the first man, the original an-
cestor from w h o m all m e n are descended.
1 0 2 
T h e same ideas recur among the Indian tribes o f America. According to 
Krause, i t is believed among the T l i n g i t that the souls o f the departed return 
to earth to enter the bodies o f the pregnant w o m e n w h o belong to their 
families. "So, w h e n a w o m a n dreams o f such and such a deceased relative, 
during pregnancy, she believes that relative's soul has entered her." I f the 
n e w b o r n displays some characteristic mark that the deceased had, i t is 
thought to be the deceased himself, returned to earth, and is given the de-
ceased's name.
1 0 3 This belief is also c o m m o n among the Haida. I t is the 
shaman w h o reveals w h i c h relative has reincarnated himself i n the child and, 
consequendy, what name the child should have.
1 0 4 I t is believed among the 
K w a k i u d that the last to die returns to life i n the person o f the first child 
b o r n i n the family.
1 0 5 T h e same is true among the H u r o n , the Iroquois, the 
T i n n e h , and many other tribes o f the U n i t e d States.
1 0 6 
101Roth, Superstition, Magic, §68; cf. §69a, the similar case of the natives of the Proserpine River. To 
simplify the exposition, I have left aside the complication that arises from sex difference. Girls' souls are 
made with the choi of 
their mothers, whereas they share with their brothers the ngai of their father. How-
ever this peculiarity, which perhaps arises from the fact that the two systems of descent have been in use 
one after the other, does not affect the principle of the soul's perpetuity. 
,02Ibid., p. 16. 
103[Aurel Krause], DieTlinkit-Indianer [Jena, H. Constable, 1885], p. 282. 
,04[John] Swanton, Contributions to the Ethnology of the Haida [Leiden, E. J. Brill, 1905], pp. 117ff. 
105Boas, Sixth Report of the Committee on the North-Western Tribes of Canada, p. 59. 
106[Joseph François] Lafitau, Moeurs des sauvages américains [comparées aux moeurs des premiers temps], vol. 
II [Paris, Saugrain l'ainé; Charles Estienne Hochereau, 1724], p. 434; [Emile Fortune Stanislas Joseph] Pe-
titot, Monographie des Dénè-Dindjié [Paris, E. Leroux, 1876], p. 59. 


262 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
T h e scope o f these ideas extends naturally to the conclusion I have de-
duced from it: m y proposed explanation for the idea o f soul. Its general ap-
plicability is additionally confirmed by the following facts. 
We k n o w
1 0 7 that each individual harbors w i t h i n himself something o f 
the anonymous force that pervades the entire sacred species, for he himself is 
a member o f that species—not, however, insofar as he is an empirical and vis-
ible being. I n spite o f the designs and symbolic signs w i t h w h i c h he decorates 
his body, n o t h i n g about h i m brings to m i n d the f o r m o f an animal or plant. 
Hence, there is another being i n h i m ; and w h i l e not ceasing to recognize 
himself i n that being, he imagines i t i n the f o r m o f an animal or plant. Is i t 
not obvious that this double can only be the soul, since the soul, on its o w n , 
is already a double o f the subject it animates? As final p r o o f o f this identifica-
tion, the organs that most preeminently incarnate the totemic principle i n 
each individual are the same as those i n w h i c h the soul resides. This is true 
o f the blood. T h e b l o o d contains some part o f the totemic essence, as is 
demonstrated by the role blood plays i n totemic ceremonies.
1 0 8 B u t at the 
same time, the b l o o d is one o f the soul's residences; or, rather, i t is the soul 
itself seen from outside. W h e n it flows, life slips away, and the soul escapes 
then and there. Hence, i t is identified w i t h the sacred principle that is i m -
manent i n the blood. 
To t u r n the matter around: I f i n fact m y explanation is well founded, the 
totemic principle that enters (as I assume) into the individual must retain a 
certain autonomy there, for i t is specifically distinct from the subject i n 
w h i c h i t is incarnated. N o w , this is precisely what H o w i t t says he observed 
among the Y u i n . H e says, " T h e fact that the totem is conceived among these 
tribes as being i n some way part o f the man is clearly proved by the case o f 
one Umbara, already mentioned. Umbara told the story o f how, a few years 
ago, an individual o f the Lace-Lizard clan sent h i m his totem as Umbara h i m -
self slept. I t went d o w n the throat o f the sleeper and nearly ate his totem, 
w h i c h resided i n his chest, and this nearly caused death."
1 0 9 So i t is quite true 
that the totem divides as i t becomes individualized and that each o f the pieces 
that is thereby detached plays the role o f a spirit, o f a soul that resides i n the 
b o d y .
1 1 0 
107See above, pp. 133ff. 
l08See above, p. 136. 
109Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 147. Cf. ibid., p. 769. 
n0Strehlow [Aranda] (vol. I, p. 15 n. 2), Schulze ("Aborigines of. . . Finke River," p. 246) portray the 
soul to us, as Howitt here portrays the totem, as coming out of the body to go and eat another being. Sim-
ilarly, we earlier saw the altjira or maternal totem manifest itself in a dream, just as a soul or a spirit does. 


The Notion of Soul 
263 
Here are more directly telling facts. I f the soul is but the totemic p r i n c i -
ple individualized, then i n certain cases, at least, it must maintain more or less 
close relations w i t h the animal or plant species whose f o r m the totem repro-
duces. A n d , i n fact, " T h e Gewwe-Gal (a tribe o f N e w South Wales) believe 
that each person has w i t h i n himself an affinity for the spirit o f some bird, 
beast, or reptile. I t is not that the individual is thought to be descended from 
that animal, but that a kinship is thought to exist between the spirit that an-
imates the man and the spirit o f the animal."
1 1 1 
Indeed, there are cases i n w h i c h the soul is thought to emanate directly 
from the totemic plant or animal. A m o n g the Arunta, according to Strehlow, 
it is believed that w h e n a w o m a n has eaten abundandy o f a fruit, she w i l l bear 
a child whose t o t e m is that fruit. I f she was l o o k i n g at a kangaroo w h e n she 
felt the first movements o f the chdd, a kangaroo ratapa is believed to have en-
tered her body and impregnated her.
1 1 2 H . Basedow has reported the same 
belief among the W o g a i t .
1 1 3 W e know, o n the other hand, that the ratapa and 
the soul are nearly indistinguishable. N o w , i t w o u l d not have been possible to 
ascribe such an o r i g i n to the soul i f i t was not thought to be made o f the 
same substance as the animals and plants o f the totemic species. 
Thus the soul is often depicted as an animal. I n the lower societies, as is 
well k n o w n , death is never considered a natural event, w i t h purely physical 
causes, but is widely i m p u t e d to the machinations o f some sorcerer. I n many 
Australian tribes, to determine w h o is responsible for a murder, people start 
from the principle that, giving i n to a sort o f compulsion, the soul o f the 
murderer inevitably comes to visit his v i c t i m . For this reason, the body is 
placed o n a scaffold, and the ground under and all around the corpse is care-
fully smoothed, so that the slightest mark o n i t is easily seen. T h e people re-
t u r n the next day. I f an animal has passed that way i n the meantime, its tracks 
are easily recognized. T h e i r shape reveals the species to w h i c h he belongs, 
'"[Lorimer] Fison and [Alfred William] Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kurnai: [Group Marriage and Relation-
ship by Elopement, Drawn Chiefly 
from 
the Usage of the Australian Aborigines. Also the Kurnai Tribe, Their Cus-
toms in Peace and War, Melbourne, G. Robertson, 1880], p. 280. 
n 2 Globus, vol. CXI, p. 289. Despite the objections of Leonhardi, Strehlow has stood behind his state-
ments on this point. Leonhardi deems that there is a certain contradiction between this assertion and the 
theory that the ratapas emanate from trees, rocks, and churingas. But since the totemic animal incarnates 
the totem, just as does the nanja tree or rock, it can play the same role. These different things are mytho-
logically equivalent. 
1 1 3[H. Basedow], "Notes on the West Coastal Tribes of the Northern Territory of S. Australia," in 
RSSA, vol. XXXI (1907), p. 4. Cf. regarding the tribes of the Cairns district (North Queensland), Man 
[vol. IX] (1909), p. 86. 


264 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
and i n that way, the social group to w h i c h the murder belongs is inferred. H e 
is said to be a man o f such and such class or c l a n ,
1 1 4 i f the animal is a totem 
o f this or that class or clan. This is because the soul is thought to have come 
i n the f o r m o f the totemic animal. 
I n other societies, where totemism has weakened or disappeared, 
the 
soul still continues to be thought o f i n animal f o r m . T h e natives o f Cape 
Bedford ( N o r t h Queensland) believe that at the m o m e n t the child enters the 
body o f its mother, i t is a curlew i f a girl and a snake i f a boy. O n l y later does 
it take a human f o r m .
1 1 5 According to the Prince o f W i e d , many Indians o f 
N o r t h America say they have an animal i n their b o d y .
1 1 6 T h e Bororo o f 
Brazil draw their souls i n the f o r m o f a b i r d and for that reason believe they 
are birds o f the same k i n d .
1 1 7 Elsewhere the soul is conceived o f as a snake, a 
lizard, a fly, a bee, and so o n .
1 1 8 
B u t i t is above all after death that the animal nature o f the soul manifests 
itself. D u r i n g life, this feature is partially veiled, so to speak, by the very f o r m 
o f the human body. Once death has set the soul free, it becomes itself again. 
A m o n g the Omaha, i n at least t w o o f the buffalo clans, the souls o f the dead 
are believed to rejoin the buffalo, their ancestors.
1 1 9 T h e H o p i are divided 
into a certain number o f clans, whose ancestors were animals or beings i n an-
imal f o r m . As Schoolcraft reports, they say that at death they regain their 
original f o r m . Each o f them becomes a bear again, or a hart, according to the 
clan to w h i c h he belongs.
1 2 0 Often the soul is thought to reincarnate itself i n 
114Among the Wakelbura where, according to Curr and Howitt, each marriage class has its own 
totems, the animal determines the class (see Curr, vol. Ill, p. 28); among the Buandik, it determines the 
clan (Mrs. James S. Smith, The Booandik Tribes of S.Australian Aborigines [Adelaide, E. Spiller,1880], p. 128). 
Cf. [Alfred William] Howitt, "On Some Australian Beliefs," in JAI, vol. XIII [1884], p. 191; XIV (1884), 
p. 362; [Northcote Whitridge] Thomas, "An American View of Totemism," in Man [vol. II] (1902), 85; 
[R. H.] Mathews, RSNSW. vol. XXXVIII, pp. 347-348; [Robert] Brough Smyth [The Aborigines of Vic-
toria, Melbourne, J. Ferres, 1878], vol. I, p. 110; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 513. 
115Roth, Superstition, Magic, §83. This is probably a form of sexual totemism. 
116Prinz [von Maximillian] Wied, Reise in das innere Nord-Amerika in der Jahren 1832 bis 1834, II 
[Koblenz, 1839], p. 190. 
n 7 K . von den Steinen, Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Bräsiliens [Berlin, D. Reimer, 1894], pp. 511, 
512. 
"'See Frazer, Golden Bough, 2d. ed., vol. 1, London, Macmillan, 1894, pp. 250, 253, 256, 257, 
258. 
119[James Owen Dorsey, "Omaha Sociology,"] Third L4nnwiiJ Report, [BAE, Washington, Govern-
ment Printing Office, 1884], pp. 229, 233. 
120[Schoolcraft], Indian Tribes, vol. IV, p. 86. 


The Notion of Soul 
265 
the body o f an animal.
1 2 1 This, quite probably, is the source o f the doctrine 
o f metempsychosis, w h i c h is so w i d e l y held. W e have seen h o w m u c h t r o u -
ble Tylor has accounting for i t .
1 2 2 I f the soul is fundamentally a human p r i n -
ciple, what could be stranger than the marked predilection for animal f o r m 
that it manifests i n so many societies? O n the other hand, all is explained if, 
in its very constitution, the soul is closely akin to the animal, for then, by re-
turning after life to the animal w o r l d , i t is only returning to its true nature. 
Thus, the quasi-uruversality o f belief i n metempsychosis is additional p r o o f 
that the constitutive elements i n the idea o f the soul have been taken chiefly 
from the animal realm, as is presupposed by the theory just set forth. 
IV 
The idea o f the soul is a particular application o f the beliefs relative to sacred 
things. I n this way may be explained the religious character this idea has dis-
played ever since i t appeared i n history and that it still has today. T h e soul has 
always been considered a sacred thing; i n this respect i t is opposed to the 
body, w h i c h i n itself is profane. The soul is not merely distinct from its phys-
ical envelope, as the inside is from the outside, and it is not merely imagined 
as being made o f a more subtle and fluid material than the body; more than 
that, it elicits i n some degree those feelings that are everywhere reserved for 
that w h i c h is divine. I f it is not made into a god, i t is seen at least as a spark 
o f the divinity. This fundamental characteristic w o u l d be inexplicable i f the 
idea o f the soul was no more than a prescientific solution to the problem o f 
dreams. Since there is n o t h i n g i n dreaming that can awaken religious e m o -
tion, the same must be true o f the cause that accounts for dreaming. H o w -
ever, i f the soul is a bit o f divine substance, it represents something w i t h i n 
I21For example, among the Batta of Sumatra (See Golden Bough, 2d. ed., vol. Ill, p. 420), in Melane-
sia (Codrington, The Melanesians, p. 178), in the Malay Archipelago (Tylor, "Remarks on Totemism," in 
JAI, new series, vol. I [1907], p. 147). It will be noticed that the cases in which the soul clearly presents 
itself after death as an animal are taken from societies in which totemism has been more or less breached. 
This is so because, where totemic beliefs are relatively pure, the idea of soul is necessarily ambiguous, for 
totemism implies that the soul participates in both realms at once. It cannot direct itself 
in either direction 
exclusively but sometimes takes one aspect and sometimes the other, depending on the circumstances. 
The more totemism recedes, the less necessary this ambiguity becomes, while, at the same time, the spir-
its feel a stronger need for differentiation. Then the quite marked affinities of 
the soul for the animal realm 
make themselves felt, especially so after it is liberated 
from 
the human body. 
!22See above, p. 172. On the universality of belief in metempsychosis, see Tylor, vol. II, pp. 8ff. 


266 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
us that is other than ourselves, and i f it is made o f the same mental mater-
ial as the sacred beings, i t w o u l d naturally be the object o f the same feel-
ings. 
N o r is the character man thus ascribes to himself the result o f mere i l l u -
sion. Like the ideas o f religious force and divinity, the idea o f the soul is not 
w i t h o u t reality. I t is quite true that we are made o f t w o distinct parts that are 
opposed to one another as the sacred is to the profane, and we can say that i n 
a sense there is divinity i n us. For society, that unique source o f all that is sa-
cred, is not satisfied to move us from outside and to affect us transitorily; it 
organizes itself lastingly w i t h i n us. I t arouses i n us a w h o l e w o r l d o f ideas and 
feelings that express i t but at the same time are an integral and permanent 
part o f ourselves. W h e n the Australian comes away from a religious cere-
mony, the representations that c o m m o n life has awakened or reawakened i n 
h i m do not instandy dissolve. T h e grand ancestral figures, the heroic exploits 
that the rites commemorate, the great things o f all kinds that worship has 
made h i m participate i n — i n sum, the various ideals that he has elaborated 
w i t h others—all these go o n living i n his consciousness. A n d by the e m o -
tions that are attached to t h e m i n his consciousness, by the very special i n -
fluence 
they have, they clearly distinguish themselves 
from 
the ordinary 
impressions that his daily dealings w i t h external things make u p o n h i m . 
M o r a l ideas are o f the same nature. I t is society that has engraved t h e m 
u p o n us, and since the respect society inspires is naturally passed o n to all that 
comes from it, the imperative norms o f conduct, because o f their origin, be-
come invested w i t h an authority and a stature that our other inward states do 
not have. Therefore, we assign t h e m a special place w i t h i n the totality o f our 
psychic life. A l t h o u g h our moral conscience is part o f our consciousness, we 
do not feel o n an equal footing w i t h it. W e cannot recognize our o w n voice 
i n that voice that makes itself heard only to order us to do some things and 
not to do others. T h e very tone i n w h i c h it speaks announces that i t is ex-
pressing something i n us that is other than us. This is what is objective about 
the idea o f the soul. T h e representations that are the warp and w o o f o f our 
inner life are o f t w o different species, irreducible to one another. Some relate 
to the outward and physical w o r l d , some to an ideal w o r l d that we consider 
to be morally above the physical one. Thus, we are really made o f t w o beings 
that are oriented i n t w o divergent and virtually opposite directions, one o f 
w h i c h exercises supremacy over the other. Such is the profound meaning o f 
the antithesis that all peoples have more or less clearly conceived: between 
the body and the soul, between the physical being and the spiritual being that 
coexist i n us. Moralists and preachers have often held that we cannot deny 
the reality and sacredness o f duty w i t h o u t falling into materialism. A n d i n -


The Notion of Soul 
267 
deed, i f we did not have the idea o f moral and religious imperatives,
1 2 3 our 
psychic life w o u l d be flattened out, all our states o f consciousness w o u l d be 
on the same plane, and all sense o f duality w o u l d disappear. To make this d u -
ality intelligible, i t is by no means necessary to imagine a mysterious and u n -
representable substance opposed to the body, under the name "soul." B u t i n 
this case, too, as i n that o f the sacred, the error is i n the literal character o f the 
symbol used, not i n the reality o f the fact symbolized. I t is true that our na-
ture is double; there truly is a parcel o f divinity i n us, because there is i n us a 
parcel o f the grand ideals that are the soul o f collectivity. 
T h e individual soul is thus only a p o r t i o n o f the group's collective soul. 
It is the anonymous force o n w h i c h the cult is based but incarnated i n an i n -
dividual whose personality it cleaves to: I t is mana individualized. Dreaming 
may well have had a role i n producing certain secondary characteristics o f the 
idea. Perhaps the fluidity and instability o f the images that occupy our minds 
during sleep, and their remarkable capacity to be transformed into one an-
other, furnished the model o f that subtle, diaphanous, and protean material 
o f w h i c h the soul is thought to be made. Moreover, the phenomena o f faint-
ing, catalepsy, and so forth may have suggested the idea that the soul was m o -
bile and, beginning i n this life, temporarily left the body; this, i n turn, has 
been used to explain certain dreams. B u t all these experiences and observa-
tions could only have had incidental, complementary influence, and indeed 
the existence o f that influence is hard to establish. W h a t is truly fundamen-
tal to the idea comes from elsewhere. 
Does not this o r i g i n o f the idea o f soul misconceive its fundamental na-
ture? I f soul is but a special f o r m o f the impersonal principle that pervades 
the group, the totemic species, and all kinds o f things that are attached to 
them, then i t too is at b o t t o m impersonal. A n d so, w i t h only a few differ-
ences, i t must therefore have the same properties as the force o f w h i c h it is 
only a specialized f o r m — i n particular, the same diffuseness, the same capac-
ity to spread contagiously, and the same ubiquity. N o w , quite the contrary, it 
is easily imagined as a definite, concrete being, w h o l l y self-contained and i n -
communicable to others; it is made the basis o f our personality. 
1 2 3If the religious and moral representations constitute the essential elements in the idea of soul, as I 
believe they do, I nonetheless do not mean to say that these are the only ones. Other states of conscience 
having this same quality, though to a lesser degree, come to group themselves around this central nucleus. 
This is true of all the higher forms of intellectual life, by reason of the quite special value and status that 
society attributes to them. When we live the life of science or art, we feel we are in contact with a circle 
of things above sensation (this, by the way, I will have occasion to show with greater precision in the Con-
clusion). This is why the higher functions of the intellect have always been regarded as specific manifes-
tations of the soul's activity. But they probably could not have been enough to form the idea of soul. 


268 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
B u t this way o f t h i n k i n g about soul is the product o f recent and p h i l o -
sophical development. T h e popular conception, such as it has emerged 
spontaneously from ordinary experience, is very different, especially at the 
beginning. For the Australian, the soul is a very vague entity, indetermi-
nate and fluid i n f o r m , pervading the entire body. A l t h o u g h it is especially 
manifest i n certain parts, there are probably none from w h i c h it is absent 
altogether, so it has a diffuseness, a contagiousness, and an omnipresence 
comparable to that o f mana. Like mana, it can subdivide and replicate itself 
infinitely, all the w h i l e remaining w h o l e i n each o f those parts (the plurality 
o f souls resulting from those replications and divisions). I n addition, the doc-
trine o f reincarnation, whose widespread acceptance we have established, 
shows what impersonal elements there are i n the idea o f soul and h o w fun-
damental they are. For the same soul to be able to take o n a new personality 
in each generation, the individual forms i n w h i c h i t is successively clothed 
must also be external to i t and unattached to its true nature. This is a k i n d o f 
generic substance that becomes individualized only secondarily and superfi-
cially. Moreover, this idea o f soul is far from having totally disappeared. T h e 
cult o f relics shows that, for ordinary believers even today, the soul o f a saint 
continues to adhere to his various bones, and w i t h all its essential powers— 
w h i c h implies that i t is imagined to be capable o f diffusing and subdividing, 
and o f incorporating itself into all sorts o f different things at the same time. 
Just as w e find i n soul the characteristic attributes o f mana, so too do sec-
ondary and superficial changes suffice for mana to become individualized as 
soul. O n e moves o n from the first idea to the second w i t h o u t any radical 
j u m p . Every religious force that is regularly attached to a definite being par-
ticipates 
i n the characteristics o f that being, takes its f o r m , and becomes its 
spirit duplicate. Tregear, i n his Maori-Polynesian dictionary, believed he 
could connect the w o r d mana to a w h o l e group o f other words, like manawa, 
manamana, and others, w h i c h seem to be o f the same family and mean 
"heart," "life," "consciousness." Is this not to say that some kinship between 
the corresponding ideas must also exist, that is, between the ideas o f imper-
sonal power and those o f inward life and mental force—in a w o r d , o f soul?
1 2 4 
This is w h y the question whether the churinga is sacred because it serves as 
residence for a soul, as Spencer and Gillen believe, or because it has imper-
sonal virtues, as Strehlow believes, is o f htde interest to me and w i t h no so-
ciological import. W h e t h e r the efficacy o f a sacred object is imagined i n 
abstract f o r m or ascribed to some personal agent is not the heart o f the ques-
tion. T h e psychological roots o f b o t h beliefs are identical. A thing is sacred 
l 2 4F. Tregear, The Maori-Polynesian Comparative Dictionary, pp. 203—205. 


The Notion of Soul 
269 
because, i n some way, i t inspires a collective feeling o f respect that removes it 
from profane contact. To understand this feeling, m e n sometimes relate it to 
a vague and imprecise cause and sometimes to a definite spiritual being w i t h 
a name and a history. B u t these varying interpretations are added to a funda-
mental process that is the same i n b o t h cases. 
This is what explains those extraordinary mixtures, examples o f w h i c h 
we have encountered along the way. I said that the individual, the soul o f the 
ancestor he reincarnates or o f w h o m his o w n soul is an emanation, his 
churinga, and the animals o f the totemic species are partially equivalent and 
interchangeable things. This is because, i n certain respects, they all act u p o n 
the collective consciousness i n the same way. I f the churinga is sacred, i t is sa-
cred because the totemic emblem engraved o n its surface provokes collective 
feelings o f respect. T h e same feeling is attached to the animals or plants 
whose outward f o r m the t o t e m copies, to the soul o f the individual (since i t 
is itself thought o f i n the f o r m o f the totemic being), and finally to the an-
cestral soul o f w h i c h the preceding is only a particular aspect. I n this way, all 
these disparate objects, whether real or ideal, have a c o m m o n element by 
w h i c h they arouse the same affective state i n consciousness and consequendy 
merge. To the extent that they are expressed by one and the same represen-
tation, they are indistinguishable. This is w h y the A r u n t a could be led to see 
the churinga as the body c o m m o n to the individual, the ancestor, and even 
the totemic being. I t is a way o f saying to himself that the feelings o f w h i c h 
those different things are the object are identical. 
However, from the fact that the idea o f soul derives from the idea o f 
mana, i t i n no way follows either that the idea o f soul was a relatively late de-
velopment or that there was a historical time i n w h i c h m e n k n e w the reli-
gious forces only i n their impersonal forms. I f by the w o r d "preanimism" we 
mean to designate a historical period d u r i n g w h i c h animism is thought to 
have been u n k n o w n , we set up an arbitrary hypothesis,
1 2 5 for there is no 
people among w h o m the idea o f soul and the idea o f mana do not co-
exist. W e thus have no basis for supposing that they were f o r m e d i n t w o 
distinct periods; all the evidence suggests instead that they are more or less 
contemporaneous. Just as there is no society w i t h o u t individuals, so the i m -
personal forces that arise from collectivity cannot take f o r m w i t h o u t incar-
nating themselves i n individual consciousnesses, i n w h i c h they become 
individualized. These are not t w o different processes but t w o different aspects 
125This is the thesis of [Konrad Theodor] Preuss in the Globus articles I have cited several times. Mr. 
Levy-Bruhl also seems inclined toward the same idea (See Fonctions mentales, etc., pp. 92—93). 


270 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
o f one and the same process. True, they are not o f equal importance, 
since one is more fundamental than the other. I f mana is to be able to i n d i -
vidualize and fragment into particular souls, it must first exist, and what 
it is i n itself does not depend o n the forms i t takes as i t individualizes. Hence 
the idea o f mana does not presuppose that o f soul. Q u i t e the contrary, the 
idea o f soul cannot be understood except i n relation to the idea o f mana. I n 
this regard, one can indeed say that i t is due to a "secondary" f o r m a t i o n — 
but a secondary formation i n the logical, not the chronological, sense o f the 
w o r d . 
V 
B u t h o w d i d m e n come to believe that the soul survives the body and can 
even survive i t indefinitely? 
W h a t emerges from the analysis I have conducted is that belief i n i m -
mortality was not at all formed under the influence o f ideas about morality. 
M a n did not imagine extending his existence beyond the t o m b so that a just 
retribution o f moral acts could be provided i n another life, i f not i n this one. 
We have seen that all considerations o f this sort were foreign to the primitive 
idea o f the beyond. 
N o r are we any better o f f accepting the hypothesis that the other life was 
invented as a means o f escape from the anguishing prospect o f annihilation. 
First o f all, the need for personal survival is far from having been very strong 
at the beginning. T h e primitive generally accepts the idea o f death w i t h a 
sort o f indifference. Brought up to take little account o f his individuality and 
accustomed to endangering his life continually, he easily lets go o f i t .
1 2 6 Sec-
ond, the immortality that is promised to h i m by the religions he practices is 
not at all personal. I n many cases, the soul does not continue the personality 
o f the deceased, or does not continue i t for long, since, forgetting its previ-
ous existence, i t goes forth after a certain time to animate other bodies and 
becomes thereby the hfe-giving principle o f new personalities. Even among 
more advanced peoples, i t was not the colorless and sad existence led by the 
shades i n Sheol or Erebus that could ease the sorrow left by the m e m o r y o f 
the life lost. 
T h e n o t i o n that connects the idea o f a posthumous life to dream expe-
riences is a more satisfactory explanation. O u r dead relatives and 
friends 
1 2 6On this point, see my [Le] Suicide [elude de sociologie, Paris, F. Alcan, 1897], pp. 233ff. 


The Notion of Soul 
271 
reappear to us i n dreams. W e see t h e m acting and hear t h e m speaking; it is 
natural to draw the conclusion that they still exist. B u t i f those observations 
could have served as confirmation o f the idea, once b o r n , they do not seem 
capable o f having called it forth from nothing. T h e dreams i n w h i c h we see 
deceased persons alive again are too rare and too short, and the memories 
they leave are i n themselves too vague, for dreams alone to have suggested 
such an important system o f beliefs to men. There is a marked disproportion 
between the effect and the cause to w h i c h i t is ascribed. 
W h a t makes the question troublesome is that, by itself, the idea o f the 
soul d i d not entail the idea o f survival but seemed to preclude it. Indeed, we 
have seen that the soul, w h i l e distinct from the body, is nevertheless thought 
to be closely linked w i t h it. Since the soul grows o l d w i t h the body and re-
acts to all the body's illnesses, i t must have seemed natural for the soul to die 
w i t h the body. T h e belief must at least have been that it ceased to exist the 
m o m e n t i t irrevocably lost its original form, w h e n nothing o f what it had 
been remained. Yet it is at just this m o m e n t that a new life opens out be-
fore it. 
T h e myths I have previously reported furnish us w i t h the only possible 
explanation o f that belief. W e have seen that the souls o f newborns were e i -
ther emanations o f ancestral souls or those same souls reincarnated. B u t to 
have been able either to reincarnate themselves or to give o f f n e w emana-
tions periodically, they had to have outlived their first possessors, so it seems 
that the idea o f the survival o f the dead was accepted i n order to make the 
b i r t h o f the living explicable. T h e primitive does not have the idea o f an all-
powerful god that pulls souls out o f nothingness. I t seems to h i m that one can 
only make souls w i t h other souls. Those that are b o r n i n this way can only 
be new forms o f those that existed i n the past. Consequently, they must go 
on existing so that others can be formed. I n sum, belief i n the immortality o f 
souls is the only way man is able to comprehend a fact that cannot fail to at-
tract his attention: the perpetuity o f the group's life. T h e individuals die, but 
the clan survives, so the forces that constitute his life must have the same per-
petuity. These forces are the souls that animate the individual bodies, because 
it is i n and by t h e m that the group realizes itself. For that reason, they must 
endure. Indeed, while enduring, they also must remain the same. Since the 
clan always keeps its characteristic f o r m , the spiritual substance o f w h i c h it is 
made must be conceived o f as qualitatively invariable. Since i t is always the 
same clan w i t h the same totemic principle, i t must also be the same souls, the 
souls being n o t h i n g other than the totemic principle fragmented and partic-
ularized. Thus, there is a mystical sort o f germinative plasma that is transmit-
ted from generation to generation and that creates, or at least is held to 


272 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
create, the spiritual unity o f the clan over time. A n d despite its symbolic na-
ture, this belief is not w i t h o u t objective truth, for although the group is not 
i m m o r t a l i n the absolute sense o f the w o r d , yet i t is true that the group lasts 
above and beyond the individuals and that it is reborn and reincarnated i n 
each n e w generation. 
O n e fact confirms this interpretation. W e have seen that, according to 
Strehlow's account, the Arunta distinguish t w o sorts o f souls: those o f the 
Alcheringa ancestors and those o f the individuals w h o at any m o m e n t i n his-
tory constitute the body o f the tribe. T h e souls o f individuals outlive the 
body for only a rather short time and are soon nullified completely. O n l y 
those o f the Alcheringa ancestors are immortal: Just as they are uncreated, so 
they do not perish. N o w , i t is to be noticed that these are also the only ones 
whose immortality is needed i n order to explain the permanence o f the 
group, for the function o f ensuring the perpetuity o f the clan falls to them 
and t h e m alone: Every conception is their doing. I n this regard, the others 
have no role to play. Thus the souls are said to be i m m o r t a l only to the ex-
tent that this immortality is useful i n making the continuity o f collective life 
intelligible. 
T h e causes o f the first beliefs about another life were thus unrelated to 
the functions that institutions beyond the grave w o u l d later have to fulfill. 
But, once b o r n , they were soon put to use for ends different from those that 
were their initial raison d'être. F r o m the Australian societies on, we see those 
causes beginning to organize themselves to this end. To do so, furthermore, 
they had no need to undergo fundamental transformations. H o w true i t is 
that the same social institution can fulfill different functions successively, 
w i t h o u t changing its nature! 
VI 
T h e idea o f soul l o n g was and i n part still is the most w i d e l y held f o r m o f the 
idea o f personality.
1 2 7 B y examining h o w the idea o f soul originated, there-
fore, we should come to understand h o w the idea o f personality was formed. 
1 2 7It might be objected that unity is the characteristic of personalities, while the soul has always been 
conceived as multiple and as capable of dividing and subdividing almost infinitely. But we know today that 
the unity of the person is also made up of parts, that it is itself also capable of dividing and subdividing it-
self. Still, the idea of personality does not disappear merely because we have ceased to think of it as an in-
divisible, metaphysical atom. The same is true of those commonsense ideas of personality that have found 
expression in the idea of soul. They show that all peoples have always felt that the human person did not 
have the absolute unity certain metaphysicians have imputed to it. 


The Notion of Soul 
273 
It is a consequence o f the preceding that t w o sorts o f elements produced 
the idea o f person. O n e is essentially impersonal: I t is the spiritual principle 
that serves as the soul o f the collectivity. That principle is the very substance 
o f w h i c h individual souls are made. I t is not the property o f anyone i n par-
ticular but part o f the collective patrimony; i n and through that principle, all 
the consciousnesses commune. F r o m a different point o f view, i f there are to 
be separate personalities, some factor must intervene to fragment and differ-
entiate this principle; i n other words, an element o f individuation is neces-
sary. T h e body plays this role. Since bodies are distinct from one another, 
since they occupy different positions i n time and space, each is a special m i -
lieu i n w h i c h the collective representations are gradually refracted and c o l -
ored differently. Hence, even i f all the consciousnesses situated i n those 
bodies v i e w the same world—namely, the w o r l d o f ideas and feelings that 
morally unify the group—they do not all v i e w i t from the same viewpoint; 
each expresses it i n his o w n fashion. 
O f those t w o equally indispensable factors, the impersonal element is 
certainly not the less important, since i t is the one that furnishes the raw ma-
terial for the idea o f soul. I t w i l l be surprising, perhaps, to see such an i m -
portant role attributed to the impersonal element i n the origin o f the idea o f 
personality. B u t the philosophical analysis o f that idea, w h i c h stole a march 
on sociological analysis, and by a lot, arrived at similar results o n this point. 
O f all the philosophers, Leibniz is one o f those w h o had the most v i v i d sense 
o f what the personality is, for the m o n a d is, first o f all, a personal and au-
tonomous being. A n d yet, for Leibniz, the content o f all the monads is iden-
tical. A l l i n fact are consciousnesses that express one and the same object: the 
w o r l d . A n d since the w o r l d itself is but a system o f representations, each i n -
dividual consciousness is i n the end only a reflection o f the universal c o n -
sciousness. However, each expresses i t from its o w n point o f v i e w and i n its 
o w n manner. W e k n o w h o w this difference o f perspectives arises from the 
fact that the monads are differendy placed w i t h respect to one another and 
w i t h respect to the w h o l e system they comprise. 
Kant expresses this same awareness differently. For h i m , the cornerstone o f 
personality is w i l l . W i l l is the capacity to act i n accordance w i t h reason, and 
reason is that w h i c h is most impersonal i n us. Reason is not my reason; it is 
human reason i n general. I t is the power o f the m i n d to rise above the partic-
ular, the contingent, and the individual and to think i n universal terms. F r o m 
this point o f view, one can say that what makes a man a person is that by w h i c h 
he is indistinguishable from other men; it is that w h i c h makes h i m man, rather 
than such and such a man. T h e senses, the body, i n short everything that i n d i -
vidualizes, is, to the contrary, regarded by Kant as antagonistic to personhood. 


274 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
This is because individuation is not the essential characteristic o f the per-
son. A person is not only a singular subject that is distinguished from all the 
others. I t is, i n addition and most o f all, a being to w h i c h a relative autonomy 
is imputed i n relation to the milieu w i t h w h i c h i t interacts most direcdy. A 
person is conceived o f as being capable, i n a certain measure, o f m o v i n g o n 
its o w n . This is what Leibniz expressed i n an extreme fashion, saying that the 
monad is entirely closed to the outside. M y analysis enables us to imagine 
h o w this conception was f o r m e d and to what it corresponds. 
T h e nature o f the soul, w h i c h is i n fact a symbolic expression o f the per-
sonality, is the same. A l t h o u g h i n close u n i o n w i t h the body, i t is presumed 
to be profoundly distinct from and broadly independent o f the body. D u r i n g 
life, i t can leave the body temporarily, and at death i t retires therefrom for 
good. Far from being subordinated to the body, i t dominates the body given 
its higher status. I t may very well b o r r o w from the body the outward f o r m i n 
w h i c h i t becomes individualized, but it owes the body n o t h i n g essential. This 
autonomy that all peoples have ascribed to the soul is not mere illusion, and 
w e n o w k n o w its objective basis. Granted, the elements that constitute the 
idea o f the soul, and those that enter into the idea [représentation] 
o f the body, 
come from t w o sources different from and independent o f one another. The 
first are made o f impressions and images that come from every part o f the 
body; the others consist o f ideas and feelings that come from the society and 
express it. Hence, the first are not derived from the second. 
I n this way, there really is a part o f us that is not direcdy subordinate to 
the organic factor: That part is everything that represents society i n us. The 
general ideas that religion or science impresses u p o n our minds, the mental 
operations that these ideas presuppose, the beliefs and feelings o n w h i c h our 
moral life is based—all the higher forms o f psychic activity that society stim-
ulates and develops i n us—are not, like our sensations and bodily states, 
towed along by the body. This is so because, as I have shown, the w o r l d o f 
representations i n w h i c h social life unfolds is added to its material substrate, 
far indeed from originating there. T h e determinism that reigns i n that w o r l d 
o f representations is thus far more supple than the determinism that is rooted 
i n our 
flesh-and-blood 
constitution, and i t leaves the agent w i t h a justified 
impression o f greater liberty. T h e m i l i e u i n w h i c h we move i n this way is 
somehow less opaque and resistant. I n i t w e feel, and are, more at ease. I n 
other words, the only means w e have o f liberating ourselves from physical 
forces is to oppose t h e m w i t h collective forces. 
W h a t w e have from society w e have i n c o m m o n w i t h our fellow men, 
so i t is far from true that the more individualized we are, the more personal 
we are. T h e t w o terms are by no means synonymous. I n a sense, they oppose 


The Notion of Soul 
275 
more than they i m p l y one another. Passion individualizes and yet enslaves. 
Our sensations are i n their essence individual. B u t the more emancipated we 
are from the senses, and the more capable w e are o f t h i n k i n g and acting c o n -
ceptually, the more we are persons. Those w h o emphasize all that is social i n 
the individual do n o t mean by that to deny or denigrate personhood. T h e y 
simply refuse to confound it w i t h the fact o f i n d i v i d u a t i o n .
1 2 8 
128For all that, I do not deny the importance of the individual factor, which is explained 
from 
my 
standpoint just as easily as its contrary. Even if the essential element of personality is that which is social in 
us, 
from 
another standpoint, there can be no social life unless distinct individuals are associated within it; 
and the more numerous and different 
from 
one another they are, the richer it is. Thus the individual fac-
tor is a condition of the personal factor. The reciprocal is no less true, for society itself is an important 
source of individual differentiation (See De la Division du travail social, 3d ed. [Paris, F. Alcan (1893), 1902], 
pp. 627ff.). 


CHAPTER NINE 
THE NOTION OF SPIRITS 
AND GODS 
W
i t h the n o t i o n o f soul, w e left the domain o f impersonal forces. B u t 
even the Australian religions recognize higher-order mythical entities, 
above and beyond the soul: spirits, civilizing heroes, and even gods, properly 
so-called. W i t h o u t entering into the mythologies i n detail, we must try to 
discover what f o r m these three categories o f spiritual beings take i n Australia 
and h o w they fit into the religious system as a whole. 
I 
A soul is not a spirit. A soul is shut up i n a definite body, and although it can 
come out at certain times, normally i t is the body's prisoner. I t escapes for 
good only at death, and even so we have seen w i t h what difficulty that sep-
aration is made final. O n the other hand, although a spirit is often closely tied 
to a particular object as its preferred residence—a spring, a rock, a tree, a star, 
and so f o r t h — i t can leave at w i l l to lead an independent life i n space. As a re-
sult, its influence has a wider radius. I t can act u p o n all individuals w h o ap-
proach i t or are approached by it. B y contrast, the soul has almost no 
influence over anything other than the body it animates; only i n very rare i n -
stances d u r i n g its earthly life does i t affect anything else. 
B u t i f the soul lacks those features that define the spirit, i t acquires them 
through death, at least i n part. Once disincarnated, and so l o n g as i t has not 
come d o w n again into a body, it has the same freedom o f movement as a 
spirit. To be sure, it is thought to leave for the land o f souls w h e n the rites o f 
m o u r n i n g are completed, but before that, i t remains i n the vicinity o f the 
t o m b for a rather l o n g time. Furthermore, even w h e n i t has left there for 
good, i t is thought to continue p r o w l i n g around the camp.
1 I t is generally 
1 [Walter Edmund] Roth, Superstition, Magic, etc. [and Medicine, in North Queensland Ethnography, Bul-
letin no. 5, Brisbane, G. A. Vaughn, 1903], §65, 68; [Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen [The 
NativeTribes of Central Australia, London, Macmillan, 1899], pp. 514, 516. 
276 


The Notion of Spirits and Gods 
277 
imagined as rather a kindly being, especially by the surviving members o f its 
family. We have seen, i n fact, that the soul o f the father comes to nurture the 
growth o f his children and grandchildren. Sometimes, however, depending 
entirely o n its m o o d and its treatment by the living, i t displays true cruelty.
2 
Thus, especially for w o m e n and children, i t is advisable not to venture out-
side the camp at night, so as to avoid the risk o f dangerous encounters.
3 
A ghost, however, is not a true spirit. First, its power is usually limited; 
second, i t does not have definite functions. It is a vagabond being w i t h no 
clear-cut responsibility, since the effect o f death was to set i t outside all the 
regular structures. I n relation to the living, it is demoted, as it were. O n the 
other hand, a spirit always has some sort o f power, and indeed i t is defined by 
that power. I t has authority over some range o f cosmic or social phenomena; 
it has a more or less precise function to perform i n the w o r l d scheme. 
B u t some souls meet this dual condition and thus are spirits proper. These 
are the souls o f mythical personages that are placed by popular imagination at 
the beginning o f time: the Alcheringa or Altjirangamitjina people o f the 
Arunta, the Mura-muras o f the Lake Eyre tribes, the M u k - K u r n a i s o f the K u r -
nai, and others. I n a sense, these actually are still souls, since they are thought 
to have animated bodies i n the past but to have separated from them at some 
point. However, as we have seen, even while they were living earthly lives, 
they already had exceptional powers. They had mana superior to that o f ordi-
nary men, and they kept it thereafter. Besides, they have definite functions. 
To begin w i t h , whether w e accept Spencer and Gillen's account or 
Strehlow's, the responsibility for ensuring the periodic recruitment o f the 
clan falls squarely o n their shoulders. Matters o f conception are their domain. 
Once conception has taken place, the ancestor's task is not finished. It is 
up to h i m to watch over the n e w b o r n . Later, w h e n the child has become a 
man, the ancestor accompanies h i m o n the hunt and drives game toward 
h i m , warns h i m i n dreams o f dangers he may encounter, protects h i m 
from 
his enemies, and so forth. O n this point, Strehlow is i n entire agreement 
w i t h Spencer and G i l l e n .
4 Granted, one may wonder how, o n their account, 
the ancestor can perform this function. I t w o u l d seem that because he rein-
carnates himself at the m o m e n t o f conception, he w o u l d have to be assimi-
2Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 515, 521; [James] Dawson [Australian Aborigines: The Languages, 
and Customs of Several Tribes of 
Aborigines in the Western District of 
Victoria, Australia, Melbourne, G. Robert-
son, 1881], p. 58; Roth, Superstition, Magic, §67. 
'Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 517. 
4[Carl] Strehlow [DieAranda- und Loritja-Stamme in ZentralAustralien, Frankfurt, J. Baer, 1907], vol. II, 
p. 76 and n. 1; Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 514, 516. 


278 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
latecl w i t h the child's soul and thus could not possibly protect i t from outside. 
B u t he can because he does not reincarnate himself whole, but instead pro-
duces his double. O n e part enters the body o f the w o m a n and impregnates 
her; another continues to exist outside and, w i t h the special name o f A r u m -
buringa, performs the function o f tutelary genie.
5 
W e can see h o w closely akin that ancestral spirit is to the genius o f the 
Latins and the 8ca'u.un> o f the Greeks.
6 T h e i r functions are completely identi-
cal. Indeed the genius is, above all, the one w h o engenders—qui gignit. T h e 
genius expresses and personifies the generative force.
7 A t the same time, it is 
the protector and guide o f the particular individual to whose person i t is at-
tached.
8 Finally, i t merges w i t h that individual's very personality, representing 
the set o f characteristic inclinations and tendencies that give h i m distinctive-
ness among other m e n .
9 Hence the w e l l - k n o w n saying indulgere genio, 
defraudare genium* 
i n the sense o f "follow one's natural temperament." F u n -
damentally, the genius is another f o r m of, and a double of, the individual's 
soul itself. T h e partial synonymy o f genius and manes proves this.
1 0 T h e manes 
are the genius after death, but they are also the part o f the deceased that sur-
vives—in other words, the soul o f the deceased. I n the same way, the 
Arunta's soul and the ancestral spirit that serve as his genius are but t w o dif-
ferent aspects o f the same being. 
T h e ancestor has a defined position, however, not only i n relation to 
persons but also i n relation to things. T h o u g h his true residence is presumed 
to be underground, the ancestor is thought to keep haunting the site o f his 
nanja tree or rock, or o f the water hole that was spontaneously formed at the 
exact m o m e n t he disappeared into the ground, after ending his first exis-
tence. Since that tree or rock is thought to represent the body o f the hero, his 
soul itself is imagined to return there continually and to reside there more or 
less permanendy. T h e presence o f that soul accounts for the religious respect 
T o indulge one's genius is to cheat one's genius. That is, to cater to one's genius, rather than letting 
it assert itself, is to frustrate it. Trans. 
5[Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes], p. 513. 
6See [Augusto] Negrioli on this question, Dei Genii presso i Romani, [Bologna, Ditta Nicola Zanichelli, 
1900]; the articles "Daimon" and "Genius" in Dictionnaire des antiquités [Grecques et Romaines, Paris, Ha-
chette, 1877-1919]; [Ludwig] Preller, Roemische Mythologie [Berlin, Weidmann, 1858], vol. II, pp. 195ÎF. 
7Negrioli, Dei Genii presso i Romani, p. 4. 
8Ibid., p. 8. 
9Ibid., p. 7. 
10Ibid., p. 11. Cf. Samter, "Der Ursprung des Larencultus," in Archiv Jiïr Religionswissenschaft, 1907, 
pp. 368-393. 


The Notion of Spirits and Gods 
279 
evoked by those places. N o one may snap a branch o f the nanja tree w i t h o u t 
risk o f falling i l l .
1 1 " A t one time, the act o f felling or damaging i t was p u n -
ished w i t h death. K i l l i n g an animal or bird that takes refuge there is forbid-
den. Even the surrounding bush has to be respected—the grass must not be 
burned. T h e rocks, too, must be treated w i t h respect. To move or break 
them is forbidden."
1 2 Since this quality o f sacredness is ascribed to the ances-
tor, he seems to be the spirit o f that tree, rock, water hole, or spring
1 3—let 
the spring be considered as having to do w i t h the r a i n ,
1 4 and he becomes a 
spirit o f the rain. Thus, these same souls that, i n one o f their aspects, serve 
men as protective genies also perform cosmic functions. O n e o f Roth's texts 
is probably to be understood i n this way: I n N o r t h Queensland, the nature 
spirits are said to be souls o f the dead that have chosen to reside i n the forests 
or i n caves.
1 5 
N o w we have spirit beings that are something other than wandering 
souls w i t h o u t specific powers. Strehlow calls t h e m gods,
1 6 but this t e r m is i n -
appropriate, at least i n the vast majority o f cases. A n d i n a society such as that 
o f the Arunta, where each individual has a protecting ancestor, there w o u l d 
be as many gods as individuals, or more. To apply the n o u n " g o d " to a sacred 
being that has only one adherent w o u l d promote terminological confusion. 
It is true that an ancestor figure can sometimes become enlarged to the point 
that i t resembles a deity proper. A m o n g the Warramunga, as I have pointed 
o u t ,
1 7 the entire clan is thought to be descended from a single ancestor. H o w , 
under certain conditions, this collective ancestor could have become the o b -
ject o f collective devotion is easily comprehended. This happened to the 
"[Rev. Louis] Schulze, "Aborigines of the Upper and Middle Finke River," RSSA, vol. XIV [1891], 
p. 237. 
12Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, p. 5. Cf. Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 133; S. Gason, in [Edward 
Micklethwaite] Curr, [ The Australian Race: Its Origin, Languages, Customs, Place of 
Landing in Australia and the 
Routes by Which It Spread Itself over That Continent, Melbourne, J. Ferres, 1886-1887], vol. II, p. 69. 
13See, in [Alfred William] Howitt [The NativeTribes of 
South East Australia, London, Macmillan, 1904], 
p. 482), the case of a Mura-mura who is regarded as the spirit of certain hot springs. 
"[Baldwin Spencer and Francis James Gillen], Northern Tribes [of Central Australia London, Macmillan, 
1904], pp. 313-314; [Robert Hamilton] Mathews, "[Ethnological Notes on the] Aboriginal Tribes of 
New South Wales and Victoria," RSNSW, vol. XXXVIII [1904], p. 351. Similarly, among the Dieri, there 
is a Mura-mura whose function is to produce rain (Howitt, NativeTribes, pp. 798—799). 
15Roth, Superstition, Magic, §67. Cf. Dawson, Australian Aborigines, p. 58. 
16Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, pp. 2ff. 
"See above, p. 252, n. 53. 


280 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
snake Wollunqua, to take one example.
1 8 According to belief, this mythical 
animal (from w h i c h the clan o f the same name is thought to originate) c o n -
tinues to live i n a water hole that is held i n religious veneration. Moreover, it 
is the object o f a cult that the clan celebrates collectively. T h e y try to please 
it and gain its favor by means o f particular rites, making prayers o f a sort to 
it, and so forth. Thus, one can say this mythical animal is like the god o f the 
clan. B u t this is a very unusual case even, according to Spencer and Gillen, a 
unique one. Normally, "spirit" is the only w o r d that is suitable for designat-
ing these ancestral personages. 
As to the manner i n w h i c h that idea was formed, w e may say that it is 
obvious from all that has been said up to now. 
As I have shown, once the existence o f souls was accepted, i t could not 
be comprehended w i t h o u t imagining, at the beginning o f things, an original 
fund o f fundamental souls from w h i c h all the others derived. These arche-
typical souls must necessarily have been imagined as containing i n themselves 
the source o f all religious efficacy, for, since the imagination goes back no 
further, all the sacred things are held to come from them: the instruments o f 
the cult, the members o f the clan, the animals o f the totemic species. T h e y 
incarnate all the religiousness that is diffused throughout the tribe and the 
w o r l d . This is w h y powers are attributed to t h e m that are markedly superior 
to those enjoyed by the mere souls o f men. Moreover, time itself increases 
and reinforces the sacredness o f the things. A very o l d churinga elicits far 
greater respect than a m o d e r n one and is thought to have more virtues.
1 9 It 
is as though the feelings o f veneration i t has received through successive gen-
erations' handling are accumulated i n it. For the same reason, the personages 
that have been the subjects o f myths transmitted respectfully for centuries 
from m o u t h to m o u t h , and that are periodically enacted by rites, were b o u n d 
to take an altogether special place i n popular imagination. 
B u t h o w does i t happen that instead o f remaining outside the framework 
o f society, they have become regular members o f it? T h e reason is that each 
individual is the double o f an ancestor. N o w , w h e n t w o beings are so closely 
akin, they are naturally thought o f as unified; since they share the same na-
ture, what affects one seems necessarily to affect the other. I n this way, the 
troop o f the mythical ancestors became attached to the society o f the living 
by a moral bond; the same interests and passions were imputed to both; and 
18Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, chap. VII. 
"Ibid., p. 277. 


The Notion of Spirits and Gods 
281 
they were seen as associates. B u t since the ancestors had higher status than 
the living, this association entered the public m i n d as a relationship between 
superiors and subordinates, patrons and clients, helpers and helped. Thus was 
born the curious n o t i o n o f the tutelary genie attached to each individual. 
H o w the ancestor was placed i n contact not only w i t h men but also w i t h 
things might appear a more troublesome question. A t first glance, i t is not 
obvious what relationship could exist between a personage o f this k i n d and a 
tree or rock. B u t a piece o f information that w e owe to Strehlow provides us 
w i t h at least a plausible solution to this problem. 
Those trees and rocks are not situated just anywhere i n the tribal t e r r i -
tory but are massed for the most part around certain sanctuaries (called ert-
natulunga by Spencer and Gillen and arknanaua by Strehlow), where the 
churingas o f the clan are kept.
2 0 H o w deeply these places are respected we 
k n o w from the very fact that the most precious cult instruments are kept 
there. I n addition, each o f t h e m radiates sanctity. This is w h y the nearby trees 
and rocks seem sacred, w h y it is forbidden to destroy or damage them, and 
w h y any violence against t h e m is sacrilege. This sacredness stems from the 
phenomenon o f psychic contagion. To account for it, the native is obliged to 
grant that these different objects are i n relations w i t h the beings that he sees 
as the source o f all religious power—that is, w i t h the Alcheringa ancestors. 
Therein originates the system o f myths I have recounted. Each ertnatulunga 
was imagined to mark the place where a group o f ancestors were swallowed 
up by the earth. T h e mounds and trees that then covered the ground were 
thought to represent their bodies. B u t because the soul generally retains a 
certain affinity for the body i n w h i c h i t once lived, people naturally came to 
believe that these ancestral souls preferred to keep 
frequenting 
the places 
where their physical envelope remained. Hence they were localized i n trees, 
rocks, and water holes. I n this way, each o f them, w h i l e remaining attached 
to the guardianship o f a definite individual, found itself transformed into a 
sort o f genius loci* and performed the function o f one.
2 1 
* A spirit attached to a place. Standard Roman belief was that every place had one. 
20Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, p. 5. 
2 1It is true that some nanja trees and rocks are not situated around the ertnatulunga but are scattered 
across various parts of the territory. They are said to correspond to places where a lone ancestor disap-
peared into the ground, lost an appendage, spilled some blood, or forgot a churinga that was transformed 
into either a tree or a rock. But these totemic sites have only secondary importance; Strehlow calls them 
kleinere Totemplatze (Aranda, vol. I, pp. 4
—
5
)
. So we can imagine that they took on this character only by 
analogy with the principal totemic centers. The trees and rocks that in some way resembled those found 
in the neighborhood of the ertnatulunga stirred similar feelings, so as a result the myth that formed a pro¬
pos of the place extended to the things. 


282 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
Thus elucidated, these ideas put us i n a position to understand a f o r m o f 
totemism that u n t i l n o w had to be left unexplained: individual totemism. 
A n individual t o t e m is defined by essentially the t w o following charac-
teristics: (1) it is a being i n the f o r m o f an animal or plant whose function is 
to protect an individual; (2) the fate o f the individual and that o f its patron 
are closely interdependent. Everything that affects the patron is passed o n 
sympathetically to the individual. T h e ancestral spirits just discussed fit the 
same definition. T h e y also belong, at least i n part, to the realm o f animals or 
o f plants. T h e y too are tutelary genies. Finally, a sympathetic b o n d attaches 
each individual to his protecting ancestor. T h e nanja tree, the mystical body 
o f that ancestor, cannot be destroyed w i t h o u t the man's feeling threatened. 
True, this belief is losing some o f its force now, but Spencer and Gillen found 
it still i n existence, and they judge it to have been widespread i n the past.
2 2 
That these t w o ideas are identical can be seen even i n the details. T h e an-
cestral souls live i n trees or rocks that are considered sacred. Similarly, among 
the Euahlayi, the spirit o f the animal that serves as an individual totem is held 
to live i n a tree or stone.
2 3 This tree or stone is sacred: N o one may touch it, 
except the one whose t o t e m i t is; and, w h e n i t is a stone or a rock, the pro-
hibition is absolute.
2 4 T h e result is that these are true places o f refuge. 
Finally, w e have seen that the individual soul is but a different aspect o f 
the ancestral spirit; i n a way, this spirit serves, to use Strehlow's phrase, as a 
second self.
2 5 Similarly, to use M r s . Parker's phrase, the individual totem o f 
the Euahlayi, called Yunbeai, is an alter ego o f the individual: " T h e soul o f 
the man is i n his Yunbeai, and the soul o f his Yunbeai is i n h i m . "
2 6 I n essence, 
then, i t is one soul i n t w o bodies. T h e kinship o f these t w o ideas is so great 
that they are sometimes expressed w i t h one and the same w o r d . This is true 
i n Melanesia and Polynesia: atai o n the island o f M o t a , tamaniu o n the island 
o f Aurora, and talegia at M o t l a w designate b o t h the soul o f an individual and 
his personal t o t e m .
2 7 T h e same is true o f aitu i n Samoa.
2 8 This is because the 
22[Spencer and Gillen], Native Tribes, p. 139. 
a{K. Langloh] Parker, [Catherine Sommerville Field Parker], The Euahlayi [Tribe, London, A. Con-
stable, 1905], p. 21. The tree that serves this purpose is generally one of those that figure among the in-
dividual's subtotems. The reason given for this choice is that, being of the same family, they are probably 
more inclined to help him. 
24Ibid., p. 36. 
25Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 81. 
^Parker, Euahlayi Tribe , p. 21. 
27[Robert Henry] Codrington, The Melanesians [Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1891], pp. 249—253. 
28[George] Turner, Samoa, London, Macmillan, 1884, p. 17. 


The Notion of Spirits and Gods 
283 
individual t o t e m is the outward and visible form o f the self, the personality, 
and the soul is its inward and invisible f o r m .
2 9 
Thus, the individual t o t e m has all the essential characteristics o f the pro-
tecting ancestor and plays the same role. A l l this is so because its o r i g i n is the 
same, and it arises from the same idea. 
I n fact, b o t h involve a duplication o f the soul. Like the ancestor, the 
totem is the individual's soul, but the soul externalized and invested w i t h 
greater powers than those it is believed to have w h i l e inside the body. This 
duplication arises from a psychological need, for all i t does is explain the na-
ture o f the soul w h i c h , as w e have seen, is double. I t is ours i n a sense, i t ex-
presses our personality. B u t i t is outside us at the same time, since it is the 
extension inside us o f a religious force that is outside us. W e cannot become 
fully merged w i t h it because we ascribe to i t a stature and a respect that lift i t 
above us and our empirical individuality. There is a part o f us, then, that we 
tend to project outside ourselves. This way o f conceiving ourselves is so well 
established i n our nature that even w h e n we try to conceive o f ourselves 
w i t h o u t using any religious symbol, w e cannot escape it. O u r moral c o n -
sciousness is like the nucleus around w h i c h the idea o f soul took f o r m , and 
yet w h e n i t speaks to us, i t seems to be a power outside o f and greater than 
us, laying d o w n the law to and j u d g i n g us, but also helping and supporting 
us. W h e n we have i t o n our side, we feel stronger amid the trials o f life and 
more certain o f overcoming, just as the Australian w h o has confidence i n his 
ancestor or his personal t o t e m feels more valiant against his enemies.
3 0 Thus 
there is something objective at the basis o f these different ideas—be they the 
R o m a n genius, the individual totem, or the Alcheringa ancestor—and that is 
the reason they have survived i n various forms until today. Everything works 
out as i f we really d i d have t w o souls: one that is i n us—or, rather, is us; an-
other that is above us, and whose function is to oversee and assist the first. 
Frazer had an i n k l i n g that there was an external soul i n the individual totem, 
29These are the very words used by Codrington, The Melanesians (p. 251). 
30This close relationship among the soul, the protective genie, and the moral consciousness of the in-
dividual is especially apparent among certain peoples of Indonesia: "One of the seven souls of the Toba-
batak is buried with the placenta; while it prefers to reside there, it can leave to give warnings to the 
individual or to show approval when he conducts himself well. Thus, in a certain sense, it plays the role 
of moral conscience. However, its warnings do not extend only to the domain of moral affairs. It is called 
the younger brother of the soul, just as the placenta is called the younger brother of the child. . . . In war, 
it inspires the man with the courage to march against the enemy" ([Johannes Gustav] Warneck, Der 
bataksche Ahnen und Geisterkult, in Allgemeine Missionszeitschrift, Berlin, 1904, p. 10. Cf. [Albertus Christi-
aan] Kruijt, Het Animisme in den indischen Archipel [
'
s Gravenhage, M. Nijhoff, 1906], p. 25). 


284 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
but he believed that externality was the result o f an artifice or a magician's 
trick. I n reality, it is implicit i n the very constitution o f the idea o f soul.
3 1 
II 
I n the main, the spirits just discussed are k i n d . N o doubt, they sometimes 
punish the man w h o does not treat t h e m properly,
3 2 but doing harm is not 
their function. 
I n itself, however, the spirit can be used for evil as w e l l as for good. This 
is w h y a class o f clever genies naturally came into being opposite the auxiliary 
and tutelary spirits, w h i c h allowed m e n to explain the enduring evils they 
had to suffer—nightmares,
3 3 illnesses,
3 4 tornadoes, storms,
3 5 and so forth. 
Doubdess, this is not because all h u m a n miseries appeared to be too abnor-
mal to be explained otherwise than by supernatural forces, but because, back 
then, all those forces were thought o f i n religious f o r m . A religious principle 
is regarded as the source o f life; hence it was logical for all the events that dis-
turb or destroy life to be brought back to a principle o f the same k i n d . 
These harmful spirits seem to have been conceived according to the 
same model as the beneficent genies just discussed. T h e y are conceived i n the 
31StiIl to be discovered is how it happens that, from some point in evolution on, this doubling of the 
soul was done in the form of the individual totem rather than that of the protecting ancestor. The ques-
tion has perhaps more ethnographic than sociological interest. Still, here is how the origin of this substi-
tution might be imagined. 
The individual totem must have played a purely complementary role at first. The individuals who 
wished to acquire powers above the ordinary were not content, and could not be content, with only the 
protection of the ancestor. Hence they sought to fit themselves out with another auxiliary of the same 
kind. And so it is that, among the Euahlayi, the magicians are the only ones who have, or could have, pro-
cured individual totems. Since each of them also has a collective totem, they end up with several souls. 
There is nothing surprising about that multiplicity of souls; It is the condition of superior efficacy. 
Once collective totemism lost ground and, in consequence, the notion of the protecting ancestor be-
gan to efface that of spirits, it became necessary to imagine the nature of the soul, which was still felt, dif-
ferendy. The idea remained that outside each individual soul there was another, responsible for watching 
over the 
first. 
In order to uncover that protective power, since it was not designated by the fact of birth 
itself, it seemed natural to use means similar to those magicians use to enter into dealings with the forces 
whose help those means ensure. 
32See, for example, Strehlow, Aranda, vol. II, p. 82. 
3 3[J. P.] Wyatt, "Adelaide and Encounter Bay Tribes," in [James Dominick] Woods, [77ie NativeTribes 
of South Australia, Adelaide, E. S. Wigg, 1879], p. 168. 
'"[Rev. George] Taplin, "The Narrinyeri" [in Woods, The Native Tribes of South Australia], pp. 62-63; 
Roth, Superstition, Magic, §116; Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 356, 358; Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, pp. 11-12. 
35Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, pp. 1
3
—
1
4
; Dawson, Australian Aborigines, p. 49. 


The Notion of Spirits and Gods 
285 
form 
o f an animal, or as part animal and part h u m a n ,
3 6 but people tend nat-
urally to ascribe enormous dimensions and repulsive appearance to t h e m .
3 7 
Like the souls o f ancestors, they are thought to live i n trees, rocks, water 
holes, and underground caverns.
3 8 M a n y are presented to us as the souls o f 
persons w h o have lived earthly lives.
3 9 Spencer and Gillen say explicitly, so 
far as the A r u n t a i n particular are concerned, that these bad genies, k n o w n 
by the name Oruncha, are Alcheringa beings.
4 0 A m o n g the personages o f 
mythical times, there were different temperaments. Certain o f t h e m had and 
still have cruel and mean instincts,
4 1 w h i l e others were o f innately poor c o n -
stitution—thin and haggard. Therefore, w h e n they went d o w n into the 
ground, the nanja rocks to w h i c h they gave b i r t h were considered to be cen-
ters o f dangerous influences.
4 2 
Certain characteristics distinguish t h e m from their brethren, the Alcher-
inga heroes. T h e y do not reincarnate themselves; they are never represented 
among the living; and they are w i t h o u t human progeny.
4 3 So w h e n , accord-
ing to certain signs, a child is believed to be the product o f their labors, it is 
put to death as soon as it is b o r n .
4 4 I n addition, these harmful spirits do not 
belong to any definite totemic center and are outside the social organiza-
tion.
45 
T h r o u g h all these traits, we see that such powers are far more magic 
^Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, pp. 11-14; [Richard] Eylmann [Die Eingeborenen der Kolonie Sud Australien, 
Berlin, D. Reumer], pp. 182, 185, Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 211; [Rev. C. W.] Schürmann, The 
Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln, in Woods [The Native Tribes of South Australia], p. 239. 
37Eylmann, Eingeborenen, p. 182. 
38Mathews, "Aboriginal Tribes," p. 345; [Lorimer] Fison and [Alfred William] Howitt, Kamilaroi and 
Kurnai [Melbourne, G. Robertson, 1880], p. 467; Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, p. 11. 
39Roth, Superstition, Magic, §115; Eylmann, Eingeborenen, p. 190. 
""Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 390—391. Strehlow calls the bad spirits Erintja, but this word 
and Oruncha are obviously equivalents. Yet they are presented in different ways. The Oruncha, according 
to Spencer and Gillen, are more malicious than evil; indeed, according to these observers (p. 328), totally 
evil beings are unknown to the Arunta. By contrast, Strehlow's Erintja have the routine function of do-
ing evil. Furthermore, according to certain myths that Spencer and Gillen themselves report (Native Tribes, 
p. 390), it seems that they have embellished the Oruncha 
figures 
somewhat. Originally, they were more 
like ogres (ibid., p. 331). 
•"Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 390—391. 
42Ibid., p. 551. 
43Ibid., pp. 326-327. 
44Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, p. 14. When there are twins, the firstborn is thought to have been con-
ceived in that way. 
45Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 327. 


286 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
than they are religious. A n d indeed, they are above all i n contact w i t h the 
magician, w h o often obtains his powers from t h e m .
4 6 I thus arrive at the 
point where the w o r l d o f religion ends and that o f magic begins; and since 
magic is beyond the scope o f m y research, I need push that study no further.
4 7 
Ill 
T h e appearance o f the idea o f spirit marks an important advance i n the i n d i -
viduation o f religious forces. Nevertheless, the spirit beings discussed up to 
n o w continue to be only secondary personages. Either they are evil genies 
that belong more to magic than to religion, or else, attached to a definite i n -
dividual and place, they can make their influence felt only w i t h i n a very l i m -
ited radius. Therefore they can be the objects o f only private and local rites. 
B u t once the idea o f spirit took form, it naturally extended into the higher 
spheres o f religious life. A n d i n this way, higher-order mythical personalities 
were b o r n . 
A l t h o u g h the ceremonies proper to each clan differ from one another, 
they belong to the same religion nonetheless, and so there are basic similari-
ties. Since every clan is but a part o f one and the same tribe, the unity o f the 
tribe cannot fail to show through the diversity o f particular cults. A n d as it 
turns out, there is indeed no totemic group that does not have churingas and 
bull roarers, w h i c h are used everywhere i n a similar way. T h e organization o f 
the tribe into phratries, marriage classes, and clans, and the exogamic p r o h i -
bitions attached thereto, are also genuinely tribal institutions. A l l the festivals 
o f initiation involve certain basic practices—tooth extraction, circumcision, 
subincision, and others—that do not vary by t o t e m w i t h i n a single tribe. 
U n i f o r m i t y i n this matter is the more easdy established since initiation always 
takes place i n the presence o f the tribe, or at least before an assembly to 
w h i c h different clans have been summoned. T h e reason is that the aim o f i n i -
tiation is to introduce the novice into the religious life o f the tribe as a whole, 
not merely that o f the clan into w h i c h he was b o r n . Therefore the varied as-
pects o f the tribal religion must be enacted before h i m and, i n a sense, pass 
before his eyes. This is the occasion o n w h i c h the moral and religious unity 
o f the tribe is best demonstrated. 
^Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 358, 381, 385; Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 334; Northern Tribes, 
p. 327. 
"Nevertheless, the spirit beings discussed up to now continue to be spirits whose only function is to 
do ill; the others' role is to prevent or neutralize the evil influence of the 
first. 
Cases of this kind are to be 
found in Northern Tribes, pp. 501—502. What brings out clearly that both are magical is that, among the 
Arunta, both have the same name. Hence, these are different aspects of the same magical power. 


The Notion of Spirits and Gods 
287 
Hence there are i n each society a certain number o f rites that are distin-
guished from all the others by their homogeneity and their universality. B e -
cause such a remarkable concordance d i d not seem explainable except by 
c o m m o n origin, it was imagined that each group o f similar rites had been i n -
stituted by one and the same ancestor, w h o had come to reveal them to the 
tribe as a whole. Thus, among the Arunta, an ancestor o f the Wildcat clan, 
named Putiaputia,
4 8 is held to have taught m e n h o w to make churingas and 
use t h e m ritually; among the Warramunga, i t is M u r t u - m u r t u ;
4 9 among the 
Urabunna, i t is W i t u r n a ;
5 0 Atnatu among the Kaitish
5 1 and T u n d u n among 
the K u r n a i .
5 2 Similarly, the practices o f circumcision are ascribed by the east-
ern D i e r i and several other tribes
5 3 to t w o specific Mura-muras, and by the 
Arunta to an Alcheringa hero o f the Lizard totem, named M a n g a r k u n -
jerkunja.
5 4 To the same personage are ascribed the institution o f marriage 
prohibitions and the social organization they entail, the discovery o f fire, the 
invention o f the spear, the shield, the boomerang, and so forth. Incidentally, 
the inventor o f the bull roarer is often considered to be the founder o f the 
initiation rites, as w e l l .
5 5 
These special ancestors could not be placed o n a par w i t h the others. For 
one thing, the feelings o f veneration they inspired were not limited to one 
clan but were c o m m o n to the w h o l e tribe. For another, all that was valued 
most i n the tribal civilization was attributed to them. For this twofold reason, 
they became the object o f special veneration. For example, i t is said that 
48Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, p. 9. Moreover, Putiaputia is not the only personage of this kind that is 
mentioned in the Arunta myths. Certain parts of the tribe give a different name to the hero to whom they 
attribute the same invention. It should be borne in mind that the breadth of the territory occupied by the 
Arunta does not permit the mythology to be perfecdy homogeneous. 
49Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 493. 
"Ibid., p. 498. 
51Ibid., pp. 498-499. 
52Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 135. 
"Ibid., pp. 476ff. 
54Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, pp. 6
—
8
. Later, the work of Mangarkunjerkunja had to be taken in hand 
again by other heroes; according to a belief that is not peculiar to the Arunta, a moment came when men 
forgot the teachings of their 
first 
initiators and compromised themselves. [Here, Durkheim may well have 
been thinking of the biblical prophets. Notice that this point is unrelated to the one made in the text. 
Trans.] 
"This is the case, for example, of Atnatu (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 153), and of 
Witurna 
(ibid., p. 498). If Tundun did not initiate the rites, it is he who is charged with directing their celebration 
(Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 670). 


288 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
Atnatu was b o r n i n the sky, even before Alcheringa times, and that he made 
and named himself T h e stars are his wives or his daughters. Beyond the sky 
where he lives, there is another w i t h another sun.* His name is sacred and 
must never be said before w o m e n or the uninitiated.
5 6 
Still, no matter h o w great the stature o f these personages, there was never 
any reason to establish special rites i n their honor, for they are themselves no 
more than the rite personified. T h e only reason they exist is to explain the 
practices that exist. T h e y are but a different aspect o f those practices. T h e 
churinga is inseparable from the ancestor w h o invented it; they sometimes 
have the same name.
5 7 W h e n the bull roarer is sounded, the voice o f the an-
cestor is said to be m a k i n g itself heard.
5 8 B u t because each o f these heroes is 
merged w i t h the cult he is said to have instituted, he is thought to oversee the 
manner i n w h i c h it is celebrated. N o t satisfied unless the faithful perform 
their duties exacdy, he punishes those w h o are neglectful.
5 9 Thus he is c o n -
sidered the guardian o f the rite as well as its founder, and for that reason he 
becomes invested w i t h an authentically moral role.
6 0 
IV 
Yet even this mythological formation is not the most advanced that is to be 
found among the Australians. Several tribes have achieved the conception o f 
a god w h o , i f not the only one, is at the least the supreme one, and one to 
w h o m a preeminent position among all the other religious entities is ascribed. 
T h e existence o f that belief was long ago reported by various observers,
6 1 
but H o w i t t has contributed most to establishing that i t is relatively w i d e -
*In the first edition, "sun" and "moon" are not capitalized, but in the second they are. The rationale 
for capitalizing them probably was that they sometimes serve as proper names. In both editions, "Kanga-
roo," "Emu," and other nouns are capitalized when they refer to clans. Trans. 
^[Spencer and Gillen], Northern Tribes, p. 499. 
"Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 493; [Fison and Howitt], Kamilaroi and Kurnai, pp. 197, 267; Spencer and 
Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 492. 
58See, for example, Northern Tribes, p. 499. 
59Ibid., pp. 338, 347, 499. 
Spencer and Gillen contend that these mythical beings play no moral role 'Northern Tribes, p. 493), 
true enough; but this is because they give the word too narrow a sense. Religious duties are duties; hence 
the fact of watching over the manner in which they are performed concerns morality—all the more be-
cause, at that moment, all morality is religious in character. 
61This fact had been documented as far back as 1845 by [Edward John] Eyre, Journals [of 
Expeditions of 
Discovery into Central 
Australia, London, T. and W. Boone, 1845], vol. II, p. 362, and before Eyre, by Hen-
derson, in his Observations on the Colonies of New South Wales and Van Diemen's Land [Calcutta, Baptist Mis-
sion Press, 1832], p. 147. 


The Notion of Spirits and Gods 
289 
spread. Indeed, he has documented i t for a very w i d e geographic area 
comprising Victoria State and N e w South Wales, and extending as far as 
Queensland.
6 2 T h r o u g h o u t that entire region, a large number o f tribes be-
lieve i n the existence o f a genuinely tribal deity that has different names i n 
different regions. T h e most frequendy employed are B u n j i l or P u n j d ,
6 3 Dara-
m u l u n ,
6 4 and Baiame.
6 5 B u t we also find the names Nuralie or N u r e l l e ,
6 6 
K o h i n ,
6 7 and Mungan-ngaua.
6 8 T h e same idea is found farther west, among 
the Narrinyeri, where the high god is called N u r u n d e r i or N g u r r u n d e r i .
6 9 
A m o n g the D i e r i , i t is quite probable that, above the Mura-muras or o r d i -
nary ancestors, there is one that enjoys a k i n d o f supremacy.
7 0 Finally, i n con-
trast to Spencer and Gillen, w h o claim not to have observed any belief i n a 
god proper among the A r u n t a ,
7 1 Strehlow assures us this people, as well as 
the Loritja, recognize a true "good god," w i t h the name A l t j i r a .
7 2 
T h e characteristics o f this personage are fundamentally the same every-
where. It is an i m m o r t a l and indeed an eternal being, since it is derived from 
62[Howitt], Native Tribes, pp. 488-508. 
63Among the Kulin, the Wotjobaluk, and the Woeworung (Victoria). 
64Among the Yuin, the Ngarrigo, and the Wolgal (New South Wales). 
65Among the Kamilaroi and the Euahlayi (the northern part of New South Wales); and more toward 
the center of the same province, among the Wonghibon and the Wiradjuri. 
66Among the Wiimbaio and the tribes of Lower Murry, [William] Ridley, Kamilaroi, [and Other Aus-
tralian Languages, Sydney, T. Richards, 1875], p. 137; [Robert] Brough Smyth, [The Aborigines ofVictoria, 
Melbourne, J. Ferres, 1878], vol. I, p. 423 n. 431). 
"Among the tribes of the Herbert River (Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 498). 
68Among the Kurnai. 
69Taplin, "Narrinyeri," p. 55; Eylmann, Eingeborenen, p. 182. 
7 0It is probably to this supreme Mura-mura that Gason alludes in the passage already cited ([Edward 
M.] Curr, [The Australian Race], vol. II, p. 55). 
71[Spencer and Gillen], Native Tribes, p. 246. 
72The difference between Baiame, Bunjil, and Daramulun, on the one hand, and Altjira, on the other, 
would be that the last named is totally indifferent to everything that concerns humanity. It is not he who 
made men, and he does not concern himself with what they do. The Arunta neither love nor fear him. 
But even if that idea was accurately observed and analyzed, it is quite difficult to accept as original, for if 
Altjira plays no role, explains nothing, and serves no purpose, what would have made the Arunta imag-
ine him? Perhaps he must be seen as a sort of Baiame who lost his former prestige, a former god whose 
memory gradually faded. Perhaps, as well, Strehlow wrongly interpreted the accounts he collected. Ac-
cording to Eylmann (who, granted, is neither a competent nor a very reliable observer), Altjira made men 
(Eingeborenen, p. 184). In addition, among the Loritja, the personage that, with the name Tukura, corre-
sponds to the Altjira of the Arunta is believed to conduct the ceremonies of initiation himself. 


290 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
no other. After having lived o n earth for a time, he lifted himself, or was car-
ried, to the sky.
7 3 H e continues to live there surrounded by his family—one 
or several wives being widely attributed to h i m , as well as children and broth-
ers
7 4 w h o sometimes assist h i m i n his functions. Because o f a stay i n the sky 
(together w i t h the family attributed to h i m ) , he is often identified w i t h par-
ticular stars.
7 5 Moreover, he is said to have power over the stars. I t is he w h o 
set up the movement o f the sun and the m o o n ;
7 6 he orders t h e m about.
7 7 It 
is he w h o causes lightning to leap forth 
from the clouds and w h o hurls 
the thunder.
7 8 Because he is the thunder, he is associated w i t h the rain as 
w e l l ,
7 9 and i t is he w h o must be addressed w h e n there is want o f water or too 
m u c h .
8 0 
H e is spoken o f as a sort o f creator. H e is called the father o f m e n and is 
said to have made them. According to a legend once current near M e l -
bourne, B u n j i l is said to have made the first man i n the following manner: 
H e made a statuette out o f clay;* then he danced all around i t several times, 
breathed into its nostrils, and the statuette came alive and began to w a l k .
8 1 
According to another m y t h , he l i t the sun, whereupon the earth warmed up 
and m e n came out o f i t .
8 2 A t the same time as he made m e n ,
8 3 this divine 
* Curiously, despite the Australian context, Swain (p. 324) wrote "white clay," although Durkheim 
merely said argile. 
73For Bunjil, see Brough Smyth [Aborigines of Victoria], vol. I, p. 417; for Baiame, Ridley, Kamilaroi, 
p. 136; 
for 
Daramulun, Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 495. 
"On the composition of 
Bunjil's family, for example, see Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 128, 129, 489, 491; 
Brough Smyth [Aborigines of Victoria], vol. I, pp. 417, 423; for that of Baiame, Parker, The Euahlayi, pp. 7, 
66, 103; Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 407, 502, 585; for that of Nurunderi, Taplin, "The Narrinyeri" [in 
Woods, 77ie Native Tribes of South Australia] pp. 57-58. Besides, the manner in which the families of the 
high gods are conceived has all sorts of variations. Such and such a personage is here the brother and else-
where called the son. The number of wives and their names vary according to region. 
"Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 128. 
76Brough Smyth [Aborigines of 
Victoria], vol. I, pp. 430, 431. 
77Ibid., vol. I, p. 432 n. 
™Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 498, 538; Mathews, "Aboriginal Tribes," RSNSW vol. XXXVIII, p. 343; 
Ridley, Kamilorai p. 136. 
79Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 538; Taplin, The Narrinyeri, pp. 57-58. 
^Parker, The Euahlayi, p. 8 
81Brough Smyth [Aborigines of Victoria], vol. I, p. 424. 
82Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 492. 
"According to certain myths, he made men and not women; this is what is said of Bunjil. But the ori-
gin of women is attributed to his son-brother, Pallyan (Brough Smyth [Aborigines of Victoria], vol. 1
, 
pp. 417, 423). 


The Notion of Spirits and Gods 
291 
personage made the animals and the trees,
8 4 and all the arts o f life—weapons, 
language, tribal rites
8 5—are thanks to h i m . H e is the benefactor o f humanity. 
Even today, he plays the role o f a k i n d o f Providence for humanity. It is he 
w h o provides his o w n w i t h all that is needful i n their existence.
8 6 H e c o m -
municates w i t h t h e m directly or through intermediaries.
8 7 A n d being at the 
same time the guardian o f tribal morality, he punishes w h e n that morality is 
violated.
8 8 Furthermore, i f we can rely o n the w o r d o f certain observers, he 
performs the function o f judge after death, distinguishing between the good 
and the bad and not treating b o t h the same.
8 9 I n any event, he is often pre-
sented as gatekeeper for the land o f the dead,
9 0 w e l c o m i n g the souls w h e n 
they arrive i n the beyond.
9 1 
Since initiation is the principal f o r m o f the tribal cult, the rites o f initia-
tion are associated especially w i t h h i m , and he is central to them. H e is often 
represented i n those rites by an image carved i n tree bark or modeled out o f 
earth. People dance around it, sing i n its honor, and indeed actually pray to 
i t .
9 2 T h e y explain to the young m e n w h o the personage is that the image 
represents, telling t h e m the secret name that w o m e n and the uninitiated must 
not know, recounting to t h e m his history and his role i n the life o f the tribe 
according to tradition. A t other moments, they raise their hands toward the 
sky, where he is thought to reside, or point the weapons or the ritual instru-
ments they have i n hand i n the same direction
9 3—means o f entering into 
communication w i t h h i m . T h e y feel his presence everywhere. H e watches 
over the novice w h i l e he is secluded i n the forest.
9 4 H e is vigüant about the 
manner i n w h i c h the rites are conducted. Since initiation is his cult, he 
84Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 489, 492; Mathews, "Aboriginal Tribes," p. 340. 
85Parker, The Euahlayi, p. 7; Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 630. 
86Ridley, Kamilaroi, p. 136; L. Parker, The Euahlayi, p. 114. 
8 7[K. Langloh], Parker, More Australian Legendary Tales [London, D. Nutt, 1898], pp. 84-99, 90-91. 
88Howitt, Native Tribes, pp.495, 498, 543, 563, 564; Brough Smyth [Aborigines of Victoria], vol. I, 
p. 429; L. Parker, The Euahlayi, p. 79. 
89Ridley, Kamilaroi, p. 137. 
'"Parker, The Euahlayi, pp. 90-91. 
91Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 495; Taplin, "The Narrinyeri," in Woods, The NativeTribes of 
South Australia, 
p. 58. 
92Howitt, NativeTribes, pp. 538, 543, 553, 555, 556; Mathews, "Aboriginal Tribes," p. 318; Parker, The 
Euahlayi, pp. 6, 79, 80. 
93Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 498, 528. 
94Ibid., p. 493; Parker, The Euahlayi, p. 76. 


292 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
makes sure that these rites, i n particular, are correctly observed. W h e n there 
are mistakes or negligence, he punishes those i n a terrible way.
9 5 
T h e authority each o f these high gods has is not restricted to a single 
tribe but is recognized as well by a number o f neighboring tribes. B u n j i l is 
worshipped i n nearly the w h o l e state o f Victoria, Baiame i n a sizable part o f 
N e w South Wales, and so forth—facts that explain w h y there are so few gods 
for a relatively large geographic area. T h e cults o f w h i c h they are objects 
therefore have an international character. Sometimes, i n fact, the diverse 
mythologies blend into, combine w i t h , and b o r r o w from one another. Thus, 
the majority o f the tribes that believe i n Baiame also accept the existence o f 
Daramulun, although they accord h i m lower standing. They take h i m to be 
a son or a brother o f Baiame, and subordinate to h i m .
9 6 Thus i n various 
forms, faith i n Daramulun is general throughout N e w South Wales. Hence 
religious internationalism is far from being the exclusive province o f the most 
m o d e r n and advanced regions. F r o m the beginning o f history, religious be-
liefs show a tendency not to confine themselves w i t h i n a narrowly delimited 
political society. T h e y naturally go beyond boundaries, spreading and be-
c o m i n g international. There certainly have been peoples and times i n w h i c h 
that spontaneous aptitude was held i n check by various social necessities. 
Nevertheless, i t is real and, as we see, very primitive. 
To Tylor this idea seemed to be o f such advanced theology that he re-
fused to see it as anything but a European importation, a somewhat distorted 
Christian idea.
9 7 B y contrast, A . L a n g
9 8 considers i t to be indigenous. B u t at 
the same time he accepts the n o t i o n that it is i n contrast w i t h Australian be-
liefs as a w h o l e and rests u p o n w h o l l y different principles. A n d he concludes 
that the religions o f Australia are made up o f t w o heterogeneous systems, one 
superimposed o n the other, and thus have a double origin. First come the 
ideas relative to totems and spirits, suggested to m e n by the spectacle o f cer-
tain natural phenomena. A t the same time, however, by a sort o f intuition 
(the nature o f w h i c h he refuses to explain
9 9), the human intellect suddenly 
95Parker, The Euahlayi, p. 76; Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 493, 612. 
'"Ridley, Kamilaroi, p. 153; Parker, T?ie Euahlayi, p. 67; Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 585; Mathews, "Abo-
riginal Tribes," p. 343. Daramulun is sometimes presented in opposition to Baiame as an inherendy evil 
spirit (L. Parker, The Euahlayi; [William] Ridley, in Brough Smyth [Aborigines of 
Victoria], vol. II, p. 285). 
"[Edward Burnett Tylor, "On the Limits of Savage Religion,"] J/U, vol. XXI [1892], pp. 292ff. 
''[Andrew] Lang, The Making of 
Religion [London, Longmans, 1898], pp. 187-293. 
"Ibid., p. 331. Mr. Lang says only that the hypothesis of St. Paul seems to him the least defective ([not] 
the most unsatisfactory). [The reference is probably to St. Paul on the road to Damascus, when he "saw a 
great light," after which "the scales fell" 
from 
his eyes and he became a believer in Jesus Christ. Trans.] 


The Notion of Spirits and Gods 
293 
manages to conceive o f one god, creator o f the w o r l d , legislator o f the moral 
order. Lang even judges that at the beginning, i n Australia especially, this idea 
is purer o f all foreign elements than i n the civilizations immediately follow-
ing. Over time, it supposedly is little by little overgrown and obscured by the 
constandy growing mass o f animist and totemist superstitions. I n this way, it 
undergoes a sort o f progressive degeneration until the day when, under the 
influence o f a privileged culture, i t manages to recover and reaffirm itself, 
w i t h a brilliance and clarity that it d i d not originally have.
1 0 0 
But the facts do not support either the skeptical hypothesis o f Tylor or 
the theological interpretation o f Lang. I n the first place, we k n o w today for 
certain that the ideas relative to the tribal high god are indigenous. They 
were reported w h e n the influence o f the missionaries had not yet had time 
to make itself felt.
1 0 1 B u t that they must be attributed to a mysterious revela-
tion does not follow. I t is far from true that they originated elsewhere. Q u i t e 
the contrary, they flow logically from the sources o f totemism and are its 
most advanced f o r m . 
We have seen that the very principles o n w h i c h totemism rests i m p l y the 
idea o f mythical ancestors, since each o f those ancestors is a totemic being. 
A l t h o u g h the high gods are surely superior to them, the differences are only 
o f degree; one passes from the first to the second w i t h o u t a radical break. I n 
fact, a high god is himself an ancestor o f special importance. H e is spoken o f 
as a man, one gifted w i t h more than human powers, o f course, but one w h o 
I00Father [Wilhelm] Schmidt has taken up the thesis of A. Lang in Anthropos ["L'Origine de l'idée de 
dieu," vol. III (1908), pp. 125-162, 336-368, 559-611, 801-836, vol. IV (1909), pp. 207-250, 505-524, 
1075—1091]. Against Sidney Hardand, who had criticized Lang's theory in an article of Folk-Lore (vol. IX 
[1898], pp. 290tT., pp. 290ff.), tided "The 'High Gods' of Australia," Father Schmidt set out to demon-
strate that Baiame, Bunjil, and the others are eternal gods, creators, omnipotent and omniscient, and 
guardians of the moral order. I will not enter into that discussion, which seems to me without interest and 
import. If those different adjectives are understood in a relative sense, in harmony with the Australian turn 
of mind, I am quite prepared to take them up on my own account and have even used them. From this 
point of view, "all-powerful" means one who has more power than the other sacred beings; "omniscient," 
one who sees things that escape the ordinary person and even the greatest magicians; and "guardian of the 
moral order," one who sees to it that the rules of Australian morality are respected, however different that 
morality may be 
from 
our own. But if one wants to give those words a meaning that only a Christian spir-
itualist can give them, it seems to me poindess to discuss an opinion so at odds with the principles of his-
torical method. 
""On that question, see N[orthcote] W[hitridge] Thomas, "Baiame and Bell-bird: A Note on Aus-
tralian Religion," in Man, vol. V (1905), 28. Cf. Lang, Magic and Religion, p. 25. [Theodor] Waitz had al-
ready argued for the original character of this idea in Anthropologie der Naturvölker [Leipzig, F. Fleischer, 
1877], pp. 796-798. 


294 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
has lived a fully human life o n earth.
1 0 2 H e is depicted as a great hunter,
1 0 3 
a powerful magician,
1 0 4 and the founder o f the t r i b e .
1 0 5 H e is the first o f 
m e n .
1 0 6 H e is even presented i n one legend as a tired old man w h o can barely 
m o v e .
1 0 7 If, among the D i e r i , there was a high god called Mura-mura, that 
w o r d is significant, since i t is used to designate ancestors as a class. I n the 
same way, Nuralie, the name o f the high god among the tribes o f the M u r -
ray River, is sometimes used as a collective phrase, collectively applied to the 
group o f mythical beings that tradition places at the beginning o f things.
1 0 8 
They are entirely comparable to the Alcheringa personages.
1 0 9 We have al-
ready encountered i n Queensland a god Anje-a or Anjir, w h o makes m e n 
and yet w h o seems only to be the first o f t h e m .
1 1 0 
W h a t has helped the thought o f the Australians to advance from the p l u -
rality o f ancestral genies to the idea o f the tribal god is that a middle t e r m 
found its place between the t w o extremes and served as a transition: the civ-
ilizing heroes. T h e mythical beings called by this name are actually mere an-
cestors to w h o m mythology has ascribed a preeminent role i n the history o f 
the tribe and has therefore placed above the others. W e have even seen that 
they were normally part o f the totemic organization: Mangarkunjerkunja is 
o f the Lizard totem and Putiaputia, o f the Wildcat totem. B u t from another 
point o f view, the functions they are said to perform, or to have performed, 
resemble those assigned to the high god very closely. H e too is believed to 
have initiated m e n into the arts o f civilization, to have been the founder o f 
the principal social institutions, and to be the one w h o revealed the great re-
ligious ceremonies, w h i c h are still under his control. I f he is the father o f 
men, i t is for having made rather than engendered them; but M a n g a r k u n -
102Dawson, Australian Aborigines, p. 49; [Rev. A.] Meyer, "Encounter Bay Tribe," in Woods [The Na-
tiveTribes of South Australia], pp. 205, 206; Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 481, 491, 492, 494; Ridley, Kamilaroi, 
p. 136. 
103Taplin, "The Narrinyeri," in Woods, pp. 55-56. 
1 0 4 L . Parker, More Australian Legendary Tales, p. 94. 
!05Taplin, "The Narrinyeri," in Woods, p. 61. 
,06Brough Smyth [Aborigines of 
Victoria], vol. I, pp. 425^127. 
107Taplin, "The Narrinyeri," in Woods, p. 60. 
mR"The world was created by beings called the Nuralie; some of these beings, which have existed for 
a long time, had the form of the crow and others, that of the eaglehawk" (Brough Smyth [Aborigines of 
Victoria], vol. I, pp. 423-424). 
109"Byamee," says Mrs. L. Parker, "is for the Euahlayi what the Alcheringa is for the Arunta" (The Eu-
ahlayi, p. 6). 
"°See above, p. 261. 


The Notion of Spirits and Gods 
295 
jerkunja d i d as m u c h . Before h i m , there were no men, but only masses o f 
formless flesh i n w h i c h the different body parts and even the different i n d i -
viduals were not separated from one another. I t is he w h o sculpted this raw 
material and w h o drew properly human beings out o f i t .
1 1 1 There are only 
slight shadings o f difference between this method o f fabrication and the one 
ascribed to B u n j i l by the m y t h I cited. Moreover, the fact that a k i n relation 
is sometimes set up between these t w o kinds o f figure brings out the c o n -
nection between them. A m o n g the K u r n a i and the Tundun, the hero o f the 
bull roarer is the son o f the high g o d Munganngaua.
1 1 2 A m o n g the Euahlayi, 
in a similar way, Daramulun, the son or brother o f Baiame, is identical to 
Gayandi, w h o is the equivalent o f T u n d u n among the K u r n a i .
1 1 3 
We certainly must not conclude from all these facts that the high god is 
no more than a civilizing hero. There are cases i n w h i c h these t w o person-
ages are clearly differentiated. B u t w h i l e they cannot be assimilated, they are 
at least akin. Sometimes, therefore, i t is rather hard to differentiate between 
them, and some o f t h e m can be classified equally w e l l i n either category. 
Thus, we have spoken o f Atnatu as a civilizing hero, but he is very close to 
being a h i g h god. 
Indeed, the n o t i o n o f high god is so closely dependent upon the ensem-
ble o f totemic beliefs that it still bean their mark. T u n d u n is a divine hero w h o 
is very close to the tribal deity, as w e have just seen. N o w , among the Kurnai, 
the same w o r d means " t o t e m . "
1 1 4 Similarly, "Altjira" is the name o f the high 
god among the Arunta and also the name o f the maternal t o t e m .
1 1 5 A d d i -
tionally, 
a number o f high gods have an obviously totemic form. Daramulun 
is an eaglehawk;
1 1 6 his mother is an e m u .
1 1 7 Baiame himself is portrayed w i t h 
the characteristics o f an e m u .
1 1 8 T h e Altjira o f the Arunta has the legs o f an 
"'In another myth reported by Spencer and Gillen, an entirely similar role is performed by two per-
sonages who live in the sky and are called Ungambikula (Native Tribes, pp. 388ff.). 
"
2Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 493. 
1 1 3L. Parker, The Euahlayi, pp. 67, 62-66. Because the high god is in close relationship with the bull 
roarer, it is identified with the thunder, the rumbling that ritual instrument makes being assimilated to that 
of thunder. 
114Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 135. The word that means "totem" is spelled by Howitt as thundung. 
115Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, pp. 1
—
2
, and vol. II, p. 59. It will be recalled that, quite probably, among 
the Arunta the maternal totem was originally the totem, period. 
1I6Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 555. 
117Ibid„ pp. 546, 560. 
n8Ridley, Kamilaroi, pp. 136, 156. He is depicted in that form during the initiation rites of the Kami¬
laroi. According to another legend, he is a black swan (Parker, More Australian Legendary Tales, p. 94). 


296 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
e m u .
1 1 9 As we saw, before being the name o f a high god, Nuralie referred to 
the founding ancestors o f the tribe; some o f those ancestors were crows and 
others, hawks.
1 2 0 According to H o w i t t ,
1 2 1 B u n j i l is always represented i n h u -
man form; however, the same w o r d is used to denote the totem o f a phratry, 
the eaglehawk. A t least one son o f his is one o f the totems that comprise the 
phratry to w h i c h he gave or lent his name.
1 2 2 His brother is Pallyan, the bat; 
the bat serves as a men's sexual totem i n many tribes o f V i c t o r i a .
1 2 3 
W e can go even further and specify the relationship that the high gods 
have w i t h the totemic system. Daramulun, like Bunjil, is an eaglehawk, and 
we k n o w that this animal is a phratry totem i n many o f the southeastern 
tribes.
1 2 4 As I have said, Nuralie seems to have been at first a collective t e r m 
that designated the eaglehawks or the crows, interchangeably. I n the tribes 
where this m y t h has been found, the crow serves as the t o t e m o f one o f the 
t w o phratries, the eaglehawk o f the other.
1 2 5 I n addition, the legendary his-
tory o f the high gods closely resembles that o f the phratry totems. T h e 
myths, and sometimes the rites, commemorate the battles that each o f these 
deities had to wage against a carnivorous bird that they d i d not easily defeat. 
Bunjil, or the first man, having made Karween, the second man, came into 
conflict w i t h h i m and, i n a k i n d o f duel, gravely w o u n d e d h i m and changed 
h i m into a c r o w .
1 2 6 T h e t w o forms o f Nuralie are depicted as t w o enemy 
groups that, at the beginning, were constandy at w a r .
1 2 7 For his part, Baiame 
fought against M u l l i a n , the cannibal eaglehawk (who, moreover, is identical 
to D a r a m u l u n ) .
1 2 8 N o w , as w e have seen, there is also a sort o f innate hostil-
ity between the phratry totems. This parallelism fully demonstrates that the 
mythology o f the high gods and that o f the totems are closely related. This 
119Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, p. 1. 
120Brough Smyth [Aborigines of 
Victoria ], vol. I, pp. 423-424. 
121Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 492. 
122Ibid., p. 128. 
123Brough Smyth [Aborigines of 
Victoria], vol. I, pp. 417—423. 
124See above, p. 106. 
125These are the tribes whose phratries bear the names Kilpara (crow) and Mukwara. This explains 
even the myth reported by Brough Smyth ([Aborigines of Victoria], vol. I, pp. 423—424). 
126Brough Smyth [Aborigines of 
Australia ], vol. I, pp. 425-427; cf. Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 486; in this 
latter case, Karween is identified with the blue heron. 
127Brough Smyth [Aborigines of 
Victoria ], vol. I, p. 423. 
128Ridley, Kamilaroi, p. 136; Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 585; Mathews, "Aboriginal Tribes," p. 111. 


The Notion of Spirits and Gods 
297 
kinship w i l l stand out even more clearly i f we notice that the rival o f the god 
is usually either the crow or the eaglehawk and that these are very c o m m o n 
phratry totems.
1 2 9 
So Baiame, Daramulun, Nuralie, and B u n j i l seem to be phratry totems 
that have been deified—and here is h o w we can envision this apotheosis as 
having come about. Clearly, i t is i n the assemblies held for initiation that this 
idea was developed; for, being strangers to the other religious ceremonies, 
only i n these rites do the high gods play a role o f any importance. Moreover, 
since initiation is the principal f o r m o f the tribal cult, a tribal mythology 
could have been b o r n only o n this occasion. W e have already seen that the 
rituals o f circumcision and subincision tended toward spontaneous personi-
fication as civilizing heroes. B u t these heroes had no supremacy; they were 
on the same footing as the other legendary benefactors o f the society. O n the 
other hand, where the tribe t o o k o n a more v i v i d awareness o f itself, this 
awareness was embodied quite naturally i n a personage that became its sym-
bol. To comprehend the ties that b o u n d t h e m to one another, no matter 
what clan they belonged to, m e n imagined that they were o f the same stock, 
that they were children o f the same father, to w h o m they owed their exis-
tence even though he owed his o w n existence to no one. T h e god o f initia-
t i o n was perfecdy suited for this role. According to a phrase that often recurs 
on the Hps o f the natives, the specific purpose o f initiation is to make, to fab-
ricate, men. Thus, a creative power was i m p u t e d to this god, and for all these 
reasons, he came to be endowed w i t h a prestige that set h i m w e l l above the 
other heroes o f mythology. T h e others became his subordinates and helpers; 
they were made into his sons or his younger brothers, like Tundun, Gayandi, 
Karween, Pallyan, and so on. B u t there already were other sacred beings that 
held an equally prominent place i n the religious system o f the tribe; these 
were the phratry totems. Wherever these have endured, they are thought to 
have d o m i n i o n over the clan totems. I n this way, they had all they needed to 
become tribal divinities themselves. Naturally, these t w o sorts o f mythical 
figures partially merged, and so i t was that one o f the t w o basic totems o f the 
tribe lent his traits to the high god. B u t since it was necessary to explain w h y 
only one o f t h e m was called to this status, and the other excluded, the latter 
was presumed to have lost out d u r i n g a fight against his rival, the exclusion 
being the consequence o f his defeat. This idea was the more easily accepted 
because i t accorded w i t h the mythology as a whole, i n w h i c h the phratry 
totems are generally viewed as enemies o f one another. 
129See above, p. 146; cf. P. Schmidt, "L'Origine de l'idée de Dieu," in Anthropos, 1909. 


298 
THE ELEMENTARY BELIEFS 
A m y t h among the Euahlayi studied by M r s . Parker
1 3 0 can serve to cor-
roborate this explanation, for it translates that explanation figuratively. As the 
story goes, the totems i n this tribe were at first only the names given to dif-
ferent parts o f Baiame's body. I n that sense, the clans are like fragments o f the 
divine body. Is this not another way o f saying that the high god is the syn-
thesis o f all the totems and hence the personification o f the tribe as a whole? 
A t the same time, however, Baiame took o n an international character. 
I n fact, the members o f the tribe to w h i c h the y o u n g initiates belong are not 
the only ones w h o attend the initiation ceremonies. Representatives o f the 
neighboring tribes are specifically invited to these festivals, w h i c h are rather 
like international fairs and are b o t h religious and secular.
1 3 1 Beliefs that are 
fashioned i n such social milieux cannot remain the exclusive patrimony o f 
any one nationality. T h e foreigner to w h o m they have been revealed takes 
them back into his native tribe. A n d since, sooner or later, he must i n t u r n 
invite his hosts o f yesterday, continual exchanges o f ideas between one soci-
ety and another are created. I n this way, an international mythology was 
formed. Since the mythology had its o r i g i n i n the rites o f initiation, w h i c h 
the god serves to personify, the high god was quite naturally the basic ele-
ment i n it. His name thus passed from one language to another, along w i t h 
the symbols attached to it. T h e fact that the names o f the phratries are usu-
ally c o m m o n to very different tribes could only facilitate that diffusion. T h e 
internationalism o f the phratry totems blazed a trail for the internationalism 
o f the high god. 
V 
Thus we arrive at the most advanced idea that totemism achieved. This is the 
point at w h i c h it resembles and prepares the way for the religions that are to 
follow and helps us to understand them. A t the same time, we can see that 
this culminating idea is continuous w i t h the more rudimentary beliefs that 
we analyzed at the outset. 
130Parker, The Euahlayi Tribe, p. 7. Among the same people, the principal wife of Baiame is also de-
picted as the mother of all the totems, without belonging to any totem herself (ibid., pp. 7, 78). 
131See Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 511-512, 513, 602ff.; Mathews, "Aboriginal Tribes," RSNSW, vol. 
XXXVIII (1904), p. 270. Invited to the feasts of initiation are not only the tribes with which a regular 
connubium is established but also those with which there are quarrels to settle. Vendettas that are half-cer-
emonial and half-serious take place on these occasions. 


The Notion of Spirits and Gods 
299 
T h e tribal high god is actually none other than an ancestral spirit that 
eventually w o n a prominent place. T h e ancestral spirits are none other than 
entities forged i n the image o f the individual souls, the origin o f w h i c h they 
are meant to account for. T h e souls, i n turn, are none other than the f o r m 
taken by the impersonal forces that we found at the basis o f totemism, as 
these become individualized i n particular bodies. T h e unity o f the system is 
as great as its complexity. 
T h e idea o f soul has undoubtedly played an important part i n this w o r k 
o f elaboration. T h r o u g h it, the idea o f personality was introduced into the 
domain o f religion. B u t what the theorists o f animism claim is far from 
true—that i t contains the seed o f the w h o l e religion. For one thing, this idea 
presupposes that o f mana or o f totemic principle, o f w h i c h it is only a par-
ticular f o r m . For another, i f the spirits and gods could not be conceived o f 
before the soul was, still they are something other than mere human souls 
freed by death. Otherwise, where w o u l d they get their superhuman powers? 
T h e idea o f soul has served only to orient the mythological imagination i n a 
new direction and to suggest to it constructions o f a n e w sort. T h e basic ma-
terial for those constructions was not taken from the idea o f soul but was i n -
stead drawn from that reservoir o f anonymous and diffuse forces w h i c h is the 
original fount o f religions. T h e creation o f mythical personalities was only 
another way o f conceiving these fundamental forces. 
T u r n i n g to the high god, that n o t i o n is w h o l l y attributable to an aware-
ness whose influence w e have already observed i n the origin o f the more 
specifically totemic beliefs: the awareness o f tribe. W e have seen that t o t e m -
ism was not the isolated w o r k o f the clans but that it was always elaborated i n 
the midst o f a tribe that was to some extent conscious o f its unity. I t is for this 
reason that the various cults peculiar to each clan come together and c o m -
plement one another i n such a way as to f o r m a unified w h o l e .
1 3 2 I t is this 
same feeling o f tribal unity that is expressed i n the idea o f a high god c o m -
m o n to the w h o l e tribe. F r o m the b o t t o m to the top o f this religious system, 
then, the same causes are at w o r k . 
U p to now, we have considered these religious representations as i f they 
were sufficient unto themselves and could be explained only i n terms o f 
themselves. I n fact, they are inseparable from the rites, not only because the 
representations appear i n the rites but also because the rites influence them. 
T h e cult not only rests o n but also reacts o n the beliefs. To understand those 
better, i t is important to understand the cult better. T h e time has come to 
take up that study. 
132See above, pp. 155-156. 


B O O K 
T H R E E 
THE DRINCIPAL 
M
Q D E S 
OF D ITUAL 
pONDUCT* 
*Les Principales attitudes 
rituelles. 
The contrast between croyances and attitudes in the odes of Books Two 
and Three, respectively, is that between thought and action. 


C H A P T E R O N E 
THE NEGATIVE CULT 
AND ITS FUNCTIONS 
The Ascetic Rites 
I
n what follows, I w i l l not undertake a full description o f the primitive cult. 
Since m y main goal is to arrive at what is most elemental and fundamen-
tal i n religious life, I w i l l make no attempt at a detailed reproduction o f all 
ritual acts i n their often chaotic multiplicity. B u t i n order to test and, i f need 
be, fine-tune the results to w h i c h m y analysis o f the beliefs has led,
1 I w i l l try 
to choose from the extremely diverse practices the most characteristic that 
the primitive follows i n the celebration o f his cult, to classify the most cen-
tral forms o f his rites, and to determine their origins and significance. 
Every cult has t w o aspects: one negative, the other positive. Actually the 
two sorts o f rites are intertwined; as we w i l l see, they presuppose one an-
other. B u t since they are different, we must distinguish between them, i f only 
to understand their relationships. 
I 
B y definition, sacred beings are beings set apart. W h a t distinguishes t h e m is 
a discontinuity between t h e m and profane beings. Normally, the t w o sorts o f 
beings are separate from one another. A w h o l e complex o f rites seeks to 
b r i n g about that separation, w h i c h is essential. These rites prevent unsanc-
tioned mixture and contact, and prevent either domain from encroaching o n 
the other. Hence they can only prescribe abstinences, that is, negative acts. 
For this reason, I propose to use the t e r m "negative cult" for the system 
'I will completely leave aside one form of ritual: oral ritual, which is to be studied in a special volume 
of the Collection of the année sociologique. 
303 


304 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
formed by these particular rites. T h e y do not mandate obligations to be car-
ried out by the faithful but instead prohibit certain ways o f acting. A c c o r d -
ingly, all take the f o r m o f prohibitions, or, to follow c o m m o n usage i n 
ethnography, the f o r m o f taboo. Taboo is the t e r m used i n the Polynesian lan-
guages to denote the institution i n accordance w i t h w h i c h certain things are 
w i t h d r a w n from ordinary use;
2 i t is also an adjective that expresses the dis-
tinctive characteristic o f those sorts o f things. I have already had occasion to 
show h o w problematic i t is to transform a local and dialectal t e r m into a 
generic one. Since there is no religion i n w h i c h prohibitions do not exist and 
play an important part, it is regrettable that this accepted terminology should 
seem to make such a widespread institution a peculiarity specific to Polyne-
sia.
3 T h e terms "interdictions" or "prohibitions"* seem to me preferable by 
far. Still, like the w o r d "totem," the w o r d "taboo" is so widely used that to 
avoid i t altogether w o u l d be an excess o f purism. Besides, its liabilities d i -
minish i f its meaning and scope are carefully specified. 
B u t prohibitions are o f different kinds, and i t is important to distinguish 
them. We need not treat every sort o f prohibition i n this chapter. 
To begin, aside from those that belong to religion, there are others that 
belong to magic. W h a t both have i n c o m m o n is that they define certain 
things as incompatible and prescribe the separation o f the things so defined. 
B u t there are also profound differences. First, the punishments are not the 
same i n the t w o cases. Certainly, as w i l l be pointed out below, the violation 
o f religious prohibitions is often thought automatically to cause physical dis-
orders from w h i c h the guilty person is thought to suffer and w h i c h are c o n -
sidered punishment for his action. B u t even w h e n that really does occur, this 
spontaneous and automatic sanction does not stand alone. I t is always sup-
plemented by another that requires human intervention. Either a punish-
ment properly so-called is added 
( i f i t does not actually precede 
the 
automatic sanction), and that punishment is purposely inflicted by human 
beings; or, at the very least, there is blame and public disapproval. Even w h e n 
*Between these two terms there is a 
fine 
grading of abstractness, interdiction being more mundane or 
applied, and interdit more abstract; but Durkheim uses the two interchangeably, although interdit is more 
frequent. Both "interdict" and "interdiction" are good English words, but I have preferred their com-
moner synonyms: "prohibition," "restriction," "ban," and the like. Trans. 
2See the article "Taboo" in the Encyclopedia Britannica, the author of which is [James George] Frazer 
[Edinburgh, Adam & Charles Black, 1887]. 
3The facts prove this to be a real liability. There is no dearth of writers who, taking the word literally, 
have believed that the institution designated by it was peculiar to primitive societies in general or even to 
the Polynesian peoples only (see [Albert] Réville, Religion des peuples non civilisés, Paris, Fischbacher, 1883, 
vol. II, p. 55; [Gaston] Richard, La Femme dans l'histoire [étude sur l'évolution de la condition sociale de la 
femme, Paris, O. Doin et Fils, 1909], p. 435). 


The Negative Cult and Its Functions 
305 
sacrilege has already been punished by the sickness or natural death o f its per-
petrator, it is also denounced. I t offends opinion, w h i c h reacts against it, and 
it places the culprit i n a state o f sin. B y contrast, a magical prohibition is sanc-
tioned only by the tangible consequences that the forbidden act is held to 
produce w i t h a k i n d o f physical necessity. B y disobeying, one takes risks like 
those a sick person takes by not following the advice o f his doctor; but i n this 
case disobedience does not constitute sin and does not produce indignation. 
In magic, there is no such thing as sin. 
I n addition, the fact that the sanctions are not the same is part and parcel 
o f a profound difference i n the nature o f the prohibitions. A religious p r o h i -
bition necessarily involves the idea o f the sacred. I t arises from the respect 
evoked by the sacred object, and its purpose is to prevent any disrespect. B y 
contrast, magic prohibitions presuppose an entirely secular idea o f prop-
erty—nothing more. T h e things that the magician recommends keeping 
separated are things that, because o f their characteristic properties, cannot be 
mixed or brought near one another w i t h o u t danger. A l t h o u g h he may ask his 
clients to keep their distance from certain sacred things, he does not do so 
out o f respect for those things or out o f fear that they may be profaned (since, 
as we know, magic thrives o n profanations).
4 H e does so only for reasons o f 
secular utility. I n short, religious prohibitions are categorical imperatives and 
magic ones are utilitarian maxims, the earliest f o r m o f hygienic and medical 
prohibitions. T w o orders o f facts that are so different cannot be studied at the 
same time, and under the same rubric, w i t h o u t confusion. Here w e need 
concern ourselves only w i t h religious prohibitions.
5 
B u t a further distinction among these prohibitions themselves is neces-
sary: There are religious prohibitions whose purpose is to separate different 
kinds o f sacred things from one another. W e recall, for example, that among 
the Wakelbura, the scaffold o n w h i c h a dead person is laid out must be built 
exclusively w i t h materials belonging to the phratry o f the deceased. A l l c o n -
tact is forbidden between the corpse, w h i c h is sacred, and things o f the other 
phratry, w h i c h are sacred too, but i n a different right. Elsewhere, the 
weapons used to hunt an animal must not be made o f a w o o d that is classi-
fied i n the same social group as the animal itself.
6 T h e most important o f 
4See p. 40, above. 
5This is not to say that there is a radical discontinuity between religious and magic prohibitions. To 
the contrary, there are some whose true nature is ambiguous. In folklore, there are prohibitions that often 
cannot be easily said to be either religious or magic. Even so, the distinction is necessary, for magic pro-
hibitions can be understood, I believe, only in relation to religious ones. 
6See above, p. 150. 


306 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
these prohibitions are examined i n a later chapter: those aimed at preventing 
all contact between the sacred pure and the sacred impure, as well as between 
things that are sacred and auspicious and those that are sacred and disastrous. 
A l l o f these prohibitions have a c o m m o n trait: T h e y do not arise from the 
fact that some things are sacred and others not but from the fact that there are 
relations o f disparity and incompatibility among sacred things. Hence, they 
are not based u p o n what is fundamental to the idea o f the sacred. Conse-
quently, the observance o f these prohibitions can give rise only to isolated, 
particular, and rather exceptional rites, but they cannot make up a cult, 
proper, for a cult is above all made up o f regular relations between the pro-
fane and the sacred as such. 
There is another m u c h more extensive and important system o f religious 
prohibitions—not the system that separates different species o f sacred things 
but the one that separates all that is sacred from all that is profane. This sys-
tem o f religious prohibitions derives direcdy from the n o t i o n o f sacredness, 
w h i c h it expresses and implements. This system furnishes the raw material 
for a genuine cult and, indeed, a cult that forms the basis o f all the rest; for 
i n their dealings w i t h sacred things, the faithful must never depart from the 
conduct i t prescribes. This is what I call the negative cult. These prohibitions 
can be said to be religious prohibitions par excellence.
7 T h e y alone w i l l be 
the subject o f the following pages. 
T h e y take many forms. Here are the principal types found i n Australia. 
First and foremost come the prohibitions o f contact. These are the p r i -
mary taboos, and the others are litde more than particular varieties o f them. 
T h e y rest o n the principle that the profane must not touch the sacred. We 
'Many of the prohibitions between sacred things are reducible, I think, to the prohibition between sa-
cred and profane. This is true for prohibitions of age or grade. In Australia, for example, there are sacred 
foodstuffs that are reserved exclusively for the initiated. But those foodstuffs are not all equally sacred; 
there is a hierarchy among them. Nor are all the initiated equal. They do not enjoy the plenitude of their 
religious rights immediately, but rather enter into the domain of sacred things gradually. They must pass 
through a series of grades that are conferred upon them, one after the other, following ordeals and special 
ceremonies; it takes them months, sometimes even years, to reach the highest. Definite foods are assigned 
to each of these grades. Men of the lower grades must not touch foods that belong, as a matter of right, 
to men of the higher grades (see [Robert Hamilton] Mathews, "Ethnological Notes on the [Aboriginal 
Tribes of New South Wales and Victoria," RSNSW. vol. XXXVIII (1904)], pp. 262fT.; Mrs. [Langloh] 
Parker [Catherine Sommerville Field Parker], The Euahlayi Tribe [London, A. Constable, 1905], p. 23; [Sir 
Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen, Northern Tribes [of Central Australia, London, Macmillan, 
1904], pp. 61 Iff.; [Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [F.James] Gillen, NativeTribes [of Central Australia, London, 
Macmillan, 1899], pp. 470ff.). The more sacred repels the less sacred, but this is because, compared to the 
first, the second is profane. In sum, all the religious prohibitions fall into two classes: the prohibitions be-
tween the sacred and the profane and those between the sacred pure and the sacred impure. 


The Negative Cult and Its Functions 
307 
have already seen that the churingas or the bull roarers must under no cir-
cumstances be handled by the uninitiated. I f adults have free use o f those o b -
jects, that is only because initiation has conferred u p o n them a quality o f 
sacredness. B l o o d (more specifically, the blood that flows during initiation) 
has a religious v i r t u e
8 and is subject to the same prohibition.
9 T h e same is 
true o f hair.
1 0 A dead person is a sacred being because the soul that animated 
the body adheres to the corpse. For this reason, i t is sometimes forbidden to 
carry the bones o f the corpse i n any way other than wrapped i n a sheet o f 
bark.
1 1 T h e very place where the death occurred must be avoided, for the 
soul o f the deceased is thought to remain there still. This is w h y the people 
break camp and move some distance away.
1 2 Sometimes they destroy the 
camp and all it contains,
1 3 and a period o f time passes before they may return 
to the same place.
1 4 Sometimes the person w h o is dying creates a vacuum 
around himself, the others deserting h i m after having settled h i m as c o m -
fortably as possible.
1 5 
T h e consumption o f food brings about an especially intimate f o r m o f 
contact. Thence arises the prohibition against eating sacred animals or plants, 
especially those serving as totems.
1 6 Such an act appears so sacrilegious that 
the prohibition covers even adults, or at least most adults, and only o l d men 
attain sufficient religious status to be not always subject to it. This prohibi-
tion has sometimes been explained i n terms o f the mythical kinship that 
8See above, p. 136. 
'Spencer and Gülen, Native Tribes, p. 463. 
10Ibid., p. 538; Spencer and Gülen, Northern Tribes, p. 604. 
"Spencer and Gülen, Northern Tribes, p. 531. 
,2Ibid., pp. 518-519; [Alfred William] Howitt, NativeTribes [of South-EastAustralia, London, Macmil-
lan, 1904], p. 449. 
13Spencer and Gülen, Native Tribes, p. 498; [Rev. Louis] Schulze, "Aboriginal Tribes of Upper and 
Middle Finke River," RSSA, vol. XIV [1891], p. 231. 
"Spencer and Gülen, Native Tribes, p. 499. 
15Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 451. [The point made is not at this place in Howitt. Trans.] 
16The alimentary restrictions applied to the totemic plant or animal are the most important, but they 
are far from being the only ones. We have seen that there are foods that, because they are considered sa-
cred, are forbidden to the uninitiated. Very different causes can make those foods sacred. For example, a
s 
we will see below, the animals that climb to the tops of trees are reputed to be sacred because they are 
neighbors of the high god that lives in the heavens. It is also possible that, for different reasons, the flesh 
of certain animals was reserved especiaUy for old men and that, as a result, it seemed to participate in the 
sacredness that old men are acknowledged to have. 


308 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
unites man w i t h the animals whose name he bears—the animals being pro-
tected, presumably, by the sympathy they inspire, as k i n .
1 7 That the origin o f 
this prohibition is not simply revulsion caused by the sense o f familial soli-
darity is brought out by the following: Consumption o f the forbidden flesh 
is presumed to cause sickness and death automatically. Thus, forces o f a dif-
ferent sort have come into play—forces analogous to those forces i n all reli-
gions that are presumed to react against sacrilege. 
Further, w h i l e certain foods, because sacred, are forbidden to the pro-
fane, other foods, because profane, are forbidden to persons endowed w i t h 
special sacredness. Thus, certain animals are often specifically designated as 
food for w o m e n . For this reason, they are believed to participate i n female-
ness and hence are profane. O n the other hand, the young initiate undergoes 
an especially harsh set o f rites. A n exceptionally powerful beam o f religious 
forces is focused u p o n h i m , so as to make it possible to transmit to h i m the 
virtues that w i l l enable h i m to enter the w o r l d o f sacred things, from w h i c h 
he had previously been excluded. Since he is then i n a state o f sanctity that 
repels all that is profane, he is not allowed to eat game that is considered to 
be women's.
1 8 
Contact can be established by means other than touching. O n e is i n con-
tact w i t h a thing simply by l o o k i n g at it; the gaze is a means o f establishing 
contact. This is why, i n certain cases, the sight o f sacred things is forbidden 
to the profane. A w o m a n must never see the cult instruments and at most is 
allowed to glimpse them from afar.
1 9 T h e same applies to totemic painting 
done o n the bodies o f celebrants for especially important ceremonies.
2 0 I n 
certain tribes, the exceptional solemnity o f initiation rites makes it impossi-
ble for w o m e n even to see the place where they have been celebrated
2 1 or the 
novice himself.
2 2 T h e sacredness that is immanent i n the entire ceremony is 
l7See [James George] Frazer, Totemism [and Exogamy London, Macmillan, 1910] p. 7. 
"Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 674. I do not address one prohibition of contact because its precise nature is 
not easy to determine: sexual contact. There are religious periods in which men must not have contact 
with women (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 293, 295; Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 387). Is it because 
the woman is profane or because the sexual act is a dreaded act? This question cannot be setded in pass-
ing. I postpone it along with everything related to conjugal and sexual rites. They are too closely bound 
up with the problem of marriage and the family to be separated from it. 
"Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 134; Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 354. 
20Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 624. 
2lHowitt, Native Tribes, p. 572. 
22Ibid., p. 661. 


17te Negative Cult and Its Functions 
309 
found as w e l l i n the persons o f those w h o direct i t or w h o take any part i n 
i t — w i t h the result that the novice must not raise his eyes to them, a prohibi-
tion that continues even after the rite has been completed.
2 3 A corpse, too, is 
sometimes taken out o f sight, the face being covered i n such a way that it 
cannot be seen.
2 4 
Speech is another means o f c o m i n g into contact w i t h persons or things. 
The exhaled breath establishes contact, since i t is a part o f ourselves that 
spreads outside us. Thus the profane are barred from speaking to sacred be-
ings or even speaking i n their presence. Just as the neophyte must look at nei-
ther those presiding nor those i n attendance, so he is also barred from talking 
to t h e m i n any way other than w i t h signs. This prohibition continues until it 
is lifted by means o f a special r i t e .
2 5 A m o n g all the Arunta, there are moments 
i n the grand ceremonies w h e n silence is obligatory.
2 6 As soon as the 
churingas are displayed, talking stops; or, i f there is talking, i t is i n a l o w voice 
and w i t h the Hps only.
2 7 
I n addition to the things that are sacred, there are words and sounds that 
have the same quality; they must not be found o n the Hps o f the profane or 
reach their ears. There are ritual songs that w o m e n must not hear, o n pain o f 
death.
2 8 T h e y may hear the noise o f the bull roarers, but only from a distance. 
Every personal name is considered an essential element o f the person w h o 
carries it. Since it is closely associated w i t h the idea o f that person, the name 
participates i n the feelings that person arouses. I f the person is sacred, so is the 
name; hence i t may not be pronounced i n the course o f profane life. A m o n g 
the Warramunga is a t o t e m that receives special veneration, the mythical ser-
pent named Wollunqua; that name is taboo.
2 9 T h e same holds true for Ba-
iame, Daramulun, and Bunjil; the esoteric forms o f their names must not be 
revealed to the uninitiated.
3 0 D u r i n g the period o f m o u r n i n g , the name o f 
the dead person must be mentioned, at least by his relatives, only i n cases o f 
23Spencer and Gülen, Native Tribes, p. 386; Hewitt, Native Tribes, pp. 655, 665. 
24Among the Wiimbaio, Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 451. 
25Ibid„ pp. 624, 661, 663, 667; Spencer and Gülen, Native Tribes, pp. 221, 382ff.; Spencer and Gülen, 
Northern Tribes, pp. 335, 344, 353, 369. 
26Spencer and Gülen, Native Tribes, pp. 221, 262, 288, 303, 367, 378, 380. 
27Ibid„ p. 302. 
28Howitt, Native Tribes, p
> 88.1. 
''Spencer and Gülen, Northern Tribes, p. 227. 
'"See above, p. 291. 


310 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
absolute necessity, and even then they must only whisper i t .
3 1 This restriction 
is often permanent for the w i d o w and certain family members.
3 2 A m o n g 
certain peoples, it extends even beyond the family, everyone w h o has the 
same name as the deceased being required to change i t temporarily.
3 3 Fur-
thermore, relatives and close friends ban certain words from everyday lan-
guage, probably because they were used by the deceased. T h e gaps are filled 
w i t h circumlocutions or w i t h borrowings from some foreign dialect.
3 4 I n ad-
dition to their ordinary, public name, m e n have another that is kept secret. 
W o m e n and children do not k n o w it, and i t is never used i n ordinary life be-
cause it has a religious quality.
3 5 Indeed, there are ceremonies during w h i c h 
the participants are required to speak i n a special language whose use is for-
bidden i n profane dealings. Here is a beginning o f sacred language.
3 6 
N o t only are sacred beings separated from profane ones, but i n addition, 
nothing that directly or indirecdy concerns profane life must be mingled 
w i t h religious life. Total nakedness is often required o f the native as the pre-
condition o f his being allowed to take part i n a r i t e .
3 7 H e must take o f f all his 
usual ornaments, even those he values most and from w h i c h he separates 
himself the less w i l l i n g l y because he imputes to t h e m protective virtues.
3 8 I f 
he must decorate himself for his ritual role, that decoration must be made es-
pecially for the occasion; i t is a ceremonial costume, a feast-day vestment.
3 9 
Since these ornaments are sacred by virtue o f the use made o f them, their use 
i n profane activities is forbidden. O n c e the ceremony is over, they are buried 
or b u r n e d ;
4 0 and indeed the m e n must wash themselves, so as not to take 
away w i t h them any trace o f the decorations that adorned t h e m .
4 1 
"Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, p. 498; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 526; [George] Taplin 
"The Narrinyeri" [in James Dominick Woods, The Native Tribes of South Australia, Adelaide, E. S. Wigg, 
1879], p. 19. 
32Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 466, 469£F. 
3 3[J. P.] Wyatt, "Adelaide and Encounter Bay Tribes," in Woods, [The Native Tribes of South Australia], 
p. 165. 
34Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 470. [It is actually at p. 466. Trans.] 
35Ibid., p. 657; Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 139; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 580fF. 
36Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 537. 
37Ibid., pp. 544, 597, 614, 620. 
38For example, the hair belt that he usually wears (Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, p. 171). 
39Ibid„ pp. 624ff. 
""Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 556. 
41Ibid„ p. 587. 


The Negative Cult and Its Functions 
311 
M o r e generally, the typical actions o f ordinary life are forbidden so l o n g 
as those o f religious life are i n progress. T h e act o f eating is profane i n itself. 
A daily occurrence, i t satisfies basically utilitarian and physical needs and is 
part o f our ordinary existence.
4 2 This is w h y eating is prohibited d u r i n g reli-
gious periods. Thus, w h e n a totemic group has lent its churinga to a foreign 
clan, the m o m e n t w h e n they are brought back and returned to the ertnatu-
lunga is one o f great solemnity. A l l those w h o take part i n the ceremony must 
abstain from eating as l o n g as it lasts, and it lasts a l o n g time.
43 T h e same rule 
is followed d u r i n g the celebration o f the rites
4 4 to be treated i n the next 
chapter, as well as at certain times d u r i n g i n i t i a t i o n .
4 5 
For the same reason, all secular occupations are suspended w h e n the 
great religious ceremonies 
take place. A c c o r d i n g to an observation by 
Spencer and G i l l e n ,
4 6 cited previously, the life o f the Australian has t w o quite 
distinct parts: O n e is taken up w i t h hunting, fishing, and war; the other is 
dedicated to the cult. These t w o forms o f activity are mutually exclusive and 
repel one another. T h e universal institution o f religious days o f rest is based 
on this principle. I n all k n o w n religions, the distinguishing feature o f feast 
days is the cessation o f w o r k and, beyond that, the suspension o f public and 
private life, insofar as it has no religious object. This pause is not merely a 
k i n d o f temporary relaxation that m e n take, so as to abandon 
themselves 
more freely to the feelings o f elation that holidays generally arouse, since i t is 
no less obligatory d u r i n g those sad holidays that are devoted to m o u r n i n g 
and penance. T h e reason for the pause is that w o r k is the preeminent f o r m 
o f profane activity. I t has no apparent aim other than meeting the secular 
needs o f life, and i t puts us i n contact only w i t h ordinary things. D u r i n g holy 
days, o n the other hand, religious life attains unusual intensity. Because the 
contrast between these t w o sorts o f existence is particularly marked at that 
42Granted, this act takes on a religious character when the 
food 
eaten is sacred. But the act in itself is 
profane, to such an extent that the consumption of a sacred food always constitutes a profanation. The 
profanation can be permitted or even prescribed but, as we will see below, only if rites to attenuate or ex-
piate the profanation precede or accompany it. The existence of these rites clearly shows that the sacred 
thing itself resists being consumed. 
43Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 263. 
"Spencerand Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 171. 
45Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 674. It may be that the prohibition against speaking during the great reli-
gious ceremonies derives in part 
from 
the same cause. In ordinary life, people speak, and in particular peo-
ple speak loudly; therefore, in religious life, they must keep silent or speak in a low voice. The same 
consideration is germane to the dietary restrictions. (See above, p. 127). 
46Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 33. 


312 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
time, they cannot abut one another. M a n cannot approach his god intimately 
while still bearing the marks o f his profane life; inversely, he cannot return to 
his ordinary occupations w h e n the rite has just sanctified h i m . Ritual cessa-
tion o f w o r k is thus no more than a special case o f the general incompatibil-
ity that divides the sacred and the profane, and i t is the result o f a prohibition. 
There is no way to enumerate every k i n d o f prohibition that is observed, 
even i n the Australian religions alone. Like the notion o f the sacred o n w h i c h 
it rests, the system o f prohibitions extends into the most varied relations. It is 
even used intentionally for utilitarian purposes.
4 7 B u t however complex this 
system may be, i n the end i t comes d o w n to t w o fundamental prohibitions 
that epitomize and govern it. 
First, religious and profane life cannot coexist i n the same space. I f reli-
gious life is to develop, a special place must be prepared for it, one from 
w h i c h profane life is excluded. T h e institution o f temples and sanctuaries 
arises from this. These are spaces assigned to sacred things and beings, serv-
ing as their residence, for they cannot establish themselves o n the ground ex-
cept by fully appropriating a part o f it for themselves. Arrangements o f this 
k i n d are so indispensable to all religious life that even the simplest religious 
cannot do w i t h o u t them. T h e ertnatulunga, the place where the churingas 
are stored, is a true sanctuary. T h e uninitiated are banned from approaching 
it, and indulging i n any k i n d o f profane occupation is forbidden there. We 
w i l l see that there are other sanctified places where important ceremonies are 
conducted.
4 8 
47Since, from the beginning, there is a sacred principle within each man, the soul, the individual has 
been surrounded by prohibitions, the 
first 
form 
of the moral prohibitions that today insulate and protect 
the human person. It is in this way that the body of the victim is considered dangerous by the murderer 
(Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 492) and is forbidden to him. Prohibitions that have this origin are 
often used by individuals as a means of withdrawing certain things from common use and establishing a 
right of property over them. "Does a man depart from camp, leaving weapons, food, etc. there?" asks 
[waiter Edmund] Roth with regard to the Palmer River tribes (North Queensland). "If he urinates near 
objects that he has thus left behind, they become tami (equivalent of the word "taboo"), and he can be as-
sured of 
finding 
them intact upon his return" [possibly, "Marriage Ceremonies and Infant Life," North 
Queensland Ethnography, Bull. 10] in RAM, [Sydney, 1908], vol. VII, part 2, p. 75). This is because the 
urine, like the blood, is held to contain a part of the sacred force that is personal to the individual. Thus 
it keeps strangers at a distance. For the same reasons, speech also can serve a
s a vehicle for these same in-
fluences. This is why it is possible to ban access to an object simply by verbal declaration. Further, this 
power of creating prohibitions is variable according to individuals—the greater their sacredness, the 
greater this power. Men have the privilege of this power to the virtual exclusion of women (Roth cites a 
single example of a taboo imposed by women). It is at its maximum among chiefs and elders, who use it 
to monopolize the things they choose ([Walter Edmund] Roth, Superstition, Magic and Medicine [Brisbane, 
G. A. Vaughn, 1903], in North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin No. 5, p. 77). In this way, religious pro-
hibition becomes property right and administrative regulation. 
48Bk. 3, chap. 2. 


The Negative Cult and Its Functions 
313 
Likewise, religious and profane life cannot coexist at the same time. I n 
consequence, religious life must have specified days or periods assigned to it 
from w h i c h all profane occupations are w i t h d r a w n . Thus were holy days 
born. There is no religion, and hence no society, that has not k n o w n and 
practiced this division o f time into t w o distinct parts that alternate w i t h one 
another according to a principle that varies w i t h peoples and civilizations. I n 
fact, probably the necessity o f that alternation led m e n to insert distinctions 
and differentiations into the homogeneity and continuity o f duration that i t 
does not naturally have.
4 9 O f course, it is virtually impossible for religion ever 
to reach the point o f being concentrated hermetically i n the spatial and t e m -
poral milieux that are assigned to it; a litde o f it inevitably filters out. There 
are always sacred things outside the sanctuaries and rites that can be cele-
brated d u r i n g workdays, but those are sacred things o f the second rank and 
rites o f lesser importance. Concentration is still the predominant characteris-
tic o f this structure; and indeed, concentration is generally total w i t h respect 
to the public cult, w h i c h must be celebrated collectively. T h e private, i n d i -
vidual cult is the only one that mingles more or less closely w i t h secular life. 
Therefore, because the individual cult is at its least developed i n the lower so-
cieties, such as the Australian tribes, the contrast between these t w o succes-
sive phases o f human life is at its most extreme there.
5 0 
II 
Thus far w e have seen the negative cult only as a system o f abstinences. I t ap-
pears capable only o f inhibiting activity, not stimulating and invigorating it. 
Nevertheless, through an unexpected reaction to this inhibiting affect, i t ex-
erts a positive and highly important influence u p o n the religious and moral 
nature o f the individual. 
Because o f the barrier that sets the sacred apart from the profane, man 
can enter into close relations w i t h sacred things only i f he strips himself o f 
what is profane i n h i m . H e cannot live a religious life o f any intensity unless 
he first withdraws more or less completely from secular hfe. T h e negative 
cult i n a sense is a means to an end; i t is the precondition o f access to the pos-
itive cult. N o t confined to protecting the sacred beings from ordinary c o n -
tact, it acts u p o n the worshipper himself and modifies his state positively. 
49See above, p. 9. 
50See above, p. 220. 


314 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
After having submitted to the prescribed prohibitions, man is not the same as 
he was. Before, he was an ordinary being and for that reason had to keep at 
a distance from religious forces. After, he is o n a more nearly equal footing 
w i t h them, since he has approached the sacred by the very act o f placing 
himself at a distance from the profane. H e has purified and sanctified himself 
by detaching himself from the l o w and trivial things that previously encum-
bered his nature. Like positive rites, therefore, negative rites confer positive 
capacities; b o t h can increase the religious zest o f individuals. As has been 
righdy observed, no one can engage i n a religious ceremony o f any i m p o r -
tance w i t h o u t first submitting to a sort o f initiation that introduces h i m grad-
ually into the sacred w o r l d .
5 1 Anointings, purifications, and blessings can be 
used for this, all being essentially positive operations; but the same results can 
be achieved through fasts and vigils, or through retreat and silence—that is, 
by ritual abstinences that are n o t h i n g more than definite prohibitions put 
into practice. 
W h e n negative rites are considered only one by one, their positive i n f l u -
ence is usually too Htde marked to be easily perceptible; but their effects cu-
mulate, and become more apparent, w h e n a full system o f prohibitions is 
focused o n a single person. This occurs i n Australia d u r i n g initiation. T h e 
novice is subjected to an extreme variety o f negative rites. H e must w i t h d r a w 
from the society where he has spent his life until then, and from virtually all 
human society. H e is not only forbidden to see w o m e n and uninitiated 
m e n ,
5 2 but he also goes to live i n the bush, far from his peers, under the su-
pervision o f a few old m e n serving as godfathers.
5 3 So m u c h is the forest con-
sidered his natural milieu that, i n quite a few tribes, the w o r d for initiation 
means "that w h i c h is o f the forest."
5 4 For the same reason, the novice is of-
ten decorated w i t h leaves d u r i n g the ceremonies he attends.
5 5 I n this way, he 
spends l o n g m o n t h s
5 6 punctuated from time to time by rites i n w h i c h he 
51See [Henri] Hubert and [Marcel] Mauss, "Essai sur la nature et la fonction du sacrifice," in Mélanges 
d'histoire des religions [Paris, F. Alcan, 1909], pp. 22ff. 
52Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 560, 657, 659, 661. Not even a woman's shadow must fall on him (ibid., 
p. 633). What he touches must not be touched by a woman (ibid., p. 621). 
53Ibid., pp. 561, 563, 670-671; Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, p. 223; Spencer and Gillen, Northern 
Tribes, pp. 340, 342. 
54The word jeraeil, for example, among the Kurnai; kuringal among the Yuin and the Wolgat (Howitt, 
NativeTribes, pp. 518, 617). 
55Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, p. 348. 
56Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 561. 


The Negative Cult and Its Functions 
315 
must participate. For h i m , this is a time for every sort o f abstinence. H e is for-
bidden a great many foods, and he is allowed only as m u c h food as is strictly 
necessary to sustain life.
5 7 Indeed, rigorous fasting is often obligatory,
5 8 or he 
is made to eat disgusting f o o d .
5 9 W h e n he eats, he must not touch the food 
w i t h his hands; his godfathers put it i n his m o u t h .
6 0 I n some cases, he must 
beg for his subsistence.
6 1 H e sleeps only as m u c h as is indispensable.
6 2 H e 
must abstain from speaking unless spoken to and indicate his needs w i t h 
signs.
6 3 H e is forbidden all recreation.
6 4 H e must not bathe;
6 5 sometimes he 
must not move. H e remains lying o n the ground, i m m o b i l e ,
6 6 w i t h o u t cloth-
ing o f any k i n d .
6 7 T h e result o f these multiple prohibitions is to b r i n g about 
a radical change i n the status o f the neophyte. Before the initiation, he lived 
w i t h w o m e n and was excluded from the cult. F r o m n o w on, he is admitted 
into the society o f men; he takes part i n the rites and has gained a quality o f 
sacredness. So complete is the metamorphosis that i t is often portrayed as a 
second birth. T h e profane person that previously was the young man is imag-
ined to have died, to have been killed and taken away by the G o d o f initia-
t i o n — B u n j i l , Baiame, or Daramulun—and to have been replaced by an 
altogether different individual from the one w h o existed previously.
6 8 Thus 
we capture i n the raw the positive effects o f w h i c h the negative rites are ca-
pable. I do not mean to claim that these rites alone produce so profound a 
transformation, but they certainly contribute to it, and substantially. 
I n light o f these facts, we can understand what asceticism is, what place 
it holds i n religious life, and where the virtues that are widely imputed to it 
"Ibid., pp. 633, 538, 560. 
58Ibid., p. 674; Parker, The Euahlayi Tribe, p. 75. 
59[William] Ridley, Kamilaroi [and Other Australian Languages, Sydney, T. Richards, 1875], p. 154. 
""Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 563. 
61Ibid., p. 611. 
62Ibid., pp. 549, 674. 
63Ibid., pp. 580, 596, 604, 668, 670; Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, pp. 223, 351. 
MHowitt, Native Tribes, p. 567. [This note and the phrase to which it is attached are missing 
from 
the 
Swain translation. Trans.] 
65Ibid„ p. 557. 
"'Ibid., p. 604; Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, p. 351. 
67Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 611. 
68Ibid., p. 589. 


316 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
originate. I n actuality, there is no prohibition whose observance is not to 
some degree like asceticism. To abstain from something that may be useful or 
from an activity that, because habitual, must meet a human need, is o f ne-
cessity to impose restrictions and renunciations u p o n oneself. For there to be 
asceticism properly so-called, i t is enough for these practices to develop i n 
such a way as to become the foundation for a genuine system o f life. T h e 
negative cult usually serves as barely more than an introduction to, and a 
preparation for, the positive cult. B u t it sometimes escapes that subordination 
and becomes central, the system o f prohibitions swelling and aggrandizing i t -
self to the point o f invading the w h o l e o f life. I n this way, systematic asceti-
cism is born; it is thus n o t h i n g more than a bloating o f the negative cult. T h e 
special virtues it is said to confer are only those conferred through the prac-
tice o f any prohibition, though i n magnified f o r m . T h e y have the same o r i -
gin, for b o t h rest o n the principle that the very effort to separate oneself from 
the profane sanctifies. T h e pure ascetic is a man w h o raises himself above 
m e n and w h o acquires a special sanctity through fasts, vigils, retreat, and si-
lence—in a w o r d , more by privations than by acts o f positive piety (offerings, 
sacrifices, prayers, etc.). History shows what heights o f religious prestige are 
attainable by those means. T h e Buddhist saint is fundamentally an ascetic, 
and he is equal or superior to the gods. 
It follows that asceticism is not a rare, exceptional, and almost abnormal 
fruit 
o f religious life, as one m i g h t think, but quite the contrary: an essential 
element o f it. Every religion has at least the seed o f asceticism, for there is 
none w i t h o u t a system o f prohibitions. I n this respect, the only possible dif-
ference between cults is that this seed is more or less developed w i t h i n them. 
A n d i t is w e l l to add that there probably is not even a single one i n w h i c h this 
development does not at least temporarily adopt the characteristic traits o f as-
ceticism proper. This generally happens at certain critical periods, w h e n a 
profound change i n an individual's condition must be brought about i n a rel-
atively short time. I n that case, i n order to b r i n g h i m more rapidly into the 
circle o f sacred things w i t h w h i c h he must be put i n contact, he is abruptly 
separated from the profane w o r l d . This does not occur w i t h o u t increased ab-
stinences and an extraordinary intensification i n the system o f prohibitions. 
Precisely this occurs i n Australia at the time o f initiation. To transform the 
youths into men, they are required to lead the life o f ascetics. M r s . Parker 
quite accurately calls t h e m the monks o f Baiame.
6 9 
69These ascetic practices may be compared to the ones used during a magicians initiation. Like the 
young neophyte, the apprentice magician is subjected to a multitude of prohibitions the observance of 
which helps him acquire his specific powers (see "L'Origine des pouvoirs magiques," in Mélanges d'histoire 
des religions, by Hubert and Mauss, pp. 171, 173, 176). It is the same for husbands on the eve of their mar-


Die Negative Cult and Its Functions 
317 
Abstinences and privations are not w i t h o u t suffering. We hold to the 
profane w o r l d w i t h every fiber o f our flesh. O u r sensuous nature attaches us 
to it; our life depends u p o n it. N o t only is the profane w o r l d the natural the-
ater o f our activity; i t enters us from every direction; it is part o f us. W e can-
not detach ourselves 
from i t w i t h o u t doing violence to our nature and 
without painfully clashing w i t h our instincts. I n other words, the negative 
cult cannot develop unless i t causes suffering. Pain is its necessary condition. 
By this route, people came to regard pain as a sort o f rite i n itself. They saw 
it as a state o f grace to be sought after and induced, even artificially, because 
o f the powers and privileges i t confers i n the same right as those systems o f 
prohibitions to w h i c h i t is the natural accompaniment. To my knowledge, 
Preuss was the first to become aware o f the religious
7 0 role that is ascribed to 
pain i n the lower societies. H e cites cases: the Arapaho w h o inflict torture 
upon themselves as protection from the dangers o f battle; the Gros-Ventre 
Indians w h o submit to torture o n the eve o f military expeditions; the Hupa 
w h o s w i m i n freezing rivers and afterward remain stretched out o n the shore 
as long as possible, to ensure the success o f their undertakings; the Karaya 
w h o periodically draw b l o o d from their arms and legs w i t h scrapers made o f 
fish teeth, to f i r m their muscles; the m e n o f Dallmannhafen (Emperor 
William's Land i n N e w Guinea) w h o combat sterility i n their wives by mak-
ing bloody cuts o n the women's upper thighs.
7 1 
B u t similar doings can be found w i t h o u t leaving Australia, especially i n 
the course o f initiation rites. M a n y o f those rites involve the systematic i n -
fliction 
o f suffering o n the neophyte, for the purpose o f altering his state and 
riage or on the day after (taboos of 
fiances 
and of newlyweds); this is because marriage also involves an 
important change in status. I confine myself to noting these briefly without lingering over them. The for-
mer concern magic, which is not my subject, while the latter belong to that system of 
juridico-religious 
rules that refer to commerce between the sexes; the study of those will be possible only in conjunction 
with the other precepts of primitive conjugal morality. 
70True, Preuss interprets these facts by saying that pain is a means of increasing a man's magical power 
(die menschliche Zauberkraft); it might be thought, following this statement, that suffering is a magic rite and 
not a religious one. But as I have already pointed out, Preuss calls all anonymous and impersonal forces 
magic, without great precision, whether they belong to magic or to religion. There no doubt are tortures 
that serve to make magicians, but many of those he describes are part of authentically religious cere-
monies. Hence their aim is to modify the religious states of individuals. 
71[Konrad Theodor] Preuss, "Der Ursprung der Religion und der Kunst," Globus, LXXXVII [1904], 
pp. 309—400. Preuss categorizes many disparate rites under the same rubric, for example, the sheddings of 
blood that act through the positive qualities ascribed to blood rather than through the sufferings they in-
volve. I single out only those phenomena in which pain is the essential element of the rite and the source 
of its efficacy. 


318 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
making h i m take o n the distinguishing qualities o f a man. A m o n g the 
Larakia, w h i l e the youths are o n retreat i n the forest, their godfathers and 
overseers constantly assault t h e m w i t h brutal blows, w i t h o u t advance w a r n -
i n g and for no apparent reason.
7 2 A m o n g the Urabunna, at a given moment, 
the novice lies stretched out o n the ground w i t h his face d o w n . A l l the m e n 
present beat h i m brutally; then they make a series o f four to eight incisions 
o n his back, d o w n b o t h sides o f his spine, and one along the midline o f his 
neck.
7 3 A m o n g the Arunta, the first rite o f initiation consists o f tossing the 
subject; the m e n throw h i m into the air, catch h i m w h e n he comes d o w n , 
and then t h r o w h i m again.
7 4 I n that same tribe, at the end o f a long series o f 
ceremonies, the y o u n g man is made to He d o w n o n a bed o f leaves w i t h live 
coals under it; and he continues to lie there immobile, i n the midst o f the 
heat and suffocating smoke.
7 5 T h e Urabunna practice a similar rite, but the 
initiate is beaten o n the back as w e l l .
7 6 So m u c h are his exertions o f this k i n d 
that he seems pathetic and half-dazed w h e n he is allowed to resume ordinary 
life.
7 7 I t is true that all these practices are often presented as ordeals to test the 
novice's w o r t h and to make k n o w n his worthiness for acceptance into reli-
gious society.
7 8 Actually, however, the probationary function o f the rite is but 
another aspect o f its efficacy, for the manner i n w h i c h the novice bears the 
ordeal proves that the rite has accomplished exacdy what i t was meant to: to 
confer o n h i m the qualities that are its primary raison d'être. 
I n other cases, these ritual torments are applied not to the whole body 
but to an organ or a tissue, i n order to stimulate its vitality. A m o n g the 
72Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 331—332. 
73Ibid., p. 335. A similar practice is found among the Dieri (Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 658ff.). 
74Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 214ff. From this example, we see that the rites of initiation 
sometimes have the characteristics of 
hazing. This is so because hazing is a true social institution that arises 
spontaneously whenever two groups that are unequal in their moral and social situations 
find 
themselves 
in intimate contact. In this case, the group that views itself 
as superior to the other resists the intrusion of 
the newcomers; it reacts against them in such a way as to make them understand how superior it feels. 
That reaction, which occurs automatically and takes the form of more or less severe torments, is also 
aimed at adapting individuals to their new life and assimilating them into their new milieu. It thus con-
stitutes a sort of initiation. In this way, we can explain why initiation constitutes a sort of hazing. It does 
because the group of elders is superior in religious and moral status to that of the young, and yet the el-
ders must take in the youths. All the conditions of hazing are present. 
75Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 372. 
76Ibid., p. 335. 
"Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 675. 
78Ibid., pp. 569, 604. 


The Negative Cult and Its Functions 
319 
Arunta, the Warramunga, and several other tribes,
7 9 at a certain m o m e n t 
during the initiation, delegated individuals plunge their teeth into the 
novice's scalp. This is so painful that usually the patient cannot bear i t w i t h -
out crying out. Its purpose is to make the hair g r o w .
8 0 T h e same treatment is 
applied to make the beard grow. T h e rite o f hair removal, w h i c h H o w i t t re-
ports for other tribes, may well have the same raison d'être
81 
A m o n g the 
Arunta and the Kaitish, according to Eylmann, m e n and w o m e n make small 
wounds o n their arms w i t h red-hot sticks so as to become skillful at making 
fire or gain the strength they need to carry heavy loads o f w o o d .
8 2 A c c o r d -
ing to the same observer, Warramunga girls amputate the second and third 
joints o f the index finger o n one hand, believing that the finger becomes 
more skillful at uncovering the yams thereby.
8 3 
It is not impossible that the extraction o f teeth might sometimes be i n -
tended to b r i n g about effects o f the same k i n d . It is certain, i n any case, that 
the purpose o f such cruel rites as circumcision and subincision is to confer 
special powers o n the genital organs. Since the y o u n g man owes special 
virtues to those rites, he is not allowed to marry until he has undergone 
them. W h a t makes this sui generis initiation indispensable is the fact that, i n 
all the lower societies, sexual u n i o n is endowed w i t h a quality o f religious-
ness. I t is thought to b r i n g into play awesome forces that man can approach 
w i t h o u t danger only i f he has gained the requisite i m m u n i t y through ritual 
procedures.
8 4 A w h o l e series o f positive and negative rites, o f w h i c h c i r c u m -
cision and subincision are the forerunners, have this purpose. A n organ is 
given sacredness by painful mutilation, for that very act enables it to w i t h -
stand sacred forces that otherwise i t w o u l d be unable to confront. 
I said at the beginning o f this w o r k that all the essential elements o f reli-
gious thought and life should be found, at least i n seed, as far back as the 
most primitive religions. T h e foregoing facts reinforce that claim. I f one be-
l i e f is held to be specific to the most m o d e r n and idealistic religions, it is the 
79Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 251; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 341, 352. 
^Consequendy, among the Warramunga, the operation must be done by individuals favored with 
beautiful heads of hair. 
81Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 675, which is about the tribes of Lower Darling. 
^[Richard] Eylmann, [Die Eingeborenen der Kolonie Sud Australien, Berlin, D. Reumer, 1908], p. 212. 
83Ibid. 
84Information on this question is to be found in my article "La Prohibition de l'inceste et ses origines" 
(Année Sociologique, vol. I [1898], pp. Iff.) and in [Alfred Ernest] Crawley, The Mystic Rose [London, 
Macmillan, 1902], pp. 37ff. 


320 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
one that attributes sanctifying power to pain. T h e rites just examined are 
based u p o n the same belief, w h i c h is variously interpreted, depending u p o n 
the historical period i n w h i c h it is examined. For the Christian, pain is 
thought to act above all u p o n the soul—refining, ennobling, and spiritualiz-
ing it. For the Australian, i t acts u p o n the body—increasing its vital energies, 
making the beard and hair grow, toughening the limbs. B u t i n b o t h cases, the 
principle is the same. I n both, pain is held to be generative o f exceptional 
forces. N o r is this belief unfounded. I n fact, the grandeur o f a man is made 
manifest by the way he braves the pain. Never does he rise above himself 
more spectacularly than w h e n he subdues his nature to the point o f making 
it follow a path contrary to the one i t w o u l d take o n its o w n . I n that way, he 
makes himself unique among all the other creatures, w h i c h go blindly where 
pleasure leads them. I n that way, he takes a special place i n the world. Pain is 
the sign that certain o f the ties that b i n d h i m to the profane w o r l d are b r o -
ken. Because pain attests that he is partially emancipated from that w o r l d , i t 
is rightly considered the t o o l o f his deliverance, so he w h o is delivered i n this 
way is not the v i c t i m o f mere illusion w h e n he believes he is endowed w i t h 
a k i n d o f mastery over things. B y the very act o f renouncing things, he has 
risen above things. Because he has silenced nature, he is stronger than nature. 
Furthermore, that virtue is far from having only aesthetic value. R e l i -
gious life as a w h o l e presupposes it. Sacrifices and offerings do not go unac-
companied by privations that exact a price from the worshipper. Even i f the 
rites do not require tangible things o f h i m , they take his time and strength. 
To serve his gods, he must forget himself. To create for t h e m the place i n his 
life to w h i c h they are entided, he must sacrifice some o f his profane interests. 
T h e positive cult is possible, then, only i f man is trained to renunciation, ab-
negation, and detachment from self—hence, to suffering. H e must not dread 
suffering, for he can carry put his duties joyfully only i f he i n some measure 
loves it. I f that is to come about, he must train himself to suffering, and this 
is where the ascetic practices lead. T h e sufferings they impose are not arbi-
trary and sterde cruelties, then, but a necessary school i n w h i c h man shapes 
and steels himself, and i n w h i c h he gains the qualities o f disinterestedness and 
endurance w i t h o u t w h i c h there is no religion. I n fact, i f this result is to be 
achieved, it helps i f the ascetic ideal is eminendy incarnated i n certain i n d i -
viduals w h o are specialized, as i t were, i n that aspect o f ritual life, almost to 
excess. Those certain individuals amount to so many living models that en-
courage striving. Such is the historical role o f the great ascetics. W h e n we an-
alyze i n detail the things they do, w e wonder w h a t the useful point o f those 
things could be. T h e contempt they profess for all that ordinarily impassions 
m e n strikes us as bizarre. B u t those extremes are necessary to maintain among 


The Negative Cult and Its Functions 
321 
the faithful an adequate level o f distaste for easy living and mundane plea-
sures. A n elite must set the goal too high so that the mass does not set it too 
low. Some must go to extremes so that the average may remain high enough. 
B u t asceticism serves more than religious ends. Here, as elsewhere, reli-
gious interests are only social and moral interests i n symbolic f o r m . T h e ideal 
beings to w h i c h cults are addressed are not alone i n demanding o f their ser-
vants a certain contempt for pain; society, too, is possible only at that price. 
Even w h e n exalting the powers o f man, it is often brutal toward individuals. 
O f necessity, it requires perpetual sacrifices o f them. Precisely because soci-
ety lifts us above ourselves, it does constant violence to our natural appetites. 
So that w e can fulfill our duties toward i t , our conditioning must ready us to 
overcome our instincts at times—when necessary, to go up the d o w n stair-
case o f nature. There is an inherent asceticism i n all social life that is destined 
to oudive all mythologies and all dogmas; it is an integral part o f all human 
culture. A n d , fundamentally, that asceticism is the rationale and justification 
o f the asceticism that religions have taught since the beginning o f time. 
Ill 
Having determined what the system o f prohibitions consists o f and what its 
negative and positive functions are, w e must n o w uncover its causes. 
I n a sense, the very n o t i o n o f the sacred logically entails it. Everything 
that is sacred is the object o f respect, and every feeling o f respect is translated 
into stirrings o f i n h i b i t i o n i n the person w h o has that feeling. Because o f the 
emotion it inspires, a respected being is always expressed i n consciousness by 
a representation that is highly charged w i t h mental energy. Hence, i t is armed 
i n such a way as to t h r o w any representation that w h o l l y or partly contradicts 
it far away from itself. Antagonism characterizes the relationship the sacred 
w o r l d has w i t h the profane one. T h e t w o correspond to t w o forms o f life 
that are mutually exclusive, or at least that cannot be lived at the same time 
w i t h the same intensity. W e cannot be devoted entirely to the ideals to w h i c h 
the cult is addressed, and entirely to ourselves and our sensuous interests also; 
entirely to the collectivity and entirely to our egoism as well. Herein are t w o 
states o f consciousness that are oriented toward, and that orient our behavior 
toward, t w o opposite poles. Whichever is more powerful must push the 
other out o f consciousness. W h e n w e think o f sacred things, the idea o f a 
profane object cannot present itself to the m i n d w i t h o u t meeting resistance, 
something w i t h i n us that opposes its settlement there. T h e idea o f the sacred 
does not tolerate such a neighbor. B u t this psychic antagonism, this mutual 
exclusion o f ideas, must necessarily culminate i n the exclusion o f the things 


322 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
that correspond to them. I f the ideas are not to coexist, the things must not 
touch one another or come into contact i n any way. Such is the very p r i n c i -
ple o f the prohibition. 
Moreover, the w o r l d o f the sacred is a w o r l d apart, by definition. Since 
the sacred is opposed to the profane w o r l d by all the features I have m e n -
tioned, it must be treated i n a way that is appropriate to it. If, i n our dealings 
w i t h the things that comprise the sacred w o r l d , we used the actions, lan-
guage, and attitudes that serve us i n our relations w i t h profane things, that 
w o u l d be to misapprehend the nature o f the sacred w o r l d and confound it 
w i t h what i t is not. W e may freely handle profane things, and we talk freely 
to ordinary beings. So we w i l l not touch sacred beings or w i l l touch t h e m 
only w i t h reserve, and we w i l l not talk i n their presence or not talk i n the or-
dinary language. A l l that is customary i n our dealings w i t h one set o f things 
must be excluded i n our dealing w i t h the other. 
But while this explanation is not inaccurate, still i t is inadequate. I n fact, a 
good many beings that are objects o f respect exist w i t h o u t being protected by 
strict systems o f prohibitions, such as I have been describing. Doubdess, the i n -
tellect has a sort o f general tendency to situate different things i n different en-
vironments, especially w h e n they are incompatible w i t h one another. B u t the 
profane environment and the sacred one are not merely distinct but also closed 
to one another; there is a gulf between them. I n the nature o f sacred beings, 
there must be some special cause that necessitates this condition o f unusual iso-
lation and mutual exclusion. A n d voila: B y a sort o f contradiction, the sacred 
w o r l d is as though inclined by its very nature to spread into the same profane 
w o r l d that it otherwise excludes. W h i l e repelling the profane world, the sa-
cred w o r l d tends at the same time to flow into the profane w o r l d whenever 
that latter w o r l d comes near it. That is w h y they must be kept at a distance 
from each other and why, i n some sense, a void must be opened between them. 
W h a t necessitates such precautions is the extraordinary contagiousness 
that sacredness has. Far from remaining attached to the things that are marked 
w i t h it, sacredness possesses a certain transience. Even the. most superficial or 
indirect contact is enough for it to spread from one object to another. R e l i -
gious forces are so imagined as to appear always o n the point o f escaping the 
places they occupy and invading all that passes w i t h i n their reach. T h e nanja 
tree i n w h i c h an ancestral spirit lives is sacred for the individual w h o consid-
ers himself a reincarnation o f that ancestor. B u t every bird that comes to light 
u p o n that tree shares i n the same quality; so to touch the bird is forbidden as 
w e l l .
8 5 1 have already shown h o w the mere touch o f a churinga is enough to 
85Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 133. 


The Negative Cult and Its Functions 
323 
sanctify people and things.
8 6 M o r e than that, all rites o f consecration are 
founded u p o n this principle, the contagiousness o f the sacred. Such, indeed, 
is the churinga's sacredness that it makes its influence felt at a distance. As we 
recall, this sacredness spreads not only to the cavity i n w h i c h churingas are 
kept but also to the w h o l e surrounding area, to the animals taking refuge 
there (which may not be killed), and to the plants growing there (which may 
not be plucked).
8 7 A snake t o t e m has its center at a place where there is a w a -
ter hole. T h e sacredness o f the totem is passed o n to the place, to the water 
hole, and to the water itself, w h i c h is forbidden to all members o f the 
totemic group.
8 8 T h e neophyte lives i n an atmosphere full o f religiousness, 
and he himself is as though suffused w i t h i t .
8 9 As a result, everything he has 
and everything he touches is forbidden to w o m e n and w i t h d r a w n from c o n -
tact w i t h them, d o w n to the bird he has struck w i t h his stick, the kangaroo 
he has r u n through w i t h his spear, and the fish that has struck his 
fishhook.
90 
B u t another side o f it is that the rites he undergoes and the things that 
play a role i n t h e m have greater sacredness than he. That sacredness is passed 
on contagiously to everything that brings either to m i n d . T h e tooth that has 
been pulled from his m o u t h is regarded as very sacred.
9 1 Therefore, he can-
not eat o f animals that have prominent teeth, since they b r i n g to m i n d the 
extracted tooth. T h e ceremonies o f the Kuringal end w i t h ritual washing.
9 2 
Aquatic birds are forbidden to the novice because they evoke this rite. T h e 
animals that climb all the way to the tops o f trees are sacrosanct to h i m as 
well, because they are too m u c h the neighbors o f Daramulun, the god o f i n i -
tiation, w h o lives i n the heavens.
9 3 T h e soul o f a dead man is a sacred being. 
We have already seen that the same property passes to the body i n w h i c h that 
soul has lived, to the place where it is buried, the camp where the man lived 
86See above, p. 120. 
87Spencer and Gülen, Native Tribes, pp. 134—135; [Carl] Strehlow, [Die Aranda- und Loritja-stamme in 
Zentral-Australien, Frankfurt, J. Baer, 1907], vol. II, p. 78. 
88Spencer and Gülen, Northern Tribes, pp. 167, 299. 
89Apart from the ascetic rites of which I have spoken, there are positive ones whose purpose is to fill 
or, as Howitt says, to saturate the neophyte with religiousness (Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 535). True, instead 
of 
speaking of religiousness, Howitt speaks of magic powers, but we know that, for the majority of ethno-
graphers, this word simply means religious virtues that are impersonal in nature. 
'"Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 674-675. 
91Spencer and Gülen, NativeTribes, p. 454. Cf. Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 561. 
92Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 557. 
"Ibid., p. 560. 


324 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
his life (which is destroyed or abandoned), the name he had, his wife, and his 
relations.
9 4 I t is as though they themselves are invested w i t h sacredness, so 
one keeps at a distance from them and does not treat t h e m as mere profane 
beings. I n the societies studied by Dawson, their names, like that o f the dead 
man, must not be spoken d u r i n g the period o f m o u r n i n g .
9 5 Certain o f the 
animals he ate may be prohibited as w e l l .
9 6 
This contagiousness o f the sacred is too well k n o w n a fact
9 7 for there to 
be any need to demonstrate its existence w i t h numerous examples. I have 
sought only to establish that it is as true o f totemism as i t is o f more advanced 
religions. Once noted, that contagiousness readily explains the extreme rigor 
o f the prohibitions that divide the sacred from the profane. B y virtue o f that 
exceptional volatility, the slightest contact, the least proximity o f a profane 
being, whether physical or simply moral, is enough to draw the religious 
forces outside their domain. O n the other hand, since they cannot exit w i t h -
out belying their nature, a w h o l e system o f measures to keep the t w o worlds 
at a respectful distance apart becomes indispensable. This is w h y ordinary 
people are forbidden not only to touch but also to see or hear that w h i c h is 
sacred, and w h y these t w o kinds o f life must not mingle i n consciousness. 
Precautions to keep t h e m apart are all the more necessary because they tend 
to merge, even w h i l e opposing one another. 
A t the same time as we understand the multiplicity o f these prohibitions, 
we understand h o w they and the sanctions attached to t h e m function. O n e 
result o f the contagiousness inherent i n all that is sacred is this: A profane be-
i n g cannot violate a prohibition w i t h o u t having the religious force that he 
has improperly approached extend to h i m and take h i m over. B u t since there 
is antagonism between himself and that force, he finds himself subject to a 
94See above, pp. 307, 310. Cf. Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 498; Spencer and Gillen, Northern 
Tribes, pp. 506-507, 518-519, 526; Howitt, NativeTribes, pp. 449, 461, 469; Mathews, "Aboriginal Tribes 
of New South Wales and Victoria," RSNSW. vol. XXXVIII [1904], p. 274; Schulze, "Aborigines of. . . 
Finke River," p. 231; Wyatt, Adelaide and Encounter Bay Tribes, in Woods [The Native Tribes of South Aus-
tralia], pp. 165, 198. 
95[James Dawson], Australian Aborigines, [The Languages and Customs of SeveralTribes of 
Aborigines in the 
Western District of Victoria, Australia, Melbourne, G. Robertson, 1881], p. 42. 
^Howitt, NativeTribes, pp. 470-471. 
"On this question, see [William] Robertson Smith, [Lectures on] the Religion of 
the Semites [London, A. 
& C. Black, 1889], pp. 152ff., 446, 481; Frazer, "Taboo," in Encyclopedia Britannica; [Frank Byron] Jevons, 
Introduction to the History of Religions [London, Methuen, 1896], pp. 59ff.; Crawley, Mystic Rose, Chaps. 
2-9; Arnold] Van Gennep, Tabou et totémisme à Madagascar [étude descriptive et théorique, Paris, E. Leroux, 
1904], chap. 3. 


The Negative Cult and Its Functions 
325 
hostile power, the hostility o f w h i c h is inevitably manifested i n violent reac-
tions that tend to destroy h i m . This is w h y sickness and death are presumed 
to be the natural consequences o f all such transgressions, and such are the 
consequences that are presumed to occur by themselves w i t h a sort o f phys-
ical necessity. T h e culprit feels invaded by a force that takes h i m over and 
against w h i c h he is powerless. Has he eaten the totemic animal? H e feels it 
pervading h i m and gnawing at his entrails; he lies o n the ground and awaits 
death.
9 8 Every profanation implies a consecration, but one that is dreadful to 
whoever is consecrated and whoever comes near h i m . Indeed the results o f 
that consecration i n part sanction the p r o h i b i t i o n .
9 9 
Notice that this explanation o f the prohibitions does not depend u p o n 
the varied symbols w i t h whose help the religious forces can be imagined. It 
is o f little consequence whether they are imagined as anonymous and i m -
personal energies or as personalities endowed w i t h consciousness and feeling. 
To be sure, they are thought i n the first case to react against profaning trans-
gressions mechanically and unconsciously, whereas i n the second they are 
thought to obey goadings o f passion aroused by the offense. Fundamentally, 
however, these t w o conceptions (which, by the way, have the same practical 
effects) do no more than express one and the same psychic mechanism i n t w o 
different languages. B o t h are based o n the antagonism between the sacred 
and the profane, plus the remarkable capacity o f the first to be passed o n to 
the second. T h e antagonism and the contagiousness act i n the same way, 
whether sacredness is i m p u t e d to blind forces or to consciousnesses. So au-
thentically religious life is far from beginning only where mythical personal-
ities exist, for w e see i n this case that the rite remains the same whether or 
not the religious beings are personified. This observation is one I w i l l have 
occasion to repeat i n each o f the chapters to come. 
IV 
I f the contagiousness o f the sacred helps to explain the system o f prohibi-
tions, h o w is this contagiousness itself to be explained? 
Some have thought they could account for i t by the w e l l - k n o w n laws 
98See the references above, p. 128, n. 1. Cf. Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 323, 324; Spencer 
and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 168; Taplin, The Narrinyeri, p. 16; Roth, [possibly "Marriage Ceremonies"], 
p. 76. 
"Bear in mind that when the prohibition violated is religious, these sanctions are not the only ones; 
there is, besides, either an actual punishment or a public stigma. 


326 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
governing the association o f ideas. Feelings evoked by a person or a thing 
spread contagiously, from the idea o f that thing or person to the representa-
tions associated w i t h it, and from there to the objects w i t h w h i c h those rep-
resentations become associated. T h e respect we have for a sacred being is 
thereby communicated to all that touches this being and to all that resembles 
it or calls i t to m i n d . O f course, an educated man is not the dupe o f such 
associations. H e knows that the emotions result from mere plays o f images, 
entirely mental combinations, and he w i l l not abandon himself to the super-
stitions that those illusions tend to create. B u t , i t is said, the primitive objec-
tifies these impressions naively, w i t h o u t critiquing them. Does a thing inspire 
reverent fear i n him? F r o m the fear, the conclusion: A majestic and awesome 
force does indeed live i n it, so he keeps his distance from that thing and treats 
it as i f i t was sacred, even though i t is i n no way entitled to b e .
1 0 0 
To say this, however, is to forget that the most primitive religions are not 
the only ones that have ascribed to sacredness such an ability to propagate. 
Even the most m o d e r n cults have a set o f rites based o n this principle. Does 
not every consecration by anointing or washing transmit the sanctifying 
virtues o f a sacred object into a profane one? A l t h o u g h that mode o f t h i n k -
ing has no natural explanation or justification, still i t is hard to see today's en-
lightened Catholic as a k i n d o f backward savage. Moreover, the tendency to 
objectify every e m o t i o n is ascribed to the primitive quite arbitrarily. I n 
everyday life, i n the details o f his secular occupations, he does not attribute 
to one thing the properties o f its neighbor, or vice versa. To be sure, he is less 
infatuated w i t h clarity and distinctness than w e are. Even so, i t is far from 
true that living i n h i m is w h o - k n o w s - w h a t deplorable inclination to scram-
ble everything, to r u n everything together. It is religious thought alone that 
has a marked inclination toward fusions o f this sort. Clearly, then, it is not i n 
the general laws o f human intelligence that we must seek the o r i g i n o f these 
predispositions but i n the special nature o f religious things. 
W h e n a force or a property seems to us to be an integral part, a c o n -
stituent element, o f whatever i t inhabits, we do not easdy imagine it as capa-
ble o f detaching itself and going elsewhere. A body is defined by its mass and 
atomic composition; we do not imagine either that i t can pass o n any o f 
these distinguishing properties by mere contact. O n the other hand, i f the 
force is one that has entered the body from outside, the idea that it should be 
100See Jevons, Introduction to the History of 
Religion, pp. 67—68.1 will say nothing about the (by the way, 
barely formulated) theory of Crawley (Mystic Rose, chaps. 4
—
7
)
, in which the reason taboos are contagious 
is that certain phenomena of contagion are erroneously interpreted. That is arbitrary. As 
Jevons quite cor-
recdy observes in the passage to which I refer the reader, the contagiousness of the sacred is affirmed a pri-
ori, and not on the basis of improperly interpreted experiences. 


The Negative Cult and Its Functions 
327 
able to escape from that body is i n no way unimaginable, for nothing attaches 
it there. Thus, the heat or electricity that any object has received from out-
side can be transmitted to the surrounding milieu, and the m i n d readily ac-
cepts the possibility o f that transmission. I f religious forces are generally 
conceived o f as external to the beings i n w h i c h they reside, then there is no 
surprise i n the extreme ease w i t h w h i c h religious forces radiate and diffuse. 
This is precisely what the theory I have put forward implies. 
Religious forces are i n fact only transfigured collective forces, that is, 
moral forces; they are made o f ideas and feelings that the spectacle o f society 
awakens i n us, not o f sensations that come to us from the physical w o r l d . 
Thus, they are quahtatively different from the tangible things i n w h i c h we l o -
calize them. F r o m those things they may very well b o r r o w the outward and 
physical forms i n w h i c h they are imagined, but they owe none o f their power 
to those things. T h e y are not held by internal bonds to the various supports 
on w h i c h they eventually settle and are not rooted i n them. To use a w o r d I 
have used already and that best characterizes t h e m ,
1 0 1 they are superadded. 
Thus no objects, to the exclusion o f others, are predisposed to receiving 
those forces. T h e most insignificant objects, even the most commonplace 
ones, can play this role. Chance circumstances decide w h i c h are the elect. Let 
us recall the terms i n w h i c h C o d r i n g t o n speaks o f mana: " I t is a force that is 
by no means fixed on a material object, but that can be carried on almost any sort of 
object!'
102 Similarly, Miss Fletcher's Dakota portrayed wakan for us as a k i n d 
o f m o v i n g force that comes and goes throughout the w o r l d , alighting here or 
there w i t h o u t settling anywhere once and for a l l .
1 0 3 T h e religiousness that is 
inherent i n man is no different. I t is true that, i n the w o r l d o f experience, no 
being is closer to the very source o f religious life; none participates i n i t more 
direcdy, for human consciousness is the place where it develops. A n d yet we 
k n o w that the religious principle that animates man, the soul, is partly exter-
nal to h i m . 
I f the religious forces do not have a place o f their o w n anywhere, their 
mobility becomes easy to explain. Since n o t h i n g binds them to the things i n 
w h i c h we localize them, it is not surprising that they escape from those 
things u p o n the slightest contact—against their w i l l , so to speak. T h e i r i n -
tensity pushes t h e m o n toward diffusion, w h i c h everything facilitates. This is 
w h y the soul itself, though holding onto the body w i t h entirely personal 
101See above, p. 230. 
102See above, p. 197. [I have rendered this passage by Codrington according to the two slighdy differ-
ent renderings by Dürkheim. Trans.] 
103See above, p. 201. 


328 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
bonds, continually threatens to leave it; all the openings and pores o f the 
body are so many channels through w h i c h i t tends to spread and diffuse to 
the outside.
1 0 4 
B u t the phenomenon w e are trying to understand w i l l be explained bet-
ter still if, instead o f considering the fully formed concept o f religious forces, 
we go back to the mental process from w h i c h i t results. 
W e have seen that the sacredness o f a being did not depend upon any one 
o f its inherent characteristics. I t is not because the totemic animal has this or 
that appearance or property that i t inspires religious feelings. T h e causes o f 
those feelings are entirely foreign to the nature o f the object o n w h i c h they 
eventually settle. W h a t constitutes those feelings are the impressions o f reas-
surance and dependence that are created i n consciousness through the w o r k -
ings o f society. B y themselves, these emotions are not b o u n d to the idea o f 
any definite object. B u t since they are emotions, and especially intense ones, 
they are eminently contagious as well. Hence, they are like an o i l slick; they 
spread to all the other mental states that occupy the m i n d . T h e y pervade and 
contaminate especially those representations i n w h i c h are expressed the var-
ious objects that the man at that very m o m e n t has i n his hands or before his 
eyes: Totemic designs that cover his body, bull roarers that he causes to res-
onate, rocks that surround h i m , ground that he tramps underfoot, and so on. 
So it is that these objects themselves take o n religious significance that is not 
intrinsic to t h e m but is conferred o n t h e m from outside. Hence contagion is 
not a k i n d o f secondary process by w h i c h sacredness propagates, once ac-
quired, but is instead the very process by w h i c h sacredness is acquired. I t set-
des by contagion; we should not be surprised that i t is transmitted 
contagiously. A special e m o t i o n gives it the reality i t has; i f sacredness be-
comes attached to an object, that happens because the e m o t i o n has encoun-
tered the object o n its path. I t naturally spreads from the object to all the 
others it finds nearby—that is, to all that some cause has brought close to the 
first i n the m i n d , whether physical contiguity or mere similarity. 
Thus, the contagious quality o f sacredness finds its explanation i n the 
theory o f religious forces that I have proposed, and that very fact serves as 
confirmation o f the theory.
1 0 5 A t the same time, i t helps us understand a fea-
ture o f primitive mentality to w h i c h I previously called attention. 
104This Preuss clearly demonstrated in the Globus articles I cited previously. 
1 0 5It is true that the contagiousness is not peculiar to religious forces, for those belonging to magic 
have the same property. And yet it is evident that those forces do not correspond to objectified social feel-
ings. This is because the magic forces were conceived on the model of religious forces. I will return later 
to this point (see p. 366). 


The Negative Cult and Its Functions 
329 
We have seen
1 0 6 h o w easily the primitive assimilates disparate kingdoms 
o f nature and sees the most disparate things as identical—men, animals, 
plants, stars, and so forth. W e n o w see one o f the causes that contributed 
most to facilitating these fusions. Because religious forces are eminently c o n -
tagious, a single principle is continually found to be animating the most dis-
parate things. I t passes among t h e m as a result o f mere physical nearness or 
mere similarity, even superficial similarity. So i t is that men, animals, plants, 
and rocks are held to participate i n the same totem: the men because they 
carry the name o f the animal; the plants because they serve as food for the 
animal; the rocks because they stand where the ceremonies are conducted. 
The religious forces are considered the source o f all that is powerful; as a re-
sult, beings that had the same religious principle must have seemed to be o f 
the same essence and to differ from one another only i n secondary charac-
teristics. This is w h y i t seemed entirely natural to put t h e m i n the same cat-
egory and to v i e w t h e m as varieties w i t h i n a single genus and as transmutable 
into one another. 
Once established, this relationship makes the phenomena o f contagion 
appear i n a new light. B y themselves, they seem aben to logical Ufe. D o they 
not bring about the mingling and fusion o f things, despite the natural differ-
ences o f those things? B u t we have seen that these fusions and participations 
have played a logical role, and one o f great utility: They have served to con-
nect things that sensation leaves separate from one another. Thus, the sort o f 
fundamental irrationality that we are at first led to impute to contagion, the 
source o f that bringing together and mixing, is far from being its distinctive 
mark. Contagion prepared the way for the scientific explanations o f the future. 
106See above, p. 237. 


CHAPTER TWO 
THE POSITIVE CULT 
The Elements of the Sacrifice 
W
hatever its importance and although i t has indirectly positive effects, 
the negative cult is not an end i n itself. I t gives access to religious life 
but presupposes, rather than constitutes, that life. I f the negative cult c o m -
mands the faithful to flee the profane w o r l d , the point is to draw them closer 
to the sacred w o r l d . M a n has never imagined that his duties toward the reli-
gious forces could be h m i t e d to abstinence from all commerce. H e has always 
thought o f himself as maintaining positive bilateral relations w i t h them, 
w h i c h a set o f ritual practices regulate and organize. To this special system o f 
rites I give the name "positive cult." 
For a long time, we were almost entirely ignorant o f what the positive cult 
o f totemic religion might include. W e k n e w almost nothing beyond the i n i t i -
ation rites, and those inadequately. This gap i n our knowledge has been par-
tially 
filled by the studies o f Spencer and Gillen o n the tribes o f central 
Australia, for w h i c h Schulze paved the way and w h i c h Strehlow has con-
firmed. There is one celebration i n particular that these explorers were espe-
cially intent o n describing and that seem to dominate the totemic cult: the one 
that, according to Spencer and Gillen, the Arunta call the Intichiuma. I t is true 
that Strehlow disputes this meaning o f the w o r d . According to h i m , intichiuma 
(or as he spells it, intijiuma) means "to teach" and designates the ceremonies 
that are performed before the young man for the purpose o f initiating h i m 
into the traditions o f the tribe. H e says that the feast I w i l l describe bears the 
name mbatjalkatiuma, w h i c h means "to fertilize" or "to repair."
1 I w i l l not try 
to setde this question o f vocabulary, w h i c h is beside the point—all the more 
so, i n that the rites to be discussed are also conducted during initiation. B e -
'[Carl] Strehlow, [DieAranda- und Loritja-Stämme in Zentral-Australien, Frankfurt, J. Baer, 1907], vol. I, 
p.4. 
330 


The Positive Cult 
331 
sides, since today the w o r d "Intichiuma" belongs to the c o m m o n parlance o f 
ethnography, to substitute another w o u l d seem poindess.
2 
The date o n w h i c h the Intichiuma takes place depends largely o n the 
time o f year. I n central Australia there are t w o clearly marked seasons: a dry 
season, w h i c h lasts a l o n g time, and a rainy one, w h i c h by contrast is short 
and often irregular. As soon as the rains come, the plants spring from the 
ground as i f by a spell, the animals multiply, and lands that were but sterile 
deserts the day before are rapidly covered again w i t h luxuriant flora and 
fauna. T h e Intichiuma is celebrated at the precise m o m e n t w h e n the good 
season seems at hand. B u t because the rainy season is quite variable, the date 
o f the ceremonies cannot be set once and for all. I t varies according to c l i -
matic conditions, w h i c h only the head o f the totemic group, the Alatunja, is 
qualified to assess. O n the day he judges to be appropriate, he informs his 
people that the time has come.
3 
Each totemic group has its o w n Intichiuma. A l t h o u g h the rite is found 
throughout the societies o f the center, i t is not the same everywhere. A m o n g 
the Warramunga i t is not the same as i t is among the Arunta, and i t varies not 
only by tribe but also by clan w i t h i n the same tribe. Still, the various proce-
dures i n use are too akin to one another to be completely dissociable. There 
are probably no ceremonies that do not have several o f those mechanisms, 
but quite unequally developed. W h a t exists only as a seed i n one case d o m i -
nates elsewhere, and vice versa. Still i t is important to distinguish t h e m care-
fully. T h e y constitute so many different ritual types that we must describe 
and explain separately—and only after that try to discern whether they all 
have a c o m m o n origin. I w i l l begin w i t h those that are observed more 
specifically among the Arunta. 
I 
T h e feast has t w o successive phases. T h e series o f rites that occur one after 
the other i n the first phrase are intended to ensure the well-being o f the an-
imal or plant species that serves as the t o t e m o f the clan. T h e means used for 
this purpose are reducible to a few main types. 
2The word designating that feast varies by tribe. The Urabunna call it Pijinta ([Sir Baldwin] Spencer 
and [Francis James] Gillen, Northern Tribes [of Central Australia, London, Macmillan, 1904], p. 284); the 
Warramunga, Thalaminta (ibid., p. 297), etc. 
3[R_ev. Louis] Schulze, "Aborigines of the Upper and Middle Finke River," RSSA, vol. XIV [1891], 
p. 243; [Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen, Native Tribes [of Central Australia, London, 
Macmillan, 1904], pp. 169-170. 


332 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
Recall that the mythical ancestors from w h i c h each clan is thought to 
descend once lived o n earth and left traces o f their passage. I n particular, 
those traces include stones or rocks that they are thought to have set d o w n i n 
certain places or that were f o r m e d at the places where they sank into the 
ground. T h e rocks and stones are considered to be the bodies or body parts 
o f the ancestors whose m e m o r y they evoke and w h o m they represent. Since 
an individual and his t o t e m are one, it follows that they also represent the an-
imals and plants that were the totems o f those same ancestors. Consequently, 
the same reality and the same properties are accorded to t h e m as to the ani-
mals and plants o f the same sort that live today. T h e advantage they have over 
these latter is to be i m m o r t a l — t o k n o w neither sickness nor death. I n this 
way, they constitute something like a permanent, unchanging, and always 
available stock o f animal and plant life. A n d i n a certain number o f cases, it is 
this reserve that people draw u p o n annually to ensure the reproduction o f the 
species. 
Here, as an example, is h o w the W i t c h e t t y G r u b clan, at Alice Springs, 
conducts its Intichiuma.
4 
O n the day set by the chief, all the members o f the totemic group gather 
at the main camp. T h e m e n o f other totems retire a certain distance; among 
the Arunta, they are forbidden to be present at the celebration o f the rite, 
w h i c h has all the characteristics o f a secret ceremony.
5 Sometimes an i n d i -
vidual o f the same phratry but a different t o t e m may be invited as a courtesy, 
but only as a witness. U n d e r no circumstances may he take an active role. 
Once the m e n o f the t o t e m have gathered, they depart, leaving only t w o 
or three o f their number at the camp. Completely naked, w i t h o u t weapons, 
and w i t h o u t any o f their usual ornaments, they walk single fde, i n profound 
silence. T h e i r attitude and pace are marked w i t h religious solemnity, because 
the act i n w h i c h they are taking part is, i n their eyes, one o f exceptional i m -
portance. I n addition, they must observe a rigorous fast u n t i l the end o f the 
ceremony. 
T h e land they cross is filled w i t h mementos left by the glorious ances-
tors. Finally they reach a place where a large block o f quartzite is stuck i n the 
earth, surrounded by small, rounded stones. T h e block represents the w i t c h -
etty grub i n its adult state. T h e Alatunja hits it w i t h a sort o f small w o o d e n 
plate, called an apmara,
6 w h i l e i n t o n i n g a chant whose object is to invite the 
"Ibid., pp. 170fF. 
5Of course, the same obligation binds the women. 
6The Apmara [Dürkheim capitalized here. Trans.] is the only object he has brought from the camp. 


The Positive Cult 
333 
animal to lay eggs. H e does the same w i t h the stones, w h i c h represent the 
eggs o f the animal, and, using one o f them, he rubs the stomach o f each per-
son i n attendance. This done, they all descend a little lower, to the foot o f a 
rock that the Alcheringa myths also celebrate, and at the base o f w h i c h is 
found another stone that again represents the witchetty grub. T h e Alatunja 
strikes i t w i t h his apmara; the m e n accompanying h i m do the same w i t h g u m 
tree branches that they have gathered o n the way, all this amid hymns repeat-
ing the invitation earlier addressed to the animal. Nearly ten different places, 
sometimes a mile apart, are visited one after the other. A t each o f them, i n 
the back o f a sort o f cave or hole, is a stone that is said to represent the w i t c h -
etty grub i n one o f its aspects or phases o f life, and the same ceremonies are 
repeated o n each o f these stones. 
T h e meaning o f the rite is apparent. T h e Alatunja strikes the sacred 
stones i n order to detach some dust from it. T h e grains o f this very holy* 
dust are regarded as so many seeds o f life, each containing a spiritual p r i n c i -
ple that, by entering an organism o f the same species, w i l l give b i r t h therein 
to a n e w being. T h e tree branches that the participants carry are used to 
spread this precious dust i n all directions; i t goes forth i n all directions to do 
its w o r k o f impregnation. B y this means, they believe they have ensured the 
abundant reproduction o f the animal species that the clan watches over, so to 
speak, and to w h i c h i t belongs. 
T h e natives themselves interpret the rite i n this way. I n the clan o f the 
Ilpirla (a sort o f manna), they proceed i n the following way. W h e n the day o f 
the Intichiuma has come, the group meets at a place where a large rock, 
about five feet high, stands; a second rock that looks very m u c h like the first 
rises o n top o f it, and smaller rocks surround this one. B o t h represent accu-
mulations o f manna. T h e Alatunja digs i n the ground at the foot o f these 
rocks and brings forth a churinga that is said to have been buried there i n 
Alcheringa times and that itself is like the quintessence o f mana. H e then 
climbs to the top o f the higher rock and rubs i t first w i t h this churinga, then 
w i t h the smaller stones that are around it. Finally, using tree branches, he 
sweeps the dust that has collected o n the surface o f the rock. Each o f the 
other participants does the same thing i n turn. N o w , say Spencer and Gillen, 
the thought o f the natives "is that the dust thus dispersed w i l l go and rest o n 
the mulga trees and there produce manna." These operations are accompa-
nied by a h y m n sung by the participants that expresses this idea.
7 
T h e same rite is found, w i t h variations, i n other societies. A m o n g the 
*Sainte. 
'Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 185-186. 


334 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
Urabunna, there is a rock representing an ancestor o f the Lizard clan; stones 
are detached from i t and t h r o w n i n all directions i n order to obtain abundant 
lizard births.
8 I n this same tribe, there is a sand bank that mythological recol-
lection closely associates w i t h the totem o f the louse. There are t w o trees at 
the same place—one called the tree o f the ordinary louse, the other that o f 
the crab louse. T h e worshippers take some o f the sand, rub it against those 
trees, and throw it i n all directions, being convinced that by this means many 
lice w i l l be b o r n .
9 T h e Mara go about the Intichiuma o f bees by spreading 
dust that has been detached from sacred rocks.
1 0 A somewhat 
different 
method is used for the plains kangaroo. T h e y collect some kangaroo dung 
and wrap it i n a grass that the animal is very fond o f and that therefore be-
longs to the kangaroo totem. They place the dung o n the ground i n the 
wrapping, between t w o layers o f the same grass, and then set fire to all o f this. 
W i t h the flame that results, they light tree branches and then shake them, so 
sparks fly i n all directions. These sparks play the same role as the dust o f the 
preceding cases.
11 
I n a number o f clans,
1 2 the m e n m i x some o f their o w n substance w i t h 
that o f the stone, i n order to make this rite more efficacious. Young men 
open their veins and let the blood gush onto the rock. This occurs, for ex-
ample, i n the Hakea Flower Intichiuma, among the Arunta. T h e ceremony 
is held at a sacred place, around a stone that is also sacred and that, i n the eyes 
o f the natives, represents hakea flowers. After several preliminary operations, 
"the old man w h o is conducting the rite asks a young man to open his veins. 
T h e y o u n g man obeys and lets his blood flow freely onto the stone, while 
those present continue to sing. T h e blood flows until the stone is completely 
covered w i t h i t . "
1 3 T h e object o f this practice is to infuse new life into the 
virtues the stone contains and make i t more powerful. Bear i n m i n d that the 
clansmen themselves are relatives o f the plant or animal whose name they 
bear. T h e same life-principle resides i n them, especially i n their blood. N a t -
urally, then, this b l o o d and the mystical seeds carried along by it are used to 
ensure the regular reproduction o f the totemic species. W h e n a man is sick 
or tired, it is c o m m o n among the Arunta for one o f his young companions 
8Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 288. 
9Ibid. 
10Ibid., p. 312. 
"Ibid. 
12We will see below that these clans are much more numerous than Spencer and Gillen say. 
"Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 184-185. 


The Positive Cult 
335 
to open his o w n veins and sprinkle the ading man w i t h the blood to revive 
h i m .
1 4 I f blood can thus reawaken life i n a man, it is not surprising that blood 
can also serve to awaken life i n the animal or plant species w i t h w h i c h the 
men o f the clan are identified. 
The same technique is used i n the Kangaroo Intichiuma at Undiara 
(Arunta). T h e setting for the ceremony is a water hole precipitously over-
hung by a rock. This rock represents an Alcheringa animal-kangaroo that was 
killed and set i n this place by a man-kangaroo o f the same period. For that 
reason, many spirits o f kangaroos are thought to reside here. After a number 
o f sacred stones have been rubbed against one another i n the manner I have 
described, several o f those present climb onto the rock and let their blood 
flow all along i t .
1 5 " T h e purpose o f this ceremony, according to what the na-
tives say, is actually the following. T h e blood o f the man-kangaroo is spilled 
on the rock i n order to free the spirits o f animal-kangaroos and scatter t h e m 
in all directions; the effect must be to increase the number o f kangaroos."
1 6 
There is even a case among the Arunta i n w h i c h blood seems to be the 
active principle o f the rite. I n the E m u group, neither stones nor anything re-
sembling stones are used. T h e Alatunja and certain o f those w i t h h i m sprin-
kle the ground w i t h their blood. O n the ground thus moistened, they trace 
lines o f various colors, w h i c h represent the various parts o f the emu's body. 
They kneel around this drawing and chant a monotonous h y m n . F r o m the 
Active emu incanted i n this way, hence from the blood used i n doing so, life-
principles come forth that w i l l animate the embryos o f the new generation 
and thus prevent the species from dying o u t .
1 7 
A clan among the W o n k g o n g a r u
1 8 has a certain k i n d offish as its totem; 
i n the Intichiuma o f this totem as well, b l o o d plays the central role. After 
having painted himself ceremonially, the chief o f the group enters a water 
14Ibid., pp. 438, 461, 464; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 596£F. 
''Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 201. 
16Ibid., p. 206.1 use the language of Spencer and Gillen and say, as they do, that it is the spirits of kan-
garoos that come away 
from 
the rocks (spirits or spirit parts of kangaroos). Strehlow, Aranda (vol. Ill, p. 7), 
disputes the accuracy of this phrase. According to him, it is real kangaroos, living bodies, that the rite 
causes to appear. But quite like the dispute over the notion of ratapa (see p. 2
5
4
—
2
5
5 above), this one is 
without interest. Since the kangaroo seeds that escape from the rocks are invisible, they are not made of 
the same substance as the kangaroos our senses perceive. That is all Spencer and Gillen mean. It is quite 
certain, moreover, that these are not pure spirits as a Christian might conceive of them. Just like human 
souls, they have physical forms. 
17Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 181. 
1 8A tribe living east of Lake Eyre. 


336 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
hole and sits d o w n i n it. T h e n , using little pointed bones, he pierces his scro-
t u m and then the skin around his navel. " T h e b l o o d that flows from these 
various wounds spreads i n the water and gives rise to fish."
1 9 
T h e D i e r i believe they make t w o o f their totems reproduce, the carpet 
snake and the w o m a snake (an ordinary snake), by a similar practice. A M u r a -
mura called M i n k a n i is believed to live under a dune. His body is represented 
by fossil bones o f animals or reptiles such as are found, H o w i t t tells us, i n the 
deltas o f the rivers that empty into Lake Eyre. W h e n the day o f the ceremony 
comes, the m e n assemble and go to the place where M i n k a n i is to be found. 
There they dig u n t i l they reach a layer o f damp earth, w h i c h they call "the 
excrement o f M i n k a n i . " F r o m then o n , they continue to sift through the soil 
w i t h great care u n t i l "the elbow o f M i n k a n i " is uncovered. T h e n t w o men 
open their veins and let the b l o o d flow o n the sacred stone. T h e songs o f 
M i n k a n i are sung w h i l e the participants, caught up i n a veritable frenzy, 
strike one another w i t h their weapons. T h e battle continues u n t i l their re-
t u r n to camp, about a mile away. There the w o m e n intervene and end the 
fighting. T h e b l o o d that flows from the wounds is collected and mixed w i t h 
the "excrement o f M i n k a n i " ; the products o f the mixture are sowed o n the 
dune. H a v i n g carried out the rite, they are convinced that carpet snakes w i l l 
be b o r n i n abundance.
2 0 
I n some cases, the substance used as a vitalizing principle is the same one 
they are trying to produce. A m o n g the Kaitish, a sacred stone representing 
the mythical heroes o f the Water clan is sprinkled d u r i n g the rainmaking cer-
emony. I t is apparendy believed that the productive virtues o f the stone are 
by this means increased, just as they are w i t h blood, and for the same rea-
sons.
2 1 A m o n g the Mara, the celebrant goes to draw water i n a sacred hole, 
drinks some and spits some i n each direction.
2 2 A m o n g the Wbrgaia, w h e n 
the yams begin to grow, the head o f the Y a m clan sends people belonging to 
the phratry to w h i c h he himself does not belong to harvest some o f the 
plants; they b r i n g h i m some and ask h i m to intervene so that the species w i l l 
develop well. H e takes one, bites i t and throws pieces i n all directions.
2 3 
"Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 287-288. 
^[Alfred William] Howitt, Native Tribes [of South-East Australia, London, Macmillan, 1904], p. 798. 
Cf. Howitt, "Legends of the Dieri and Kindred Tribes of Central Australia," JAI, vol. XXIV [1885], 
pp. 124ff. Howitt believes that the ceremony is conducted by the people of the totem but is not in a po-
sition to certify this fact. 
2lSpencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 295. 
22Ibid., p. 314 
23Ibid., pp. 296-297. 


The Positive Cult 
337 
A m o n g the Kaitish, w h e n (after various rites w h i c h I w i l l not describe) a 
certain seed grass called erlipinna comes to full maturity, the chief o f the 
totem brings a little to the men's camp and grinds it between t w o stones. T h e 
dust thereby obtained is piously collected, and several grains o f i t are placed 
on the hps o f the chief, w h o blows, scattering t h e m i n all directions. U n -
doubtedly, the purpose o f this contact w i t h the m o u t h o f the chief, w h i c h 
has a special sacramental virtue, is to stimulate the vitality o f the seeds c o n -
tained w i t h i n these kernals and that, propelled to all points o f the horizon, 
w i l l spread their fertilizing properties to the plants.
2 4 
For the native, the efficacy o f these rites is beyond doubt: H e is con-
vinced that they must produce the results he expects o f them, and w i t h a sort 
o f necessity. I f the outcome does not live up to his hopes, he merely con-
cludes that they have been cancelled out by the evil deeds o f some hostile 
group. I n any case, i t does not enter his m i n d that a favorable outcome might 
be obtained by other means. If, by chance, the vegetation grows, or i f the 
animals multiply before he has carried out the Intichiuma, he assumes that 
another Intichiuma has been celebrated—under the earth, by the souls o f 
the ancestors—and that the living reap the benefits o f this underground cer-
emony.
2 5 
24Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 170. 
25Ibid., p. 519. The analysis of the rites just studied has been made only with the observations that we 
owe to Spencer and Gillen. After this chapter was written, Strehlow published the third installment of his 
work, which treats the positive cult and, in particular, the Intichiuma—or, as he says, the rites of mbat-
jalkatiuma, I have found nothing in this publication that obliges me to alter the preceding description, or 
even to make major amendments. Of greatest interest in what Strehlow teaches us on this subject is that 
the sheddings and offerings of blood are much more common than might have been suspected from the 
account of Spencer and Gillen (see Strehlow, Aranda, vol. Ill, pp. 13, 14, 19, 29, 39, 43, 46, 56, 67, 80, 
89). 
Incidentally, Strehlow's information on the cult must be used circumspecdy, for he did not witness the 
rites he describes. He settled for collecting oral accounts, and in general these are rather sketchy (see vol. 
Ill, preface of Leonhardi, p. v). One can even ask whether he has not gone too far in assimilating the 
totemic ceremonies of initiation to those he calls mbatjalkatiuma. To be sure, he has not failed to make a 
laudable effort to distinguish them: indeed, he has brought out clearly two of their differentiating charac-
teristics. First, the Intichiuma is always conducted in a consecrated place, to which the memory of some 
ancestor is attached, whereas the initiation ceremonies may be conducted anywhere. Second, offerings of 
blood are specific to the Intichiuma, which proves that they are part and parcel of what is most essential 
to these rites (vol. Ill, p. 7). In the description of the rites that he gives, we 
find 
mingled together infor-
mation that refers indiscriminately to both kinds of rite. In fact, in the ones he describes for us under the 
name mbatjalkatiuma, the young men generally play an important role (see, for example, pp. 11, 13, 
etc.)—which is characteristic of initiation. Similarly, it even appears that the location of the rite is up to 
the participants, since they build an artificial stage. They dig a hole and go into it; throughout no refer-
ence is made to rocks or sacred trees and to their ritual role. 


338 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
II 
Such is act one o f the feast. 
Actually, there is no ceremony as such i n the period that immediately 
follows, yet religious life remains intense. I t reveals itself through a heighten-
ing i n the usual system o f prohibitions. T h e sacredness o f the totem is some-
h o w reinforced; there is less inclination to touch it. Whereas the Arunta may 
eat their totemic animal or plant i n ordinary times, provided they do so w i t h 
moderation, this right is suspended the day after the Intichiuma. T h e dietary 
prohibition is strict and unqualified. I t is believed that any violation w i l l neu-
tralize the beneficial effects o f the rite and arrest the reproduction o f the 
species. A l t h o u g h the people o f other totems w h o happen to be i n the same 
locality are not subject to the same restriction, they are not as free at this time 
as they ordinarily are. T h e y may not eat the totemic animal just anywhere— 
i n the bush, for example—but are required to b r i n g i t to the camp, and only 
there may it be cooked.
2 6 
There is a final ceremony to b r i n g these extraordinary prohibitions to an 
end and adjourn this long series o f rites. A l t h o u g h it varies somewhat ac-
cording to clan, the essential elements are the same everywhere. Here are 
t w o o f the principal forms the ceremony takes among the Arunta. O n e refers 
to the W i t c h e t t y G r u b and the other to the Kangaroo. 
Once the caterpillars have reached full maturity and prove to be abun-
dant, the people o f the totem, as well as others, collect as many as possible. 
Everyone then brings those they have found to camp and cook them until 
they become hard and crisp. T h e cooked products are kept i n a type o f 
w o o d e n container called a pitchi. Caterpillars can be harvested for only a very 
short time, as they appear only after the rain. W h e n they begin to be less 
plentiful, the Alatunja summons 
everyone to the men's camp; at the 
Alatunja's invitation, each brings his supply. T h e outsiders place theirs before 
the people o f the totem. W i t h the help o f his companions, the Alatunja takes 
one pitchi and grinds the contents between t w o stones. H e then eats a little 
o f the powder thus obtained, and the rest is given to the people o f the other 
clans, w h o from n o w o n may do what they want w i t h it. T h e procedure is 
exactly the same for the supply the Alatunja has made. F r o m this moment 
on, the m e n and w o m e n o f the t o t e m may eat some, but only a litde. I f they 
exceeded the permissible limits, they w o u l d lose the strength they need to 
celebrate the Intichiuma, and the species w o u l d not reproduce. B u t i f they 
26Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 203. Cf. [Rev. A.] Meyer, The Encounter Bay Tribe, in [James Do-
minick] Woods, [The Native Tribes of South Australia, Adelaide, E. S. Wigg, 1879], p. 187. 


The Positive Cult 
339 
ate none o f i t at all, and especially i f the Alatunja totally abstained from eat-
ing any i n the circumstances just mentioned, they w o u l d be stricken w i t h the 
same impotence. 
I n the totemic group o f the Kangaroo that has its center at Undiara, cer-
tain features o f the ceremony are more obvious. After the rites o n the sacred 
rock that I have described are done w i t h , the y o u n g m e n leave to hunt the 
kangaroo and b r i n g the game back to the men's camp. T h e elders, i n the 
midst o f w h o m stands the Alatunja, eat a little o f the animal's flesh and w i t h 
its fat anoint the bodies o f those w h o have taken part i n the Intichiuma. T h e 
rest is shared among the assembled men. N e x t , the m e n o f the totem deco-
rate themselves w i t h totemic designs, and the night is spent i n singing that 
recalls the exploits o f the m e n - and animal-kangaroos i n Alcheringa times. 
O n the following day, the y o u n g m e n go hunting again i n the forest, b r i n g -
ing back more kangaroos than they did the first time, and the ceremony o f 
the previous night resumes.
2 7 
W i t h variations o f detail, the same rite is found i n the other Arunta 
clans,
2 8 among the Urabunna,
2 9 the Kaitish,
3 0 the Unmatjera,
3 1 and the E n -
counter Bay tribe.
3 2 Everywhere it comprises the same basic elements. Several 
specimens o f the totemic plant or animal are presented to the head o f the clan, 
w h o solemnly eats some and is required to do so. I f he d i d not fulfill this oblig-
ation, he w o u l d lose his power to celebrate the Intichiuma efficaciously—that 
is, to create the species each year. Sometimes the ritual eating is followed by 
an anointing done w i t h the fat o f the animal or w i t h certain parts o f the 
plant.
3 3 Generally, the rite is repeated afterward by the men o f the totem, or at 
least by the elders. Once i t is over, the special restrictions are lifted. 
A t present, there is no such ceremony among the tribes farther north, 
the Warramunga and neighboring societies.
3 4 Nonetheless, one still finds 
traces that seem to evidence a time w h e n that was not u n k n o w n . I t is true 
27Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 204. 
28Ibid., pp. 205-207. 
29Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 286-287. 
30Ibid., p. 294. 
31lbid., p. 296. 
32Meyer, ["The Encounter Bay Tribe"] in Woods [The Native Tribes of South Australia], p. 187. 
3 3I have already cited one case of this; others are to be found in Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, 
p. 205; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 286. 
34The Walpari, Wulmala, Tjingili, Umbaia. 


340 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
that the head o f the clan never eats the t o t e m ritually and obligatorily. B u t in 
certain cases, the people w h o are not o f the totem whose Intichiuma has just 
been conducted are required to b r i n g the animal or plant to the camp and of-
fer it to the head, asking h i m i f he wishes to eat some. H e refuses and adds: 
" I have made this for you; y o u may eat freely o f i t . "
3 5 Thus the custom o f 
presentation persists and the question asked o f the chief seems to hark back 
to a time w h e n ritual eating was practiced.
3 6 
Ill 
W h a t gives the system o f rites just described its interest is that i t contains all 
the principal elements, and i n the most elementary f o r m n o w k n o w n , o f a 
great religious institution that was destined to become a foundation o f the 
positive cult i n the higher religions: the institution o f sacrifice. 
It is well k n o w n h o w m u c h the works o f Robertson Smith have revolu-
tionized the traditional theory o f sacrifice.
3 7 U n t i l Smith, sacrifice was seen 
only as a sort o f tribute or homage, either obligatory or freely given, and 
35Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 318. 
'"For this second part of the ceremony, as for the first, I have followed Spencer and Gillen. On this 
point, Strehlow's recent volume confirms the observations of his predecessors, at least in essentials. He 
recognizes, indeed, that after the 
first 
ceremony (on p. 13 he says two months after), the head of the clan 
ritually eats a bit of the totemic animal or plant, and that they then proceed to the lifting of the prohibi-
tions; he calls this operation die Freigabe des Totems zum allgemeinen Gebrauch (vol. Ill, p. 7). He even in-
forms us that this operation is important enough to be designated by a special word in the Arunta 
language. True, he adds that this ritual consumption is not the only one, that sometimes the chief and el-
ders also eat the sacred plant or animal before the initial ceremony, and that the celebrant in the rite does 
the same after the celebration. There is nothing implausible about this. Such acts of consumption are so 
many means used by the celebrants or the participants to confer on themselves the virtues they wish to 
acquire; it is not surprising that they should be multiple. None of that invalidates the account of Spencer 
and Gillen, for the rite they emphasize, not without reason, is the Freigabe des Totems. 
Strehlow disputes the claims of Spencer and Gillen on only two points. In the 
first 
place, he declares 
that the act of ritual consumption does not always take place. That fact is beyond question, because some 
totemic animals and plants are inedible. But the fact remains that the rite is very common; Strehlow him-
self cites numerous examples of it (pp. 13, 14, 19, 23, 33, 36, 50, 59, 67, 68, 71, 75, 80, 84, 89, 93). In 
the second place, we have seen that (according to Spencer and Gillen) if the chief of the clan did not par-
take of the totemic animal or plant, he would lose his powers. Strehlow assures us that native testimony 
does not corroborate this assertion. But this question seems to me altogether secondary. The certain fact 
is that this ritual consumption is prescribed—hence that it is judged to be useful or necessary. Like all 
communions, its only purpose is to confer on the communicant the virtues he needs. It does not follow 
from the fact that the natives, or some of them, have forgotten that this function of the rite is not real. 
Must it be repeated that worshippers most often do not know the real reasons for the practices that they 
carry out? 
37See [William Robertson Smith, Lectures on] the Religion of the Semites, 2d. ed., London, A. & C. 
Black, 1894], Lectures VI to XI, and the article "Sacrifice" in the Encyclopedia Britannica [Edinburgh, 
Adam & Charles Black, 1891]. 


The Positive Cult 
341 
analogous to those that subjects owe their princes. Robertson Smith was the 
first to draw attention to the fact that this traditional explanation d i d not ac-
count for t w o fundamental features o f the rite. First, it is a meal; the sub-
stance o f sacrifice is food. Second, i t is a meal o f w h i c h the faithful w h o offer 
it partake at the same time as the god to w h o m it is offered. Certain parts o f 
the v i c t i m are reserved for the deity; others are conferred o n the celebrants, 
w h o consume them. This is why, i n the Bible, the sacrifice is sometimes 
called a meal prepared before Yahweh. I n many societies, the meal is taken i n 
c o m m o n to create a b o n d o f artificial kinship among the participants. K i n are 
beings w h o are made o f the same flesh and the same blood. A n d since food 
constantly remakes the substance o f the body, shared food can create the 
same effects as shared origin. According to Smith, the object o f sacrificial 
banquets is to have the faithful and the god commune i n one and the same 
flesh, to tie a knot o f kinship between them. F r o m this perspective, sacrifice 
came into v i e w i n an altogether novel way. Its essence was no longer the act 
o f renunciation that the w o r d "sacrifice" usually expresses, as was so l o n g be-
lieved; i t was first and foremost an act o f alimentary c o m m u n i o n . 
I n particular details, no doubt, this manner o f explaining what sacrificial 
banquets achieve must be qualified. W h a t they achieve does not result ex-
clusively from the fact o f sharing a c o m m o n table. M a n does not sanctify 
himself only because, i n some sense, he sits d o w n at the same table as the god, 
but principally because the food that he consumes i n the ritual meal has sa-
credness. Indeed, as has been shown, a w h o l e series o f preliminary steps i n 
the sacrifice (washings, anointings, prayers, and so on) transform the animal 
to be immolated into a sacred thing, the sacredness o f w h i c h is thereafter 
communicated to the faithful w h o partake o f i t .
3 8 B u t i t is no less true that 
alimentary c o m m u n i o n is among the essential elements o f sacrifice. N o w , i f 
we go back to the rite that ends the Intichiuma ceremonies, it too consists i n 
an act o f this k i n d . W h e n the totemic animal is killed, the Alatunja and the 
elders solemnly partake o f it. Thus they commune w i t h the sacred principle 
that inhabits it, and they absorb that principle into themselves. T h e only dif-
ference i n this context is that the animal is sacred naturally, whereas ordinar-
ily it acquires sacredness only artificially i n the course o f the sacrifice. 
Furthermore, the function o f this c o m m u n i o n is manifest. Every m e m -
ber o f the totemic clan carries w i t h i n himself a k i n d o f mystic substance that 
makes up the higher part o f his being: His soul is made from that substance. 
H e becomes a person through it; the powers he ascribes to himself, and his 
38See Hubert and Mauss, "Essai sur la nature et la fonction du sacrifice," in Mélanges d'histoire des reli-
gions [Paris, F. Alcan, 1909], pp. 40ff. 


342 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
social role, come to h i m from it. So he has a vital interest i n preserving it i n -
tact and i n keeping i t i n a state o f perpetual y o u t h as m u c h as possible. Alas, 
all forces, even the most spiritual, are w o r n away w i t h the passage o f time i f 
nothing replenishes the energy they lose i n the ordinary course o f events: 
Herein lies a vital necessity that, as we w i l l see, is the profound cause o f the 
positive cult. T h e people o f a totem cannot remain themselves unless they 
periodically renew the totemic principle that is i n them, and since they con-
ceive this principle i n the f o r m o f a plant or an animal, they go to that ani-
mal or plant to seek the strength they need to renew and rejuvenate it. A man 
o f the Kangaroo clan believes he is, and feels he is, a kangaroo. T h r o u g h that 
quality he defines himself, and it determines his place i n society. I n order to 
maintain that quality, from time to time he causes a little flesh o f that animal 
to pass into his o w n substance. A few bits are enough, i n accordance w i t h the 
rule that the part is as good as the w h o l e .
3 9 
To make all the hoped-for results possible, however, i t is important that 
this procedure not occur at just any time. T h e time w h e n the new genera-
tion has just reached its full development is the most opportune, for that is 
also w h e n the forces that animate the totemic species come into full b l o o m . 
They have just been extracted from the r i c h reservoirs o f life that are the sa-
cred trees and rocks. Besides, all sorts o f means have been used to heighten 
their intensity, such being the purpose o f the rites that have occurred i n the 
first part o f the Intichiuma. W h a t is more, by their very appearance, the first 
fruits 
o f the harvest make the energy they contain manifest. I n those 
first 
fruits, 
the totemic god asserts himself i n all the splendor o f youth. This is 
why, throughout the ages, the first fruits have been considered very sacred 
food, reserved to very sacred beings. Naturally, therefore, the Australian uses 
them to regenerate himself spiritually. I n this way, b o t h the date and the cir-
cumstances o f the ceremony are explained. 
Perhaps it w i l l seem surprising that such sacred food is eaten by mere 
profane beings, but there is no positive cult that does not move w i t h i n this 
contradiction. A l l beings that are sacred stand beyond the reach o f the p r o -
fane, by reason o f their distinguishing trait. O n the other hand, they w o u l d 
lose their w h o l e raison d'être i f they were not placed i n a relationship w i t h 
those same faithful w h o must otherwise stay respectfully at a distance 
from 
them. There is no positive rite that does not fundamentally constitute a ver-
itable sacrilege. M a n can have no dealings w i t h the sacred beings w i t h o u t 
crossing the barrier that must ordinarily keep h i m separate from them. 
A l l that matters is that the sacrilege be carried out w i t h mitigating pre-
39For an explanation of this rule, see above, pp. 230-231. 


The Positive Cult 
343 
cautions. T h e commonest o f those consist o f preparing the transition and i n -
troducing the faithful into the w o r l d o f sacred things slowly, and only i n 
stages. Broken up and diluted i n this way, the sacrilege does not strike the re-
ligious consciousness abrupdy. N o t felt as such, it vanishes. This is what is 
happening i n the case before us. T h e effect o f a w h o l e sequence o f cere-
monies conducted p r i o r to the m o m e n t w h e n the t o t e m is solemnly eaten 
has been gradually to sanctify the participants. It is essentially a religious pe-
riod, w h i c h they could not go through w i t h o u t transformation o f their reli-
gious state. Little by little, the fasts, the contact o f sacred rocks and the 
churingas,
4 0 totemic decorations, and so forth, have conferred a sacredness 
on them that they did not have before and that permits them, w i t h o u t scan-
dalous and dangerous profanation, to confront the dangerous and awesome 
food ordinarily forbidden to t h e m .
4 1 
I f the act by w h i c h a sacred being is offered up and then eaten by those 
w h o venerate it can be called a sacrifice, the rite just discussed is entided to 
the same name. Moreover, the similarities i t has w i t h other practices found 
in many agrarian cults clarify its meaning. As it turns out, even among 
peoples w h o have attained a high level o f civilization, a c o m m o n rule is that 
the first products o f the harvest are used as the substance o f ritual meals, the 
paschal meal being the best-known example.
4 2 Since agrarian rites are at the 
very foundation o f worship i n its most advanced forms, we see that the I n -
tichiuma o f Australian societies is closer to us than its apparent crudeness 
might have led us to believe. 
B y a stroke o f genius, Smith had an i n t u i t i o n o f these facts w i t h o u t 
k n o w i n g them. T h r o u g h a string o f ingenious deductions (which need not 
be repeated here, since they are o f only historic interest
4 3), he came to be-
lieve he could establish that at the beginning the animal offered up i n the sac-
rifices must at first have been considered as quasi-divine and as the close k i n 
o f those w h o offered it. N o w , these are precisely the characteristics by w h i c h 
the totemic species is defined. Thus, Smith came to suppose that totemism 
must have k n o w n and practiced a rite very similar to the one we have just ex-
amined. Indeed, he tended to see this k i n d o f sacrifice as the o r i g i n o f the 
"
•
"
S
e
e Strehlow, Aranda, vol. Ill, p. 3. 
•"Besides, it should not be forgotten that among the Arunta, eating of the totemic animal is not for-
bidden altogether. 
42See other examples in [James George] Frazer, The Golden Bough, 2d. ed. [London, Macmillan, 
1894], pp. 348ff. 
41The Religion of the Semites, pp. 275ff. 


344 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
sacrificial institution as a w h o l e .
4 4 A t the beginning, sacrifice is instituted not 
to create a b o n d o f artificial kinship between man and his gods but to 
maintain and renew the natural kinship that at the beginning united men. 
Here, as elsewhere, the artifice is b o r n only to imitate nature. B u t i n Smith's 
book, this hypothesis was presented as litde more than a mental construct, 
w h i c h the facts then k n o w n did not at all adequately warrant. T h e few 
cases o f totemic sacrifice that he cites i n support o f his thesis do not 
mean what he says they do, and the animals that figure i n it were not real 
totems.
4 5 B u t today, one may say that this has been proved, o n one point at 
least: W e have just seen that totemic sacrifice, as Smith conceived i t , is 
or was practiced i n a large number o f societies. Granted, we have no p r o o f 
that this practice is necessarily inherent i n totemism or that i t is the seed 
from w h i c h all the other types o f sacrifice have emerged. B u t i f the univer-
sality o f the rite is hypothetical, its existence can no longer be disputed. 
We must consider i t established from n o w o n that the most mystical f o r m 
o f alimentary c o m m u n i o n is found as early as the most rudimentary religion 
n o w k n o w n . 
IV 
O n another point, however, the new facts w e have at hand undermine 
Smith's theories. According to h i m , c o m m u n i o n was not only an essential el-
ement o f sacrifice but also the only element, at least initially. H e thought not 
only that i t was a mistake to reduce sacrifice to a mere act o f tribute or of-
fering but also that the idea o f offering was initially absent; that this idea 
made only a late appearance, influenced by external circumstances; and that, 
far from helping us to understand the true nature o f the ritual mechanism, 
the idea o f offering masked it. Smith believed that he detected too gross an 
absurdity i n the very idea o f sacrifice for it to be viewed as the profound 
cause o f such a great institution. O n e o f the most important functions that 
fall squarely u p o n the shoulders o f the deity is to see that m e n have the food 
they need to live, so it w o u l d seem impossible that sacrifice should involve a 
presentation o f food to the deity. It seems contradictory for the gods to ex-
pect their food from man, w h e n it is by t h e m that man himself is fed. H o w 
•"Ibid., pp. 318-319. 
45See on this point Hubert and Mauss, Mélanges d'histoire des religions, preface, pp. vff. 


The Positive Cult 
345 
could they need his help to claim their just p o r t i o n o f the things that he re-
ceives from their hands? F r o m these considerations, Smith concluded that 
the combined idea o f sacrifice-offering could have been b o r n only i n the 
great religions. I n t h e m once the gods were separated from the things w i t h 
w h i c h they were originally merged, they were conceived as rather like kings, 
foremost owners o f the land and its products. F r o m then on, according to 
Smith, sacrifice was confounded w i t h the tribute that subjects pay their 
prince i n return for the rights conceded to them. I n reality, however, this 
new interpretation was an alteration and even a corruption o f the original 
idea. For w h e n the n o t i o n that "the idea o f property makes everything it 
touches material" becomes part o f sacrifice, sacrifice is denatured and made 
into a k i n d o f bartering between man and the deity.
4 6 
T h e facts I have set forth undermine that argument. T h e rites I have de-
scribed are certainly among the most primitive ever observed. As yet, no def-
inite mythical personality is seen to make its appearance i n them; there are 
neither gods nor spirits as such, and only vague, anonymous, impersonal 
forces are at w o r k . Yet the reasoning they presuppose is exactly the reasoning 
Smith declared impossible because o f its absurdity. 
Let us l o o k again at the first act o f the Intichiuma: the rites intended to 
bring about the fertility o f the animal or plant species that serves as the totem 
o f the clan. This species is the sacred thing. I t incarnates what I was led to 
call, i n a metaphorical sense, the totemic deity. B u t we have seen that it needs 
man's help to perpetuate itself. I t is man w h o dispenses life to a new genera-
tion each year; w i t h o u t h i m , it w o u l d not see the light o f day. I f man stopped 
celebrating the Intichiuma, the sacred beings w o u l d disappear from the face 
o f the earth. I n a sense, i t is from h i m that they have their being. I n another 
sense, however, i t is from t h e m that he has his o w n . Once they have attained 
maturity, i t is from t h e m that he w i l l b o r r o w the strength needed for the 
maintenance and repair o f his spiritual being. Hence it is man w h o makes his 
gods, one can say, or at least, i t is man w h o makes t h e m endure; but at the 
same time, it is through t h e m that he himself endures. Thus he regularly 
closes the circle that, according to Smith, is entailed by the very n o t i o n o f 
sacrificial tribute. H e gives to sacred beings a litde o f what he receives 
from 
them and he receives from them, all that he gives them. 
There is more: T h e offerings that he is required to make each year are 
not different i n nature from those that w i l l be made later, i n sacrifices prop-
'[William Robertson Smith], The Religion of the Semites, pp. 390ff. 


346 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
erly so-called. T h e sacrificer offers an animal so that the life-principles 
w i t h i n it separate from the organism and go forth to feed the deity. Similarly, 
the grains o f dust that the Australian detaches from the sacred rock are so 
many principles that spread through space so that they w i l l vitalize the 
totemic species and b r i n g about its renewal. T h e movement by w h i c h this 
spreading is done is also the one that normally accompanies offerings. I n cer-
tain cases, the resemblance between the t w o rites goes as far as the details o f 
the movements made. W e have seen that the Kaitish pour water o n a stone 
i n order to have rain; among certain peoples, the priest pours water o n the 
altar for the same purpose.
4 7 T h e sheddings o f blood, w h i c h are customary 
i n some Intichiumas, are true offerings. Just as the Arunta or the D i e r i sprin-
kle the rock or the sacred design w i t h blood, so i n the more advanced cults 
is the b l o o d o f the sacrificed v i c t i m , or the believer, i n many cases poured 
out on, or i n front of, the altar.
4 8 I n this case, i t is given to the gods, whose 
favorite food it is. I n Australia, i t is given to the sacred species. Thus there are 
no longer any grounds for the v i e w that the idea o f offerings is a recent prod-
uct o f civilization. 
A document for w h i c h w e are indebted to Strehlow brings out this k i n -
ship between the Intichiuma and sacrifice. It is a h y m n accompanying the 
Kangaroo Intichiuma that describes the ceremony and states its hoped-for ef-
fects. A piece o f the kangaroo's fat has been placed by the chief o n a support 
made o f branches. T h e text says that this fat makes the fat o f the kangaroos 
grow.
4 9 I n this case, therefore, they do not confine themselves to spreading 
sacred dust or h u m a n blood; the animal itself is immolated—one can say sac-
rificed, placed o n a k i n d o f altar—and offered to the species whose life it 
must maintain. 
We see n o w i n what sense i t is permissible to say that the Intichiuma 
contains the seeds o f the sacrificial system. I n the f o r m i t takes w h e n fully 
constituted, sacrifice comprises t w o essential elements: an act o f c o m m u n i o n 
and an act o f offering. T h e faithful commune w i t h the god by ingesting a 
sacred food and simultaneously make an offering to this god. W e 
find 
these t w o acts i n the Intichiuma as just described. T h e only difference is that 
4 7R. Smith himself cites such cases, ibid., p. 231. 
48See for example Exodus, 29:10-14; Leviticus, 9:8-11; the priests of Baal let their own blood flow 
on the altar (I Kings 18:8). [Compare Exodus 39:13 with Dürkheims discussion of 
special treatment given 
to the liver, fat, and other parts of 
sacrificed animals. In I Kings 18:28, we learn about the Baal priests' en-
counter with Elijah, where Durkheim's claim that "there are no religions that are false" is dramatically 
contradicted. Trans.] 
49Strehlow, Aranda, vol. Ill, p. 12, verse 7. 


The Positive Cult 
347 
they are done simultaneously or immediately after one another i n sacrifice 
proper,
5 0 whereas they are separated i n the Australian ceremony. I n the first 
case, they are part o f one indivisible rite; i n the second, they occur at differ-
ent times and may even be separated by a rather l o n g interval, but basically 
the mechanism is the same. Taken as a whole, the Intichiuma is a sacrifice, 
but one whose parts are not yet j o i n e d and organized. 
This comparison has the twofold advantage o f helping us understand the 
nature o f b o t h the Intichiuma and sacrifice better. 
We understand the Intichiuma better. Indeed, the conception put forth 
by Frazer, w h o made it out to be simply a magical operation devoid o f any re-
ligious character,
5 1 n o w seems untenable. To place outside religion a rite that 
appears to be the herald o f such a great religious institution is unimaginable. 
We also understand better what sacrifice itself is. I n the first place, the 
equal importance o f the t w o elements that enter into i t is henceforth estab-
lished. I f the Australian makes offerings to his sacred beings, there is no basis 
at all for supposing that the idea o f offering was foreign to the original orga-
nization o f the sacrificial institution and disturbed its natural harmony. 
Smith's theory must be revised o n this p o i n t .
5 2 Sacrifice is certainly a process 
o f c o m m u n i o n i n part. B u t i t is also, and no less fundamentally, a gift, an act 
o f renunciation. I t always presupposes that the worshipper relinquishes to the 
gods some part o f his substance or his goods. A n y attempt to reduce one o f 
these elements to the other is poindess. Indeed, the offering may have more 
lasting effects than the c o m m u n i o n .
5 3 
I n the second place, i t seems that sacrifice i n general, and i n particular 
the sacrificial offering, can be made only to personal beings. T h e offerings 
we have just encountered i n Australia do not entail any such notion. I n other 
words, sacrifice is independent o f the variable forms i n w h i c h religious forces 
are thought of; i t has deeper causes, w h i c h we w i l l examine below. 
It is clear, however, that the act o f offering naturally awakens i n people 
the idea o f a moral subject that the offering is meant to satisfy. T h e ritual acts 
50At least, when it is performed in its entirely; in certain cases it can be reduced to only one of these 
elements. 
''According to Strehlow [Aranda] vol. Ill, p. 9, the natives "regard these ceremonies as a sort of divine 
service, in the same way as the Christian regards the practices of his religion." 
5 2It might be well to ask whether the sheddings of blood and offerings of hair that Smith sees a
s acts 
of communion are not typical offerings. (See Smith, The Religion of the Semites, pp. 320ff.) 
53The piacular sacrifices, of which I will speak more specifically in Bk. 3, chap. 5, consist entirely of 
offerings. They serve as communions only secondarily. 


348 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
I have described become easier to understand w h e n they are believed to be 
addressed to persons. Thus, even w h i l e only b r i n g i n g impersonal powers 
into play, the practices o f the Intichiuma paved the way for a different con-
ception.
5 4 To be sure, they could not have been sufficient to produce the idea 
o f mythic personalities straightaway. B u t once formed, the idea was drawn 
into the cult by the very nature o f the rites. A t the same time, i t became less 
abstract. As it interacted more direcdy w i t h action and life, it took o n greater 
reality by the same stroke. Thus we can believe that practice o f the cult en-
couraged the personification o f religious forces—in a secondary way, no 
doubt, but one that deserves notice. 
V 
T h e 'contradiction that R . Smith saw as inadmissible, a piece o f blatant i l -
logic, must still be explained. 
I f sacred beings always manifested their powers i n a perfecdy equal m a n -
ner, it w o u l d appear inconceivable that man should have dreamed o f offering 
them favors. I t is hard to see what they could have needed from h i m . B u t as 
long as they are merged w i t h things and seen as cosmic principles o f life, they 
are subject to its rhythm. That life unfolds through oscillations back and forth 
that succeed one another i n accordance w i t h a definite law. A t some times, 
life affirms itself i n all its splendor; at others, i t fades so m u c h that one w o n -
ders whether it w i l l not end altogether. Every year, the plants die. W i l l they 
be reborn? T h e animal species tend to diminish through natural or violent 
death. W i l l they renew themselves i n time, and as they should? Above all, the 
rain is uncertain, and for l o n g periods i t seems to have disappeared, never to 
return. W h a t these weakenings o f nature bear witness to is that, at the corre-
sponding seasons, the sacred beings to w h i c h the animals, plants, rain, and so 
forth are subject pass through the same critical states, so they too have their 
periods o f breakdown. M a n can never take part i n these spectacles as an i n -
different watcher. I f he is to live, life must continue universally, and therefore 
the gods must not die. H e therefore seeks to support and aid them; and to do 
this, he puts at their service the forces he has at his disposal and mobilizes for 
that purpose. T h e b l o o d flowing i n his veins has fecundating virtues; he w i l l 
54This has caused these ceremonies often to be spoken of as though they were addressed to personal 
deities. (See, for example, a text of Krichauff and another of Kempe cited by [Richard] Eylmann, [Die 
Eingeborenen der Kolonie Sud Australien, Berlin, D. Reumer, 1908], pp. 202—203.) 


The Positive Cult 
349 
pour it out. H e w i l l draw u p o n the seeds o f life that slumber i n the sacred 
rocks that his clan possesses, and he w i l l sow t h e m i n the w i n d . I n a w o r d , he 
w i l l make offerings. 
I n addition, these external and physical crises go hand i n hand w i t h i n -
ternal and mental crises that tend toward the same result. T h e sacred beings 
are sacred only because they are imagined as sacred. Let us stop believing i n 
them, and they w i l l be as i f they were not. I n this respect, even those that 
have a physical f o r m , and are k n o w n to us through sense experience, depend 
on the thought o f the faithful w h o venerate them. T h e sacredness that de-
fines t h e m as objects o f the cult is not given i n their natural makeup; i t is su-
peradded to t h e m by belief. T h e kangaroo is only an animal, like any other; 
for the Kangaroo people, however, it contains a principle that sets it apart 
from other beings, and this principle exists only i n the minds that think o f 
i t .
5 5 If, once conceived, the sacred beings d i d not need m e n i n order to live, 
the representations that express t h e m w o u l d have to remain the same. This 
stability is impossible. I n actuality, i t is i n group life that these representations 
are formed, and group life is by nature intermittent. O f necessity, then, they 
share the same intermittence. T h e y achieve their greatest intensity w h e n the 
individuals are assembled and i n direct relations w i t h one another, at the m o -
ment w h e n everyone communes i n the same idea or emotion. Once the as-
sembly is dissolved and each person has returned to his o w n existence, those 
representations lose more and more o f their original energy. Overlaid little by 
little by the rising flood o f day-to-day sensations, they w o u l d eventually dis-
appear into the unconscious, unless we found some means o f calling them 
back to consciousness and revitalizing them. N o w they cannot weaken w i t h -
out the sacred beings' losing their reality, because the sacred beings exist only 
i n and through their representations.* I f we think less hard about them, they 
count for less to us and we count less o n them; they exist to a lesser degree. 
Thus, here again is a point o f v i e w from w h i c h the favors o f m e n are neces-
sary to them. This second reason to help t h e m is even more important than 
the first, for it has existed from time i m m e m o r i a l . T h e intermittences o f 
physical life affect religious beliefs only w h e n religions are not yet detached 
from their cosmic magma. B u t the intermittences o f social life are inevitable, 
and even the most idealistic religions can never escape them. 
Moreover, i t is because the gods are i n this state o f dependence o n the 
This sentence is missing from the Swain translation. 
5 3In a philosophical sense, the same is true of anything, for things exist only through representation. 
But as 1 have shown (pp. 228—229), this proposition is doubly true of religious forces, because there is 
nothing in the makeup of things that corresponds to sacredness. 


350 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
thought o f man that man can believe his help to be efficacious. T h e only 
way to renew the collective representations that refer to sacred beings is 
to plunge them again into the very source o f religious life: 
assembled 
groups. T h e emotions aroused by the periodic crises through w h i c h external 
things pass induce the m e n witnessing t h e m to come together, so that they 
can see what i t is best to do. B u t by the very fact o f being assembled, they 
comfort one another; they find the remedy because they seek it together. 
T h e shared faith comes to life again quite naturally i n the midst o f recon-
stituted collectivity. I t is reborn because it finds itself once again i n the same 
conditions i n w h i c h it was first b o r n . Once it is restored, i t easdy overcomes 
all the private doubts that had managed to arise i n individual minds. T h e 
mental image* o f the sacred things regains strength sufficient to withstand 
the inward or external causes that tended to weaken it. Despite the o b -
vious failures, one can no longer believe that the gods w i l l die, because 
they are felt to live again i n the depths o f one's o w n self. N o matter h o w 
crude the techniques used to help the gods, they cannot seem unavailing, 
because everything happens as i f they really were w o r k i n g . People are more 
confident because they feel stronger, and they are stronger i n reality be-
cause the strength that was flagging has been reawakened i n their conscious-
nesses. 
It is necessary, then, to refrain from believing, w i t h Smith, that the cult 
was instituted only for the benefit o f m e n and that the gods have no use for 
it. T h e y still need i t as m u c h as their faithful do. N o doubt, the m e n could 
not live w i t h o u t the gods; but o n the other hand, the gods w o u l d die i f they 
were not worshipped. Thus the purpose o f the cult is not only to b r i n g the 
profane into c o m m u n i o n w i t h sacred beings but also to keep the sacred be-
ings alive, to remake and regenerate t h e m perpetually. To be sure, the mate-
rial offerings do not produce this remaking through their o w n virtues but 
through mental states that reawaken and accompany these doings, w h i c h are 
empty i n themselves. T h e true raison d'être o f even those cults that are most 
materialistic i n appearance is not to be sought i n the actions they prescribe 
but i n the inward and moral renewal that the actions help to b r i n g about. 
W h a t the worshipper i n reality gives his god is not the food he places o n the 
altar or the b l o o d that he causes to flow from his veins: I t is his thought. N e v -
ertheless, there remains a mutually reinforcing exchange o f good deeds 
between the deity and his worshippers. T h e rule do ut desj by w h i c h the 
principle o f sacrifice has sometimes been defined, is not a recent invention 
*Durkheim said image, which here refers to a mental, rather than a physical, representation. 
*I give in order that you might give. 


The Positive Cult 
351 
by utilitarian theorists; i t simply makes explicit the mechanics o f the sacrifi-
cial system itself and, more generally, that o f the w h o l e positive cult. Thus, 
the circle Smith pointed out is quite real, but nothing about it offends the i n -
telligence. It arises from the fact that although sacred beings are superior to 
men, they can live only i n human consciousnesses. 
But if, pressing the analysis further and substituting for the religious sym-
bols the realities they express, we inquire into the way those realities behave 
w i t h i n the rite, this circle w i l l seem to us even more natural, and we w i l l bet-
ter understand its sense and purpose. If, as I have tried to establish, the sacred 
principle is n o t h i n g other than society hypostasized and transfigured, it 
should be possible to interpret ritual life i n secular and social terms. Like r i t -
ual life, social life i n fact moves i n a circle. O n the one hand, the individual 
gets the best part o f himself from society—all that gives h i m a distinctive 
character and place among other beings, his intellectual and moral culture. 
Let language, sciences, arts, and moral beliefs be taken from man, and he falls 
to the rank o f animahty; therefore the distinctive attributes o f human nature 
come to us from society. O n the other hand, however, society exists and lives 
only i n and through individuals. Let the idea o f society be extinguished i n i n -
dividual minds, let the beliefs, traditions, and aspirations o f the collectivity be 
felt and shared by individuals no longer, and the society w i l l die. Thus we can 
repeat about society what was previously said about the deity: It has reality 
only to the extent that i t has a place i n human consciousnesses, and that 
place is made for society by us. W e n o w glimpse the profound reason w h y 
the gods can no more do w i t h o u t their faithful than the faithful can do w i t h -
out their gods. I t is that society, o f w h i c h the gods are only the symbolic ex-
pression, can no more do w i t h o u t individuals than individuals can do 
w i t h o u t society. 
Here we touch the solid rock o n w h i c h all the cults are built and that has 
made t h e m endure as l o n g as human societies have. W h e n we see what the 
rites are made o f and what they seem to be directed toward, we wonder w i t h 
astonishment h o w m e n could have arrived at the idea and, especially, h o w 
they remained attached to i t so faithfully. W h e r e could they have gotten the 
illusion that, w i t h a few grains o f sand t h r o w n to the w i n d or a few drops o f 
blood poured o n a rock or o n the stone o f an altar, the life o f an animal 
species or a god could be maintained? W h e n , from beneath these outward 
and seemingly irrational doings, we have uncovered a mental mechanism that 
gives t h e m sense and moral i m p o r t , we have made a step toward solving this 
problem. B u t nothing assures us that the mechanism itself is anything but a 
play o f hallucinatory images. I have indeed shown what psychological 
processes make the faithful t h i n k that the rite makes the spiritual forces they 


352 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
need come to life again around them; but from the fact that i t can be ex-
plained psychologically does not follow that this belief has objective value. 
To have a sound basis for seeing the efficacy that is imputed to the rites as 
something other than offspring o f a chronic delusion w i t h w h i c h humanity 
deceives itself, it must be possible to establish that the effect o f the cult is pe-
riodically to recreate a moral being o n w h i c h w e depend, as it depends upon 
us. N o w , this being exists: I t is society. 
I n fact, i f religious ceremonies have any importance at all, it is that they 
set collectivity i n m o t i o n ; groups come together to celebrate them. Thus 
their first result is to b r i n g individuals together, multiply the contacts be-
tween them, and make those contacts more intimate. That i n itself modifies 
the content o f the consciousnesses. O n ordinary days, the m i n d is chiefly oc-
cupied w i t h utilitarian and individuahstic affairs. Everyone goes about his 
o w n personal business; for most people, what is most important is to meet 
the demands o f material life; the principal motive o f economic activity has 
always been private interest. O f course, social feelings could not be absent al-
together. W e remain i n relationship w i t h our fellow men; the habits, ideas, 
and tendencies that upbringing has stamped o n us, and that ordinarily pre-
side over our relations w i t h others, continue to make their influence felt. B u t 
they are constandy frustrated and held i n check by the opposing tendencies 
that the requirements o f the day-in, day-out struggle produce and perpetu-
ate. Depending o n the intrinsic energy o f those social feelings, they h o l d up 
more or less successfully; but that energy is not renewed. T h e y live o n their 
past, and, i n consequence, they w o u l d i n time be depleted i f nothing came 
to give back a litde o f the strength they lose through this incessant conflict 
and 
friction. 
W h e n the Australians hunt or fish i n scattered small groups, they lose 
sight o f what concerns their clan or tribe. T h e y think only o f taking as m u c h 
game as possible. O n feast days, however, these concerns are overshadowed 
obligatorily; since they are i n essence profane, they are shut out o f sacred pe-
riods. W h a t then occupies the m i n d are the beliefs held i n c o m m o n : the 
memories o f great ancestors, the collective ideal the ancestors e m b o d y — i n 
short, social things. Even the material interests that the great religious cere-
monies aim to satisfy are public and hence social. T h e w h o l e society has an 
interest i n an abundant harvest, i n timely rain that is not excessive, and i n the 
normal reproduction o f the animals. Hence i t is society that is foremost i n 
every consciousness and that dominates and directs conduct, w h i c h amounts 
to saying that at such times i t is even more alive, more active, and thus more 
real than at profane times. A n d so w h e n m e n feel there is something outside 


The Positive Cult 
353 
themselves that is reborn, forces that are reanimated, and a life that reawak-
ens, they are not deluded. This renewal is i n no way imaginary, and the i n -
dividuals themselves benefit from it, for the particle o f social being that each 
individual bears w i t h i n himself necessardy participates i n this collective 
remaking. T h e individual soul itself is also regenerated, by immersing 
itself once more i n the very wellspring o f its life. As a result, that soul 
feels stronger, more mistress o f itself, and less dependent upon physical ne-
cessities. 
We k n o w that the positive cult tends naturally to take o n periodic forms; 
this is one o f its distinguishing traits. O f course, there are rites that man cel-
ebrates occasionally, to deal w i t h temporary situations. B u t these episodic 
practices never play more than a secondary role, even i n the religions we are 
studying i n this book. T h e essence o f the cult is the cycle o f feasts that are 
regularly repeated at definite times. We are n o w i n a position to understand 
where that impulse toward periodicity comes from. T h e r h y t h m that reli-
gious life obeys only expresses, and results from, the r h y t h m o f social life. So-
ciety cannot revitalize the awareness it has o f itself unless it assembles, but it 
cannot remain continuously i n session. T h e demands o f hfe do not permit it 
to stay i n congregation indefinitely, so it disperses, only to reassemble anew 
w h e n it again feels the need. It is to these necessary alternations that the reg-
ular alternation o f sacred and profane time responds. Because at least the 
manifest function o f the cult is initially to regularize the course o f natural 
phenomena, the r h y t h m o f cosmic life set its mark u p o n the r h y t h m o f ritual 
life. Hence, for a l o n g time the feasts were seasonal; we have observed that 
such was already a trait o f the Australian Intichiuma. B u t the seasons merely 
provided the external framework o f this organization, not the principle o n 
w h i c h it rests, for even the cults that have exclusively spiritual ends have re-
mained periodic. T h e reason is that this periodicity has different causes. B e -
cause the seasonal changes are critical periods for nature, they are a natural 
occasion for gatherings and thus for religious ceremonies. B u t other events 
could play, and have i n fact played, the role o f occasional causes. Yet it must 
be acknowledged that this framework, although purely external, has shown 
remarkable endurance, for its vestige is still found i n the religions that are 
furthest removed from any physical basis. Several Christian feasts are b o u n d 
w i t h unbroken continuity to the pastoral and agricultural feasts o f the an-
cient Israelites, even t h o u g h they are neither pastoral nor agricultural any 
longer. 
T h e f o r m o f this cycle is apt to vary from one society to another. Where 
the period o f dispersion is l o n g or the dispersion very great, the period o f 


354 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
congregation is prolonged i n t u r n , and there are veritable orgies o f collective 
and religious life. Feasts come one after the other for weeks or months, and 
ritual life sometimes rises to outright frenzy. This is true o f the Australian 
tribes and o f several societies i n the American N o r t h and N o r t h w e s t .
5 6 Else-
where, by contrast, these t w o phases o f social life follow one another more 
closely, and the contrast between t h e m is less marked. T h e more societies 
develop, the less is their tolerance for interruptions that are too pronounced. 
56See Mauss, Essai sur les variations saisonnières des sociétés Eskimos, in AS, vol. IX [1906], pp. 96ff. 


C H A P T E R T H R E E 
THE POSITIVE CULT 
(CONTINUED) 
Mimetic Rites and the Principle of Causality 
T
he techniques just discussed are not the only ones used to b r i n g about 
the fertility o f the totemic species. Others w i t h the same purpose either 
accompany t h e m or take their place. 
I 
I n the same ceremonies I have described, various rites apart from blood or 
other sacrifices are often performed to supplement or reinforce the effects o f 
those practices. T h e y are composed o f movements and cries intended to 
m i m i c the behavior or traits o f the animal whose reproduction is hoped for. 
For this reason, I call t h e m mimetic. 
A m o n g the Arunta, the W i t c h e t t y G r u b Intichiuma involves more than 
the rites that are carried out o n the sacred rocks, as discussed above. Once 
those have been completed, the participants start back toward the camp. 
W h e n they are no more than about a mile away from it, they call a_halt and 
decorate themselves ritually, after w h i c h they continue their march. T h e i r 
adornment announces that an important ceremony is to come. A n d so i t 
does. W h i l e the detachment was away, one o f the elders left o n guard at the 
camp has built a shelter out o f long, narrow branches; i t is called the Umbana 
and represents the chrysalis from w h i c h the insect emerges. A l l those w h o 
have taken part i n the earlier ceremonies gather near the place where this 
structure has been put up; then they slowly advance, stopping from time to 
time until they reach the Umbana, w h i c h they enter. Immediately, all those 
w h o do not belong to the phratry to w h i c h the W i t c h e t t y Grub totem be-
longs (but w h o are o n the scene, though at a distance) he face d o w n o n the 
ground; they must stay i n this posture until they are given permission to get 
355 


356 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
up. D u r i n g this time, a h y m n rises from w i t h i n the Umbana. It recounts the 
various phases the animal goes through i n the course o f his development and 
the myths concerning the sacred rocks. A t the end o f this h y m n , the Alatunja 
glides out o f the Umbana and, still crouching, slowly advances o n the ground 
i n front o f it. H e is followed by all his companions, w h o imitate his ges-
tures. They apparently mean to portray the insect as it emerges from the 
chrysalis. T h e singing that is heard at the same moment, a k i n d o f oral c o m -
mentary o n the rite, is i n fact a description o f the movements the animal 
makes at this stage o f its development.
1 
I n another Intichiuma,
2 celebrated a propos o f another sort o f grub, the 
unchalka
3 grub, this characteristic is even more pronounced. T h e participants 
i n the rite adorn themselves w i t h designs representing the unchalka bush, o n 
w h i c h this grub lives at the beginning o f its life; then they cover a shield w i t h 
concentric circles o f d o w n that represent another k i n d o f bush o n w h i c h the 
adult insect lays its eggs. W h e n these preparations are complete, everyone sits 
o n the ground i n a semicircle facing the principal celebrant. T h e celebrant 
alternately curves his body i n t w o by bending toward the ground and rising 
on his knees; at the same time, he shakes his outspread arms, a way o f repre-
senting the wings o f the insect. F r o m time to time, he leans over the shield, 
imitating the manner i n w h i c h the butterfly hovers over the shrubs i n w h i c h 
it lays its eggs. W h e n this ceremony is over, another begins at a different 
place, to w h i c h they go i n silence. This time, t w o shields are used. O n one, 
the tracks o f the grub are represented by zigzag lines; o n the other are c o n -
centric circles o f unequal size, some representing the eggs o f the insect and 
the others the seeds o f the eremophile bush, o n w h i c h it feeds. As i n the first 
ceremony, everyone sits i n sdence w h i l e the celebrant moves about, imitat-
ing the movements o f the animal w h e n it leaves the chrysalis and struggles to 
take flight. 
Spencer and Gillen point out a few more practices from among the 
Arunta, w h i c h are similar but o f lesser importance. For example, i n the I n -
tichiuma o f the E m u , the participants at a given m o m e n t try to copy the gait 
and appearance o f this bird i n their o w n behavior;
4 i n an Intichiuma o f the 
'[Sir Baldwin Spencer and Francis James Gillen, The Native Tribes of Central 
Australia, London, Macmil-
lan, 1899], p. 176. 
2[Sir Baldwin Spencer and Francis James Gillen, The Northern Tribes of Central Australia, London, 
Macmillan, 1904], p. 179. It is true that Spencer and Gillen do not say explicidy that the ceremony is an 
Intichiuma, but the context leaves no doubt about the meaning of the rite. 
3In the index of names of totems, Spencer and Gillen spell it Untjalka (Northern Tribes, p. 772). 
4[Spencer and Gillen], Native Tribes, p. 182. 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
357 
Water, the m e n o f the totem make the characteristic cry o f the plover, a cry 
that i n their minds is associated w i t h the rainy season.
5 B u t all i n all, these 
two explorers noted rather few instances o f mimetic rites. I t is certain, h o w -
ever, that their relative silence o n this point arises either from the fact that 
they d i d not observe enough Intichiumas or that they overlooked this aspect 
o f the ceremonies. Schulze, o n the other hand, was struck by the extremely 
mimetic character o f the Arunta rites. " T h e sacred corroborées," he says, 
"are for the most part ceremonies that represent animals"; he calls t h e m "an-
imal tjurungas,"
6 and the documents Strehlow collected have corroborated 
his reporting. I n Strehlow's w o r k , the examples are so numerous that it is i m -
possible to cite t h e m all; there are virtually no ceremonies i n w h i c h some i m -
itative gesture is not noted. According to the nature o f the totems whose 
feast is celebrated, they j u m p i n the manner o f kangaroos and imitate the 
movements kangaroos make w h e n eating. T h e y imitate the flight o f w i n g e d 
ants, the characteristic noise the bat makes, the cry o f the w i l d turkey and 
that o f the eagle, the hissing o f the snake, the croaking o f the frog, and so 
forth.
7 W h e n the t o t e m is a plant, they gesture as though p i c k i n g
8 or eating
9 
it, for example. 
A m o n g the Warramunga, the Intichiuma generally takes a very unusual 
f o r m (described i n the next chapter) that differs from those studied up to 
now. Nonetheless, a typical case o f a purely mimetic Intichiuma exists among 
this people: that o f the W h i t e Cockatoo. T h e ceremony Spencer and Gillen 
described began at ten at night. A l l night long, the head o f the clan imitated 
the cry o f the bird w i t h distressing monotony. H e stopped only w h e n he had 
used up all his strength and was replaced by his son; then he began again as 
soon as he felt a little rested. These exhausting exercises continued w i t h o u t 
break until m o r n i n g .
1 0 
L i v i n g beings are not the only ones they try to imitate. I n a large n u m -
ber o f tribes, the Intichiuma o f the R a i n basically consists o f imitative rites. 
That celebrated among the Urabunna is one o f the simplest. T h e head o f the 
5Ibid., p. 193. 
6[Rev. Louis] Schulze, "Aborigines of the Upper and Middle Finke River," RSSA, vol. XIV [1891], 
p. 221; cf. p. 243. 
7[Carl] Strehlow, [DieAranda- und Loritja-Stamme in Zentral-Australien, Frankfurt, J. Baer, 1907], vol. 
Ill, pp. 11, 84, 31, 36, 37, 68, 72. 
8Ibid., p. 100. 
9Ibid., pp. 81, 100, 112, 115. 
'"[Spencer and Gillen], Northern Tribes, p. 310. 


358 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
clan is seated o n the ground, decorated i n w h i t e d o w n and holding a lance. 
H e moves every w h i c h way, probably to shake o f f the d o w n that is attached 
to his body and represents the clouds w h e n they are dispersed i n the air. I n 
that way, he imitates the great Alcheringa man-clouds that, according to leg-
end, had the habit o f rising to the sky to f o r m the clouds from w h i c h the rain 
then came back to earth. I n short, the object o f the entire rite is to depict the 
formation and ascent o f the rain-bearing clouds.
1 1 
A m o n g the Kaitish, the ceremony is m u c h more complex. I have already 
noted one o f the means employed: T h e celebrant pours water o n the sacred 
stones and o n himself. Other rites strengthen the effect this sort o f offering 
has. T h e rainbow is thought to be closely connected to the rain. It is the son, 
the Kaitish say, and it is always i n a h u r r y to come out and stop the rain. So 
i f the rain is to fall, the rainbow must not appear. T h e y think they can get this 
result i n the following way. O n a shield they draw a design representing the 
rainbow. T h e y take this shield to camp, carefully keeping it hidden from all 
eyes. They are convinced that, i n making this image o f the rainbow invisible, 
they are preventing the appearance o f the rainbow itself. Meanwhde, w i t h a 
pitchi full o f water at his side, the head o f the clan throws tufts o f w h i t e 
d o w n , representing the clouds, i n all directions. Repeated imitations o f the 
plover's cry round out the ceremony, w h i c h seems to have special solemnity. 
For as long as it lasts, those w h o participate i n i t , whether as actors or as 
members o f the congregation, must have no contact w i t h their wives, not 
even to speak w i t h t h e m .
1 2 
T h e methods o f depiction are not the same among the D i e r i . The rain is 
depicted not by water but by blood, w h i c h m e n cause to flow from their 
veins onto those i n attendance.
1 3 A t the same time, they throw handfuls o f 
white d o w n , w h i c h symbolize the clouds. I n t o a hut that has been built 
ahead o f time, they place t w o large stones that represent the banking up o f 
clouds, a sign o f rain. H a v i n g left t h e m there for a time, they move the stones 
a certain distance away and place t h e m as far up as possible o n the tallest tree 
they can find. This is a way o f making the clouds m o u n t into the sky. Some 
powdered gypsum is t h r o w n into a water hole, at the sight o f w h i c h the rain 
"Ibid., pp. 285—286. It may be that the movements of the lance are to pierce the clouds. 
12[Spencer and Gillen] Northern Tribes, pp. 294—296. On the other hand, interestingly enough, among 
the Anula, the rainbow is held to bring about rain. (Ibid., p. 314.) 
13The same procedure is used among the Arunta (Strehlow, Aranda, vol. Ill, p. 132). True, the ques-
tion arises whether this shedding of blood might not be an offering for the purpose of bringing forth the 
principles that produce rain. However, Gason says emphatically that it is a way of imitating the falling rain. 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
359 
spirit immediately makes clouds appear. Finally everyone, young and old, 
come together around the hut and, w i t h their heads d o w n , rush toward it. 
They pass violently through it, repeating the movement several times, until 
the only part o f the structure that remains standing is its supporting posts. 
Then they attack the posts as well, shaking and tearing at them until the 
whole structure collapses. T h e operation o f piercing the hut all over is i n -
tended to represent the clouds parting; and the collapse o f its structure, the 
falling o f the r a i n .
1 4 
A m o n g the tribes o f the northwest studied by C l e m e n t ,
1 5 w h i c h occupy 
the territory between the Fortescue and Fitzroy rivers, there are ceremonies 
conducted for exactly the same purpose as the Intichiumas o f the Arunta and 
that seem i n the main to be essentially mimetic. 
A m o n g these peoples, the name tarlow is given to piles o f stones that are 
apparently sacred because, as we w i l l see, they are the object o f important 
rites. Each animal and plant—each totem or subtotem
1 6—is represented by a 
tarlow, o f w h i c h a specific
1 7 clan is the custodian. T h e similarity between 
these tarlows and the sacred stones o f the Arunta is easy to see. 
W h e n kangaroos are scarce, for example, the head o f the clan to w h i c h 
the tarlow o f the kangaroos belongs goes to the tarlow w i t h some o f his 
companions. There they execute various rites. T h e principal ones consist o f 
j u m p i n g around the tarlow as the kangaroos j u m p and d r i n k i n g as they 
d r i n k — i n short, imitating their most characteristic movements. T h e weap-
ons used i n h u n t i n g the animal play an important role i n these rites. T h e y are 
brandished, t h r o w n against the stones, and so forth. W h e n it is a matter o f 
emus, they go to the tarlow o f the emus; they walk and r u n as those birds do. 
The cleverness that the natives display i n these imitations is apparendy quite 
remarkable. 
Other tarlows are dedicated to plants—grass seeds, for example. I n this 
14[S.] Gason, "The Dieyerie Tribe," in [Edward Micklethwaite Curr, The Australian Race: Its Origin, 
Languages, Customs, Place of Landing in Australia and the Routes by Which It Spread Itself over That Continent, 
Melbourne, J. Ferres, 1886-1887], vol. II, pp. 66-68; [Alfred William] Howitt (The NativeTribes [of South-
east Australia, London, Macmillan, 1904], pp. 798-800) mentions another Dieri rite to get rain. 
15[E.] Clement, "Ethnographical Notes on the Western-Australian Aborigines [with a Descriptive 
Catalogue of Ethnographical Objects 
from 
Western Australia]," in Internationales Archiv fur Ethnographic, 
vol. XVI [1903], pp. 6-7. Cf. Withnal, Marriage Rites and Relationship, in [Science of] Man: [Australasian 
Anthropological 
Journal, vol. VI], 1903, p. 42. 
1 6I assume that a subtotem can have a tarlow because, according to Clement, certain clans have several 
totems. 
17Clement says a tribal 
family. 


360 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
case, the techniques used i n w i n n o w i n g or m i n i n g those seeds are mimed. 
A n d since, i n ordinary life, i t is w o m e n w h o are ordinarily responsible 
for such tasks, i t is also they w h o perform the rite amid songs and dances. 
II 
A l l o f these rites belong to the same category. T h e principle o n w h i c h they 
are based is one o f those o n w h i c h what is c o m m o n l y (and improperly
1 8) 
called sympathetic magic is based. 
This principle may usually be subdivided into t w o .
1 9 
T h e first can be stated i n this way: Whatever touches an object also touches 
everything that has any relationship of proximity or solidarity with that object. Thus, 
whatever affects the part affects the whole; any force exerted o n an i n d i v i d -
ual is transmitted to his neighbors, his k i n , and everything w i t h w h i c h he is 
united i n any way at all. A l l these cases are simply applications o f the law o f 
contagion, w h i c h we studied earlier. A good or bad state or quality is trans-
mitted contagiously from one subject to another that has any relationship 
w i t h the first. 
T h e second principle is usually summarized i n this formula: Like produces 
like. T h e depiction o f a being or a state produces that being or state. This is 
the m a x i m that the rites just described put into operation, and its character-
istic traits can be grasped best w h e n they occur. T h e classic example o f be-
witchment, w h i c h is generally presented as the typical application o f this 
same precept, is m u c h less significant. Indeed, the phenomenon i n b e w i t c h -
ment is largely a mere transfer. T h e idea o f the image is associated i n the 
m i n d w i t h the idea o f the model. As a result, the effects o f any action o n the 
statuette are passed o n contagiously to the person whose traits i t mimics. I n 
relation to the original, the image plays the role o f the part i n relation to the 
whole; it is an agent o f transmission. Thus it is believed that one can obtain 
the same result by b u r n i n g the hair o f the person one wants to get at. T h e 
only difference between these t w o kinds o f operation is that, i n one, the 
communication is done by means o f similarity, and i n the other, by means o f 
contiguity. 
T h e rites that concern us are a different case. T h e y presuppose not 
1 8I will explain the nature of this impropriety below (p. 517). 
19On this classification see [James George] Frazer, Lectures on the Early History of Kingship, [London, 
Macmillan, 1905], pp. 37ff.; [Henri] Hubert and [Marcel] Mauss, ["Esquisse d'une] théorie générale de la 
magie," [AS, vol. VII, 1904], pp. 61ff. 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
361 
merely the passage o f a given state or quality from one object into another 
but the creation o f something altogether new. T h e very act o f depicting the 
animal gives b i r t h to that animal and creates i t — i n imitating the noise o f the 
w i n d or the falling water, one causes the clouds to f o r m and dissolve into 
rain, and so forth. I n b o t h kinds o f rites, resemblance undoubtedly has a role 
but a very different one. I n bewitchment, resemblance only guides the force 
exerted i n a particular way; i t orients a power that is not its o w n i n a certain 
direction. I n the rites just considered, it acts by itself and is directly effica-
cious. Besides, contrary to the usual definitions, what really differentiates the 
two principles o f the magic called sympathetic and its corresponding prac-
tices is not that contiguity acts i n some cases and resemblance i n others, but 
that, i n the first, there is merely contagious communication and, i n the sec-
ond, production and creation.
2 0 
Thus to explain the mimetic rites is to explain the second o f these p r i n -
ciples, and vice versa. 
I w i l l not tarry long over the explanation that the anthropological school 
has put forward, notably Tylor and Frazer. T h e y call u p o n the association 
o f ideas, just as they do to account for the contagiousness o f the sacred. 
"Homeopathic magic," says Frazer, w h o prefers this t e r m to that o f "mimetic 
magic," "rests o n the association o f ideas by similarity, and contagious magic 
on the association o f ideas by contiguity. Homeopathic magic errs by taking 
things that resemble one another as identical."
2 1 B u t this is to misunderstand 
the specific character o f the practices under discussion. F r o m one point o f 
view, Frazer s formula could be applied somewhat justifiably to the case o f 
bewitchment.
2 2 I n that context, it actually is t w o distinct things—the image 
and the model it represents more or less schematically—that are assimilated 
to one another because o f their partial resemblance. B u t only the image is 
given i n the mimetic rites we have just studied, and as for the model, there is 
none, since the new generation o f the totemic species is still no more than a 
hope, and an uncertain hope at that. Thus there can be no question o f as-
similation, mistaken or not; there is creation, i n the full sense o f the w o r d , 
and h o w the association o f ideas could ever lead one to believe i n this cre-
2 0I say nothing about the so-called law of contrariety. As Hubert and Mauss have shown, the contrary 
produces its contrary only by means of its like (Théorie générale de la magie, p. 70). 
2 1 [Frazer], Lectures on the Early History of Kingship, p. 39. 
2 2It is applicable in the sense that there really is an amalgamation of the statuette and the person be-
witched. But this amalgamation is far from being a mere product of the association of ideas by similarity. 
As I have shown, the true determining cause of the phenomenon is the contagiousness that is character-
istic of religious forces. 


362 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
ation is not clear. H o w could the mere fact o f representing the movements o f 
an animal produce certainty that the animal w i l l be reborn i n abundance? 
T h e general properties o f h u m a n nature cannot explain such o d d prac-
tices. Instead o f considering the principle o n w h i c h they rest i n its general 
and abstract f o r m , let us put it back into the moral milieu to w h i c h i t belongs 
and i n w h i c h we have just observed it. Let us reconnect i t w i t h the set o f 
ideas and feelings that are the o r i g i n o f the rites i n w h i c h it is applied, and 
we w i l l be i n a better position to discern its causes. 
T h e m e n w h o gather for these rites believe they really are animals or 
plants o f the species whose name they bear. T h e y are conscious o f an animal 
or plant nature, and i n their eyes that nature constitutes what is most essen-
tial and most excellent about themselves. W h e n they are assembled, then, 
their first act must be to affirm to one another this quality that they ascribe 
to themselves and by w h i c h they define themselves. T h e t o t e m is their rally-
ing sign. For this reason, as we have seen, they draw it o n their bodies, and 
they try to emulate it by their gestures, cries, and carriage. Since they are 
emus or kangaroos, they w i l l behave like the animals o f the same name. B y 
this means, they witness to one another that they are members o f the same 
moral community, and they take cognizance o f the kinship that unites them. 
T h e rite not only expresses this kinship but also makes or remakes it, for this 
kinship exists only insofar as it is believed, and the effect o f all these collec-
tive demonstrations is to keep alive the beliefs o n w h i c h i t rests. So although 
these jumps, cries, and movements o f all kinds are bizarre and grotesque i n 
appearance, i n reality they have a meaning that is human and profound. T h e 
Australian seeks to resemble his t o t e m just as the adherent o f more advanced 
religions seeks to resemble his G o d . For both, this is a means o f c o m m u n i n g 
w i t h the sacred, that is, w i t h the collective ideal that the sacred symbolizes. 
It is an early f o r m o f the 6u,oLCuat<; TO> 9ew. * 
Still, this first cause applies to what is most specific to the totemic beliefs, 
and i f i t was the only cause, the principle o f like produces like w o u l d not 
have lived beyond totemism. Since there is perhaps no religion i n w h i c h rites 
derived from i t are not to be found, another cause must have combined w i t h 
that one. 
I n fact, the very general purpose o f the ceremonies i n w h i c h we have 
seen it applied is not only the one I have just mentioned, fundamental 
though it is, for they also have a more immediate and conscious purpose: to 
b r i n g about the reproduction o f the totemic species. T h e idea o f this neces-
* Imitation of God. 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
363 
sary reproduction haunts the minds o f the faithful; they concentrate the force 
o f their attention and w i l l o n this goal. N o w a single concern cannot haunt 
an entire group o f m e n to that extent and not become externalized i n tangi-
ble f o r m . Since all are t h i n k i n g o f an animal or plant to whose destinies the 
clan is allied, this t h i n k i n g i n c o m m o n is inevitably manifested outwardly by 
movements, and the ones most singled out for this role are those that repre-
sent the animal or plant i n one o f its most characteristic forms. There are no 
movements that as closely resemble the idea that fills consciousnesses at that 
moment, since they are its direct and almost automatic translation. T h e peo-
ple do their best to imitate the animal; they cry out like it; they j u m p like 
it; they m i m i c the settings i n w h i c h the plant is dady used. A l l o f these 
processes o f representation are so many ways o f outwardly marking the goal 
to w h i c h everyone aspires and o f saying, calling on, and imagining the thing 
they want to b r i n g about.
2 3 N o r is this the need o f any one era or caused by 
the beliefs o f any one religion. I t is quintessentialfy human. This is why, even 
i n religions very different from the one w e are studying, once, the faithful are 
gathered together to ask their gods for an outcome that they fervently desire, 
they are virtually compelled to depict it. To be sure, speech is one means o f 
expressing it, but movement is no less natural. Springing from the body just 
as spontaneously, it comes even before speech or, i n any case, at the same 
time. 
B u t even i f we can thus understand h o w these movements found their 
way into the ceremony, w e must still explain the power that is ascribed to 
them. I f the Australian repeats t h e m regularly at each new season, it is be-
cause he thinks they are required for the success o f the rite. Where could he 
have gotten the idea that imitating an animal makes i t reproduce? 
Such an obvious error seems barely intelligible so long as we see i n the 
rite only the physical purpose i t apparendy has. B u t we k n o w that apart 
from 
its presumed effect o n the totemic species, it has a profound influence o n the 
souls o f the faithful w h o take part. T h e faithful come away from i t w i t h an 
impression o f well-being whose causes they do not see clearly but that is well 
founded. T h e y feel that the ceremony is good for them; and i n it they do i n -
deed remake their moral being. H o w w o u l d this k i n d o f euphoria not make 
them feel that the rite has succeeded, that i t actually was what i t set out to 
be, that i t achieved its intended goal? A n d since the reproduction o f the 
totemic species is the only goal that is consciously pursued, i t seems to be 
achieved by the methods used, the efficacy o f w h i c h stands thereby d e m o n -
strated. I n this way, m e n came to ascribe creative virtues to movements that 
"On the causes of this outward manifestation, see above, pp. 23Iff. 


364 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
are empty i n themselves. T h e power o f the rite over minds,* w h i c h is real, 
made t h e m believe i n its power over things, w h i c h is imaginary; the efficacy 
o f the whole led m e n to believe i n that o f each part, taken separately. The 
genuinely useful effects brought about by the ceremony as a whole are tan-
tamount to an experimental justification o f the elementary practices that 
comprise it, though i n reality all these practices are i n no way indispensable 
to its success. Moreover, the fact that they can be replaced by others o f a very 
different nature, w i t h o u t change i n the final result, proves that they do not 
act by themselves. Indeed, it seems there are Intichiumas made up o f offer-
ings only and w i t h o u t mimetic rites; others are purely mimetic and w i t h o u t 
offerings. Nevertheless, b o t h are thought to be equally efficacious. Thus i f 
value is attached to these various manipulations, i t is not because o f value i n -
trinsic to t h e m but because they are part o f a complex rite whose overall u t i l -
ity is felt. 
We can understand that way o f t h i n k i n g all the more easily since w e can 
observe i t i n our midst. Especially among the most cultivated peoples and 
milieux, w e often come u p o n believers ^ [croyants] w h o , w h i l e having doubts 
about the specific power ascribed by dogma to each rite taken separately, 
nonetheless persist i n their religious practice. T h e y are not certain that the 
details o f the prescribed observances can be rationally justified, but they feel 
that it w o u l d be impossible to emancipate themselves 
from those w i t h o u t 
falling into moral disarray, from w h i c h they recoil. Thus the very fact that 
faith has lost its intellectual roots among t h e m reveals the profound causes 
that underlie it. This is w h y the faithful [fidèles] are i n general left indifferent 
by the facile criticisms that a simplistic rationalism has sometimes leveled 
against ritual prescriptions. T h e true justification o f religious practices is not 
i n the apparent ends they pursue but i n their invisible influence over c o n -
sciousnesses and i n their manner o f affecting our states o f m i n d . Sirnilarly, 
w h e n preachers undertake to make a convert, they focus less u p o n directly 
establishing, w i t h systematic evidence, the truth o f some particular proposi-
tion or the usefulness o f such and such observance, than u p o n awakening or 
reawakening the sense o f moral support that regular celebration o f the cult 
provides. I n this way, they create a predisposition toward believing that goes 
i n advance o f proof, influences the intellect to pass over the inadequacy o f 
* L'efficacité morale du rite, qui est réelle, a fait croire à son efficacité physique, qui est imaginaire. . . . Here the 
term "moral" refers to mind as opposed to matter. 
tDurkheim here uses the term croyants in contrast with fidèles, used twice as often. Professor Douglas 
Kibbee was kind enough to give me an exact count, plus the exact contexts, using his database searcher. 
Personal communication, 4 May 1992. 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
365 
the logical arguments, and leads i t to go, as i f o n its o w n , beyond the propo-
sitions the preachers want to get i t to accept. This favorable prejudice, this 
leap toward believing, is precisely what faith is made of; and i t is faith that 
gives the rites authority i n the eyes o f the believer—no matter w h o he is, the 
Christian or the Australian. T h e Christian is superior only i n his greater 
awareness o f the psychic process from w h i c h belief results. H e knows that sal-
vation comes "by faith alone." 
Because such is the o r i g i n o f faith, it is i n a sense "impervious to experi-
ence."
2 4 I f the periodic failures o f the Intichiuma do not shake the confidence 
the Australian has i n his rite, i t is because he holds w i t h all the strength o f his 
soul to those practices he comes to for the purpose o f renewing himself pe-
riodically. H e could not possibly deny t h e m i n principle w i t h o u t causing a 
real upheaval o f his entire being, w h i c h resists. B u t however great that resis-
tance might be, i t does not radically distinguish the religious mentality 
from 
the other forms o f human mentality, even from those other forms that we are 
most i n the habit o f opposing to it. I n this regard, the mentality o f the savant 
differs only i n degree from the foregoing. W h e n a scientific law has the au-
thority o f numerous and varied experiments, to reject it too easdy u p o n dis-
covery o f one single fact that seems to contradict it is contrary to all method. 
It is still necessary to ensure that this fact has only one interpretation and can-
not be accounted for w i t h o u t abandoning the proposition that seems dis-
credited. T h e Australian does no differendy w h e n he puts d o w n the failure o f 
an Intichiuma to evildoing somewhere, or the abundance o f a harvest that 
comes too soon to some mystic Intichiuma celebrated i n the beyond. 
H e has even less grounds for doubting his rite o n the strength o f a c o n -
trary fact, since its value is, or seems to be, established by a larger number o f 
facts that accord w i t h it. To begin w i t h , the moral efficacy o f the ceremony 
is real and directly felt by all w h o take part; therein is a constantly repeated 
experience whose i m p o r t no contradictory experience can weaken. W h a t is 
more, physical efficacy itself finds at least apparent confirmation i n the results 
o f objective observation. It is i n fact normal for the totemic species to repro-
duce itself regularly. Thus, i n the great majority o f cases, everything happens 
as i f the ritual movements truly have brought about the hoped-for results. 
Failures are not the rule. N o t surprisingly, since the rites, especially the p e r i -
odic ones, demand only that nature take its regular course, it seems most of-
ten to obey them. I n this way, i f the believer happens to seem resistant to 
certain lessons from experience, he does so by relying o n other experiences 
24[Lucien] Lévy-Bruhl, Les Fonctions mentales dans les sociétés inférieures [Paris, F. Alcan, 1910], 
pp. 61-68. 


366 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
that seem to h i m more conclusive. T h e researcher does this more methodi-
cally but acts no differently. 
Thus magic is not, as Frazer h e l d ,
2 5 a primary datum and religion only 
its derivative. Q u i t e the contrary, the precepts o n w h i c h the magician's art 
rests were formed under the influence o f religious ideas, and only by a sec-
ondary extension were they turned to purely secular applications. Because all 
the forces o f the universe were conceived o n the model o f sacred forces, the 
contagiousness inherent i n the sacred forces was extended to t h e m all, and it 
was believed that, under certain conditions, all the properties o f bodies could 
transmit themselves contagiously. Similarly, once the principle that like pro-
duces like took f o r m to satisfy definite religious needs, it became detached 
from its ritual origins and, through a k i n d o f spontaneous generalization, be-
came a law o f nature.
2 6 To comprehend these fundamental axioms o f magic, 
we must resituate t h e m i n the religious milieux i n w h i c h they were b o r n and 
w h i c h alone permits us to account for them. W h e n we see those axioms as 
the w o r k o f isolated individuals, lone magicians, we wonder h o w human 
minds imagined them, since n o t h i n g i n experience could have suggested or 
verified them. I n particular, w e cannot understand h o w such a deceptive 
craft could have abused men's trust for so long. T h e problem disappears i f the 
faith m e n have i n magic is only a special case o f religious faith i n general, i f 
it is itself the product, or at least the indirect product, o f a collective effer-
vescence. I n other words, using the phrase "sympathetic magic" to denote 
the collection o f practices just discussed is not altogether improper. A l t h o u g h 
there are sympathetic rites, they are not peculiar to magic. N o t only are they 
found i n religion as well, but i t is from religion that magic received them. 
Thus, all we do is court confusion if, by the name we give those rites, we 
seem to make them out to be something specifically magical. 
Hence the results o f m y analysis strongly resemble those H u b e r t and 
Mauss obtained w h e n they studied magic directly.
2 7 T h e y showed magic 
to be something altogether different from crude industry, based o n crude 
science. T h e y have brought to light a w h o l e background o f religious con-
ceptions that lie behind the apparently secular mechanisms used by the ma-
25[James George Frazer], Golden Bough, 2d. ed. vol. I [London, Macmillan, 1894], pp. 6
9
—
7
5
. 
2 6I do not mean to say that there was a time when religion existed without magic. Probably, as reli-
gion was formed, certain of its principles were extended to nonreligious relations, and in this way, a more 
or less developed magic came to complement it. Even if these two systems of ideas and practices do not 
correspond to distinct historical phases, nevertheless there is a definite relationship of derivation between 
them. This is all I have set out to establish. 
27[Mauss and Hubert, Théorie générale de la magie], pp. 108ff. [Actually, pp. 131—187. Trans.] 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
367 
gician, a w h o l e w o r l d o f forces the idea o f w h i c h magic took from religion. 
We can n o w see w h y magic is so full o f religious elements: It was b o r n out 
o f religion. 
Ill 
The principle just explained does not have a merely ritual function; it is o f 
direct interest to the theory o f knowledge. I n effect, it is a concrete statement 
o f the law o f causality and, i n all likelihood, one o f the earliest statements o f 
it ever to have existed. A full-fledged n o t i o n o f the causal relation is implied 
i n the power thus attributed to "like produces like." A n d because it serves as 
the basis o f cult practices as well as the magician's technique, this conception 
bestrides primitive thought. Thus, the origins o f the precept o n w h i c h 
mimetic rites rest can explain h o w the principle o f causality originated. T h e 
one should help us understand the other. I have just shown that the first arises 
from social causes. It has been fashioned by groups w i t h collective ends i n 
view, and collective feelings express it. Thus we may presume that the same 
is true o f the second. 
To verify whether this is indeed the o r i g i n o f the elements from w h i c h 
the principle o f causality is made, it is enough to analyze the principle itself. 
First and foremost, the idea o f causal relation implies efficacy, effective 
power, or active force. We usually understand "cause" to mean "that w h i c h 
is able to produce a definite change." Cause is force before it has manifested 
the power that is i n it. Effect is the same power, but actualized. H u m a n i t y has 
always imagined causality i n dynamic terms. To be sure, some philosophers 
deny this conception any objective basis; they see it only as an arbitrary c o n -
struct o f imagination that relates to n o t h i n g i n things. For the moment, h o w -
ever, we do not have to ask ourselves whether it has a basis i n reality; noticing 
that it exists and that it constitutes, and has always constituted, an element o f 
ordinary thought (as is acknowledged even by those w h o criticize it) is 
enough. O u r immediate purpose is to find out not what causality amounts 
to logically but what accounts for it. 
It has social causes. T h e analysis o f the evidence has already permitted us 
to show that, i n prototype, the idea o f force was mana, wakan, the totemic 
principle—various names given to collective force objectified and projected 
into things.
2 8 So the first power that m e n imagined as such does indeed ap-
pear to have been that w h i c h society exerts u p o n its members. Analysis later 
confirms this result o f observation. Indeed, it is possible to establish w h y this 
28See above, p. 205ff. 


368 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
idea o f power, o f efficacy and o f active force, could not have come to us from 
anywhere else. 
It is obvious at first glance, and recognized by all, that external experi-
ence cannot possibly give us this idea. T h e senses show us only phenomena 
that coexist w i t h or follow one another, but n o t h i n g they perceive can give 
us the idea o f that constraining and determinative influence that is character-
istic o f what we call a power or a force. T h e senses take i n only states that are 
realized, achieved, and external to one another, w h i l e the internal process 
that binds these states together eludes the senses. N o t h i n g they teach us can 
possibly suggest to us the idea o f something that is an influence or an efficacy 
For just this reason, the philosophers o f empiricism have seen these different 
ideas as so many mythological aberrations. B u t even supposing that there was 
nothing but hallucinations i n all these, it w o u l d still behoove us to say h o w 
they came to be. 
I f external experience has no part i n the o r i g i n o f these ideas and if, on 
the other hand, it is inadmissible that they should have been given us ready-
made, we must assume that they come to us from internal experience. I n 
fact, the idea o f force is obviously full o f spiritual elements that could only 
have been borrowed from our psychic life. 
It has often been thought that the act by w h i c h our w i l l comes to a de-
cision, holds our desires i n check, and rules our bodies could have served as 
the model for this construction. I n an act o f w i l l , it is said, we direcdy per-
ceive ourselves as a power i n action. Seemingly, therefore, once man came 
u p o n that idea, extending i t to things was all i t took for the concept o f force 
to come into being. 
As l o n g as the animist theory passed for demonstrated truth, that expla-
nation could seem confirmed by history. I f the forces w i t h w h i c h human 
thought at first populated the w o r l d really had been spirits—that is, personal 
and conscious beings more or less like m a n — w e m i g h t believe that our i n d i -
vidual experience was enough to furnish us w i t h the elements from w h i c h 
the idea o f force is made. Instead, we k n o w that the first forces men imag-
ined are anonymous, vague, diffuse forces, the impersonality o f w h i c h re-
sembles cosmic forces, and w h i c h therefore stand i n the strongest contrast 
w i t h the eminendy personal power that is the h u m a n w i l l . Hence they could 
not have been conceived i n the image o f the w i l l . 
Moreover, there is a fundamental characteristic o f impersonal forces that 
w o u l d be inexplicable o n that hypothesis: their communicability. T h e forces 
o f nature have always been conceived o f as being able to pass from one o b -
ject into another, to mingle and combine w i t h one another, and to change 
into one another. Indeed, that property is what gives t h e m explanatory 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
369 
value. B y virtue o f that property, the effects can be j o i n e d to their causes 
without discontinuity. N o w , the " I " is exactly opposite i n character; it is i n -
communicable. I t cannot change bases or spread from one to another. I t 
spreads i n only a metaphorical sense. T h e manner i n w h i c h it arrives at and 
carries out its decisions cannot possibly suggest to us the idea o f an energy 
that is communicated, that can even assimilate into others and, through those 
combinations and mixtures, give b i r t h to n e w effects. 
Thus, as implied i n the causal relation, the idea o f force must have a 
twofold character. First, it can come to us only from our inward experience; 
the only forces we can touch directly are o f necessity moral forces. A t the 
same time, however, they must also be impersonal, since the idea o f i m -
personal power was constituted first. N o w , the only forces that satisfy this 
twofold condition are those that arise from life i n c o m m o n : collective forces. 
In actuality, they are o n the one hand w h o l l y psychic, made exclusively o f 
objectified ideas and feelings, and o n the other hand, they are by definition 
impersonal, since they are the product o f cooperation. B e i n g the w o r k o f all, 
they are the property o f no one i n particular. So litde do they belong to the 
personalities o f the subjects i n w h i c h they reside that they are never fixed 
there. Just as they enter subjects from outside, so are they always ready to de-
tach themselves from those subjects. T h e y have a spontaneous tendency to 
spread further and invade n e w domains. As we know, none are more conta-
gious and hence more communicable. 
Granted, physical forces have the same property, but we cannot have d i -
rect consciousness o f them. Because they are external to us, we cannot even 
apprehend t h e m as such. W h e n I r u n against an obstacle, I have a sensation 
o f confinement and discomfort; however, the force causing that sensation is 
not i n me but i n the obstacle and thus beyond the range o f m y perception. 
We perceive its effects but not the force itself. This is not the case w i t h social 
forces. Since they are part o f our interior life, we not only k n o w the results 
o f their action but see t h e m i n action. T h e force that isolates the sacred be-
ing and holds the profane ones at a distance is, i n reality, not i n that being; it 
lives i n the consciousness o f the faithful. Thus the faithful feel it at the very 
m o m e n t that it acts o n their wills to prohibit certain actions and prescribe 
others. Because this happens entirely w i t h i n us, we capture i n action the 
constraining and necessitating influence that escapes us w h e n it comes 
from 
an external thing. O f course, we do not always interpret that influence ade-
quately, but we cannot fail to be conscious o f it. 
Furthermore, the idea o f force bears the mark o f its origin overtly. I t i n 
fact entails an idea o f power that does not go w i t h o u t those o f ascendancy, 
mastery, domination—and, correspondingly, o f dependence and subordina-


370 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
tion. 
T h e relations that all these ideas express are eminently social. I t is soci-
ety that has classified beings as superior and subordinate, as masters who 
command and subjects w h o obey; it is society that has conferred o n the first 
that singular property that makes command efficacious and that constitutes 
power. So everything tends to show that the first powers the human mind 
conceived are those that societies instituted as they became organized. It is in 
their image that the powers o f the physical w o r l d were conceived. Thus man 
could not have arrived at the idea o f himself as a force i n charge o f the body 
i n w h i c h it resides w i t h o u t introducing concepts borrowed from social life 
into the idea he had o f himself. I n fact, he had to differentiate himself from 
his physical double and impute a higher sort o f dignity to himself than to this 
d o u b l e — i n a w o r d , he had to t h i n k o f himself as a soul. I n fact, it is i n the 
f o r m o f the soul that he has always imagined the force that he believes he is. 
B u t w e k n o w that the soul is something altogether different from a name 
given to the abstract faculty to move, think, or feel. Above all, it is a religious 
principle, a particular aspect o f the collective force. I n sum, man feels he is a 
soul, and thus a force, because he is a social being. A l t h o u g h an animal moves 
its legs just as we do and has the same control over his muscles as we, noth-
i n g warrants our supposing that he has consciousness o f himself as o f an ac-
tive and efficient cause. This is because it has no soul—or, more precisely, it 
does not impute a soul to itself. B u t i f it does not impute a soul to itself, this 
is because i t does not participate i n a social life comparable to that o f men. 
A m o n g animals, n o t h i n g resembling a civilization exists.
2 9 
T h e idea o f force is not all there is to the principle o f causality. This p r i n -
ciple consists i n a j u d g m e n t stating that a force develops i n a definite manner 
and that its state at each m o m e n t o f its evolution predetermines the succeed-
i n g state. T h e first is called cause; the second, effect; and the causal judgment 
affirms the existence o f a necessary conjunction between these t w o moments 
o f any force. R u l e d by a sort o f constraint from w h i c h i t cannot free itself, 
the m i n d sets up this relation i n advance o f any proof. It postulates this rela-
tionship, as people say, a priori. 
Empiricism has never succeeded i n giving an account o f that apriorism 
and that necessity. Never have the philosophers o f that school been able to 
explain h o w an association o f ideas reinforced by habit could produce any-
thing other than a state o f expectancy, a more or less strong predisposition on 
the part o f ideas to call themselves to m i n d i n a definite order. N o w , the 
w O f course, there are animal societies. Even so, the meaning of the word is by no means the same 
when applied to men and animals. The institution is the characteristic phenomenon of human societies; 
there are no institutions in animal societies. 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
371 
principle o f causality has an entirely different character. I t is not simply an i n -
herent tendency for our thought to unfold i n a certain way; it is a n o r m ex-
ternal and superior to the flow o f our representations, w h i c h it rules and 
regulates absolutely. I t is endowed w i t h an authority that binds the intellect 
and goes beyond the intellect; i n other words, the intellect is not its creator. 
In this regard, it does no good to substitute hereditary for individual habit. 
The nature o f habit does not change because it lasts longer than a man's life; 
it is only stronger. A n instinct is not a rule. 
T h e rites just studied enable us to discern a source o f that authority that 
until n o w has been little suspected. Let us recall h o w the causal law that the 
mimetic rites put into practice was b o r n . T h e group comes together, d o m i -
nated by one concern: I f the species whose name it bears does not reproduce, 
the clan is doomed. I n this way, the c o m m o n feeling that animates all its 
members is expressed outwardly i n the f o r m o f definite movements that al-
ways recur i n the same way i n the same circumstances. A n d for the reasons set 
forth, it turns out that the desired result seems to be obtained w h e n the cer-
emony has been conducted. A n association is thereby formed between the 
idea o f this result and that o f the actions preceding it. This association does 
not vary from one subject to the other. Because it is the product o f a collec-
tive experience, it is the same for all w h o take part i n the rite. Nonetheless, i f 
no other factor intervened, only a collective state o f waiting w o u l d result. 
Having completed the imitative movements, everyone w o u l d wait, more or 
less confidently, to see the i m m i n e n t approach o f the hoped-for event. Even 
so, an imperative rule o f thought w o u l d not come into being. 
Because a social interest o f premier importance is at stake, society cannot 
let things take their course, at the mercy o f circumstances; hence i t intervenes 
to regulate their course to suit its needs. Society requires this ceremony, 
w h i c h it cannot do w i t h o u t , to be repeated whenever necessary and, hence, 
the actions that are the condition o f success to be regularly done. It imposes 
them as an obligation. Those actions imply a definite attitude o f m i n d that, 
in response, shares the same quality o f obligation. To prescribe that the ani-
mal or plant must be imitated to make t h e m come to life again is to make 
"like produces like" into an axiom that must not be doubted. O p i n i o n can-
not p e r m i t individuals to deny this principle i n theory, w i t h o u t at the same 
time permitting t h e m to violate i t i n their conduct. I t therefore imposes the 
principle, as it does the practices that derive from it, and i n this way the 
ritual precept is reinforced by a logical principle that is none other than 
the intellectual aspect o f the ritual one. T h e authority o f b o t h derives from 
the same source: society. T h e respect evoked by society passes into those 
ways o f thinking and acting to w h i c h i t attaches value. O n e cannot stand 


372 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
aside from either w i t h o u t meeting resistance from prevailing opinion. This is 
w h y the ways o f t h i n k i n g require the adherence o f the intellect i n advance o f 
all examination, just as the ways o f acting directly b r i n g about the submission 
o f the w i l l . 
Using this example, w e can test once again h o w a sociological theory o f 
the idea o f causality, and the categories more generally, b o t h diverges from 
the classical doctrines o n this question and accords w i t h them. Here, as in 
apriorism, causality retains the a priori and necessary character o f the causal 
relation. T h e sociological theory does not simply affirm it but also accounts 
for i t and yet does not, as i n empiricism, make i t disappear whde ostensibly 
accounting for it. Besides, there can be no question o f denying the part that 
belongs to individual experience. That the individual by himself notes regu-
lar sequences o f phenomena, and i n so doing acquires a certain sensation o f 
regularity, is not to be doubted. B u t this sensation is not the category o f causal-
ity. T h e first is individual, subjective, and incommunicable; we make it our-
selves 
from our personal observations. T h e second is the w o r k o f the 
collectivity, w h i c h gives i t to us ready-made. I t is a framework i n w h i c h our 
empirical observations arrange themselves and w h i c h enables us to think 
about them—that is, to see t h e m from an angle that enables us to understand 
one another o n the subject o f those observations. To be sure, i f the 
frame-
w o r k can be applied to the content, that is because it is not w i t h o u t rela-
tionship to that content, but the framework does not merge w i t h what it 
contains. It transcends and dominates the content because it has a different 
origin. I t is not simply a collection o f individual memories; it is made, first 
and foremost, to satisfy the needs o f life i n c o m m o n . 
I n sum, the mistake o f empiricism has been to see the causal tie as only a 
learned construct o f speculative thinking and the product o f a more or less 
systematic generalization. Pure speculation can give b i r t h only to views that 
are provisional, hypothetical, and more or less plausible, but views that must 
always be regarded as suspect. W e do not k n o w whether some new observa-
tion w i l l invalidate t h e m i n the near future. Therefore an axiom that the m i n d 
does and must accept, w i t h o u t testing and w i t h o u t qualification, cannot 
come to us from that source. T h e demands o f action, especially o f collective 
action, can and must express themselves i n categorical formulas that are 
peremptory and sharp and that b r o o k no contradiction, for collective move-
ments are possible only i f they are concerted, and thus regulated and well de-
fined. 
T h e y preclude blind groping, w h i c h is the source o f anarchy. They 
tend by themselves toward an organization that, once established, imposes i t -
self u p o n individuals. A n d since action cannot do w i t h o u t the intellect, the 
intellect is eventually pulled along i n the same way, adopting w i t h o u t argu-


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
373 
ment the theoretical postulates that practice requires. T h e imperatives o f 
thought and those o f the w i l l are probably t w o sides o f the same coin. 
It is far from m y intention, however, to offer these observations as a 
complete theory o f the concept o f causality. That issue is too complex to be 
resolved i n this way. T h e principle o f cause has been understood differendy 
in different times and places; i n a single society i t varies w i t h social milieux, 
and w i t h the realms o f nature to w h i c h it is applied.
3 0 Therefore, one cannot 
possibly determine what causes and conditions he behind i t after considering 
only one o f the forms it has taken historically. T h e views that have just been 
set forth must be regarded only as indicative; they w i l l have to be tested and 
fleshed out. Nonetheless, since the causal law just considered is surely one o f 
the most primitive i n existence and since i t has played an important role i n 
the development o f human thought and industry, i t constitutes a choice ex-
periment, and so i t can be presumed that the observations i t has allowed us 
to make are i n some measure generalizable. 
30The idea of cause is not the same for a scientist as for a man who is scientifically uneducated. Be-
sides, many of our contemporaries understand the principle of causality differendy depending on the phe-
nomena to which it is applied—social or physicochemical. In the social realm, there is an idea of causality 
that is extraordinarily reminiscent of the one on which magic was based for so long. We might well ask 
ourselves whether a physicist and a biologist imagine the causal relation in the same fashion. 


CHAPTER FOUR 
THE POSITIVE CULT 
(CONTINUED) 
Representative or Commemorative Rites 
I
n the t w o preceding chapters, the explanation o f the positive rites that I 
offered ascribes to t h e m moral and social meaning, first and foremost. T h e 
physical efficacy ascribed to t h e m by the faithful is an interpretation that 
hides their fundamental reason for being: T h e y are deemed to have an effect 
o n things because they serve to remake individuals and groups morally. This 
hypothesis enabled me to account for the facts, but i t cannot be said to have 
been proved directly. Indeed, i t seems at first glance to j i b e rather poorly w i t h 
the nature o f the ritual mechanisms I have analyzed. W h e t h e r these mecha-
nisms be offerings or mimetic practices, the actions that constitute t h e m have 
purely physical ends i n view. T h e i r sole purpose is or seems to be to induce 
the rebirth o f the totemic species. I n that case, is i t not surprising that their 
real function should be to serve moral ends? 
It is true that their physical function may very well have been exagger-
ated by Spencer and Gillen, even i n the cases where it is most clearly i n c o n -
testable. I n the v i e w o f those authors, each clan celebrates its Intichiuma i n 
order to provide a useful foodstuff to the other clans. T h e whole cult sup-
posedly involves a k i n d o f economic cooperation among different totemic 
groups, each supposedly w o r k i n g for all the rest. But, according to Strehlow, 
this n o t i o n o f Australian totemism is utterly foreign to the native mentality. 
H e says: " I f , w h d e doing their utmost to multiply the animals or plants o f the 
consecrated species, the members o f a totemic group seem to be w o r k i n g for 
their fellow m e n o f other totems, we must refrain from seeing this collabora-
tion as the fundamental principle o f Arunta or Loritja totemism. Never have 
the black m e n themselves told me that the point o f their ceremonies was any 
such thing. O f course, w h e n I suggested this idea to t h e m and explained it, 
they understood and went along. B u t no one w i l l blame me i f I have a cer-
374 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
375 
tain mistrust for responses obtained under these conditions." Strehlow ob-
serves, furthermore, that this way o f interpreting the rite is contradicted by 
the fact that the totemic animals or plants are not all edible or useful; some 
have no use, and indeed some are dangerous. Thus the ceremonies that c o n -
cern t h e m cannot have nutritional ends i n view.
1 
O u r author concludes: " W h e n the natives are asked the decisive reason 
for these ceremonies, they reply unanimously: I t is because the ancestors 
have so instituted things. That is w h y we act i n this way and not some 
other."
2 B u t to say that the rite is observed because i t comes from the ances-
tors is to acknowledge that its authority is one and the same as the authority 
o f tradition, w h i c h is eminendy a social thing. I t is celebrated to keep faith 
w i t h the past and preserve the group's moral* identity, not because o f the 
physical effects it can b r i n g about. Thus, its profound causes can be glimpsed 
through the very manner i n w h i c h the faithful explain it. 
There are cases i n w h i c h this aspect o f the ceremonies is immediately 
obvious. 
I 
This aspect o f the ceremonies is best observed among the Warramunga.
3 
A m o n g this people, each clan is held to be descended from a single ancestor 
w h o , although b o r n i n a definite place, spent his life o n earth traveling the 
country i n all directions. H e it is w h o gave the land its present f o r m during 
those travels, they say, and he w h o made the mountains and the plains, the 
water holes and the streams, and so forth. A t the same time, along his route 
he sowed the seeds o f life that came forth 
from his body and, through 
successive reincarnations, became the present-day members o f the clan. T h e 
"•Note the term "moral," here used in the sense that encompasses conscience collective in its cognitive and 
normative meanings. 
'Of course, these ceremonies are not followed by alimentary communion. According to Strehlow, 
they have a distinct generic name, at least when they involve inedible plants: They are called knujilelama, 
not mbatjalkatiuma. ([Carl Strehlow, Die Aranda- und Loritja-Stamme in Zentral-Australien] vol. Ill [Frank-
furt,.!. Baer, 1907], p. 96). 
2Ibid., p. 8. 
3The Warramunga are not the only people among whom the Intichiuma takes the form I will de-
scribe. It is also found among the Tjingilli, the Umbaia, the Wulmala, the Walpari, and even the Kaitish, 
although the Kaitish ritual is in some ways reminiscent of the Arunta one ([Sir Baldwin] Spencer and 
[Francis James] Gillen, Northern Tribes [of Central Australia, London, Macmillan, 1904], pp. 291, 309, 311, 
317). I adopt the Warramunga a
s the type case because they have been very well studied by Spencer and 
Gillen. 


376 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
purpose o f the Warramunga ceremony, w h i c h corresponds exactly to the I n -
tichiuma o f the Arunta, is to depict and commemorate the mythical history 
o f the ancestor. It involves neither sacrifice nor, w i t h only a single excep-
t i o n ,
4 mimetic practices. T h e rite involves remembering the past and making 
it present, so to speak, by means o f a true dramatic performance 
[représenta-
tion]. This t e r m is all the more appropriate i n the present case, since the cel-
ebrant is by no means viewed as an incarnation o f the ancestor he represents. 
H e is an actor playing a role. 
Here, as an example, is what the Intichiuma o f the Black Snake consists 
of, as observed by Spencer and G i l l e n .
5 
T h e initial ceremony does not seem to refer to the past; at least, the de-
scription given us does not justify such an interpretation. I t consists o f r u n -
ning and j u m p i n g by t w o celebrants
6 adorned w i t h figures that represent the 
black snake. W h e n b o t h at last fall exhausted to the ground, those i n atten-
dance r u n their hands gendy over the emblematic designs that cover the 
backs o f the t w o actors. This gesture is said to please the black snake. O n l y 
after that does the series o f commemorative rites begin. 
T h e y act out the mythical history o f the ancestor, Thalaualla, from the 
m o m e n t he came out o f the ground to the m o m e n t he finally disappeared 
into it again. They follow h i m through all his travels. According to the myth, 
he conducted totemic ceremonies i n each o f the localities where he so-
j o u r n e d . These are repeated i n the same order i n w h i c h they are said to have 
taken place at the beginning. T h e movement that recurs most frequently is a 
sort o f rhythmic and violent trembling o f the entire body because, i n m y t h -
ical times, the ancestor shook himself i n this way to b r i n g out the seeds o f life 
w i t h i n h i m . T h e actors have their skin covered w i t h d o w n that comes off and 
flies away as a result o f this shaking. This is a means o f depicting the flight o f 
the mystical seeds and their dispersion i n the air. 
We recall that among the Arunta, the place where the ceremony occurs 
is ritually determined. I t is the site o f the sacred rocks, trees, and water holes, 
and the faithful must go there to celebrate the cult. A m o n g the Warramunga, 
though, the choice o f site is arbitrary and a matter o f convenience. Theirs is 
a conventional stage. T h e actual place where the events that are the theme o f 
the rite occurred is represented by drawings. Sometimes these drawings are 
This is true for the Intichiuma of the white cockatoo; see p. 357 above. 
5Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 300fF. 
6One of the two actors does not belong to the Black Snake clan but to the Crow. This is because the 
Crow is considered an associate of the Black Snake—in other words, its subtotem. 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
377 
made o n the bodies o f the actors themselves. For example, a small circle c o l -
ored i n w i t h red and painted o n the back and stomach represents a water 
hole.
7 I n other examples, the image is traced i n the dirt. O n ground previ-
ously dampened and covered w i t h red ochre, they make curved lines from a 
series o f w h i t e points, symbolizing a stream or a mountain. This is a r u d i -
mentary theatrical set. 
I n addition to the strictly religious ceremonies that the ancestor is said to 
have conducted i n the past, simple epic or comic episodes o f Thalaualla's 
earthly career are presented. Thus, at a certain moment, while three actors 
are busy o n stage w i t h an important rite, another hides behind a clump o f 
trees some distance away. H u n g around his neck is a packet o f d o w n repre-
senting a wallaby. As soon as the main ceremony has ended, an old man traces 
o n the ground a line that leads to the place where a fourth actor is hiding. 
T h e others walk behind, w i t h their eyes lowered and fixed u p o n this line as 
i f they are following a path. W h e n they discover the man, they act surprised, 
and one o f t h e m beats h i m w i t h a stick. This entire m i m i c r y portrays an i n -
cident i n the life o f the great black snake. O n e day, his son went o f f to hunt 
alone, bagged a wallaby, and ate it w i t h o u t giving any to his father. T h e fa-
ther followed his tracks, surprised h i m , and forced h i m to vomit. This i n c i -
dent is alluded to i n the beating that ends the performance.
8 
I w i l l not state here all the mythical events that are presented one after 
the other. T h e foregoing examples are enough to show the character o f these 
ceremonies. They are plays, but plays o f a very particular kind. They act, or 
at least are thought to act, upon the course o f nature. W h e n the c o m m e m o -
ration o f Thalaualla is over, the Warramunga are convinced that black snakes 
cannot fad to increase and multiply. Thus these dramas are rites, and i n fact 
rites that, by the way they w o r k , are comparable i n every respect to those that 
make up the Arunta Intichiuma. 
Consequendy, the t w o sets o f rites can shed light upon one another. I n -
deed, comparing them is all the more legitimate because there is no radical 
discontinuity between them. N o t only is the same goal pursued i n b o t h 
cases, but what is most characteristic o f the Warramunga ritual is to be found 
i n embryonic f o r m i n the other. As the Arunta generally practice i t , the I n -
tichiuma contains what amounts to a k i n d o f implicit commemoration. T h e 
places where i t is celebrated are, obligatorily, those that the ancestors made 
illustrious. T h e paths the faithful take i n their pious pilgrimages are those 
'Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 302. 
8Ibid., p. 305. 


378 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
traveled by the Alcheringa heroes; the places where they stop to conduct 
rites are those where the ancestors themselves sojourned, where they van-
ished into the ground, and so forth. Thus everything calls their m e m o r y back 
into the minds o f those i n attendance. Moreover, they quite often supple-
ment the physical rites* w i t h hymns recounting the ancestors' exploits.
9 Let 
those stories be acted out rather than told, and let t h e m develop i n this new 
f o r m so as to become the essence o f the ceremony, and we w i l l have the War-
ramunga ceremony. M o r e than that: F r o m one standpoint, the Arunta I n -
tichiuma is already a sort o f play. T h e celebrant, i n fact, is one and the same 
as the ancestor from w h o m he descends and w h o m he reincarnates.
1 0 T h e 
movements he makes are those the ancestor made i n the same circumstances. 
To speak precisely, o f course, he is not playing the ancestral personage as an 
actor might do; he is that very personage. I n a sense, i t is still the hero w h o 
is o n the stage. To accentuate the representative character o f that rite, all it 
takes is to accentuate the duality o f the ancestor and the celebrant. This is 
precisely what happens among the Warramunga.
1 1 Indeed, there is m e n t i o n 
o f at least one Intichiuma among the Arunta, i n w h i c h certain people are re-
sponsible for portraying ancestors w i t h w h o m they have no mythical relation 
o f descent and thus i n w h i c h there are dramatic performances i n the full 
sense. This is the Intichiuma o f the E m u .
1 2 I n this case, too, contrary to what 
usually happens among this people, it does seem that the theater o f the cer-
emony is artificially set u p .
1 3 
* Rites manuels. These stand in contrast to rites oraux, "oral rites." 
9See Spencer and Gillen, NatiueTribes [of Central Australia, London, Macmillan, 1889], p. 188; Streh-
low, Aranda, vol. Ill, p. 5. 
'"Strehlow himself recognizes this: "The totemic ancestor and his descendant, that is to say the one 
who depicts him (der Darsteller), are presented in these sacred songs as one and the same" ([Aranda ], vol. 
Ill, p. 6). Since this incontestable fact contradicts the thesis that ancestral souls are not reincarnated, 
Strehlow adds in a note, "During the ceremony, there is, properly speaking, no incarnation of the ances-
tor in the person who depicts him." If Strehlow means that incarnation does not occur during the cere-
mony, nothing is more certain.- But if he means that there is no incarnation at all, I do not understand how 
the celebrant and the ancestor can merge. 
"Perhaps this difference arises in part 
from 
the fact that, among the Warramunga, each clan is thought 
to descend from a single ancestor around whom the mythical history of the clan has gradually condensed. 
This is the ancestor commemorated in the rite; however, the celebrant is not necessarily descended from 
him. Indeed, we might ask whether these mythical chiefs, demigods of a sort, undergo reincarnation. 
12In that Intichiuma, three participants depict ancestors "of considerable antiquity"; they actually play 
a role (Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 181—182). Spencer and Gillen add, it is true, that those are an-
cestors who came after the Alcheringa period. But they are nonetheless mythical personages, and they are 
portrayed during a rite. 
13Indeed, we are not told of sacred rocks and water holes. The center of the ceremony is an image of 
an emu that is drawn on the ground and can be drawn anywhere. 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
379 
That these t w o kinds o f ceremonies have a certain air o f kinship, despite 
the differences between them, does not mean that there is a definite relation-
ship o f succession between them, and that one is a transformation o f the other. 
The resemblances observed may actually arise from their having the same o r i -
gin—that is, from their being divergent forms o f the same original ceremony. 
We w i l l see, i n fact, that this hypothesis is the most probable. But there is no 
need to take a position o n that question, and the preceding is enough to es-
tablish that these are rites o f the same kind. Thus w e have a basis for compar-
ing them and for using the one to help us understand the other better. 
W h a t is peculiar to those Warramunga ceremonies that I have just dis-
cussed is that not one movement is made for the purpose o f helping or 
directly causing the totemic species to be r e b o r n .
1 4 I f we analyze the move-
ments made together w i t h the words said, we find n o t h i n g that reveals any 
intention o f this k i n d . Everything takes place i n dramatic performances* that 
have no purpose other than to make the clan's mythical past present i n peo-
ple's minds. B u t the mythology o f a group is the collection o f beliefs c o m -
m o n to the group. H o w the society imagines man and the w o r l d is expressed 
in the traditions whose m e m o r y the mythology perpetuates; i t is a morality 
and a cosmology at the same time as i t is a history. Therefore the rite serves 
and can only serve to maintain the vitality o f those beliefs and to prevent 
their m e m o r y from being obliterated—in other words, to revitalize the most 
essential elements o f the collective consciousness and conscience. T h r o u g h 
this rite, the group periodically revitalizes the sense it has o f itself and its 
unity; the nature o f the individuals as social beings is strengthened at the 
same time. T h e glorious memories that are made to live again before their 
eyes, and w i t h w h i c h they feel i n accord, b r i n g about a feeling o f strength 
and confidence. O n e is more sure i n one's faith w h e n one sees h o w far into 
the past i t goes and what great things i t has inspired. This is the feature o f the 
ceremony that makes i t instructive. T h e tendency o f the w h o l e ceremony is 
to act o n minds, and o n minds alone. B u t i f i t is believed to act o n things at 
the same time, and to b r i n g about the prosperity o f the species, this can only 
be as a counterpart o f the moral influence i t exercises—and that moral influ-
ence obviously is the only one that is real. Therefore, the hypothesis I have 
proposed is verified by a revelatory experiment and is the more compelling 
* Tout se passe en représentations qui ne peuvent être destinées qu'à rendre présent aux esprits le passé mythique 
du clan. The word représentation neady joins two meanings: "dramatic performance" and "idea." 
1 4I do not mean to say, however, that all the ceremonies of the Warramunga are of this type. The ex-
ample of the white cockatoo, discussed above, proves that there are exceptions. 


380 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
because, as I have just established, the ritual systems o f the Warramunga and 
the Arunta do not differ fundamentally. T h e one simply brings out w i t h 
greater clarity what we had already guessed about the other. 
II 
There are ceremonies i n w h i c h this representative and ideal feature is even 
more pronounced. I n the ceremonies just discussed, dramatic representation 
was not an end i n itself; it was only a means to a completely mundane end, 
the reproduction o f the totemic species. B u t there are others that are not par-
ticularly different from the preceding and yet from w h i c h interests o f that 
sort are entirely absent. I n those, the past is represented for the sole purpose 
o f representing it and impressing it more deeply u p o n minds, w i t h no ex-
pectation that the rite should have any particular influence u p o n nature. A t 
the very least, the physical effects that are sometimes imputed to the rite are 
entirely secondary and unrelated to the liturgical importance i t is given. This 
is notably the case o f the feasts the Warramunga celebrate i n honor o f the 
snake W o l l u n q u a .
1 5 
As I have already said, Wollunqua is a t o t e m o f a very special k i n d . It is 
not an animal or plant species but a unique being; only one Wollunqua ex-
ists. Furthermore, he is a purely mythical being. T h e natives imagine h i m as 
a sort o f colossal snake, so tall that his head is lost i n the clouds w h e n he 
stands o n his tail. H e is believed to live i n a water hole, called Thapauerlu, 
w h i c h is hidden deep i n a lonely valley. B u t although Wollunqua differs i n 
some respects from ordinary totems, still he has all the distinguishing features 
o f one. H e serves as a collective name and emblem for a whole group o f 
individuals w h o see h i m as their c o m m o n ancestor. A n d the relations they 
have w i t h this mythical beast are identical to those that the members o f other 
clans believe they have w i t h the founders o f their o w n respective clans. I n 
Alcheringa times,
1 6 Wollunqua traveled the country i n every direction. I n 
the various localities where he stopped, he sowed spirit-children, spirit p r i n -
ciples that continue to serve today as souls for living beings. Wollunqua is 
15Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 226ff. Cf. on the same subject certain passages of Eylmann 
that apparendy refer to the same mythical being ([Richard] Eylmann, Die Eingeborenen [der Kolonie Sud 
Australien, Berlin, D. Reumer, 1908], p. 185). Strehlow also mentions a mythical snake among the Arunta 
(Kulaia, water snake), which may well be the same as Wollunqua (Strehlow, Aranda, vol. I, p. 78; cf. vol. 
II, p. 71, where Kulaia 
figures 
on the list of totems). 
16So as not to complicate the terminology, I use the Arunta term. Among the Warramunga, this myth-
ical time is called Wingara. 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
381 
even regarded as a k i n d o f preeminent totem. T h e Warramunga are divided 
into t w o phratries, one called U l u u r u and the other K i n g i l l i . Almost all the 
totems o f the first are various species o f snake. T h e y are all considered to be 
descendants o f Wollunqua; he is said to be their grandfather.
1 7 F r o m this one 
can guess how, i n all likelihood, the Wollunqua m y t h was born. To explain 
the presence o f so many similar totems i n one phratry, they were all imagined 
to be derived from one and the same totem; but o f necessity, he had to be 
given gigantic f o r m , so that, by his very appearance, he w o u l d fit the i m p o r -
tant role assigned to h i m i n the history o f the tribe. 
Wollunqua is the object o f ceremonies no different i n nature from those 
we studied previously. These are performances i n w h i c h the principal events 
o f his mythical life are depicted; he is shown c o m i n g out o f the ground and 
m o v i n g from one locality to the other; the various episodes o f his life and his 
travels are acted out; and so forth. Spencer and Gillen were present at 
fifteen 
ceremonies o f this k i n d , w h i c h occurred one after the other between 27 July 
and 23 August, following a prescribed order i n such a way as to f o r m a true 
cycle.
1 8 Thus, the detads o f the rites that make up this feast do not distinguish 
it from an ordinary Intichiuma among the Warramunga; that m u c h is recog-
nized by the authors w h o have described i t for us.
1 9 B u t o n the other hand, 
it is an Intichiuma that cannot possibly have the aim o f ensuring the fecun-
dity o f an animal or plant species; Wollunqua is a species i n himself and does 
not reproduce. H e is; and the natives apparendy do not feel that he requires 
a cult i n order to go o n being. N o t only do these ceremonies not have the 
efficacy o f the classic Intichiuma, but they do not seem to have material ef-
ficacy o f any k i n d . Wollunqua is not a deity set over a definite range o f nat-
ural phenomena, and thus no definite service is expected o f h i m i n exchange 
for worship. 
True, i t is said that i f the ritual prescriptions are improperly observed, 
Wollunqua becomes angry, leaves his retreat, and avenges himself upon the 
faithful for their negligence. A n d w h e n everything has been properly done, 
they tend to believe that all w i l l be well and that some happy event w i l l oc-
cur. B u t the idea o f these possible sanctions was apparently b o r n only after 
17"It is not easy," say Spencer and Gillen, "to express in words that which is a rather vague feeling 
among the natives. But after having carefully observed the different ceremonies, we gained the quite dis-
tinct impression that, in the minds of the natives, Wollunqua corresponded to the idea of a dominant 
totem." (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 248.) 
18Among the most solemn of these ceremonies is the one I had occasion to describe above 
(pp. 219—220), during which an image of 
Wollunqua is drawn on a sort of mound that is later broken into 
pieces amid a general effervescence. 
19Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 227, 248. 


382 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
the fact, so as to account for the rite. It seemed natural that, once b o r n , the 
ceremony should have some purpose, and hence that to o m i t prescribed ob-
servances was somehow dangerous. B u t the rite was not instituted to prevent 
these mythical dangers or to b r i n g about particular advantages. Incidentally, 
these dangers are conceived i n the vaguest o f terms. For example, w h e n 
everything is done w i t h , the elders announce that Wollunqua w i l l send rain 
i f he is satisfied. B u t they do not celebrate the feast for the purpose o f having 
rain.
2 0 T h e y celebrate it because the ancestors did, because they are attached 
to it as a very respected tradition, and because they come out o f it w i t h a 
sense o f moral well-being. Other considerations play only a supplementary 
role; they can serve to strengthen the faithful i n the conduct that the rite i m -
poses, but they are not the raison d'etre o f that conduct. 
Here, then, is a w h o l e collection o f ceremonies whose sole purpose is to 
arouse certain ideas and feelings, to j o i n the present to the past and the i n d i -
vidual to the collectivity. I n fact, not only are these ceremonies incapable o f 
serving other ends, but the faithful themselves seek n o t h i n g more from them. 
This is additional evidence that the psychic state i n w h i c h the assembled 
group finds itself does indeed constitute the only solid and stable basis o f 
what m i g h t be called the ritual mentality. So far as beliefs ascribing this or 
20Here is how the terms used by Spencer and Gillen describe the proceedings in their only passage 
about a possible relationship between the Wollunqua and the phenomenon of rain. Some days after the 
rite that is celebrated at the mound, "the elders declare that they have heard Wollunqua speak, that he was 
satisfied with what happened, and that he would send rain. The reason for this prophecy is that they had 
heard, a
s we had, the thunder resounding some distance away." Rainmaking is so far 
from 
being the im-
mediate aim of the ceremony that it was not imputed to Wollunqua until several days after the rite had 
been celebrated, and following accidental circumstances. Another fact shows how vague the ideas of the 
natives are on this point. Several lines further on, the thunder is presented as a sign, not of Wollunqua s 
satisfaction but of his annoyance. Despite the prognostications, continue our authors, "the rain did not 
fall. But some days later, thunder was again heard rumbling far away. The elders said that Wollunqua was 
rumbling because he was angry" about the way in which the rite had been conducted. Thus, the same 
phenomenon, the sound of thunder, is interpreted sometimes as a sign of favorable intentions and at oth-
ers, of evil ones. 
There is, however, a detail of the ritual that would have direct efficacy, if one accepted the explana-
tion of it that Spencer and Gillen suggest. According to them, the mound is destroyed in order to frighten 
Wollunqua and, by magical means, prevent him 
from 
leaving his retreat. To me, this interpretation appears 
very suspect. As a matter of fact, in the circumstances just described in which it was announced that Wol-
lunqua was angry, this anger was attributed to the fact that they had neglected to clean up the debris from 
the mound. Hence, this cleanup is far 
from 
being aimed at intimidating and coercing Wollunqua; Wol-
lunqua himself demands it. This is probably no more than a special case of a more general rule in effect 
among the Warramunga: The cult instruments must be destroyed after each ceremony. Thus, when the 
rite has been completed, the ritual ornaments in which the celebrants are dressed are torn off forcefully. 
(Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 205.) 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
383 
that physical efficacy to the rites are concerned, those are accessory and c o n -
tingent matters, since they can be absent w i t h o u t change to the essence o f 
the rite. Thus, even more markedly than the preceding, the Wollunqua cer-
emonies i n a sense lay bare the positive cult. 
I f I have given special emphasis to those ceremonies, it is because o f their 
unusual importance, but others are o f the same character. Thus, the War-
ramunga have a "Laughing B o y " totem. Spencer and Gillen say that the 
clan o f this name has the same organization as the other totemic groups. Like 
them, i t has its sacred places (mungai) where the founding ancestor conducted 
ceremonies i n mythical times and where he left behind spirit-children 
w h o became the m e n o f the clan. T h e rites connected w i t h this totem are 
indistinguishable from those related to animal or plant totems.
2 1 I t is obvious, 
however, that the rites cannot possibly have physical efficacy. They are a 
series o f four more or less repetitious ceremonies, their sole purpose being 
to amuse, to provoke laughter by laughter—that is, to cultivate gaiety 
and good h u m o r w i t h i n the group that more or less specializes i n those 
traits.
2 2 
W e find among the Arunta themselves more than one totem that has no 
other Intichiuma. I n fact, among this people, the folds or depressions i n the 
land that mark the place where some ancestor sojourned are sometimes used 
as totems.
2 3 To such totems are attached ceremonies that obviously cannot 
have physical effects o f any k i n d . T h e y can only be made up o f performances 
whose purpose is to commemorate the past, and they can have no goal other 
than that c o m m e m o r a t i o n .
2 4 
W h d e these ritual performances help us understand the nature o f the 
cult better, they also b r i n g out an important element o f religion: its recre-
ational and aesthetic element. 
I have already shown that they are closely akin to dramatic perfor-
mances.
2 5 This kinship stands out even more clearly i n the ceremonies just 
described. N o t only do they use the same techniques as drama, but they have 
21Ibid., pp. 207-208. 
22Ibid., p. 210. 
"See numbers 432—442, in the list of totems compiled by Strehlow ([Aranda ], vol. II, p. 72). 
24See ibid., vol. Ill, p. 8. Also among the Arunta, there is a Worra totem that gready resembles the 
Warramungas' "Laughing Boy" totem (ibid, and vol. Ill, p. 124). Worra means "young men." The object 
of the ceremony is to make the young men take more pleasure in the game of labara (on this game, see 
ibid., vol. I, p. 55, n. 1). 
"See above, p. 376. 


384 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
the same sort o f goal. Since utilitarian purposes are i n general alien to them, 
they make m e n forget the real w o r l d so as to transport t h e m into another 
where their imagination is more at home; they entertain. Sometimes they 
even go as far as having the outward appearance o f recreation. W e see those 
present laughing and openly having f u n .
2 6 
T h e representative rites and the collective recreations are so close to one 
another that people move from one genre to the other w i t h o u t any sense o f 
discontinuity. T h e trait o f the specifically religious ceremonies is that they 
must be performed o n consecrated ground, from w h i c h w o m e n and the 
uninitiated are excluded.
2 7 I n others, this religious feature is somewhat o b -
scured, although not gone completely. T h e y occur away from the ceremo-
nial ground, w h i c h shows that to some extent they are already secular; even 
so, the profane ( w o m e n and children) are not admitted. Hence they straddle 
the boundary between t w o domains. I n general, they relate to mythical per-
sonages that do not fit neady into the scheme o f totemic religion. T h e per-
sonages are spirits, most often evil ones, that are more connected w i t h the 
magicians than w i t h the ordinary faithful, and sorts o f bogeymen i n w h i c h 
m e n do not believe w i t h the same degree o f seriousness and firm conviction 
as they accord to properly totemic beings and things.
2 8 I n step w i t h the 
weakening o f the tie that binds events and personages to the history o f the 
tribe, b o t h take o n a more unreal appearance, and the nature o f the corre-
sponding ceremonies changes. I n this way, we gradually enter into the d o -
main o f pure fantasy and pass from the commemorative rite to the ordinary 
c o r r o b o r é e , mere public rejoicing that is no longer religious i n any way and 
i n w h i c h everyone, w i t h o u t distinction, may take part. Indeed, perhaps cer-
tain o f these performances that today are only for entertainment are ancient 
rites whose function has changed. I n fact, the boundaries between these t w o 
kinds o f ceremonies are so fluid that i t is hard to say precisely to w h i c h group 
they belong.
2 9 
2 6An example of this kind is to be found in Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 204. 
27Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 118 n. 2, 618ff.; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 716ff. 
However, there are sacred ceremonies 
from 
which women are not totally excluded (see, for example, 
ibid., pp. 375ff.); but that is the exception. 
^See Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 329ff.; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 210ff. 
29This is the case, for example, of the Molonga corroborée, among the Pitta-Pitta of Queensland and 
neighboring tribes (see [Walter Edmund] Roth, Ethnological Studies among the North West Central Queens-
land Aborigines [Brisbane, E. Gregory, 1897], pp. 120ff.). Information on these ordinary corroborées is to 
be found in Stirling [Sir Baldwin] Spencer, Report [on the Work] of the Horn [Scientific] Expedition to Central 
Australia [London, Dulau, 1896], Part IV, p. 72, and in Roth, Queensland Aborigines, pp. 117ff. 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
385 
It is well k n o w n that games and the principal forms o f art seem to have 
been b o r n i n religion and that they l o n g maintained their religious charac-
ter.
3 0 W e can see w h y : w h i l e pursuing other goals direcdy, the cult has at the 
same time been a f o r m o f recreation. R e l i g i o n has not played this role by 
chance or a happy coincidence but as a result o f its inherent logic. Indeed, as 
I have shown, although religious thought is something other than a system o f 
fictions, the realities to w h i c h it corresponds can gain religious expression 
only i f imagination transfigures them. Great is the distance between society, 
as i t is objectively, and the sacred things that represent i t symbolically. T h e 
impressions really felt by men—the raw material for this construction—had 
to be interpreted, elaborated, and transformed to the point o f becoming u n -
recognizable. So the w o r l d o f religious things is pardy an imaginary w o r l d 
(albeit only i n its outward form) and, for this reason, one that lends itself 
more readdy to the free creations o f the m i n d . Moreover, because the i n -
tellectual forces that serve i n m a k i n g it are intense and tumultuous, the 
mere task o f expressing the real w i t h the help o f proper symbols is insuffi-
cient to occupy them. A surplus remains generally available that seeks to busy 
itself w i t h supplementary and superfluous works o f luxury—that is, w i t h 
works o f art. 
W h a t is true o f practices is true o f beliefs. T h e state o f effervescence i n 
w h i c h the assembled faithful find themselves is translated outwardly by exu-
berant motions that are not easily subordinated to ends that are defined 
too stricdy. T h e y escape, partly w i t h o u t destination, displaying themselves 
merely for the sake o f displaying themselves, and taking pleasure i n what 
amount to games. Besides, to the extent that the beings to w h i c h the cult is 
addressed are imaginary, they are i n no position to contain and regulate this 
exuberance; the weight o f tangible and durable realities is needed to press ac-
tivity into exact and harmonious adaptations. Therefore, we risk misunder-
standings w h e n , to explain rites, w e believe an exact purpose and raison d'être 
must be assigned to each movement. Some serve no purpose; they merely 
satisfy the worshippers' need to act, move, and gesticulate. T h e worshippers 
are seen j u m p i n g , w h i r l i n g , dancing, shouting, and singing, and they are not 
always able to assign a meaning to this turbulence. 
Thus, religion w o u l d not be religion i f there was no place i n i t for free 
combinations o f thought and action, for games, for art, for all that refreshes 
a spirit w o r n d o w n by all that is overburdening i n day-to-day labor. That 
'"On that question, see especially the excellent work of [Stewart] Culin, "Games of the North Amer-
ican Indians," Twenty-Sixth Report, BAE, [Washington, Government Printing Office, 1907]. 


386 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
w h i c h made art exist makes i t a necessity. I t is not merely an outward adorn-
ment that the cult can be thought o f as dressing up i n , i n order to hide what 
may be too austere and harsh about it; the cult i n itself is aesthetic i n some 
way. Because o f the w e l l - k n o w n connections mythology has w i t h poetry, 
scholars have sometimes wanted to situate mythology outside religion.
3 1 The 
truth is that there is a poetry inherent i n all religion. T h e representative cer-
emonies just studied make this aspect o f religious life obvious, but there are 
virtually no rites that do not manifest it i n some degree. 
Obviously, it w o u l d be a grave error to see only this aspect o f religion or 
to overstate its importance. W h e n a rite serves only as entertainment, it is no 
longer a rite. T h e moral forces that religious symbols express are real forces 
that we must reckon w i t h and that we may not do w i t h as we please. Even i f 
the purpose o f the cult is not to achieve physical effects, but deliberately stops 
at acting u p o n minds, it exerts its influence i n a different direction than does 
a pure w o r k o f art. T h e representations it works to arouse and maintain are 
not empty images that correspond to n o t h i n g i n reality and that we call up 
for no purpose, merely for the pleasure o f watching t h e m appear and c o m -
bine w i t h one another before our eyes. T h e y are as necessary to the good or-
der o f our moral life as food is to the nurture o f our physical life. I t is through 
them that the group affirms and maintains itself, and we k n o w h o w indis-
pensable the group is to the individual. Thus a rite is something other than a 
game; i t belongs to the serious side o f life. 
B u t w h i l e the unreal and imaginary element is not the essence, it still 
plays a role that is far from negligible. That element enters into the feeling o f 
comfort that the faithful draw from the accomplished rite. Recreation is one 
f o r m o f the moral remaking that is the primary object o f the positive cult. 
Once we have fulfilled our ritual duties, we return to profane life w i t h more 
energy and enthusiasm, not only because w e have placed ourselves i n contact 
w i t h a higher source o f energy but also because our o w n capacities have been 
replenished through living, for a few moments, a life that is less tense, more 
at ease, and freer. R e l i g i o n gains thereby an appeal that is not the least o f its 
attractions. 
For this reason, the idea o f a religious ceremony o f any importance nat-
urally elicits the idea o f a festival. Inversely, every festival has certain charac-
teristics o f a religious ceremony, even i f it is o f purely secular origin. I n every 
case, its effect is to b r i n g individuals together, to put the masses into m o t i o n , 
and thus induce a state o f effervescence—sometimes even d e l i r i u m — w h i c h 
31See above, p. 79. 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
387 
is not w i t h o u t kinship to the religious state. M a n is carried outside h i m -
self, pulled away from his ordinary occupations and preoccupations. We 
observe the same manifestations i n b o t h cases: cries, songs, music, violent 
movements, dances, the search for stimulants that increase vitality, and o t h -
ers. It has often been observed that popular festivals lead to excesses, causing 
people to lose sight o f the boundary between the licit and the i l l i c i t ;
3 2 there 
are also religious ceremonies that b r i n g about a k i n d o f thirst for violating 
those rules that ordinarily are widely obeyed.
3 3 To be sure, this is not because 
there is no basis for distinguishing between the t w o forms o f public activity. 
Simple rejoicing, the profane c o r r o b o r é e , has no serious purpose, but w h e n 
taken as a whole, a ritual ceremony always has a serious purpose. Once again, 
we must notice that there is no rejoicing i n w h i c h the seriousness o f life has 
no echo at all. Instead, the basic difference lies i n the different proportions i n 
w h i c h the t w o elements are combined. 
Ill 
As i t happens, a more general fact confirms the preceding views. I n their first 
w o r k , Spencer and Gillen presented the Intichiuma as a perfectly circum-
scribed ritual entity. T h e y spoke o f it as i f it was a process devoted exclusively 
to ensuring the reproduction o f the totemic species; and i t seemed that the 
Intichiuma must necessarily lose any sort o f meaning beyond this single func-
tion. B u t i n their Northern Tribes of Central Australia, the same authors use dif-
ferent language, perhaps w i t h o u t being aware o f it. T h e y recognize that these 
same ceremonies can just as well take place i n the Intichiumas proper as i n 
the initiation rites.
3 4 T h e y serve just as well either to make animals and plants 
o f the totemic species or to confer u p o n the neophytes the qualities it takes 
32Notably, in sexual matters. Sexual license is common in the ordinary corroborées (see Spencer and 
Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 9
6
—
9
7
, and Northern Tribes, pp. 136—137). On sexual license in popular feasts gen-
erally, see [Alfred] Hagelstange, Süddeutsches Bauernleben im Mittelalter [Leipzig, Duncker & Humbolt, 
1898], pp. 221ff. 
33Thus, the rules of exogamy are obligatorily violated during certain religious ceremonies (see above, 
p. 218, n. 27). We probably should not seek precise ritual meaning in this license. It simply arises me-
chanically from the state of overexcitement provoked by the ceremony. It is an example of those rites that 
have no definite object in themselves but are merely discharges of activity (see above, p. 385). The native 
himself does not assign it a definite purpose; he says only that if this license is not committed, the rite will 
not produce its effects; the ceremony will be botched. 
34These are the very words Spencer and Gillen use; "They (the ceremonies connected to the totems) 
are often, but not always, associated with those that concern the initiation of young men, or else they are 
part of the Intichiumas" (Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 178). 


388 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
to become full members o f the society o f m e n .
3 5 F r o m this point o f view, the 
Intichiuma appears i n a n e w light. N o longer is it a distinct ritual mechanism 
based o n principles that are peculiar to i t but instead a particular application 
o f more general ceremonies that can serve quite different purposes. This is 
why, before speaking o f the Intichiuma and o f initiation, they devote a spe-
cial chapter o f their n e w w o r k to totemic ceremonies i n general, apart 
from 
the various forms they may take depending o n the purposes they serve.
3 6 
This inherent indeterminacy o f the totemic ceremonies was 
only 
pointed to by Spencer and Gillen, and indeed rather indirecdy, but i t has 
been confirmed by Strehlow i n the most explicit terms. H e says, " W h e n the 
young novices are passed through the various initiation celebrations, rites are 
performed one after another for them. Nevertheless, although these rites re-
produce those o f the cult proper, d o w n to the most characteristic details 
(Read: the rites that Spencer and Gillen term Intichiuma), their purpose is not to 
multiply the corresponding totem and make i t prosper."
3 7 So the same cere-
m o n y is used i n b o t h cases; only the name is changed. W h e n its purpose is 
strictly the reproduction o f the species, i t is called Mbatjalkatiuma, and w h e n 
it is a procedure o f initiation i t is given the name I n t i c h i u m a .
3 8 
I n addition, among the Arunta, certain secondary characteristics distin-
guish these t w o kinds o f ceremonies from one another. A l t h o u g h the struc-
ture o f the rites is the same i n b o t h cases, the shedding o f blood and, more 
generally, the offerings characteristic o f the A r u n t a Intichiuma are lacking i n 
their initiation ceremonies. Furthermore, whereas the Arunta Intichiuma is 
held at a place authoritatively set by tradition and to w h i c h people must 
pilgrimage, the stage o n w h i c h the initiation ceremonies are held is purely 
conventional.
3 9 B u t w h e n the Intichiuma consists merely o f a dramatic per-
formance, as is the case among the Warramunga, the lack o f distinction be-
3 5I leave aside the question of what this trait consists in. That question would lead into a development 
that would be very long and very technical and, for this reason, would have to be handled separately. The 
question does not, however, affect the propositions that are established in the course of the present work. 
•'"This is Chapter VI, tided "Ceremonies Connected with the Totems." 
37Strehlow, Aranda, vol. Ill, pp. 1-2. 
38The error with which Strehlow taxes Spencer and Gillen is explained in this way: They applied to 
one form of the rite the term that more especially suits the other. But in this instance, the error does not 
seem as grave as Strehlow makes it out to be. 
39Indeed, it cannot have any other character. In fact, since initiation is a tribal feast, the novices of dif-
ferent totems are initiated at the same 
time. 
The ceremonies that occur one after the other in this way, at 
the same place, always refer to several totems, and consequendy, they must take place outside the locali-
ties to which myth attaches them. 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
389 
tween the t w o rites is total. T h e past is commemorated i n both; the m y t h is 
put into action—performed—and cannot be performed i n t w o markedly 
different ways. Thus, depending o n the circumstances, one and the same cer-
emony fulfills t w o distinct functions.
4 0 
Indeed, i t can lend itself to a good many other uses. As we know, since 
blood is a sacred thing, w o m e n must not see it flowing. Nevertheless, a quar-
rel may o n occasion break out i n their presence and end i n bloodshed. A r i t -
ual infraction is thereby committed. A m o n g the Arunta, i n order to atone for 
this lapse, the man whose b l o o d has flowed first must "conduct a ceremony 
that refers either to his father's or his mother's totem."
4 1 That ceremony bears 
a special name, Alua uparilima, w h i c h means "erasing o f the blood." But, i n 
and o f itself, i t is no different from those conducted d u r i n g initiation or at 
the Intichiumas; it portrays an event o f the ancestors' history. Thus i t can 
serve equally well to initiate, to act u p o n the animal species, or to expiate a 
sacrilege. W e w i l l see below that a totemic ceremony can take the place o f a 
funeral r i t e .
4 2 
H u b e r t and Mauss have already drawn attention to a functional ambigu-
ity o f the same sort i n the case o f sacrifice and, more specifically, H i n d u sac-
rifice.
4 3 T h e y have shown that the sacrifices o f c o m m u n i o n , expiation, oaths, 
and contracts were but variants o f the same mechanism. As we n o w see, this 
phenomenon is far more primitive and by no means confined to the institu-
t i o n o f sacrifice. There is perhaps no rite that does not display similar inde-
terminacy. T h e mass is used for marriages as w e l l as for burials; it redeems the 
sins o f the dead, ensures divine favor to the living, and so on. Fasting is an 
expiation and a penance, but i t is also a preparation for c o m m u n i o n ; it even 
""How it happens that I have nowhere studied rites of initiation in and of themselves will now be un-
derstood. They do not constitute a ritual entity but are a composite made from various sorts of rites. For 
example, there are prohibitions, ascetic rites, and representative ceremonies that are indistinguishable from 
those conducted during the Intichiuma. Thus I have had to take this composite system apart and sepa-
rately treat each of the elementary rites that comprise it, classifying them with those similar rites with 
which they must be compared. In addition, we have seen (pp. 288—289) that initiation has served as the 
point of departure for a new religion that tends to move beyond totemism. But it was enough to show 
that totemism contained the seed of that religion; I did not have to pursue its development. Since the ob-
ject of this book is to study the elementary beliefs and practices, I must stop at the moment they give birth 
to more complex forms. 
41Spencer and Gillen, NativeTribes, p. 463. If the individual can, as he chooses, conduct a ceremony of 
either his father's or his mother's totem, that is because, for the reasons set forth above (p. 185), he belongs 
to both. 
42See below, Bk. 3, chap. 5, p. 399. 
43See [Henri Hubert and Marcel Mauss], "Essai sur [la nature et fonction du] sacrifice," in Melanges 
d'histoire des religions [Paris, F. Alcan, 1909], p. 83. 


390 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
conveys positive virtues. This ambiguity shows that the real function o f a rite 
is not the specific, well-defined results i t seems intended to reap and by 
w h i c h it is usually characterized. Instead, its real function is a general result, 
w h i c h can take different forms i n different circumstances and yet remain al-
ways and everywhere the same. 
T h e theory I have put forward presupposes exacdy this. I f the true func-
t i o n o f the cult is to arouse i n the faithful a certain state o f soul, are o f moral 
strength and confidence, and i f the various effects imputed to the rites are 
only due to secondary and variable causes o f this fundamental state, then it is 
not surprising that the same rite should seem to produce multiple effects 
while keeping the same components and structure. I n every case, those m e n -
tal dispositions that its permanent function is to b r i n g about remain the same; 
they depend o n the fact that the group is assembled, not o n the particular 
reasons w h y the group is assembled. O n the other hand, however, they are 
interpreted differendy to fit the circumstances to w h i c h they apply. Is it a 
physical effect that one wants to obtain? T h e confidence felt w i l l lead to be-
lieving that this result has been or w i l l be obtained by the means used. Has 
one c o m m i t t e d some lapse that one wants to erase? T h e same state o f moral 
assurance w i l l cause the same ritual movements to take o n expiatory virtues. 
I n this way, the apparent efficacy w i l l seem to change, even though the real 
efficacy remains unchanging; and the rite w i l l seem to fulfill disparate func-
tions even though i n fact it has only one, w h i c h is always the same. 
Conversely, just as a single rite can serve several ends, several rites can 
be used interchangeably to b r i n g about the same end. To ensure the repro-
duction o f the totemic species, sacrifices, mimetic practices, or c o m m e m o -
rative performances can be used equally well. This interchangeability o f rites 
demonstrates once again—just as their plasticity demonstrates—the extreme 
generality o f the useful influence they exercise. W h a t matters most is that i n -
dividuals are assembled and that feelings i n c o m m o n are expressed through 
actions i n c o m m o n . B u t as to the specific nature o f these feelings and actions, 
that is a relatively secondary and contingent matter. To become conscious o f 
itself, the group need not perform some acts rather than others. A l t h o u g h it 
must commune i n the same thought and the same action, the visible forms 
i n w h i c h this c o m m u n i o n occurs hardly matter. T h e external forms proba-
bly do not come about by chance. T h e y have their causes, but these causes 
do not go to the essence o f the cult. 
Everything brings us back, then, to the same idea. First and foremost, the 
rites are means by w h i c h the social group reaffirms itself periodically. A n d 
perhaps, beginning there, we can achieve a hypothetical reconstruction o f the 
manner i n w h i c h the first totemic cult must have been born. M e n w h o feel 


The Positive Cult (Continued) 
391 
united—in part by ties o f blood but even more by c o m m o n interests and tra-
ditions—assemble and become conscious o f their moral unity. For the reasons 
I have set forth, they are led to conceive this unity as a very special k i n d o f 
consubstantiality. They regard themselves as all participating i n the nature o f a 
certain animal. U n d e r those conditions, there w i l l be only one way for them 
to affirm their collective existence: to affirm themselves as animals o f that 
same species—and this not only i n the silence o f consciousness but by physi-
cal doing. I t is this doing that w i l l f o r m the cult, and obviously it can only be 
movements by w h i c h the man imitates the animal w i t h w h i c h he identifies 
himself. Thus understood, the mimetic rites come into v i e w as the primitive 
f o r m o f the cult. Some w i l l find that this is to attribute a rather large histori-
cal role to practices that at first glance resemble childish games. But, as I have 
shown, these naive and gauche gestures, these crude modes o f representation, 
express and nurture a feeling o f pride, confidence, and reverence that is en-
tirely comparable to the feeling expressed by the faithful o f the most idealist 
religions w h e n , gathered together, they proclaim themselves to be the chil-
dren o f the all-powerful G o d . I n b o t h cases, this feeling stems from the same 
impressions o f security and respect that are aroused i n individual conscious-
nesses by the great moral force that dominates them: the collective force. 
I n all likelihood, the other rites we have studied are no more than varia-
tions o n this fundamental rite. Once the close u n i o n between animal and 
man 
was accepted, man strongly felt the need to ensure the regular repro-
duction o f the totemic species, and that reproduction was made the principal 
object o f the cult. I n this way, those mimetic practices that probably had only 
a moral aim at the beginning found themselves subordinated to a utilitarian, 
material one, and he conceived o f t h e m as means o f producing the desired 
result. B u t w i t h further evolution i n the mythology that at first identified the 
ancestor hero w i t h the totemic animal, the ancestor figure became more dis-
tinct and personal, imitation o f the ancestor replaced imitation o f the animal, 
and the representative rites replaced or supplemented the mimetic ones. F i -
nally, to become more certain o f attaining the goal he was striving toward, 
man felt the need to b r i n g into play all the means available to h i m . Having i n 
hand reserves o f life-forces accumulated i n the sacred rocks, he used those; 
since the man's b l o o d was o f the same nature as the animal's, he used it for 
the same purpose, and he shed it. Inversely, because o f that same kinship, the 
man used the animal's flesh for the purpose o f remaking his o w n substance. 
Thence came the rites o f sacrifice and c o m m u n i o n . I n the end, however, all 
these varied practices are variations o n the same theme: Fundamentally, we 
encounter everywhere the same state o f soul, differendy interpreted accord-
ing to the circumstances, historical moments, and inclinations o f the faithful. 


CHAPTER FIVE 
THE PIACULAR RITES* AND 
THE AMBIGUITY OF THE 
NOTION OF THE SACRED 
N
o matter h o w greatly the actions they involve may differ 
from 
one 
another, the various positive rites just reviewed have one feature in 
c o m m o n : T h e y are all carried out w i t h confidence, joy, and enthusiasm. 
A l t h o u g h the wait for a future and contingent event is never 
w i t h o u t 
uncertainty, usually the rain falls w h e n the season comes, and the animal 
and plant species reproduce o n schedule. Repeated experience has shown 
that the rites generally b r i n g about the hoped-for effect that is their raison 
d'être. T h e y are celebrated w i t h assurance, and w i t h rejoicing i n advance 
o f the happy event they induce and announce. T h e actions contribute to 
that state o f m i n d . To be sure, the seriousness that always attends a religious 
ceremony marks them, but that seriousness precludes neither high spirits 
nor joy. 
Those ceremonies are joyful. B u t there are sad ceremonies as well, whose 
purpose is to meet a calamity or to remember and m o u r n one. These rites 
take o n a distinctive f o r m that I w i l l characterize and explain. Since they re-
veal a new aspect o f religious life, it is all the more necessary to examine 
t h e m separately. 
I propose to call ceremonies o f this type "piacular." T h e advantage o f the 
t e r m "piaculum" is that w h i l e suggesting the idea o f expiation, i t neverthe-
less has a m u c h broader meaning. A n y misfortune, anything that is ominous, 
and anything that motivates feelings o f disquiet or fear requires a piaculum 
'Dürkheim formulated this concept of rites conducted on the occasion of death, misfortune, or col-
lective crisis that are not expressions of individual feeling. He introduced the term into the study of reli-
gion and ritual. See the Maemillan Dictionary of 
Anthropology, London, 1986. 
392 


The Piacular Rites and the Ambiguity of the Notion of the Sacred 
393 
and is therefore called piacular.
1 This w o r d seems well suited to designating 
rites that are conducted under conditions o f uncertainty or sadness. 
I 
M o u r n i n g offers us an initial, and important, example o f piacular rites. 
T h e various rites used for m o u r n i n g must be distinguished. Some c o n -
sist only o f prohibitions: I t is forbidden to pronounce the name o f the de-
ceased
2 or to remain at the place where the death occurred;
3 the relatives, 
especially the female ones, must abstain from all communication w i t h out-
siders;
4 the ordinary occupations o f life are suspended, just as they are during 
feasts;
5 and so on. Since all these practices belong to the negative cult and are 
explained as rites o f that sort, they need not concern us here. They arise 
from 
the fact that the deceased is a sacred being. As a result o f contagion, every-
thing that is or was i n contact w i t h h i m is i n a religious state that precludes 
all contact w i t h the things o f profane life. 
B u t m o u r n i n g consists o f more than prohibitions to be respected. Posi-
tive acts are required, and k i n are b o t h the agents and the objects o f them. 
These rites quite c o m m o n l y begin as soon as death seems imminent. 
Here is a scene that Spencer and Gillen witnessed among the Warramunga. 
A totemic rite had just been celebrated, and the actors and spectators were 
leaving the sacred ground w h e n suddenly a piercing scream arose from the 
1 "Piacularia auspicia appellabant quae sacrificantibus tristiaportendebant" (Paul ex. Fest., p. 244, ed. Muller). 
[They used to call the auspices piacularia auspices, which portended sad things to the people sacrificing. 
Trans.] The word piaculum is even used as a synonym of misfortune. "Vettonica herba," says Pliny [The El-
der, Natural History], "tantumquegloriae habet ut domus in qua sata sit tuta existimetur a piaculis omnibus" (XX
8, 46). [The vetonica herb is so renowned that the house in which it is planted is considered safe 
from 
all 
piacula. I am indebted to Kathryn Argetsinger for these Latin translations.] 
2[Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen, Northern Tribes [of Central Australia, London, 
Macmillan, 1904], p. 526; [Richard] Eylmann, [Die Eingeborenen der Kolonie Sud Australien, Berlin, D. 
Reumer, 1908], p. 239. Cf. above, p. 310. 
'[Robert] Brough Smyth [The Aborigines of Victoria], vol. I [Melbourne: J. Ferres, 1878], p. 106; 
[James] Dawson, [Australian Aborigines; The Languages and Customs of Several Tribes of Aborigines in the 
Western District of Victoria, Australia, Melbourne, G. Robertson, 1881], p. 64; Eylmann, Die Eingeborenen, 
p. 239. 
4Dawson, Australian Aborigines, p. 66; Eylmann, Die Eingeborenen, p. 241. 
5[Sir Baldwin] Spencer and [Francis James] Gillen, NativeTribes [of Central Australia, London, Macmil-
lan, 1899], p. 502; Dawson, Australian Aborigines, p. 67. 


394 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
encampment. A man was dying there. Immediately, the w h o l e company be-
gan to r u n as fast as possible, and most o f t h e m began to scream even as they 
ran. "Between us and the camp," say these observers, "there was a deep 
stream o n whose banks sat several men; scattered here and there, heads d o w n 
between their knees, they cried and lamented." 
As we crossed the stream, we found the camp broken up, as required by 
custom. Some of the women, who had come from all directions, lay upon 
the body of the dying man; others stood or knelt all around it, pushing the 
points of their digging sticks into the tops of their heads, thereby causing 
wounds from which the blood ran down over their faces. They kept up a 
continuous wailing all the while. 
At this juncture, some men run up to the body, throwing themselves 
down upon it as the women get up; after a few moments, nothing is visible 
but a writhing mass of interlaced bodies. To one side, seated with their 
backs to the dying man, and still dressed in their ceremonial decorations, 
three men of the Thapungarti class let out piercing cries. After a minute or 
two, another man of the same class rushes onto the scene, screaming with 
pain and brandishing a stone knife. As soon as he reaches the camp, he 
makes such deep incisions across his thighs, into the muscles, that, unable 
to hold himself up, he finally falls on the ground in the midst of a group; 
two or three of his female relatives pull him away and apply their lips to his 
gaping wounds while he lies senseless. 
T h e sick man did not die until late that evening. As soon as he had drawn his 
last breath, the same scene began again. This time, the moans were even 
more penetrating. Caught up i n the same frenzy, m e n and w o m e n ran back 
and forth, cutting themselves w i t h knives and pointed sticks; the w o m e n hit 
each other, w i t h no one trying to fend o f f the blows. Finally, after an hour, a 
torchlight procession moved across the plain to the tree i n whose branches 
the body had been placed.
6 
Whatever their violence, these displays are tightly controlled by eti-
quette. C u s t o m designates the individuals w h o make bloody gashes o n t h e m -
selves; they must have specified kinship relations w i t h the deceased. I n the 
case Spencer and Gillen observed among the Warramunga, those w h o 
slashed their thighs were the maternal grandfather, maternal uncle, and wife's 
brother o f the deceased.
7 Others are required to cut their whiskers and hair 
6Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 516—517. 
'Ibid., pp. 520—521. The authors do not tell us whether these are tribal or blood relatives. The first 
hypothesis is the more likely. 


The Piacular Rites and the Ambiguity of the Notion of the Sacred 
395 
and then cover their scalps w i t h pipe clay. T h e w o m e n have especially rigor-
ous obligations. T h e y must cut their hair and cover their entire body w i t h 
pipe clay; furthermore, total silence is imposed o n t h e m for the period o f 
m o u r n i n g , w h i c h can last up to t w o years. As a result o f this prohibition, it 
is not u n c o m m o n among the Warramunga for all the w o m e n o f a camp to 
be condemned to absolute silence. T h e y become so accustomed to it that, 
even after the period o f m o u r n i n g expires, they voluntarily give up spoken 
language and prefer sign language (which they use w i t h remarkable skill). 
Spencer and Gillen k n e w an old w o m a n w h o had not spoken for more than 
twenty-four years.
8 
T h e ceremony I have described opens a l o n g sequence o f rites that oc-
cur one after the other for weeks and even months. I t is repeated i n various 
forms over the days that follow. Groups o f m e n and w o m e n sit o n the 
ground, crying, lamenting, and embracing one another at particular times. 
These ritual embraces are repeated often over the period o f m o u r n i n g . T h e 
individuals feel the need to come close to one another, it seems, and to c o m -
mune intimately. T h e y can be seen pressed together and entwined to the 
point o f f o r m i n g a single mass that emits l o u d moans.
9 Meanwhile, the 
w o m e n go back to lacerating their heads, and they go to the extreme o f ap-
plying the ends o f red-hot sticks to the wounds they make, i n order to ag-
gravate t h e m .
1 0 
Practices o f this sort are c o m m o n throughout Australia. Funeral rites— 
that is, the ritual attention given the corpse, the manner i n w h i c h i t is buried, 
and so forth—vary from tribe to t r i b e
1 1 and, w i t h i n a single tribe, according 
to the age, sex, and social rank o f the individuals.
1 2 B u t the ceremonies o f 
'Ibid., pp. 525—526. Although only an abstinence, this prohibition against speaking, specifically 
women's, has all the signs of a piacular rite, for it is a way of inconveniencing oneself. This is why I men-
tion it here. Fasting also can be either a piacular or an ascetic rite, depending on the circumstances. It de-
pends on the conditions in which the fasting occurs and the aim sought (see below, p. 400, on the 
difference between these two sorts of rites). 
9A plate in Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 525, illustrates this rite quite vividly. 
,0lbid., p. 522. 
"On the principal kinds of funeral rites, see [Alfred William] Howitt, NativeTribes [of South-East Aus-
tralia, New York, Macmillan, 1904], pp. 446-508, for the tribes of the southeast; Spencer and Gillen, 
Northern Tribes, p. 505, and Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 497ff., for the tribes of the center; [Wal-
ter Edmund] Roth, North Queensland Ethnography, Bull. 9, in RAM, VI, part 5, 1907, pp. 365ff. ("Burial 
Ceremonies and Disposal of the Dead"). 
12See, for example, Roth, "Burial Ceremonies," p. 368; [Edward John] Eyre, Journals of Expeditions [of 
Discovery] into Central Australia [London, T. and W. Boone, 1845], vol. II, pp. 344—345, 347. 


396 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
m o u r n i n g itself vary only i n detail, repeating the same theme everywhere. 
Everywhere, there is the same silence punctuated by w a i l i n g ,
1 3 the same 
obligation to cut the hair or beard
1 4 and cover the head w i t h pipe clay, ashes, 
or even excrement;
1 5 everywhere, finally, there is the same frenzy o f beating, 
lacerating, and b u r n i n g oneself. I n the center o f Victoria, " w h e n there is a 
death, the w o m e n cry, lament, and tear the skin o f their temples w i t h their 
fingernads. 
T h e relatives o f the deceased lacerate themselves furiously, espe-
cially i f they have lost a son. T h e father hits his head w i t h a tomahawk and 
sobs bitterly. T h e mother, seated near the fire, burns her breast and abdomen 
w i t h a stick reddened i n the fire. . . . Sometimes, these burns are so cruel that 
death results."
1 6 
According to an account by B r o u g h Smyth, here is what occurs i n the 
southern tribes o f the same state. Once the body is lowered into the grave, 
the widow begins her funeral observances. She shears off the hair above her 
forehead, and, reaching outright frenzy, takes hold of red-hot sticks and ap-
plies them to her chest, arms, legs, and thighs. She seems to enjoy the tor-
tures she inflicts on herself. It would be rash and, besides, useless to try to 
stop her. When she is so exhausted that she can no longer walk, she goes 
on trying to kick the ashes of the fire and throw them in all directions. Hav-
ing fallen on the ground, she takes ashes into her hands and rubs her 
wounds with them; then she scratches her face (the only part o f her body 
that the sticks passed through the fire have not touched). The blood that 
flows mingles with the ashes that cover her wounds and, still scraping her-
self, she laments and cries out.
1 7 
T h e description o f m o u r n i n g rites among the K u r n a i that H o w i t t gives 
us is remarkably similar to the preceding. Once the body has been wrapped 
i n opossum skin and enclosed i n a bark shroud, a hut is budt, and i n it the 
relatives gather. "There, lying o n the ground, they lament their fate, saying 
for example: ' W h y have y o u left us?' F r o m time to time, their grief is inten-
13Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 500; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 507, 508; Eylmann 
[Die Eingeborenen], p. 241; Mrs. Langloh Parker [Catherine Sommerville Field Parker], The EuahlayiTribe 
[London: A. Constable, 1905], pp. 83£F.; Brough Smyth, Aborigines of 
Victoria, vol. I, p. 118. 
14Dawson, Australian Aborigines, p. 66; Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 466; Eylmann, Die Eingeborenen, 
pp. 239-240. 
15Brough Smyth, Aborigines of 
Victoria, vol. I, p. 113. 
16W. E. Stanbridge, Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London, n.s., vol. I, p. 286. 
"Brough Smyth, Aborigines of 
Victoria, vol. I, p. 104. 


The Piacular Rites and the Ambiguity of the Notion of the Sacred 
397 
sified by penetrating moans from one o f them: T h e wife o f the deceased 
cries, ' M y husband is dead,' or the mother, ' M y child is dead.' Each o f those 
present repeats the same cry: O n l y the words change, depending u p o n the 
tie o f kinship each has w i t h the deceased. Using sharpened stones or toma-
hawks, they beat and tear themselves until their heads and bodies stream w i t h 
blood. T h e cries and moans continue through the night."
1 8 
Sadness is not the only feeling expressed during these ceremonies. A 
k i n d o f anger is usually mingled w i t h it. T h e relatives apparently need some-
h o w to avenge the death suffered. They are seen throwing themselves u p o n 
and trying to w o u n d each other. T h e attack is sometimes real and sometimes 
pretended.
1 9 There are even cases i n w h i c h a k i n d o f dueling is organized. 
A m o n g the Kaitish, the hair o f the deceased goes by right to his son-in-law. 
I n turn, the son-in-law must go, together w i t h a company o f relatives and 
friends, to challenge one o f his tribal brothers (that is, a man w h o belongs to 
the same marriage class as he and w h o , as such, could also have married the 
daughter o f the deceased). T h e challenge may not be refused, and the t w o 
combatants inflict serious injuries u p o n one another's shoulders and thighs. 
W h e n the duel is over, the challenger gives his adversary the hair he had c o n -
ditionally inherited. T h e adversary leaves, i n his o w n turn, to challenge and 
fight another o f his tribal brothers to w h o m the precious relic is then trans-
mitted, but always conditionally; i n this way it passes from hand to hand and 
circulates from group to group.
2 0 Moreover, some part o f these same feelings 
enters into the sort o f rage w i t h w h i c h each relative beats, burns, or slashes 
himself. A pain that reaches such great intensity does not go w i t h o u t anger. 
O n e cannot but be struck by the similarities o f these customs to those o f the 
vendetta. B o t h arise from the same principle: that death calls for the shedding 
o f blood. T h e only difference is that the victims are relatives i n one case and 
strangers i n the other. A l t h o u g h w e need not specifically discuss the vendetta, 
w h i c h falls under the domain o f legal institutions, it is appropriate to show 
h o w i t is connected to the m o u r n i n g rites, whose end it announces.
2 1 
I n some societies, m o u r n i n g concludes w i t h a ceremony whose efferves-
cence matches or even surpasses that produced during the opening cere-
monies. A m o n g the Arunta, this rite o f cloture is called U r p m i l c h i m a . 
18Howitt, Native Tribes, p. 459. Similar scenes will be found in Eyre, Journals of Expedition, vol. II, 
pp. 255 n, 347; Roth, "Burial Ceremonies," especially pp. 394, 395; [George] Grey, [Journal of the Two 
Expeditions in North Western and Western Australia, London, T. and W. Boone, 1841], vol. II, pp. 320ff. 
19Brough Smyth, Aborigines ofVictoria, vol. I, pp. 104, 112; Roth, "Burial Ceremonies," p. 382. 
20Spencerand Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 511-512. 
21Dawson, Australian Aborigines, p. 67; Roth, "Burial Ceremonies," pp. 366—367. 


398 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
Spencer and Gillen were present at t w o o f these. O n e was conducted i n 
honor o f a man, the other o f a w o m a n . Here is the description they give o f 
the woman's.
2 2 
T h e y begin by making ornaments o f a very special type, w h i c h are called 
Chimurilia by the m e n and Aramurilia by the w o m e n . Using a sort o f resin, 
they glue small animal bones ( w h i c h have previously been collected and 
stored) to locks o f hair furnished by relatives o f the dead w o m a n . They attach 
these pendants to one o f those headbands o f the k i n d that w o m e n often 
wear, adding w h i t e cockatoo and parakeet feathers to it. W h e n these prepa-
rations are complete, the w o m e n gather i n their camp. T h e y paint their bod-
ies w i t h different colors, according to the degree o f their kinship w i t h the 
deceased. After having held themselves i n a mutual embrace for about ten 
minutes, wailing all the while, they begin to walk toward the tomb. A t a cer-
tain distance along the way, they meet a b l o o d brother o f the deceased, w h o 
is accompanied by some o f her tribal brothers. T h e y all sit o n the ground, 
and the wailing begins again. T h e n , a p i t c h i
2 3 containing the Chimurilias is 
presented to the older brother, w h o presses it against his stomach; this is said 
to be a means o f lessening his pain. T h e y b r i n g out one o f these C h i m u r i l -
ias, and the mother o f the dead w o m a n puts it o n her head for a few m o -
ments. T h e n it is put back into the pitchi, w h i c h the other m e n take turns 
pressing against their breasts. Finally, the brother places the Chimurilias on 
the heads o f the t w o older sisters, and they set out again for the tomb. E n 
route, the mother throws herself o n the ground several times, trying to slash 
her head w i t h a pointed stick. Each time, the other w o m e n lift her up again 
and seem absorbed i n preventing her from h u r t i n g herself. Once at the tomb, 
she throws herself o n the m o u n d and tries to destroy it w i t h her hands, while 
the other w o m e n literally dance o n top o f her. T h e tribal mothers and aunts 
(father's sisters o f the dead woman) follow her example. They, too, throw 
themselves o n the ground, beating and tearing at one another. I n the end, 
blood streams over their entire bodies. After a time, they are pulled away. The 
older sisters then make a hole i n the earth o f the tomb, into w h i c h they place 
the Chimurilias, w h i c h have previously been broken into pieces. Once 
again, the tribal mothers t h r o w themselves o n the ground and slash each 
other's heads. A t this moment, "the crying and wailing o f the w o m e n w h o 
have remained all around seemed to rouse t h e m to the ultimate degree o f ex-
citement. T h e b l o o d that flowed the length o f their bodies, over the pipe clay 
22Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 508-510. 
23The small wooden vessel already described, above p. 338. 


The Piacular PJtes and the Ambiguity of the Notion of the Sacred 
399 
w i t h w h i c h they were covered, gave t h e m the appearance o f ghosts. A t the 
end, the o l d mother remained alone lying o n the tomb, completely ex-
hausted and groaning feebly." T h e others then lifted her up again, and re-
moved the pipe clay i n w h i c h she had been covered. This was the end o f the 
ceremony and o f the m o u r n i n g .
2 4 
A m o n g the Warramunga, the final rite has rather special features. A l -
though the shedding o f b l o o d seems to have no place i n it, the collective ef-
fervescence is expressed differently. A m o n g this people, before the body is 
finally buried, i t is laid out o n a sort o f platform i n the branches o f a tree and 
left there slowly to decompose until only the bones remain. T h e bones are 
then collected and, w i t h the exception o f one humerus, placed inside an 
anthill. T h e humerus is wrapped i n a bark sheath that is decorated i n various 
ways. T h e sheath is carried to the camp amid the shrieks and moans o f 
w o m e n . I n the days that follow, the Warramunga conduct a series o f totemic 
ceremonies, w h i c h refer to the t o t e m o f the deceased and to the mythical 
history o f the ancestors from w h o m the clan is descended. W h e n all these 
ceremonies are over, they move o n to the rite o f cloture. 
A trench one foot deep and fifteen feet l o n g is made o n the ceremonial 
ground. A totemic design has previously been drawn o n the ground at a dis-
tance from it, the design representing the totem o f the deceased and certain 
places where the ancestor sojourned. A small trench has been dug i n the 
ground very near this design. Ten decorated m e n then advance, one after the 
other. W i t h their hands crossed behind their heads and their legs apart, they 
stand astride the trench. W h e n the signal is given, the w o m e n rush from the 
camp, i n the deepest sdence. W h e n they are near, they get into single file, the 
last holding i n her hands the sheath containing the humerus. T h e n they all 
t h r o w themselves o n the ground and, m o v i n g o n their hands and knees be-
tween the spread legs o f the men, crawl the full length o f the trench. This 
scene marks a state o f great sexual excitement. As soon as the last w o m a n has 
passed, the sheath is taken away from her and carried toward the hole, near 
w h i c h stands an old man; he breaks the bone i n one stroke, and the pieces are 
speedily buried. D u r i n g this time, the w o m e n have remained farther away 
w i t h their backs to the scene, w h i c h they are forbidden to watch. B u t w h e n 
they hear the b l o w o f the axe, they flee, shrieking and moaning. T h e rite is 
over; the m o u r n i n g done.
2 5 
2 4s P encer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 508—510. The other last rite that Spencer and Gillen attended 
is described on pp. 503-508 of the same work. It does not differ fundamentally from the one I have just 
analyzed. 
25Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, pp. 531—540. 


400 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
II 
These rites belong to a category very different from those I have constructed 
thus far. This is not to say that important resemblances between them cannot 
be found, and there w i l l be occasion to note those; but the differences are 
perhaps more obvious. Instead o f joyful dances, songs, and dramatic perfor-
mances, w h i c h entertain and relax the spirit, there are tears and laments—in 
short, the most varied displays o f anguished sorrow and a k i n d o f mutual 
pity that takes up the entire scene. A l t h o u g h there certainly is shedding o f 
blood i n the course o f the Intichiuma, that is an offering made out o f pious 
enthusiasm. So although the actions resemble one another, the feelings 
they express are different and even opposite. Sinularly, ascetic rites do i n -
deed involve abstinences, prohibitions, and mutilations that must be borne 
w i t h impassive firmness and a k i n d o f serenity. B u t here, despondency, cries, 
and tears are the rule. T h e ascetic tortures himself i n order to prove—in 
the eyes o f his neighbor as w e l l as his o w n — t h a t he is above suffering. I n 
m o u r n i n g , people h u r t themselves i n order to prove that they are i n the 
grip o f suffering. A l l these signs are recognizable as characteristic traits o f 
piacular rites. 
H o w may these rites be explained? 
O n e initial fact remains constant: M o u r n i n g is not the spontaneous ex-
pression o f individual emotions.
2 6 I f the relatives cry, lament, and beat t h e m -
selves black and blue, the reason is not that they feel personally affected by 
the death o f their kinsman. I n particular cases, to be sure, the sadness ex-
pressed may happen to be truly felt.
2 7 B u t generally there is no relationship 
between the feelings felt and the actions done by those w h o take part i n the 
r i t e :
2 8 If, at the very m o m e n t w h e n the mourners seem most overcome by 
the pain, someone turns to t h e m to talk about some secular interest, their 
faces and tone often change instantly, taking o n a cheerful air, and they speak 
w i t h all the gaiety i n the w o r l d .
2 9 M o u r n i n g is not the natural response o f a 
private sensibility hurt by a cruel loss. I t is an obligation imposed by the 
group. O n e laments not simply because one is sad but because one is o b l i -
26Contrary to what [Frank Byron] Jevons says, Introduction to the History of Religions [London, 
Methuen, 1896], pp. 46fF. 
27This is what leads Dawson to say that people mourn sincerely (Australian Aborigines, p. 66). But Eyl-
mann declares that he has known only one case of wounding for sadness really felt (Die Eingeborenen, 
p. 113). 
28Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 510. 
29Eylmann, Die Eingeborenen, pp. 238—239. 


The Piacular Rites and the Ambiguity of the Notion of the Sacred 
401 
gated to lament. I t is a ritual facade that must be adopted out o f respect for 
custom, but one that is largely independent o f the individuals' emotional 
states. Moreover, this obligation is sanctioned by mythic or social penalties. It 
is believed, for example, that w h e n a relative does not properly carry out 
m o u r n i n g , the soul o f the deceased dogs his steps and kills h i m .
3 0 I n other 
cases, society does not leave the punishment o f the neglectful to religious 
forces but steps i n to punish ritual lapses. I f a brother-in-law does not carry 
out the funeral obligations he owes to his father-in-law, i f he does not make 
the mandatory incisions o n himself, his tribal fathers-in-law take his wife 
back and give her to someone else.
3 1 I n order to do right by custom, there-
fore, sometimes they force tears artificially.
3 2 
W h e r e does this obligation come from? 
Ethnographers and sociologists have generally been satisfied w i t h the na-
tives' o w n answer to this question. T h e natives say that the dead man wants 
to be mourned, that he is offended i f denied his rightful tribute o f sorrow, 
and that the only way to prevent his anger is to c o n f o r m to his wishes.
3 3 
B u t this mythological explanation merely changes the terms o f the prob-
l e m and does not solve it; we still need to k n o w w h y the dead man impera-
tively demands m o u r n i n g . I t w i l l be said that i t is i n the nature o f man to 
want to be m o u r n e d and missed: B u t to use this feeling to explain the c o m -
plex apparatus o f rites that constitute m o u r n i n g is to ascribe affective needs 
to the Australian that even the civilized man does not display. Let us grant 
something that is not self-evident a priori: that the idea o f not being too 
quickly forgotten is naturally pleasing to the man w h o thinks o f the future. 
Even i f that was true, we w o u l d still need to establish that i t has always had 
so large a place i n the hearts o f the living that an attitude based almost en-
tirely o n such a concern could reasonably have been ascribed to the dead. It 
seems especially improbable that such a feeling could have managed so c o m -
pletely to preoccupy and impassion m e n w h o just barely have the habit o f 
t h i n k i n g beyond the present. I t is far from true that the desire to live o n i n 
the m e m o r y o f the survivors must be regarded as the root o f m o u r n i n g . 
Rather, one begins to ask oneself whether i t is not m o u r n i n g itself, once i n -
stituted, that awakened the n o t i o n o f and taste for posthumous lamentation. 
I f we k n o w what primitive m o u r n i n g is, the standard interpretation 
seems all the more untenable. I t consists not merely o f pious regrets accorded 
•"'Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 507; Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 498. 
3!Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 500; Eylmann, Die Eingeborenen, p. 227. 
32Brough Smyth, Aborigines of 
Victoria, vol. I, p. 114. 
33Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 510. 


402 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
to the one w h o is no more but also o f harsh abstinences and cruel sacrifices. 
T h e rite not only demands that one think o f the deceased i n a melancholy 
way but that one beat, bruise, lacerate, and b u r n oneself. W e have even seen 
that people i n m o u r n i n g are so carried away i n t o r t u r i n g themselves that 
they sometimes do not survive their wounds. W h a t w o u l d be the dead man's 
reason for imposing such tortures u p o n them? Such cruelty o n his part i n d i -
cates something other than a desire not to be forgotten. For the deceased to 
find pleasure i n seeing his o w n suffer, he w o u l d have to hate them and thirst 
for their blood. This ferocity w i l l no doubt seem natural to those for w h o m 
every spirit is necessarily an evil and dreaded power. B u t we k n o w that there 
are all kinds o f spirits. H o w does it happen that the soul o f the deceased 
should necessarily be an evil spirit? As l o n g as the man is alive, he loves his 
k i n and trades favors w i t h them. Is it not strange that his soul should slough 
off his earlier feelings the instant it is freed from the body, so as to become a 
mean and tormenting genie? Yet generally, the dead man retains the person-
ality o f the one w h o lived; he has the same character, the same hatreds, and 
the same affections. So the metamorphosis is far from being self-evident and 
comprehensible. True, the natives implicitly concede that point w h e n they 
explain the rite by the demands o f the deceased; but the question precisely is 
to k n o w from whence that idea came to them. Far from our being able to re-
gard that metamorphosis as a truism, it is as obscure as the rite itself and, 
hence, inadequate to account for the rite. 
Finally, although one may have found the reasons for this stunning trans-
formation, one w o u l d still have to explain w h y it is only temporary, for it 
does not last beyond m o u r n i n g . Once the rites have been done, the deceased 
once again becomes what he was i n life: an affectionate and devoted relative. 
H e places the new capacities he gains from his n e w condition at the disposal 
o f his o w n .
3 4 F r o m then on, he is seen as a good genie, always ready to help 
those he once tormented. F r o m whence could these successive reversals have 
arisen? I f the bad feelings ascribed to the soul arise only from the fact that it 
is no longer alive, then they ought to remain invariant. A n d i f m o u r n i n g de-
rives from such feelings, then i t ought to be w i t h o u t end. 
These mythical explanations do not translate the rite itself but the idea 
the individual has o f it. I n order to confront the reality they do translate but 
distort, we can put t h e m aside. W h d e m o u r n i n g differs from other forms o f 
the positive cult, it resembles t h e m i n one respect: I t too is made o f collec-
34Several examples of this belief are to be found in Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 435. Cf. Strehlow, Aranda, 
vol. I, pp. 1
5
—
1
6 and vol. II, p. 7. 


The Piacular Rites and the Ambiguity of the Notion of the Sacred 
403 
tive rites that b r i n g about a state o f effervescence i n those w h o take part. 
The intense feelings are different; the w i l d intensity is the same. Presumably, 
therefore, the explanation o f the joyful rites is applicable to the sad rites, pro-
vided their terms are transposed. 
W h e n an individual dies, the family group to w h i c h he belongs feels 
diminished, and it comes together to react to this diminishment. A shared 
misfortune has the same effect as the approach o f a happy event. It enlivens 
collective feelings, w h i c h lead individuals to seek one another out and come 
together. I n fact, w e have seen this need affirm itself sometimes w i t h special 
energy—people kissing and putting their arms around one another, pressing 
as close together as possible. B u t the emotional state i n w h i c h the group finds 
itself reflects the circumstances it is then going through. N o t only do the k i n 
most immediately affected b r i n g their personal sorrow to the gathering, but 
the society exerts moral pressure o n its members, and they bring their feel-
ings into harmony w i t h the situation. I f society permitted them to remain 
indifferent to the b l o w that strikes and diminishes it, i t w o u l d be proclaiming 
that it does not h o l d its rightful place i n their hearts. Indeed, it w o u l d deny 
itself. For a family to tolerate that one o f its members should die w i t h o u t be-
ing m o u r n e d w o u l d give witness thereby that it lacks moral unity and cohe-
siveness: I t abdicates; it renounces its existence. 
For his part, w h e n the individual feels f i r m l y attached to the society to 
w h i c h he belongs, he feels morally b o u n d to share i n its grief and its joy. To 
abandon i t w o u l d be to break the ties that b i n d h i m to the collectivity, to give 
up wanting collectivity, and to contradict himself. I f the Christian fasts and 
mortifies himself d u r i n g the commemorative feasts o f the Passion and the 
Jew o n the anniversary o f Jerusalem's fall, it is not to give way to sadness 
spontaneously felt. I n those circumstances, the believer's inward state is i n 
disproportion to the harsh abstinences to w h i c h he submits. I f he is sad, i t is 
first and foremost because he forces himself to be and disciplines himself to 
to be; and he disciplines himself to be i n order to affirm his faith. T h e atti-
tude o f the Australian i n m o u r n i n g is to be understood i n the same way. I f 
he cries and moans, i t is not only to express individual sadness but also to f u l -
fill a duty to the feeling—an obligatory feeling o f w h i c h the society around 
h i m does not fad to r e m i n d h i m o n occasion. 
We k n o w from elsewhere h o w h u m a n feelings intensify w h e n they are 
collectively affirmed. Like joy, sadness is heightened and amplified by its re-
verberation from one consciousness to the next, and then i t gradually 
expresses itself overtly as unrestrained and convulsive movement. This no 
longer is the joyful animation that we observed awhile ago; it is cries and 
shrieks o f pain. Every person is pulled along by every other, and something 


404 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
like a panic o f sadness occurs. W h e n the pain reaches such a pitch, it be-
comes suffused w i t h a k i n d o f anger and exasperation. O n e feels the need 
to break or destroy something. O n e attacks oneself or others. O n e strikes, 
wounds, or burns oneself, or one attacks someone else, i n order to strike, 
w o u n d , or b u r n h i m . Thus was established the m o u r n i n g custom o f giving 
oneself over to veritable orgies o f torture. I t seems to me probable that the 
vendetta and head h u n t i n g have no other origin. I f every death is imputed to 
some magical spell and if, for that reason, i t is believed that the dead person 
must be avenged, the reason is a felt need to find a v i c t i m at all costs on 
w h o m the collective sorrow and anger can be discharged. This v i c t i m w i l l 
naturally be sought outside, for an outsider is a subject minoris resistentiae*'; 
since he is not protected by the fellow-feeling that attaches to a relative or a 
neighbor, nothing about h i m blocks and neutralizes the bad and destructive 
feelings aroused by the death. Probably for the same reason, a w o m a n serves 
more often than a man as the passive object o f the most cruel m o u r n i n g rites. 
Because she has lower social significance, she is more readily singled out to 
fill the function o f scapegoat. 
We see that this explanation o f m o u r n i n g leaves ideas o f soul or spirit en-
tirely out o f account. T h e only forces really at w o r k are o f an entirely imper-
sonal nature; these forces are the emotions that the death o f a member arouses 
i n the group. B u t the primitive does not k n o w the psychic mechanism 
from 
w h i c h all these practices arise. Thus, w h e n he tries to account for them, he 
has to forge a quite different explanation for himself. A l l he knows is that he 
must painfully mortify himself. Because every obligation arouses the idea o f 
a w i l l that obligates, he looks around h i m for the source o f the constraint he 
feels. N o w there is a moral power whose reality seems to h i m certain and al-
together apt for this role—and that is the soul set at liberty by the death. For 
what could be more interested than the soul i n the repercussions o f its o w n 
demise for the living? Therefore, w e imagine that i f the living inflict unnat-
ural treatment upon themselves, it is to give i n to the soul's demands. T h e 
idea o f the soul must therefore have entered the mythology o f m o u r n i n g af-
ter the fact. Moreover, since i n h u m a n demands are attributed to the soul, we 
must o n those grounds suppose that i t abandoned all h u m a n feeling w h e n it 
left the body it formerly animated. Thus is explained the metamorphosis that 
*Less able to resist. This account of scapegoating, a
s a process by which society reaffirms itself in the 
face of loss, is closely analogous to Durkheim's 1899 account of anti-Semitism in France: "When society 
undergoes suffering, it feels the need to find someone whom it can hold 
responsible 
for its sickness, on 
whom it can avenge its misfortunes: and those against whom opinion already discriminates are naturally 
desiginated for this role. These are the pariahs who serve as expiatory victims." Quoted in Steven Lukes, 
Entile Dürkheim: His Life and Work (London, Allen Lane, 1973), p. 345. 


The Macular Rites and the Ambiguity of the Notion of the Sacred 
405 
makes a dreaded enemy out o f yesterday's relative. This transformation is not 
the genesis o f m o u r n i n g but rather its sequel. It expresses the change that has 
occurred i n the emotional state o f the group. T h e dead man is not m o u r n e d 
because he is feared; he is feared because he is mourned. 
This change i n emotional state can only be temporary. T h e rites o f 
m o u r n i n g b o t h result from and conclude it. T h e y gradually neutralize the 
very causes that gave them birth. T h e basis o f m o u r n i n g is the impression o f 
enfeeblement that is felt by the group w h e n i t loses a member. B u t this very 
impression has the effect o f bringing the individuals close to one another, 
putting them into closer touch, and inducing i n them the same state o f soul. 
A n d from all this comes a sensation o f renewed strength, w h i c h counteracts 
the original enfeeblement. People cry together because they continue to be 
precious to one another and because, regardless o f the b l o w that has fallen 
upon it, the collectivity is not breached. To be sure, i n that case they only 
share sad emotions i n c o m m o n ; but to commune i n sadness is still to c o m -
mune, and every c o m m u n i o n o f consciousnesses increases social vitality, i n 
whatever f o r m it is done. 
T h e extraordinary violence o f the displays that necessarily and obligato-
rily express the shared sorrow is evidence that, even at this moment, society 
is more alive and active than ever. I n fact, w h e n social feeling suffers a painful 
shock, it reacts w i t h greater force than usual. O n e never holds so tighdy to 
one's family as w h e n it has just been tested. This excess o f energy all the 
more thoroughly erases the effects o f the crippling that occurred to begin 
w i t h , and i n this way the sensation o f cold that death everywhere brings w i t h 
it is dissipated. T h e group feels its strength gradually c o m i n g back to it; it be-
gins again to hope and to live. O n e comes out o f m o u r n i n g , and one comes 
out o f it thanks to m o u r n i n g itself. B u t since the idea people have o f the soul 
reflects the moral state o f the society, that idea must change w h e n the state 
changes. W h i l e the people were i n the period o f dejection and anguish, they 
conceived o f the soul as having the traits o f an evil being, interested only i n 
persecuting men. N o w that they again feel confidence and security, they 
must concede that the soul has recovered its original nature and its original 
feelings o f tenderness and solidarity. Thus can be explained the very differ-
ent ways i n w h i c h i t is conceived at different periods o f its existence.
3 5 
35One may ask why repeated ceremonies are necessary to bring about the relief that follows mourn-
ing. First, it is because funerals are often very long, with multiple procedures that spread out over many 
months. In this way, they prolong and maintain the moral disturbance caused by the death (cf. [Robert] 
Hertz, ["Contribution a une etude sur la] representation collective de la mort," AS, vol. X [1907], 
pp. 48ff.). Furthermore, death is a profound change, with wide and lasting repercussions for the group. It 
takes 
time 
for those effects to be neutralized. 


406 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
N o t only do m o u r n i n g rites bring into being certain o f the secondary 
characteristics ascribed to the soul, but perhaps, as well, the idea that the soul 
outlives the body is not alien to them. To be i n a position to understand the 
practices to w h i c h he subjects himself w h e n a relative dies, man has no choice 
but to believe that those practices are not a matter o f indifference to the de-
ceased. T h e shedding o f blood that is so widely practiced i n m o u r n i n g is actu-
ally a sacrifice to the dead m a n .
3 6 It is done because some part o f the deceased 
person lives on, and since what lives o n is not the body, w h i c h is obviously not 
m o v i n g and is decomposing, that part can only be the soul. O f course, i t is i m -
possible to say for certain what role these considerations played i n the origin o f 
the idea o f life after death. B u t probably the influence o f the cult was i n this 
case what it is elsewhere. Rites are easier to explain w h e n they are thought o f 
as being addressed to personal beings; i n this way, m e n were prompted to ex-
tend the influence o f mythic personalities i n religious life. So that they could 
account for mourning, they extended the existence o f the soul beyond the 
tomb. Here is a further example o f the way i n w h i c h rites react upon beliefs. 
Ill 
Death is not the only event that can unsettle a community. There are a good 
many other occasions for m e n to be saddened and become disquieted. A n d 
so we m i g h t anticipate that even the Australians k n o w and conduct piacular 
rites other than those o f m o u r n i n g . I t is noteworthy, however, that only a 
small number o f examples can be found i n observers' accounts. 
O n e rite o f this sort very closely resembles those just studied. Recall that, 
among the Arunta, each local group ascribes exceptionally important virtues 
to its collection o f churingas. I t is a collective palladium, whose fate is linked 
w i t h that o f the collectivity. Thus, w h e n enemies or w h i t e m e n manage to 
uncover one o f these religious treasures, the loss is deemed a public calamity. 
This misfortune is the occasion o f a rite that has all the characteristics o f 
m o u r n i n g . Bodies are covered w i t h w h i t e pipe clay, and at the camp two 
weeks are spent i n waning and lamentation.
3 7 This is further evidence that 
m o u r n i n g is caused not by the manner i n w h i c h the soul o f the dead person 
3 6In a case reported by Grey, based on an observation by Bussel, the rite is quite like sacrifice, with the 
blood being poured onto the corpse itself (Grey, Journal of 
Two Expeditions, vol. II, p. 330). In other in-
stances, there is a sort of 
beard offering, in which the men in mourning cut off part of their beards, which 
they throw on the corpse (ibid., p. 335). 
37Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, pp. 135—136. 


The Piacular Rites and the Ambiguity of the Notion of the Sacred 
407 
is conceived but by impersonal causes, by the moral state o f the group. Here, 
indeed, is a rite whose structure cannot be distinguished from m o u r n i n g 
proper and yet does not depend u p o n any idea o f spirit or evil d e m o n .
3 8 
T h e distress i n w h i c h society finds itself w h e n the harvests have been i n -
sufficient is another circumstance that gives rise to ceremonies o f this sort. 
" T h e natives w h o live i n the environs o f Lake Eyre," says Eylmann, "also try 
to conjure away the inadequacy o f the food supply w i t h secret ceremonies. 
B u t several o f the ritual practices observed i n this region are different from 
those previously discussed: T h e y seek to act u p o n the religious powers or 
forces o f nature not w i t h symbolic dances, mimetic movements, and dazzling 
decorations, but w i t h sufferings that the individuals inflict upon themselves. 
I n the northern territories, as well, they strive to appease those powers that 
are ill-disposed toward men, by using tortures such as prolonged fasts, vigils, 
dances carried o n until the dancers are exhausted, and physical suffering o f 
all kinds."
3 9 T h e torments the natives undergo for this purpose sometimes 
leave t h e m so w o r n out that they are unable to hunt for many days.
4 0 
These practices are used most o f all to combat drought, since lack o f wa-
ter leads to general famine. T h e y resort to violent means o f remedying this 
evil. O n e o f the means used is t o o t h extraction. A m o n g the Kaitish, for ex-
ample, an incisor is extracted from an individual and hung from a tree.
4 1 
A m o n g the D i e r i , the idea o f rain is closely associated w i t h that o f bloody i n -
cisions made o n the skin o f the thorax and arms.
4 2 A m o n g the same people, 
w h e n the drought is very severe, the grand council meets and summons the 
w h o l e tribe. It is a genuinely tribal event. W o m e n are sent forth i n all d i -
rections to call the people together at a prescribed place and time. Once 
gathered, they are heard to groan, to scream i n piercing voices about the mis-
erable state o f the land, and to ask the Mura-muras (mythical ancestors) to 
confer o n t h e m the power to make abundant rain f a l l .
4 3 I n cases (very rare, 
however) w h e n there has been too m u c h , an analogous ceremony to stop the 
3 8Of course, each churinga is considered to be connected with an ancestor. Sail, lost churingas are not 
mourned in order to appease the spirits of the ancestors. I have shown elsewhere (pp. 121-122) that the 
idea of the ancestor entered into the idea of the churinga only in a secondary way, and after the fact. 
39Eylmann, Die Eingeborenen, p. 207; cf. p. 116. 
4llIbid„ p. 208. 
4,Ibid., p. 211. 
42[Alffed William] Howitt, "The Dieri [and Other Kindred Tribes of Central Australia"], JAI, vol. 
XX (1891), p. 93. 
43Howitt, NativeTribes, p. 394. 


408 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
rain takes place. T h e old m e n then enter into a state o f out-and-out frenzy,
4 4 
and the cries made by the crowd are pathetic to hear.
4 5 
Spencer and Gillen recount a ceremony for us, under the name Intichi-
uma, that may well have the same purpose and origin as the preceding. Physi-
cal torture is used to make an animal species multiply. There is a clan among 
the Urabunna that has a k i n d o f snake called wadnungadni as its totem. This is 
h o w the chief goes about "making sure that animal does not fail to reproduce." 
After decorating himself, he kneels o n the ground, w i t h his arms fully ex-
tended. A helper pinches the skin o f the right arm between his fingers while 
the celebrant forces a pointed bone five inches long through the fold thereby 
formed. The left a r m is treated i n the same way. This self-mutilation is held to 
produce the desired result.
4 6 A m o n g the D i e r i , an analogous rite is used to 
make the w i l d chicken lay eggs: T h e celebrants pierce their scrotums.
4 7 I n cer-
tain other tribes o f Lake Eyre, the ear is pierced to make the yams produce.
4 8 
Partial or total famines are not the only disasters that can befall a tribe. 
Other events that threaten or seem to threaten the group's existence occur 
from time to time. This is the case, for example, o f the southern lights. T h e 
K u r n a i believe that i t is a fire l i t i n the sky by the high god Mungan-ngaua. 
This is why, w h e n they see the lights, they fear that fire w i l l spread to earth 
and engulf them. T h e result is a great effervescence i n the camp. T h e K u r n a i 
shake the dried hand o f a dead man, to w h i c h they ascribe an assortment o f 
virtues, and they give out yells such as: "Send it back; do not let us burn." A t 
the same time, by order o f the elders, there are exchanges o f wives, w h i c h al-
ways signals great excitement.
4 9 T h e same sexual license is reported among 
the W i i m b a i o whenever some calamity appears i m m i n e n t , and especially i n 
times o f epidemic.
5 0 
U n d e r the influence o f these ideas, mutilation and the shedding o f b l o o d 
are sometimes regarded as efficacious means o f curing sicknesses. A m o n g the 
44Ibid., p. 396. 
^Communication of [S.] Gason, ["Of the Tribes Dieyerie, Auminie, Yandrawontha, Yarawurka, Pd-
ladapa, Lat. 31°S„ Long. 138° 55'"] JAL, vol. XXIV (1895), p. 175. 
^Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 286. 
47[S.] Gason, "The Dieyerie Tribe," in [Edward Micklethwaite] Curr, The Australian Race: Its Origin, 
Languages, Customs, Place of Landing in Australia, and the Routes by Which It Spread Itself over That Continent, 
vol. II, Melbourne, John Ferres, 1886-1887, p. 68. 
48Ibid.; Eylmann, Die Eingeborenen, p. 208. 
49Howitt, Native Tribe, pp. 277, 430. 
50Ibid., p. 195. 


The Piacular Rites and the Ambiguity of the Notion of the Sacred 
409 
D i e r i , w h e n a child has an accident, his relatives beat themselves o n the head 
w i t h sticks or boomerangs, until the blood streams d o w n their faces. They 
believe they are relieving the child's pain thereby.
5 1 Elsewhere, people imag-
ine they obtain the same result w i t h an additional totemic ceremony.
5 2 These 
are analogous to the rite to erase the consequences o f a ritual lapse, already 
considered.
5 3 To be sure, although i n these last cases there are neither wounds 
nor blows nor physical sufferings o f any k i n d , the rite does not differ i n 
essence from the preceding ones. T h e p o i n t i n all cases is to t u r n aside an evil 
or expiate a misdeed w i t h extra ritual proceedings. 
Such are the only piacular rites, other than rites o f mourning, that I have 
managed to collect for Australia. I n all likelihood, some must have escaped 
me, and we may surmise as well that others went unnoticed by the observers. 
Still, i f only a few have been discovered up to now, the likely reason is that 
they do not count for m u c h i n the cult. Since the rites that express painful 
emotions are relatively few i n primitive religions, we see h o w far those reli-
gions are from being daughters o f apprehension and fear. N o doubt, the rea-
son is that although the Australian leads an impoverished existence compared 
to that o f more civilized peoples, he by contrast asks so little o f life that he 
contents himself w i t h little. His only need is for nature to follow its normal 
course, for the seasons to move i n regular succession, and for the rain to fall 
at the usual time, abundandy but not excessively. Great disturbances i n the 
cosmic order are always unusual. Thus i t was noteworthy that most o f the 
regular piacular rites I reported above were observed i n the tribes o f the cen-
ter, where droughts are frequent and constitute genuine public disasters. Still, 
it is surprising that piacular rites for the specific purpose o f expiating sin ap-
pear to be almost entirely absent. Nonetheless the Australian, like any man, 
must c o m m i t ritual misdeeds that i t w o u l d be i n his interest to atone for. A n d 
so I raise the question whether the sdence o f the texts o n this point may not 
be put d o w n to inadequacies o f observation. 
A l t h o u g h the substantive evidence I have managed to call upon is sparse, 
it is nonetheless instructive. 
W h e n we study piacular rites i n the more advanced religions, i n w h i c h 
the religious forces are individualized, the rites seem to be closely connected 
5IGason, The Dieyerie Tribe, vol. II, p. 69. The same procedure is used to redeem a ridiculous act. 
When, through clumsiness or otherwise, a person has made those near him laugh, he asks them to hit him 
on the head until the blood flows. Then things are restored and the person others were laughing at joins 
in the gaiety of those around him (ibid., p. 70). 
52Eylmann, Die Eingeborenen, pp. 212, 447. 
"See above, p. 389. 


410 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
w i t h anthropomorphic ideas. I f the faithful impose privations o n themselves 
and undergo tortures, they do so to disarm the malevolence that they impute 
to sacred beings to w h o m they think they are subject. To appease the hate or 
anger o f those beings, the faithful anticipate their demands, striking them-
selves so as not to be struck by them. It seems, then, that these practices could 
only have been b o r n w h e n gods and spirits were conceived o f as moral per-
sons susceptible to passions like those o f humans. For this reason, Robertson 
Smith believed he could assign expiatory sacrifices and sacrificial offerings to 
a relatively recent date. According to h i m , the shedding o f blood that is char-
acteristic o f these rites was at first merely a process o f communion: M a n 
spilled his blood o n the altar to tighten the bonds between himself and his 
god. T h e rite presumably did not take o n a piacular and punitive character 
until its original meaning had been forgotten and until the new idea people 
had o f the sacred beings enabled them to ascribe a different function to i t .
5 4 
B u t since piacular rites go as far back as the Australian societies, they 
cannot be assigned so recent an origin. Moreover, w i t h one exception,
5 5 all 
those I have just mentioned are independent o f any anthropomorphic idea, 
for they involve neither gods nor spirits. Abstinences and bloodletting stop 
famines and cure sicknesses, acting o n their o w n . T h e w o r k o f no spiritual 
being is thought to intrude between the rite and the effects i t is thought to 
b r i n g about. Hence i t was only later that mythic personalities came onto the 
scene. T h e y helped to make the ritual mechanism easier to imagine, once it 
was established, but they are not conditions o f its existence. That mechanism 
was instituted for different reasons and owes its efficacy to a different cause. 
It acts through the collective forces that i t sets i n m o t i o n . Does a misfor-
tune threatening the collectivity seem imminent? T h e collectivity comes 
together, as it does i n consequence o f m o u r n i n g , and a sense o f disquiet nat-
urally dominates the assembled group. As always, the effect o f making these 
feelings shared is to intensify them. T h r o u g h being affirmed, these feelings 
are excited and inflamed, reaching an intensity that is expressed i n the equiv-
alent intensity o f the actions that express them. I n the same way that people 
utter terrible cries u p o n the death o f a close relative, they are caught up by 
the imminence o f a collective misfortune and feel the need to tear and de-
stroy. To satisfy this need, they strike and w o u n d themselves and make their 
blood flow. B u t w h e n emotions are as v i v i d as this, even i f they are painful, 
34[William Robertson Smith, Lectures on] the Religion of 
the Semites, lect. XI [London, A. and C. Black, 
1889]. 
55According to Gason, this is true of the Dieri invoking the water Mura-muras in time of drought. 


Tiie Piacular Rites and the Ambiguity of the Notion of the Sacred 
411 
they are i n no way depressing. Q u i t e the contrary, they point to a state o f ef-
fervescence that entails the mobilization o f all our o w n active energy and, i n 
addition, a further influx from outside ourselves. 
That this excitation has arisen from a sad event matters little, for it is no 
less real and not specifically different from the one observed i n joyful feasts. 
As a matter o f fact, it sometimes manifests itself through movements o f the 
same kind. T h e same frenzy takes hold o f the faithful, along w i t h the same i n -
clination to sexual debauchery—a sure sign o f great nervous overexcitement. 
Robertson Smith had already noticed this curious influence o f the sad rites i n 
the Semitic cults. " I n difficult times," he says, " w h e n men's thoughts were 
usually somber, they turned to the physical excitements o f religion, just as, 
now, they take refuge i n wine. A m o n g the Semites, as a general rule, w h e n 
worship began w i t h wailing and lamentation—as i n the m o u r n i n g o f Adonis 
or i n the great expiatory rites that became c o m m o n i n later times—a sudden 
revolution created an explosion o f gaiety and rejoicing to follow the gloomy 
service w i t h w h i c h the ceremony had begun."
5 6 I n short, while the religious 
ceremonies start out from a disquieting or saddening fact, they retain their 
power to enliven the emotional state o f the group and the individuals. 
Simply by being collective, religious ceremonies raise the vital tone. W h e n 
one feels life i n oneself-—in the f o r m o f painful anger or joyful enthusiasm— 
one does not believe i n death; one is reassured, one takes greater courage, and, 
subjectively, everything happens as i f the rite really had set aside the danger that 
was feared. This is h o w curative or preventive virtues came to be ascribed to 
the movements that the rite is made of: the cries uttered, the blood shed, the 
wounds inflicted upon oneself or others. A n d since these various torments 
necessarily cause suffering, i n the end, suffering i n itself is regarded as the 
means o f conjuring away evil and curing sickness.
5 7 Later, w h e n most o f the 
religious forces had taken the f o r m o f personified spirits,* the efficacy o f these 
practices was explained by imagining their purpose to be propitiation o f a 
malevolent or angry god. B u t these ideas reflect only the rite and the feelings 
it arouses; they are an interpretation o f it, not its determining cause. 
A ritual lapse works no differently. It, too, is a menace for the collectiv-
ity. I t strikes at the moral existence o f the collectivity because it strikes at the 
* Personnalités spirituelles. 
56Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites, p. 262. 
5 7It is possible, by the way, that the belief in the morally uplifting virtues of suffering (see above, 
p. 317) played some role in this. Since pain sanctifies and since it raises the religious level of the faithful, 
it can also uplift the faithful when they have fallen below the norm. 


412 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
beliefs o f the collectivity. B u t let the anger caused by a ritual misdeed be ex-
pressed openly and energetically, and the evil i t caused is counteracted. I f that 
anger is strongly felt by all, the reason is that the infraction committed is an 
exception, w h i l e the shared faith is still intact. Hence the moral unity o f the 
group is not i n danger. T h e pain inflicted as expiation is but a manifestation 
o f this public anger and physical p r o o f o f its unanimity. I n this way, the pain 
really does have the redeeming powers that people impute to it. Basically, the 
feeling at the root o f the properly expiatory rites is no different i n k i n d 
from 
the one we have found at the root o f other piacular rites. I t is a sort o f angry 
sorrow, w h i c h tends to express itself through destructive acts. A t times, this 
pain is relieved to the detriment o f the very one w h o feels it; at times, i t is at 
the expense o f an outside third party. B u t the psychic mechanism is basically 
the same i n both cases.
5 8 
IV 
O n e o f the greatest services Robertson Smith rendered to the science o f re-
ligions is to have called attention to the ambiguity o f the idea o f the sacred. 
Religious forces are o f t w o kinds. Some are benevolent, guardians o f 
physical and moral order, as well as dispensers o f life, health, and all the qual-
ities that men value. This is true o f the totemic principle, w h i c h is spread out 
over the whole species, o f the mythical ancestor, o f the animal-protector, o f 
civilizing heroes, and o f tutelary gods i n all their kinds and degrees. Whether 
they are thought o f as distinct personalities or as diffused energies makes little 
difference. I n both forms, they play the same role and affect the consciousness 
o f the faithful i n the same manner. They inspire a respect that is full o f love 
and gratitude. T h e persons and things that are ordinarily i n contact w i t h them 
participate i n the same feelings and the same quality. They are sacred persons 
and things. So, too, are the places consecrated to the cult, the objects used i n 
the regular rites, the priests, the ascetics, and so on. O n the other hand, there 
are evd and impure powers, bringers o f disorder, causes o f death and sickness, 
instigators o f sacrilege. T h e only feelings man has for them is a fear that usu-
ally has a component o f horror. Such are the forces o n w h i c h and through 
w h i c h the sorcerer acts: those that come from corpses and from menstrual 
blood, those that unleash every profanation o f holy [siJi'wies] things, and so on. 
The spirits o f the dead and the evil genies o f all kinds are its personified forms. 
Between these t w o categories o f forces and beings, there is the sharpest 
possible contrast, up to and including the most radical antagonism. T h e good 
58Cf. what I have said about expiation in my Division du travail social, 3d ed., Paris, F. Alcan, 1902, 
pp. 64£F. 


The Piacular Rites and the Ambiguity of the Notion of the Sacred 
413 
and wholesome forces push far away from themselves those other forces, 
w h i c h negate and contradict them. Besides, the first are forbidden to the 
second. A n y contact between t h e m is considered the worst o f profanations. 
This is the archetype o f those prohibitions between sacred things o f different 
kinds, whose existence I have mentioned along the way.
5 9 Since w o m e n dur-
i n g menstruation are impure, and especially so at the first appearance o f the 
menses, they are rigorously sequestered at that time, and men must have no 
contact w i t h t h e m .
6 0 T h e bull roarers and the churingas are never i n contact 
w i t h a dead person.
6 1 A sacrilegious person is cut o f f from the society o f the 
faithful and not allowed to take part i n the cult. T h e w h o l e o f religious life 
gravitates around t w o opposite poles, then, their opposition being the same 
as that between the pure and the impure, the saint and the sacrilegious per-
son, the divine and the diabolical. 
B u t although opposite to one another, these t w o aspects o f religious life 
are at the same time closely akin. First, b o t h have the same relation to pro-
fane beings. T h e y must abstain from all contact w i t h impure things and w i t h 
very holy [saintes] things. T h e former are no less forbidden than the latter, 
and they, too, are taken out o f circulation, w h i c h is to say that they are also 
sacred [sdrres]. To be sure, the t w o do not provoke identical feelings. Disgust 
and horror are one t h i n g and respect another. Nonetheless, for actions to be 
the same i n b o t h cases, the feelings expressed must not be different i n kind. 
I n fact, there actually is a certain horror i n religious respect, especially w h e n 
it is very intense; and the fear inspired by malignant powers is not w i t h o u t a 
certain reverential quality. Indeed, the shades o f difference between these 
t w o attitudes are sometimes so elusive that it is not always easy to say i n just 
w h i c h state o f m i n d the faithful are. A m o n g certain Semitic peoples, pork 
was forbidden, but one d i d not always k n o w w i t h certainty i f it was forbid-
den as an impure thing or as a holy [sainte] t h i n g .
6 2 A n d the same point can 
be applied to a very large number o f dietary restrictions. 
There is more: A n impure t h i n g or an evil power often becomes a holy 
thing or a tutelary power—and vice versa—without changing i n nature, but 
5,See pp. 304-306 above. 
60Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 460; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 601; Roth, [Super-
stition, Magic and Medicine], North Queensland Ethnography, Bull. 5 [Brisbane, G. A. Vaughn, 1903], p. 24. 
There is no need to multiply references in support of such a well-known fact. 
6lHowever, Spencer and Gillen cite a case in which churingas are placed under the head of the dead 
person (Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 156). As they acknowledge, however, this is unique and ab-
normal (ibid., p. 157), and it is strenuously denied by Strehlow (Aranda, vol. II, p. 79). 
62Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites, p. 153, cf. p. 446, the additional note tided "Holiness, Un-
cleanness and Taboo." 


414 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
simply through a change i n external circumstances. W e have seen that the 
soul o f the dead person, at first a dreaded principle, is transformed into a pro-
tective genie w h e n the m o u r n i n g is over. Similarly the corpse, w h i c h at first 
inspires only terror and distance, is later treated as a venerated relic. Funeral 
anthropophagy, w i d e l y practiced i n the Australian societies, is evidence o f 
this transformation.
6 3 T h e totemic animal is archetypically the holy being, 
but for h i m w h o wrongfully consumes its flesh, i t is a principle o f death. T h e 
person gudty o f sacrilege is, generally speaking, only a profane person w h o 
has been infected by a benevolent religious force. Changing its nature w h e n 
it changes its habitat, this force pollutes rather than sanctifies.
6 4 T h e blood 
that comes from the genital organs o f a w o m a n , though it is obviously as i m -
pure as that o f the menses, is often used as a remedy against sickness.
6 5 T h e 
v i c t i m immolated i n expiatory sacrifices is saturated w i t h impurity, because 
the sins to be expiated have been made to converge u p o n it. However, once 
it is slaughtered, its flesh and b l o o d are put to the most pious uses.
6 6 
Inversely, although c o m m u n i o n is a religious procedure whose function 
is ordinarily consecration, it sometimes has the same effects as a sacrilege. I n -
dividuals w h o have c o m m u n e d together are, i n certain cases, forced to flee 
one another, like carriers o f plague. I t is as though they have become sources 
o f dangerous contamination for one another. T h e sacred b o n d that joins 
t h e m separates t h e m at the same time. C o m m u n i o n s o f this sort are c o m m o n 
i n Australia. O n e o f the most typical has been observed among the N a r r i n -
yeri and neighboring tribes. W h e n a child comes into the w o r l d , its parents 
carefully preserve its umbilical cord, w h i c h is thought to contain some part 
o f the chdd's soul. T w o individuals w h o exchange umbilical cords preserved 
i n this way commune by the very fact o f this exchange; i t is as though they 
exchanged souls. B u t by the same token, they are forbidden to touch one an-
other, to speak to one another, and even to see one another. I t is as though 
they were objects o f horror for one another.
6 7 
63Howitt, Native Tribes, pp. 448-450; Brough Smyth, Aborigines of Victoria, vol. I, pp. 118, 120; Daw-
son, The Australian Aborigines, p. 67; Eyre, Journals of Expedition, vol. II, p. 257; [Walter Edmund] Roth, 
"Burial Ceremonies," p. 367. 
MSee pp. 324-325 above. 
65Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, p. 464; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, p. 599. 
''For example, among the Israelites, the altar is purified with the blood of the expiatory victim (Lev. 
4: 5ff.); the 
flesh 
is burned, and the ashes are used to make a purifying water (Num.: 19.) 
67Taplin, "The Narrinyeri Tribe," in [James Dominick Woods, The Native Tribes of South Australia, 
Adelaide, E. S. Wigg, 1879], pp. 32-34. When the two individuals who have exchanged their umbilical 
cords belong to different tribes, they are used as agents of intertribal commerce. In this case, the exchange 
of cords takes place shortly after their births and through the intermediary of their respective parents. 


The Piacular Rites and the Ambiguity of the Notion of the Sacred 
415 
So the pure and the impure are not t w o separate genera but t w o varieties 
o f the same genus that includes all sacred things. There are t w o sorts o f sa-
cred, lucky and unlucky; and not only is there no radical discontinuity be-
tween the t w o opposite forms, but the same object can pass from one to the 
other w i t h o u t changing its nature. T h e impure is made from the pure, and 
vice versa. T h e possibility o f such transformations constitutes the ambiguity 
o f the sacred. 
B u t w h i l e Robertson Smith had a keen sense o f this ambiguity, he never 
accounted for i t explicidy. H e confined himself to pointing out that since all 
religious forces are intense and contagious, i n whatever direction their influ-
ence is exercised, the wise thing is to approach t h e m w i t h respectful precau-
tions. It seemed to h i m that the farrufy resemblance they all have could be 
accounted for i n this way, despite the contrasts that otherwise distinguish 
them. B u t first o f all, that only shifted the question. Still to be shown was 
h o w the powers o f evil come to have the intensity and contagiousness o f 
the others. Put differendy, h o w does i t happen that these powers are o f a reli-
gious nature? Second, the energy and volatility c o m m o n to both do not 
enable us to understand how, despite the conflict between them, they can 
transform themselves into one another or replace one another i n their respec-
tive functions, or h o w the pure can contaminate while the impure sometimes 
sanctifies.
6 8 
T h e explanation o f the piacular rites that I have just proposed enables us 
to answer this twofold question. 
We have seen that the evil powers actually result from and symbolize 
these rites. W h e n society is going through events that sadden, distress, or 
anger it, i t pushes its members to give witness to their sadness, distress, or 
anger through expressive actions. I t demands crying, lamenting, and w o u n d -
i n g oneself and others as a matter o f duty. I t does so because those collective 
demonstrations, as well as the moral c o m m u n i o n they simultaneously 
bear witness to and reinforce, restore to the group the energy that the events 
6 8It is true that [William Robertson] Smith does not accept the reality of these substitutions and trans-
formations. According to him, the expiatory victim could purify only because it was itself in no way im-
pure. From the beginning, it was a holy thing; it was intended to reestablish, through communion, the 
ties of kinship that united the worshipper to his god, after a ritual lapse had loosened or broken them. For 
that operation, they chose an exceptionally holy animal, so that communion would be more efficacious 
and might remove the effects of the wrong more completely. Only when they had ceased to understand 
the meaning of the rite was the sacrosanct animal considered impure (Religion of the Semites, pp. 347ff.). 
But it is inadmissible that such universal beliefs and practices a
s those that we find at the basis of expiatory 
sacrifice should result from a mere error of interpretation. In fact, it is beyond doubt that the impurity of 
the sin was loaded onto the expiatory victim. Moreover, we have just seen that these transformations from 
pure to impure, or vice versa, are found in the simplest societies we know. 


416 
THE PRINCIPAL MODES OF RITUAL CONDUCT 
threatened to take away, and thus enables it to recover its equilibrium. I t is 
this experience that man is interpreting w h e n he imagines evd beings out-
side h i m whose hostility, whether inherent or transitory, can be disarmed 
only through h u m a n suffering. So these beings are n o t h i n g other than c o l -
lective states objectified; they are society itself seen i n one o f its aspects. B u t 
we also k n o w that the beneficent powers are not made any differently; they 
too result from and express collective life; they too represent society, but so-
ciety captured i n a very different posture—that is, at the m o m e n t w h e n it 
confidendy affirms itself and zealously presses things into the service o f the 
ends it is pursuing. Since these t w o kinds o f forces have a c o m m o n origin, 
it is not surprising that, even though m o v i n g i n opposite directions, they 
should have the same nature, that they should be equally intense and conta-
gious—and hence, prohibited and sacred. 
F r o m precisely this fact, we can understand h o w they are transformed 
into one another. Since they reflect the emotional state i n w h i c h the group 
finds itself, a change i n that state is sufficient to make the forces themselves 
change direction. W h e n the m o u r n i n g ends, the household o f the deceased 
has been calmed by the m o u r n i n g itself; i t gathers new confidence; the 
individuals are relieved o f the painful pressure that was exerted u p o n them; 
they feel more at ease. I t therefore seems to t h e m that the spirit o f the de-
ceased has set aside its hostile feelings i n order to become a benevolent p r o -
tector. T h e other transmutations, examples o f w h i c h I have cited, are to be 
explained i n the same way. W h a t makes a thing sacred is, as I have shown, the 
collective feeling o f w h i c h it is the object. If, i n violation o f the prohibitions 
that isolate it, i t comes i n contact w i t h a profane person, this same feeling w i l l 
spread contagiously to that person and mark h i m w i t h a special quality. H o w -
ever, w h e n i t arrives at that, i t finds itself i n a very different state from the one 
i n w h i c h i t was at the outset. H a v i n g been shocked and angered by the pro-
fanation entailed by this wrongful, unnatural extension, i t becomes aggressive 
and inclined toward destructive violence; i t is inclined to seek revenge for the 
trespass it has endured. For this reason, the infected subject is as though i n -
vaded by a virulent and noxious force, threatening to all that comes near h i m ; 
thereafter, he inspires nothing but distance and repugnance, as though he was 
marked w i t h a taint or stain. A n d yet the cause o f this stain is the very psy-
chic state that i n other circumstances consecrated and sanctified. B u t let the 
anger thus aroused be satisfied by an expiatory rite, and it subsides, relieved. 
T h e offended feeling is propitiated and returns to its initial state. Thus, it 
again acts as it acted at first. Instead o f contaminating, it sanctifies. Because it 
goes o n infecting the object to w h i c h i t has become attached, that object 
cannot become profane and religiously indifferent again. B u t the direction o f 


The Piacular Rites and the Ambiguity of the Notion of the Sacred 
417 
the religious force that appears to occupy i t has been inverted. F r o m being 
impure i t has become pure and an instrument o f purification. 
I n summary, the t w o poles o f religious life correspond to the two opposite 
states through w h i c h all social life passes. There is the same contrast between 
the lucky and the unlucky sacred as between the states o f collective euphoria 
and dysphoria. B u t because b o t h are equally collective, the mythological con-
structions that symbolize them are i n their very essence closely related. W h i l e 
the feelings placed i n c o m m o n vary from extreme dejection to extreme high-
spiritedness, from painful anger to ecstatic enthusiasm, the result i n all cases is 
c o m m u n i o n among individual consciousnesses and mutual calming. W h i l e the 
fundamental process is always the same, different circumstances color it differ-
endy. I n the end, then, it is the unity and diversity o f social life that creates at 
the same time the unity and the diversity o f sacred beings and things. 
This ambiguity is not peculiar to the idea o f the sacred alone. Something 
o f this same quality is to be found i n all the rites studied. O f course, it was 
necessary to distinguish them. Treating t h e m as one and the same w o u l d have 
been to misunderstand the multiple aspects o f religious life. B u t however dif-
ferent they may be, there is no discontinuity between them. Quite the con-
trary, they are overlapping and even interchangeable. I have already shown 
that rites o f offering and c o m m u n i o n , mimetic rites, and commemorative 
rites often perform the same functions. O n e m i g h t think that the negative 
cult is more clearly separated from the positive cult, yet we have seen that the 
negative cult can nonetheless b r i n g about positive effects identical to those 
o f the positive cult. T h e same results are obtained through fasts, abstinences, 
and self-mutilation as through communions, offerings, and commemora-
tions. Conversely, offerings and sacrifices i m p l y privations and renunciations 
o f all kinds. T h e continuity between ascetic and piacular rites is even more 
apparent. B o t h are made o f sufferings, accepted or endured, to w h i c h similar 
efficacy is ascribed. Thus, the practices no more fall into t w o separate genera 
than the beliefs do. However complex the outward manifestations o f religious 
life may be, its inner essence is simple, and one and the same. Everywhere it 
fulfills the same need and derives from the same state o f m i n d . I n all its forms, 
its object is to lift man above himself and to make h i m live a higher hfe than 
he w o u l d i f he obeyed only his individual impulses. T h e beliefs express this 
hfe i n terms o f representations; the rites organize and regulate its functioning. 


CONCLUSION 
I
said at the beginning o f this b o o k that the religion whose study I was u n -
dertaking contained w i t h i n itself the most characteristic elements o f reli-
gious life. T h e truth o f that proposition can n o w be tested. However simple 
the system I have studied may be, I have nonetheless found w i t h i n it all the 
great ideas and all the principal forms o f ritual conduct o n w h i c h even the 
most advanced religions are based: the distinction between sacred and p r o -
fane things; the ideas o f soul, spirit, mythical personality, national and even 
international divinity; a negative cult w i t h the ascetic practices that are its ex-
treme f o r m ; rites o f sacrifice and c o m m u n i o n ; mimetic, commemorative, 
and piacular rites. N o t h i n g essential is absent. Thus I have reason to be con-
fident that the results achieved are not specific to totemism but can help us 
understand w h a t religion i n general is. 
Some w i l l object that a single religion, whatever its geographic spread, is 
a narrow basis for such an induction. I t is by no means m y intent to ignore 
what an expanded test can add to the persuasiveness o f a theory. B u t it is no 
less true that w h e n a law has been proved by a single well-made experiment, 
this p r o o f is universally valid. I f a scientist managed to intercept the secret o f 
life i n only a single case, the truths thus obtained w o u l d be applicable to all 
living things, including the most advanced, even i f this case was the simplest 
protoplasmic being imaginable. Accordingly if, i n the very humble societies 
just studied, I have managed to capture some o f the elements that comprise 
the most fundamental religious ideas, there is no reason not to extend the 
most general results o f this research to other religions. I n fact, it is i n c o n -
ceivable that the same effect could be sometimes due n o w to one cause, n o w 
to another, according to the circumstances, unless fundamentally the t w o 
causes were but one. A single idea cannot express one reality here and a dif-
ferent one there unless this duality is merely apparent. If, among certain peo-
ples, the ideas "sacred," "soul," and "gods" can be explained sociologically, 
then scientifically w e must presume that the same explanation is valid i n 
principle for all the peoples among w h o m the same ideas are found w i t h es-
sentially the same characteristics. Assuming that I am not mistaken, then, at 
least some o f m y conclusions can legitimately be generalized. T h e time has 
come to draw these out. A n d an induction o f this sort, based o n a w e l l -
defined experiment, is less reckless than so many cursory generalizations that, 
i n their striving to reach the essence o f religion i n a single stroke w i t h o u t 
418 


Conclusion 
419 
grounding themselves i n the analysis o f any particular religion, are at great 
risk o f floating away into the void. 
I 
Most often, the theorists w h o have set out to express religion i n rational 
terms have regarded i t as being, first and foremost, a system o f ideas that cor-
respond to a definite object. That object has been conceived i n different 
ways—nature, the infinite, the unknowable, the ideal, and so forth—but 
these differences are o f litde importance. I n every case, the representations— 
that is, the beliefs—were considered the essential element o f religion. For 
their part, rites appeared from this standpoint to be no more than an exter-
nal, contingent, and physical translation o f those inward states that alone 
were deemed to have intrinsic value. This n o t i o n is so widespread that most 
o f the time debates o n the topic o f religion t u r n around and about o n the 
question o f whether religion can or cannot be reconciled w i t h science—that 
is, whether there is r o o m alongside scientific knowledge for another f o r m o f 
thought held to be specifically religious. 
B u t the believers—the m e n w h o , living a religious life, have a direct 
sense o f what constitutes religion—object that, i n terms o f their day-to-day 
experience, this way o f seeing does not r i n g true. Indeed, they sense that the 
true function o f religion is not to make us think, enrich our knowledge, or add 
representations o f a different sort and source to those we owe to science. Its 
true function is to make us act and to help us live. T h e believer w h o has c o m -
m u n e d w i t h his god is not simply a man w h o sees n e w truths that the unbe-
liever knows not; he is a man w h o is stronger. * W i t h i n himself, he feels more 
strength to endure the trials o f existence or to overcome them. H e is as though 
lifted above the human miseries, because he is lifted above his human condi-
tion. H e believes he is delivered from evil—whatever the f o r m i n w h i c h he 
conceives o f evil. T h e first article o f any faith is belief i n salvation by faith. 
B u t i t is hard to see h o w a mere idea could have that power. I n fact, an 
idea is but one element o f ourselves. H o w could i t confer o n us powers that 
are superior to those given us i n our natural makeup? As rich i n emotive 
power as an idea may be, i t cannot add anything to our natural vitality; i t can 
only release emotive forces that are already w i t h i n us, neither creating nor i n -
creasing them. F r o m the fact that we imagine an object as w o r t h y o f being 
loved and sought after, it does not follow that we should feel stronger. Ener-
gies greater than those at our disposal must come from the object, and, more 
* Qui pent davantage. Literally "who is capable of more." Durkheim italicized peut. 


420 
Conclusion 
than that, we must have some means o f making t h e m enter into us and blend 
into our inner life. To achieve this, it is not enough that we think about 
them; i t is indispensable that we place ourselves under their influence, that 
we t u r n ourselves i n the direction from w h i c h w e can best feel that influence. 
I n short, we must act; and so we must repeat the necessary acts as often as is 
necessary to renew their effects. F r o m this standpoint, i t becomes apparent 
that the set o f regularly repeated actions that make up the cult regains all its 
importance. I n fact, anyone w h o has truly practiced a religion knows very 
well that i t is the cult that stimulates the feelings o f joy, inner peace, serenity, 
and enthusiasm that, for the faithful, stand as experimental p r o o f o f their be-
liefs. T h e cult is not merely a system o f signs by w h i c h the faith is outwardly 
expressed; i t is the sum total o f means by w h i c h that faith is created and 
recreated periodically. W h e t h e r the cult consists o f physical operations or 
mental ones, it is always the cult that is efficacious. 
This entire study rests o n the postulate that the unanimous feeling o f be-
lievers d o w n the ages cannot be mere illusion. Therefore, like a recent apol-
ogist o f faith,
1 I accept that religious belief rests o n a definite experience, 
whose demonstrative value is, i n a sense, not inferior to that o f scientific ex-
periments, though i t is different. I too t h i n k "that a tree is k n o w n by its 
fruits,"
2 
and that its fertility is the best p r o o f o f what its roots are w o r t h . B u t 
merely because there exists a "religious experience," i f y o u w i l l , that is 
grounded i n some manner (is there, by the way, any experience that is not?), 
it by no means follows that the reality w h i c h grounds it should conform o b -
jectively w i t h the idea the believers have o f it. T h e very fact that the way i n 
w h i c h this reality has been conceived has varied infinitely i n different 
times 
is enough to prove that none o f these conceptions expresses it adequately. I f 
the scientist sets i t d o w n as axiomatic that the sensations o f heat and light that 
m e n have correspond to some objective cause, he does not thereby conclude 
that this cause is the same as it appears to the senses. Likewise, even i f the 
feelings the faithful have are not imaginary, they still do not constitute p r i v -
deged intuitions; there is no reason whatever to t h i n k that they i n f o r m us 
better about the nature o f their object than ordinary sensations do about the 
nature o f bodies and their properties. To discover what that object consists 
of, then, w e must apply to those sensations an analysis similar to the one that 
has replaced the senses' representation o f the w o r l d w i t h a scientific and c o n -
ceptual one. 
This is precisely what I have tried to do. W e have seen that this reality— 
'William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience [London, Longmans, 1902]. 
2Ibid. (p. 19 of the French translation). 


Conclusion 
421 
w h i c h mythologies have represented i n so many different forms, but w h i c h 
is the objective, universal, and eternal cause o f those sui generis sensations o f 
w h i c h religious experience is made—is society. I have shown what moral 
forces it develops and h o w it awakens that feeling o f support, safety, and pro-
tective guidance w h i c h binds the man o f faith to his cult. I t is this reality that 
makes h i m rise above himself. Indeed, this is the reality that makes h i m , for 
what makes man is that set o f intellectual goods w h i c h is civilization, and civ-
ilization is the w o r k o f society. I n this way is explained the preeminent role 
o f the cult i n all religions, whatever they are. This is so because society can-
not make its influence felt unless i t is i n action, and it is i n action only i f the 
individuals w h o comprise it are assembled and acting i n c o m m o n . It is 
through c o m m o n action that society becomes conscious o f and affirms itself; 
society is above all an active cooperation. As I have shown, even collective 
ideas and feelings are possible only through the overt movements that sym-
bolize t h e m .
3 Thus it is action that dominates religious life, for the very rea-
son that society is its source. 
To all the reasons adduced to justify this conception, a final one can be 
added that emerges from this b o o k as a whole. A l o n g the way, I have estab-
lished that the fundamental categories o f thought, and thus science itself, 
have religious origins. T h e same has been shown to be true o f magic, and 
thus o f the various techniques derived from magic. Besides, it has long been 
k n o w n that, until a relatively advanced m o m e n t i n evolution, the rules o f 
morality and law were not distinct from ritual prescriptions. I n short, then, 
we can say that nearly all the great social institutions were b o r n i n religion.
4 
For the principal features o f collective life to have begun as none other than 
various features o f religious life, it is evident that religious life must necessar-
ily have been the eminent f o r m and, as it were, the epitome o f collective life. 
I f religion gave b i r t h to all that is essential i n society, that is so because the 
idea o f society is the soul o f religion. 
Thus religious forces are h u m a n forces, moral forces. Probably because 
collective feelings become conscious o f themselves only by settling u p o n ex-
ternal objects, those very forces could not organize themselves w i t h o u t tak-
ing some o f their traits from things. I n this way, they took o n a k i n d o f 
3See above, pp. 23Iff. 
4Only one form of social activity has not as yet been explicitly linked to religion: economic activity. 
Nevertheless, the techniques that derive from magic turn out, by this very fact, to have indirectly religious 
origins. Furthermore, economic value is a sort of power or efficacy, and we know the religious origins of 
the idea of power. Since mana can be conferred by wealth, wealth itself has some. From this we see that 
the idea of economic value and that of religious value cannot be unrelated; but the nature of these rela-
tionships has not yet been studied. 


422 
Conclusion 
physical nature; they came to mingle as such w i t h the life o f the physical 
w o r l d , and through them it was thought possible to explain events i n that 
w o r l d . B u t w h e n they are considered only from this standpoint and i n this 
role, we see only what is most superficial about them. I n reality, the essential 
elements out o f w h i c h they are made are borrowed from consciousness. O r -
dinarily, they do not seem to have a human character except w h e n they are 
thought o f i n human f o r m ,
5 but even the most impersonal and most anony-
mous are n o t h i n g other than objectified feelings. 
O n l y by seeing religions i n this way does i t become possible to detect 
their real meaning. I f we rely o n appearances, the rites often seem to be 
purely manual operations—anointings, purifications, meals. To consecrate a 
thing, one places it i n contact w i t h a source o f religious energy, just as today 
a body is placed i n contact w i t h a source o f heat or electricity i n order to heat 
or electrify it. T h e procedures used i n the t w o cases are not essentially dif-
ferent. Understood i n this way, religious technique seems to be a k i n d o f 
mystical mechanics. B u t these physical operations are but the outer envelope 
i n w h i c h mental operations lie hidden. I n the end, the point is not to exert 
a k i n d o f physical constraint u p o n blind and, more than that, imaginary 
forces but to reach, fortify, and discipline consciousnesses. T h e lower reli-
gions have sometimes been called materialistic. That t e r m is incorrect. A l l 
religions, even the crudest, are i n a sense spiritualistic. T h e powers they bring 
into play are, above all, spiritual, and their primary function is to act upon 
moral life. I n this way, we understand that what was done i n the name o f re-
ligion cannot have been done i n vain, for it is necessarily the society o f men, 
it is humanity, that has reaped the fruits. 
It may be asked, Exactly what society is i t that i n this way becomes the 
substrate o f religious life? Is i t the real society, such as it exists and functions 
before our eyes, w i t h the moral and juridical organization that i t has toiled to 
fashion for itself over the course o f history? B u t that society is full o f flaws 
and imperfections. I n that society, good rubs shoulders w i t h evil, injustice is 
ever o n the throne, and truth is continually darkened by error. H o w could a 
being so crudely made inspire the feelings o f love, ardent enthusiasm, and 
w i l l i n g self-sacrifice that all the religions demand o f their faithful? Those 
perfect beings that are the gods cannot have taken their traits from such a 
mediocre, sometimes even base, reality. 
W o u l d i t not be instead the perfect society, i n w h i c h justice and truth 
reigned, and from w h i c h evil i n all its forms was uprooted? N o one disputes 
3It is for this reason that Frazer and even Preuss set the impersonal religious forces outside religion, or 
at most at its threshold, in order to relate them to magic. 


Conclusion 
423 
that this perfect society has a close relationship to religious sentiment, for re-
ligions are said to aim at realizing it. However, this society is not an e m p i r i -
cal fact, well defined and observable; it is a fancy, a dream w i t h w h i c h men 
have lulled their miseries but have never experienced i n reality. I t is a mere 
idea that expresses i n consciousness our more or less obscure aspirations t o -
ward the good, the beautiful, and the ideal. These aspirations have their roots 
i n us; since they come from the very depths o f our being, nothing outside us 
can account for them. Furthermore, i n and o f themselves, they are already 
religious; hence, far from being able to explain religion, the ideal society pre-
supposes i t .
6 
B u t to see only the idealistic side o f religion is to simplify arbitrarily. I n 
its o w n way, religion is realistic. There is no physical or moral ugliness, no 
vice, and no evil that has not been deified. There have been gods o f theft and 
trickery, lust and war, sickness and death. As uplifted as its idea o f divinity is, 
Christianity itself was obliged to make a place i n its mythology for the spirit 
o f evd. Satan is an essential component o f the Christian machinery; yet, even 
i f he is an impure being, he is not a profane being. T h e anti-god is a g o d — 
lower and subordinate, i t is true, yet invested w i t h broad powers; he is even 
the object o f rites, at the very least negative ones. Far from ignoring and dis-
regarding the real society, religion is its image, reflecting all its features, even 
the most vulgar and repellent. Everything is to be found i n it, and i f we most 
often see good t r i u m p h i n g over evil, life over death, and the forces o f light 
over the forces o f darkness, this is because i t is no different i n reality. I f the 
relationship between these forces was reversed, life w o u l d be impossible, 
whereas i n fact, life maintains itself and even tends to develop. 
B u t i t is quite true that even i f the mythologies and theologies allow a 
clear glimpse o f the reality, the reality we find i n t h e m has been enlarged, 
transformed, and idealized. T h e most primitive religions are no different i n 
this respect from the most m o d e r n and the most refined. We have seen, for 
example, h o w the Arunta place at the beginning o f time a mythical society 
whose organization exactly replicates the one that still exists today. It is made 
u p o f the same clans and phratries, i t is subject to the same marriage rules, 
and it practices the same rites. B u t the personages that comprise i t are ideal 
beings endowed w i t h capacities to w h i c h mere mortals cannot lay claim. B e -
l o n g i n g to animality and humanity at the same time, their nature is not only 
higher but also different. T h e evil powers undergo a similar metamorphosis 
6[Emile] Boutroux, Science et religion [dans la philosophie contemporaine, Paris, E. Flammarion, 1907], 
pp. 206-207. 


424 
Conclusion 
i n that religion. I t is as though evil itself undergoes refinement and idealiza-
tion. T h e question that arises is where this idealization comes from. 
O n e proposed answer is that man has a natural capacity to idealize, that 
is, to replace the real w o r l d w i t h a different one to w h i c h he travels i n 
thought. B u t such an answer changes the terms o f the problem, neither solv-
ing nor even advancing it. This persistent idealization is a fundamental fea-
ture o f religions. So to explain religions i n terms o f an innate capacity to 
idealize is simply to replace one w o r d w i t h its equivalent; i t is like saying that 
man created religion because he has a religious nature. Yet the animal knows 
only one w o r l d : the w o r l d i t perceives through experience, internal as well 
as external. M a n alone has the capacity to conceive o f the ideal and add it to 
the real. Where, then, does this remarkable distinction come from? Before 
taking i t to be a primary fact or a mysterious virtue that eludes science, one 
should first have made sure that this remarkable distinction does not arise 
from conditions that can be determined empirically. 
M y proposed explanation o f religion has the specific advantage o f p r o -
v i d i n g an answer to this question, since what defines the sacred is that the 
sacred is added to the real. A n d since the ideal is defined i n the same way, 
we cannot explain the one w i t h o u t explaining the other. W e have seen, i n 
fact, that i f collective life awakens religious thought w h e n it rises to a cer-
tain intensity, that is so because it brings about a state o f effervescence that 
alters the conditions o f psychic activity. T h e vital energies become hyper-
excited, the passions more intense, the sensations more powerful; there are 
indeed some that are produced only at this moment. M a n does not recog-
nize himself; he feels somehow transformed and i n consequence transforms 
his surroundings. To account for the very particular impressions he receives, 
he imputes to the things w i t h w h i c h he is most directly i n contact properties 
that they do not have, exceptional powers and virtues that the objects o f or-
dinary experience do not possess. I n short, u p o n the real w o r l d where p r o -
fane life is lived, he superimposes another that, i n a sense, exists only i n his 
thought, but one to w h i c h he ascribes a higher k i n d o f dignity than he as-
cribes to the real w o r l d o f profane life. I n t w o respects, then, this other w o r l d 
is an ideal one. 
Thus the formation o f an ideal is by no means an irreducible datum that 
eludes science. I t rests o n conditions that can be uncovered through observa-
tion. 
It is a natural product o f social life. I f society is to be able to become 
conscious o f itself and keep the sense i t has o f itself at the required intensity, 
it must assemble and concentrate. This concentration brings about an uplift-
ing o f moral life that is expressed by a set o f ideal conceptions i n w h i c h the 
new life thus awakened is depicted. These ideal conceptions correspond to 


Conclusion 
425 
the onrush o f psychic forces added at that m o m e n t to those we have at our 
disposal for the everyday tasks o f life. A society can neither create nor recre-
ate itself w i t h o u t creating some k i n d o f ideal by the same stroke. This cre-
ation is not a sort o f optional extra step by w h i c h society, being already made, 
merely adds finishing touches; it is the act by w h i c h society makes itself, and 
remakes itself, periodically. Thus, w h e n we set the ideal society i n opposition 
to the real society, like t w o antagonists supposedly leading us i n opposite d i -
rections, we are reifying and opposing abstractions. T h e ideal society is not 
outside the real one but is part o f it. Far from our being divided between 
t h e m as though between t w o poles that repel one another, we cannot h o l d 
to the one w i t h o u t h o l d i n g to the other. A society is not constituted simply 
by the mass o f individuals w h o comprise it, the ground they occupy, the 
things they use, or the movements they make, but above all by the idea it has 
o f itself. A n d there is no doubt that society sometimes hesitates over the 
manner i n w h i c h i t must conceive itself. I t feels pulled i n all directions. 
W h e n such conflicts break out, they are not between the ideal and the real-
ity but between different ideals, between the ideal o f yesterday and that o f t o -
day, between the ideal that has the authority o f tradition and one that is only 
c o m i n g into being. Studying h o w ideals come to evolve certainly has its 
place, but no matter h o w this problem is solved, the fact remains that the 
w h o l e o f i t unfolds i n the w o r l d o f the ideal. 
Therefore the collective ideal that religion expresses is far from being due 
to some vague capacity innate to the individual; rather, it is i n the school o f 
collective life that the individual has learned to f o r m ideals. I t is by assimilating 
the ideals worked out by society that the individual is able to conceive o f the 
ideal. I t is society that, by drawing h i m into its sphere o f action, has given h i m 
the need to raise himself above the w o r l d o f experience, while at the same time 
furnishing h i m the means o f imagining another. It is society that built this new 
w o r l d while building itself, because it is society that the new w o r l d expresses. 
There is nothing mysterious about the faculty o f idealization, then, whether i n 
the individual or i n the group. This faculty is not a sort o f luxury, w h i c h man 
could do without, but a condition o f his existence. I f he had not acquired it, 
he w o u l d not be a social being, w h i c h is to say that he w o u l d not be man. To 
be sure, collective ideals tend to become individualized as they become incar-
nate i n individuals. Each person understands them i n his o w n way and gives 
them an individual imprint, some elements being taken out and others being 
added. As the individual personality develops and becomes an autonomous 
source o f action, the personal ideal diverges from the social one. B u t i f we want 
to understand that aptitude for living outside the real, w h i c h is seemingly so re-
markable, all we need to do is relate it to the social conditions o n w h i c h it rests. 


426 
Conclusion 
B u t the last thing to do is to see this theory o f religion as merely a refur-
bishment o f historical materialism. That w o u l d be a total misunderstanding 
o f m y thought. I n pointing out an essentially social thing i n religion, I i n no 
way mean to say that religion simply translates the material forms and i m -
mediate vital necessities o f society into another language. I do indeed take i t 
to be obvious that social life depends o n and bears the mark o f its material 
base, just as the mental life o f the individual depends o n the brain and indeed 
o n the w h o l e body. B u t collective consciousness is something other than a 
mere epiphenomenon 
o f its morphological base, just as individual c o n -
sciousness is something other than a mere product o f the nervous system. I f 
collective consciousness is to appear, a sui generis synthesis o f individual c o n -
sciousnesses must occur. T h e product o f this synthesis is a whole w o r l d o f 
feelings, ideas, and images that follow their o w n laws once they are born. 
T h e y mutually attract one another, repel one another, fuse together, subdi-
vide, and proliferate; and none o f these combinations is directly commanded 
and necessitated by the state o f the underlying reality. Indeed, the life thus 
unleashed enjoys such great independence that it sometimes plays about i n 
forms that have no aim or utility o f any k i n d , but only for the pleasure o f af-
f i r m i n g itself. I have shown that precisely this is often true o f ritual activity 
and mythological thought.
7 
B u t i f religion has social causes, h o w can the individual cult and the u n i -
versalistic character o f certain religions be explained? I f i t is b o r n in foro ex¬
terno, * h o w was i t able to pass into the inner core o f the individual and 
become ever more deeply implanted i n him? I f it is the w o r k o f definite and 
particular societies, h o w could i t become detached enough from them to be 
conceived o f as the c o m m o n holding o f all humanity? 
Since, i n the course o f our study, w e came u p o n the first seeds o f i n -
dividual religion and religious cosmopolitanism and saw h o w they were 
formed, we possess the most general elements o f an answer to that twofold 
question. 
I have shown that the religious force animating the clan becomes i n d i -
vidualized by incarnating itself i n individual consciousnesses. Secondary sa-
cred beings are formed i n this way, each individual having his o w n that is 
made i n his o w n image, part o f his intimate life, and at one w i t h his fate. 
T h e y are the soul, the individual totem, the protecting ancestor, and so forth. 
*In the external world. 
'See above, pp. 382ff. Cf. my article on the same question: "Représentations individuelles et 
représentations collectives," RMM, vol. VI, 1898 [pp. 273ff.]. 


Conclusion 
427 
These beings are the objects o f rites that the worshipper can conduct o n his 
o w n , apart from any group, so it is actually a primitive f o r m o f the i n d i v i d -
ual cult. O f course, i t is still only a very undeveloped cult, but that is because 
the cult expressing the individual personality could not be very well devel-
oped, given that the individual personality is at that stage still marked very 
slightly, w i t h little value attributed to it. As individuals became more differ-
entiated and the value o f the person grew, the corresponding cult itself took 
o n a larger role i n religious life as a whole, at the same time more completely 
sealing itself o f f from the outside. 
T h e existence o f individual cults does not therefore imply anything that 
contradicts or complicates a sociological explanation o f religion. T h e reli-
gious forces they address are merely collective forces i n individualized forms. 
Even where religion seems to be entirely w i t h i n the individual, the living 
source that feeds i t is to be found i n society. W e can n o w judge the w o r t h o f 
the radical individualism that is intent o n making religion out to be a purely 
individual thing: I t misconceives the fundamental conditions o f religious life. 
A n d i f that radical individualism has remained i n the state o f unrealized the-
oretical aspiration up to now, that is because it is unrealizable i n fact. A p h i -
losophy can very well be w o r k e d out i n the silence o f inward meditation, but 
not a faith. A faith above all is w a r m t h , life, enthusiasm, enhancement o f all 
mental activity, uplift o f the individual above himself. Except by reaching 
outside himself, h o w could the individual add to the energies he possesses? 
H o w could he transcend himself by his o w n strength? T h e only hearth at 
w h i c h w e can w a r m ourselves morally is the hearth made by the company o f 
our fellow men; the only moral forces w i t h w h i c h we can nourish our o w n 
and increase t h e m are those we get from others. Let us even grant the exis-
tence o f beings more or less like those the mythologies depict for us. I f they 
are to have the useful influence over souls that is their raison d'être, we must 
believe i n them. T h e beliefs are at w o r k only w h e n they are shared. W e may 
well keep t h e m t h e m going for a time through personal effort alone, but they 
are neither b o r n nor obtained i n this way, and it is doubtful that they can be 
preserved under those conditions. I n fact, the man w h o has a genuine faith 
feels an irrepressible need to spread it. To do so, he comes out o f his isolation, 
he approaches others, he seeks to convince them, and i t is the ardor o f the 
convictions he brings about that i n t u r n reinforces his o w n . That ardor 
w o u l d speedily dissipate i f left alone. 
W h a t is true o f religious individualism is true o f religious universalism. 
Far from being exclusively the trait o f a few very great religions, we have 
found i t i n the Australian system—not at its base, to be sure, but at its pinna-
cle. Bunjil,- Daramulun, and Baiame are not mere tribal gods, since each is 


428 
Conclusion 
recognized by a number o f different tribes. Their cult is i n a sense interna-
tional. So this conception is quite close to the one found i n the most m o d e r n 
theologies. As a result, and for that very reason, certain writers have felt duty 
b o u n d to deny its authenticity, even though its authenticity cannot be denied. 
B u t I have been able to show h o w this conception was formed. 
Tribes that neighbor one another and are o f the same civilization cannot 
help but have ongoing relationships w i t h one another. A l l kinds o f c i r c u m -
stances provide the occasion for contact. Apart from business, w h i c h is still 
rudimentary, there are marriages; international marriages are very c o m m o n 
i n Australia. I n the course o f these contacts, m e n naturally become conscious 
o f the moral kinship that unites them. T h e y have the same social organiza-
tion, the same division into phratries, clans, and marriage classes; they c o n -
duct the same or similar initiation rites. T h e effect o f mutual borrowings or 
agreements is to consolidate the spontaneous similarities. T h e gods to w h i c h 
such obviously identical institutions were attached could hardly remain dis-
tinct i n people's minds. Everything brought t h e m together; and i n conse-
quence, even supposing that each tribe had w o r k e d out its o w n n o t i o n o f 
them independendy they must as a matter o f course have had a tendency to 
amalgamate. Furthermore, the likelihood is that the gods were first c o n -
ceived i n these intertribal assemblies, for they are gods o f initiation, first and 
foremost, and various tribes are usually represented at the initiation cere-
monies. Thus i f sacred beings unconnected w i t h any territorially defined so-
ciety were formed, it is not because they had an extrasocial origin. Rather, 
it is because above these territorial groupings are others w i t h more fluid 
boundaries. These other groupings do not have fixed frontiers but include a 
great many more or less neighboring and related tribes. T h e very special so-
cial life that emerges tends to spread over an area w i t h o u t clear limits. Quite 
naturally, the corresponding mythological personages are o f the same charac-
ter; their sphere o f influence is not definite; they hover above the individual 
tribes and above the land. These are the great international gods. 
N o t h i n g i n this situation is peculiar to Australian societies. There is no 
people, and no State, that is not engaged w i t h another more or less unde-
limited society that includes all peoples and all States* w i t h w h i c h it is d i -
recdy or indirectly i n contact; there is no national life that is not under the 
sway o f an international collective life. T h e more we advance i n history, the 
larger and the more important these international groupings become. I n this 
way, we see how, i n some cases, the universalistic tendency could develop to 
'Dürkheim capitalized "Church" and "State." 


Conclusion 
429 
the point o f affecting not only the highest ideas o f the religious system but 
also the very principles on w h i c h it rests. 
II 
Thus there is something eternal i n religion that is destined to outlive the suc-
cession o f particular symbols i n w h i c h religious thought has clothed itself. 
There can be no society that does not experience the need at regular inter-
vals to maintain and strengthen the collective feelings and ideas that provide 
its coherence and its distinct individuality. This moral remaking can be 
achieved only through meetings, assemblies, and congregations i n w h i c h the 
individuals, pressing close to one another, reaffirm i n c o m m o n their c o m -
m o n 
sentiments. Such is the o r i g i n o f ceremonies that, by their object, by 
their results, and by the techniques used, are not different i n k i n d from cer-
emonies that are specifically religious. W h a t basic difference is there between 
Christians' celebrating the principal dates o f Christ's life, Jews' celebrating 
the exodus from Egypt or the promulgation o f the Decalogue, and a citizens' 
meeting commemorating the advent o f a n e w moral charter or some other 
great event o f national life? 
I f today we have some difficulty imagining what the feasts and cere-
monies o f the future w i l l be, it is because w e are going through a period o f 
transition and moral mediocrity. T h e great things o f the past that excited our 
fathers no longer arouse the same zeal among us, either because they have 
passed so completely into c o m m o n custom that we lose awareness o f them or 
because they no longer suit our aspirations. Meanwhile, no replacement for 
t h e m has yet been created. We are no longer electrified by those principles 
i n whose name Christianity exhorted the masters to treat their slaves h u -
manely; and besides, Christianity's idea o f human equality and fraternity 
seems to us today to leave too m u c h r o o m for unjust inequalities. Its pity for 
the downcast seems to us too platonic. W e w o u l d like one that is more v i g -
orous but do not yet see clearly what it should be or h o w it might be realized 
i n fact. 
I n short, the former gods are g r o w i n g old or dying, and others have not 
been b o r n . This is what voided Comte's attempt to organize a religion using 
old historical memories, artificially revived. I t is life itself, and not a dead 
past, that can produce a living cult. B u t that state o f uncertainty and confused 
anxiety cannot last forever. A day w i l l come w h e n our societies once again 
w i l l k n o w hours o f creative effervescence d u r i n g w h i c h n e w ideals w i l l again 
spring forth and n e w formulas emerge to guide humanity for a time. A n d 


430 
Conclusion 
w h e n those hours have been lived through, m e n w i l l spontaneously feel the 
need to relive t h e m i n thought from time to time—that is, to preserve their 
m e m o r y by means o f celebrations that regularly recreate their fruits. W e have 
already seen h o w the [French] R e v o l u t i o n instituted a w h o l e cycle o f cele-
brations i n order to keep the principles that inspired it eternally young. I f 
that institution quickly perished, i t is because the revolutionary faith lasted 
only briefly, and because disappointments and discouragements quickly re-
placed the first m o m e n t o f enthusiasm. B u t although that w o r k miscarried, 
it helps us to imagine what m i g h t have come to be under other conditions; 
and everything leads us to believe that the w o r k w i l l sooner or later be taken 
up again. There are no i m m o r t a l gospels, and there is no reason to believe 
that humanity is incapable o f conceiving new ones i n the future. As to k n o w -
ing what the symbols w i l l be i n w h i c h the new faith w i l l come to express i t -
self, whether they w i l l resemble those o f the past, whether they w i l l better 
suit the reality to be expressed—that is a question that exceeds human facul-
ties o f prediction and that, moreover, is beside the point. 
B u t feasts and rites—in a w o r d , the cult—are not the w h o l e o f religion. 
R e l i g i o n is not only a system o f practices but also a system o f ideas whose 
object is to express the w o r l d ; even the humblest have their o w n cosmolo-
gies, as we have seen. N o matter h o w these t w o elements o f religious life may 
be related, they are nonetheless quite different. O n e is turned toward action, 
w h i c h it elicits and regulates; the other toward thought, w h i c h it enriches 
and organizes. Since they do not rest o n the same conditions, then, there is 
reason to ask whether the ideas correspond to needs as universal and as per-
manent as the practices do. 
W h e n we impute specific traits to religious thought and believe its func-
tion is to express, by its o w n methods, a w h o l e aspect o f the real that eludes 
both ordinary knowledge and science, w e naturally refuse to grant that the 
speculative role o f religion could ever be overthrown. B u t i t does not seem 
to me that analysis o f the facts has demonstrated this specificity o f religion. 
T h e religion we have just studied is one o f those i n w h i c h the symbols used 
are the most unsettling to reason. Everything about it seems full o f mystery. 
A t first glance, those beings that simultaneously participate i n the most dis-
parate kingdoms, multiply w i t h o u t ceasing to be one, and break up w i t h o u t 
diminishing, seem to belong to an entirely different w o r l d from the one i n 
w h i c h w e live. Some have even gone so far as to say that the thought that 
built i t was totally ignorant o f the laws o f logic. Never, perhaps, has the c o n -
trast between reason and faith been so pronounced. I f ever there was a m o -
ment i n history w h e n the difference between t h e m must have stood out 
plainly, then that truly was the moment. 


Conclusion 
431 
B u t I have noted, contrary to such appearances, that the realities to 
w h i c h religious speculation was applied then are the same ones that w o u l d 
later serve as objects o f scientists' reflection. Those realities are nature, man, 
and society. T h e mystery that appears to surround t h e m is entirely superficial 
and fades u p o n closer scrutiny. To have t h e m appear as they are, it is enough 
to pull aside the veil w i t h w h i c h the mythological imagination covered them. 
R e l i g i o n strives to translate those realities into an intelligible language that 
does not differ i n nature from that used by science. B o t h attempt to connect 
things to one another, establish internal relations between those things, clas-
sify them, and systematize them. W e have even seen that the essential notions 
o f scientific logic are o f religious origin. O f course, science reworks those 
notions i n order to use them. It distills out all sorts o f extraneous elements 
and generally brings to all its efforts a critical spirit that is u n k n o w n i n reli-
gion; i t surrounds itself w i t h precautions to "avoid haste and bias" and to 
keep passions, prejudices, and all subjective influences at bay. B u t these i m -
provements i n m e t h o d are not enough to differentiate science from religion. 
I n this regard, b o t h pursue the same goal; scientific thought is only a more 
perfected f o r m o f religious thought. Hence i t seems natural that rehgion 
should lose ground as science becomes better at performing its task. 
There is no doubt, i n fact, that this regression has taken place over the 
course o f history. A l t h o u g h the offspring o f religion, science tends to replace 
religion i n everything that involves the cognitive and intellectual functions. 
Christianity has by n o w definitively sanctioned that replacement, i n the 
realm o f physical phenomena. Regarding matter as a profane thing par ex-
cellence, Christianity has easfly abandoned knowledge to a discipline that is 
alien to it, tradidit mundum hominum disputationi. * So i t is that the sciences o f 
nature have, w i t h relative ease, succeeded i n establishing their authority and 
i n having that authority acknowledged. B u t Christianity could not let the 
w o r l d o f souls out o f its grip as easily, for i t is above all over souls that the god 
o f the Christians wishes to rule. This is w h y the idea o f subjecting psychic 
life to science l o n g amounted to a k i n d o f profanation; even today, that idea 
is still repugnant to many. Today, experimental and comparative psychology 
has been created and must be reckoned w i t h . B u t the w o r l d o f religious and 
moral life still remains forbidden. T h e great majority o f m e n continue to be-
lieve that there is an order o f things that the intellect can enter only by very 
special routes. Hence the strong resistance one encounters whenever one at-
tempts to treat religious and moral phenomena scientifically. Yet these efforts 
*It abandoned the world to the disputes of men. 


432 
Conclusion 
persist despite opposition, and that very persistence makes i t foreseeable that 
this last barrier w i l l give way i n the end, and that science w i l l establish itself 
as mistress, even i n this preserve. 
This is what the conflict o f science and religion is about. People often 
have a mistaken idea o f i t . * Science is said to deny religion i n principle. B u t 
religion exists; i t is a system o f given facts; i n short, it is a reality. H o w could 
science deny a reality? Furthermore, insofar as religion is action and insofar 
as i t is a means o f m a k i n g m e n live, science cannot possibly take its place. A l -
though science expresses life, i t does not create life, and science can very well 
seek to explain faith but by that very fact presupposes faith. Hence there is 
conflict o n only a limited point. O f the t w o functions originally performed 
by religion, there is one, only one, that tends more and more to escape it, and 
that is the speculative function. W h a t science disputes i n religion is not its 
right to exist but its right to dogmatize about the nature o f things, its pre-
tensions to special expertise for explaining man and the w o r l d . I n fact, reli-
gion does not k n o w itself. I t knows neither what it is made o f nor what 
needs i t responds to. Far from being able to tell science what to do, religion 
is itself an object for science! A n d o n the other hand, since apart from a re-
ality that eludes scientific reflection, religious speculation has no special o b -
ject o f its o w n , that religion obviously cannot play the same role i n the future 
as i t d i d i n the past. 
However, religion seems destined to transform itself rather than disappear. 
I have said that there is something eternal i n religion: the cult and the 
faith. B u t m e n can neither conduct ceremonies for w h i c h they can see no ra-
tionale, nor accept a faith that they i n no way understand. To spread or sim-
ply maintain religion, one must justify it, w h i c h is to say one must devise a 
theory o f it. A theory o f this sort must assuredly rest o n the various sciences, 
as soon as they come into existence: social sciences first, since religious faith 
has its origins i n society; psychology next, since society is a , synthesis o f h u -
man 
consciousnesses; sciences o f nature 
finally, since m a n and society are 
linked to the universe and can be abstracted from i t only artificially. B u t as 
important as these borrowings from the established sciences may be, they are 
i n no way sufficient; faith is above all a spur to action, whereas science, no 
matter h o w advanced, always remains at a distance from action. Science is 
fragmentary and incomplete; i t advances but slowly and is never finished; but 
life—that cannot wait. Theories whose calling is to make people live and 
make t h e m act, must therefore rush ahead o f science and complete i t prema-
*This sentence is missing from Swain. 


Conclusion 
433 
turely. T h e y are possible only i f the demands o f practicality and vital necessi-
ties, such as we feel w i t h o u t distinctly conceiving them, push thought be-
y o n d what science permits us to affirm. I n this way, even the most rational 
and secularized religions cannot and can never do w i t h o u t a particular k i n d 
o f speculation w h i c h , although having the same objects as science itself, still 
cannot be properly scientific. T h e obscure intuitions o f sense and sensibility 
often take the place o f logical reasons. 
Thus, from one point o f view, this speculation resembles the speculation 
we encounter i n the religions o f the past, w h i l e from another, it differs 
from 
them. W h i l e exercising the right to go beyond science, i t must begin by 
k n o w i n g and drawing inspiration from science. As soon as the authority o f 
science is established, science must be reckoned w i t h ; under pressure o f need, 
one can go beyond science, but i t is from science that one must start out. 
O n e can affirm n o t h i n g that science denies, deny n o t h i n g that science af-
firms, 
and establish n o t h i n g that does not directly or indirectly rest o n p r i n -
ciples taken from science. F r o m then on, faith* no longer holds the same 
sway as i n the past over the system o f representations that can continue to be 
called religious. There rises a power before religion that, even though reli-
gion's offspring, from then o n applies its o w n critique and its o w n testing to 
religion. A n d everything points to the prospect that this testing w i l l become 
ever more extensive and effective, w i t h o u t any possibility o f assigning a l i m i t 
to its future influence. 
Ill 
I f the fundamental notions o f science are o f religious o r i g i n , h o w could reli-
g i o n have engendered them? I t is not obvious at first glance what the points 
o f contact between logic and religion m i g h t be. Indeed, since the reality that 
religious thought expresses is society, the question can be posed i n terms that 
b r i n g out the difficulty more clearly, as follows: W h a t could have made so-
cial life such an important source o f logical life? N o t h i n g predisposed society 
for this role, it w o u l d seem, since i t is obvious that m e n did not come t o -
gether for the purpose o f satisfying speculative needs. 
Some w i l l t h i n k i t reckless o f me to broach a problem o f such complex-
ity here. For the treatment it deserves to be possible, the sociological c o n d i -
tions o f knowledge w o u l d have to be better k n o w n than they are. We can 
only begin to discern a few o f those conditions. However, the question is so 
"The first edition says la 
foi—"faith"; the second says la hi—"law." 


434 
Conclusion 
important and so directly implied by everything that has gone before that I 
must make an effort not to leave i t w i t h o u t an answer. Perhaps, moreover, it 
may be possible to set forth even n o w a few general principles o f a k i n d that 
may at least shed light o n the solution. 
T h e basic material o f logical thought is concepts. To try to discover h o w 
society could have played a role i n the genesis o f logical thought therefore 
amounts to asking h o w it can have taken part i n the formation o f concepts. 
I f we see the concept only as a general idea, as is most usually the case, 
the problem seems insoluble. B y his o w n means, the individual can indeed 
compare his perceptions or images and sift out what they have i n c o m m o n ; 
i n other words, he can generalize. So it is not easy to see w h y generalization 
should be possible only i n and through society. But, first o f all, it is inadmis-
sible that logical thought should be characterized exclusively by the wider 
scope o f the representations that constitute it. I f there is nothing logical about 
the particular ideas, w h y w o u l d the general ones be any different? T h e gen-
eral exists only i n the particular; i t is the particular, simplified and stripped 
d o w n . T h e general, then, cannot have virtues and privileges that the partic-
ular does not have. Inversely, i f conceptual thought can be applied to genus, 
species, and variety, however small, w h y could it not extend to the i n d i v i d -
ual, that is, to the l i m i t toward w h i c h the idea tends i n proportion as its scope 
narrows? As a matter o f fact, there are a good many concepts that have i n d i -
vidual objects. I n every k i n d o f religion, the gods are individualities distinct 
from one another; they are nevertheless conceived, not perceived. Each peo-
ple imagines its historical or legendary heroes i n a certain fashion, w h i c h is 
historically variable, and these representations are conceptual. Finally, each o f 
us has a certain n o t i o n o f the individuals w i t h w h o m he is i n contact—their 
character, their appearance, and the distinctive traits o f their physical and 
moral temperaments. Such notions are true concepts. N o doubt, they are i n 
general rather crudely formed; but even among scientific concepts, are there 
many that are perfectly adequate to their objects? I n this regard, our o w n 
concepts and those o f science differ only i n degree. 
Therefore, the concept must be defined by other traits. T h e following 
properties distinguish i t from tangible representations o f any sort—sensa-
tions, perceptions, or images. 
Sense representations are i n perpetual flux; they come and go like the 
ripples o f a stream, not staying the same even as long as they last. Each is 
linked w i t h the exact m o m e n t i n w h i c h it occurs. W e are never assured o f re-
trieving a perception i n the same way we felt it the first time; for even i f the 
thing perceived is unchanged, we ourselves are no longer the same. T h e c o n -
cept, o n the other hand, is somehow outside time and change; it is shielded 


Conclusion 
435 
from 
all such disturbance; one might say that it is i n a different region o f the 
m i n d , a region that is calmer and more serene. T h e concept does not move 
o n its o w n by an internal, spontaneous development; quite the contrary, i t 
resists change. I t is a way o f t h i n k i n g that at any given m o m e n t i n time is 
fixed and crystallized.
8 To the extent that it is what it has to be, i t is u n -
changeable. I f it does change, change does not come about because o f its na-
ture but because we have discovered some imperfection i n it, because it 
needs to be rectified. T h e system o f concepts w i t h w h i c h we think i n every-
day life is the one the vocabulary o f our mother tongue expresses, for each 
w o r d translates a concept. Language is fixed; i t changes but slowly, and, 
hence, the same is true o f the conceptual organization it translates. T h e sci-
entist finds himself i n the same position vis-à-vis the special terminology 
used by the science to w h i c h he is committed, and consequently vis-à-vis the 
special system o f concepts to w h i c h that terminology corresponds. H e may 
innovate, o f course, but his innovations always do a certain violence to es-
tablished ways o f thinking. 
A t the same time as being relatively unchangeable, a concept is universal, 
or at least universalizable. A concept is not m y concept; i t is c o m m o n to me 
and other m e n or at least can be communicated to them. It is impossible for 
me to make a sensation pass from m y consciousness into someone else's; it is 
closely dependent o n m y body and personality and cannot be detached 
from 
them. A l l I can do is invite another person to set himself before the same o b -
ject as I and open himself to its influence. B y contrast, conversation and i n -
tellectual dealings among m e n consist i n an exchange o f concepts. T h e 
concept is, i n essence, an impersonal representation. B y means o f it, human 
intelligences communicate.
9 
Defined i n that way, the nature o f the concept bespeaks its origins. I t is 
c o m m o n to all because i t is the w o r k o f the community. It does not bear the 
i m p r i n t o f any individual intellect, since it is fashioned by a single intellect i n 
w h i c h all the others meet, and to w h i c h they come, as it were, for nourish-
ment. I f i t has greater stability than sensations or images, that is so because 
collective representations are more stable than individual ones; for while the 
8William James, The Principles of Psychology, I [New York, Macmillan, 1890], p. 464. 
'This universality of the concept must not be confused with its generality. The two are very different 
things. What I call universality is the property the concept has of being communicated to a number of 
minds and indeed to all minds, in principle. That communicability is altogether independent of its scope. 
A concept that applies only to a single object, one whose scope is therefore minimal, can be universal in 
the sense that it is the same for all minds: The concept of a deity is of this sort. 


436 
Conclusion 
individual is sensitive to even slight changes i n his internal or external envi-
ronment, only quite weighty events can succeed i n changing the mental 
equdibrium o f society. Whenever w e are i n the presence o f a type
10 o f 
thought or action that presses uniformly o n individual intellects or wills, that 
pressure o n the individual reveals the intervention o f the collectivity. Further, 
I said before that the concepts w i t h w h i c h we routinely think are those de-
posited i n the vocabulary. I t is beyond doubt that speech, and hence the sys-
tem o f concepts i t translates, is the product o f a collective elaboration. W h a t 
it expresses is the manner i n w h i c h society as a w h o l e conceives the objects 
o f experience. T h e notions corresponding to the various elements o f lan-
guage are therefore collective representations. 
T h e very content o f these notions testifies i n the same way. Indeed, there 
are scarcely any words, even among those w e most c o m m o n l y use, whose 
meaning does not to some degree go beyond the limits o f our personal ex-
perience. Often a t e r m expresses things we have never perceived and experi-
ences w e have never had or never witnessed. Even w h e n we k n o w certain o f 
the objects to w h i c h the t e r m refers, we k n o w t h e m only as particular ex-
amples that serve to illustrate the idea but that w o u l d never have been 
enough to f o r m it by themselves. There is a w h o l e science condensed i n 
words then, a science that is more than individual; and it so far surpasses me 
that I cannot even make all the results m y o w n . W h o o f us knows all the 
words o f the language he speaks and the full meaning o f each word? 
This point enables me to define the sense i n w h i c h I say that concepts are 
collective representations. I f they are c o m m o n to an entire social group, it is 
not because they are a simple average o f the corresponding individual repre-
sentations; i f they were that, they w o u l d be o f poorer intellectual content 
than individual representations, whereas they are i n fact replete w i t h k n o w l -
edge surpassing that o f the average individual. Concepts are not abstract 
things that have reality only i n particular circumstances. T h e y are representa-
tions just as concrete as any the individual can make o f his o w n environment, 
for they correspond to the way i n w h i c h the special being that is society 
thinks about the things o f its o w n experience. If, i n fact, concepts most of-
ten are general ideas, i f they express categories and classes rather than partic-
I0Some will object that, in the individual, ways of acting or thinking often become fixed and crystal-
lized as habits that resist change, through the effect of repetition alone. But habit is only a tendency to re-
peat an action or an idea automatically whenever the same circumstances reactivate it; habit does not 
imply that the idea or action is constituted in the state of exemplary types, proposed or imposed on the 
mind or will. It is only when a type of this sort is preestablished—that is, when a rule or norm is insti-
tuted—that the workings of society can and must be presumed. 


Conclusion 
437 
ular objects, that is because individual and variable characteristics o f beings 
are rarely o f interest to society. Because o f its very scope, society can hardly 
be affected by any but their most general and lasting properties. Hence it is 
this general aspect that bears society's attention. I t is i n the nature o f society 
most often to see things i n large masses and i n the f o r m they take most gen-
erally. However, that generality is not indispensable; and, i n any case, even 
w h e n these representations have the generic character that is most usual for 
them, they are the w o r k o f society and are enriched by its experience. 
This, furthermore, is what makes conceptual thought valuable to us. 
I f the concepts were merely general ideas, they w o u l d not gready enrich 
knowledge, for as I have already said, the general contains nothing more than 
the particular. B u t i f they are collective representations, first and foremost, 
they add to what our personal experience can teach us all the w i s d o m and 
science that the collectivity has amassed over centuries. To think w i t h con-
cepts is not merely to see the real i n its most general characteristics but to 
t u r n u p o n sensation a beam that lights, penetrates, and transforms it. To con-
ceptualize a thing is to apprehend its essential elements better and to place it 
i n the group to w h i c h i t belongs. Each civilization has its o w n ordered sys-
t e m o f concepts, w h i c h characterizes it. Before this system o f ideas, the i n d i -
vidual intellect is i n the same situation as the vois of Plato before the w o r l d o f 
Ideas. H e strives to assimilate them, for he needs them i n order to deal w i t h 
his fellow men, but this assimilation is always incomplete. Each o f us sees 
t h e m i n his o w n way. Some escape us completely, remaining beyond our 
range o f vision, w h i l e others are glimpsed i n only some o f their aspects. 
There are some, and indeed many, that we distort by thinking them. Since 
they are by nature collective, they cannot become individualized w i t h o u t be-
i n g added to, modified, and consequendy distorted. This is w h y we have so 
m u c h difficulty understanding one another, and why, indeed often, we He to 
one another unintentionally. This happens because w e all use the same words 
w i t h o u t giving t h e m the same meaning. 
We can n o w begin to see society's share i n the o r i g i n o f logical thought. 
Logical thought is possible only w h e n man has managed to go beyond the 
fleeting representations he owes to sense experience and i n the end to con-
ceive a w h o l e w o r l d o f stable ideals, the c o m m o n ground o f intelligences. To 
think logically, i n fact, is always, i n some measure, to t h i n k impersonally; it is 
also to t h i n k sub specie aeternitatis. * Impersonality and stability: Such are the 
t w o characteristics o f truth. Logical life obviously presupposes that man 
knows, at least confusedly, that there is a truth distinct from sense appear-
* Under the aspect of eternity. 


438 
Conclusion 
ances. B u t h o w could he have arrived at any such idea? People proceed most 
often as though logical life must have appeared spontaneously, as soon as man 
opened his eyes u p o n the w o r l d . B u t there is nothing i n direct experience to 
suggest it; indeed, everything opposes it. Thus, children and animals have not 
even a clue o f it. History shows, furthermore, that i t t o o k centuries to 
emerge and take shape. I n our Western w o r l d , only w i t h the great thinkers 
o f Greece d i d logical life for the first time become clearly conscious o f itself 
and o f the consequences it implies. A n d w h e n the discovery came, it pro-
voked wonderment, w h i c h Plato expressed i n magnificent language. B u t 
even i f it was only then that the idea was expressed i n philosophical f o r m u -
las, it necessardy existed before then as a vague awareness. Philosophers 
sought to clarify this awareness; they d i d not create it. To have been able to 
reflect u p o n and analyze it, they must have been given it, and the question is 
where this awareness came from, that is, o n what experience it was based. 
The answer is collective experience. I t is i n the f o r m o f collective thought 
that impersonal thought revealed itself to humanity for the first time, and by 
what other route that revelation could have come about is hard to see. 
Solely because society exists, there also exists beyond sensations and i m -
ages a whole system o f representations that possess marvelous properties. B y 
means o f them, m e n understand one another, and minds gain access to one 
another. They have a k i n d o f force and moral authority by virtue o f w h i c h 
they impose themselves u p o n individual minds. F r o m then on, the individual 
realizes, at least dimly, that above his private representations there is a w o r l d o f 
type-ideas according to w h i c h he has to regulate his o w n ; he glimpses a whole 
intellectual w o r l d i n w h i c h he participates but w h i c h is greater than he. This 
is a first intuition o f the realm o f truth. As soon as he became aware o f that 
higher intellectuality, he set about scrutinizing its nature, trying to find out 
h o w these preeminent representations came by their prerogatives. A n d to the 
extent that he thought he had discovered their causes, he undertook to put 
those causes to w o r k himself and, by himself, to draw the conclusions they 
lead to; that is, he gave himself the right to make concepts. I n this way, the fac-
ulty o f conceptualization individualized itself. B u t to understand the origins o f 
that faculty, it must be linked to the social conditions o n w h i c h it depends. 
Some w i l l object that I am presenting the concept i n only one o f its as-
pects—that its role is to ensure not only agreement among minds but also, 
and even more, their agreement w i t h the nature o f things. A concept w o u l d 
seem not to fulfill its raison d'être unless i t was true—that is, objective—and 
its impersonality to be only a consequence o f its objectivity. I t is i n things 
conceived as adequately as they can be that minds should communicate. I do 
not deny that conceptual evolution moves partly i n this direction. T h e c o n -


Conclusion 
439 
cept that is at first held to be true because it is collective tends not to become 
collective unless i t is held to be true: We demand its credentials before giv-
ing i t credence. B u t first, we must not lose sight o f the fact that, even today, 
the great majority o f the concepts that we use are not methodically con-
structed; w e come by t h e m from language, that is, from c o m m o n experi-
ence, and w i t h o u t subjecting t h e m to any prior critique. Concepts that are 
scientifically w r o u g h t and criticized are always i n a very small minority. Sec-
ond, 
there are only differences o f degree between those concepts and the 
ones that draw all their authority only from the fact o f being collective. A 
collective representation, because it is collective, already presents assurances 
o f objectivity. N o t w i t h o u t reason has it been able to generalize and maintain 
itself w i t h such persistence. I f it was i n disagreement w i t h the nature o f 
things, it w o u l d not have succeeded i n acquiring broad and prolonged d o -
m i n i o n over minds. Fundamentally, what makes scientific concepts inspire 
confidence is that they can be tested methodically. A collective representa-
tion necessarily undergoes a test that is repeated indefinitely. T h e m e n w h o 
adhere to a collective representation verify i t through their o w n experience. 
Thus i t cannot be w h o l l y inadequate to its object. Certainly it may explain 
that object w i t h imperfect symbols, but scientific symbols are themselves 
never more than approximate. T h e m e t h o d I follow i n the study o f religious 
phenomena is based o n exactly this principle. I regard it as axiomatic that, 
strange though religious beliefs may sometimes be i n appearance, they con-
tain their o w n truth, w h i c h must be uncovered.
1 1 
Inversely, even w h e n constructed i n accordance w i t h all the rules o f sci-
ence, concepts are far from taking their authority from their objective value 
alone. To be believed, i t is not enough that they be true. I f they are not i n 
harmony w i t h other beliefs and other opinions—in short, w i t h the whole set 
o f collective representations—they 
w i l l be denied; minds w i l l be closed to 
them; as a result, they w i l l be and yet not be. I f bearing the seal o f science is 
usually enough today to gain a sort o f privileged credibility, that is because 
we have faith i n science. B u t that faith is not essentially different from reli-
gious faith. T h e value w e attribute to science depends, i n the last analysis, 
u p o n the idea we collectively have o f its nature and role i n life, w h i c h is to 
say that i t expresses a state o f opinion. T h e reason is that everything i n social 
life rests o n opinion, including science itself. To be sure, we can make o p i n -
i o n an object o f study and create a science o f it; that is what sociology p r i n -
cipally consists i n . Still the science o f o p i n i o n does not create opinion, but 
"From the very fact that a representation has a social origin, we see how far it is from being without 
objective value. 


440 
Conclusion 
can only clarify it and make it more conscious o f itself. I n this way, i t is true, 
science can lead o p i n i o n to change, but science remains the product o f o p i n -
ion even at the m o m e n t i t seems to rule opinion; for as I have shown, science 
draws the strength i t takes to act u p o n o p i n i o n from o p i n i o n itself.
1 2 
To say that concepts express the manner i n w h i c h society conceives o f 
things is also to say that conceptual thought is contemporaneous w i t h h u -
manity. Therefore, I refuse to see t h e m as the product o f more or less m o d -
ern culture. A man w h o d i d not t h i n k w i t h concepts w o u l d not be a man, 
for he w o u l d not be a social being. L i m i t e d to individual perceptions alone, 
he w o u l d not be distinct from an animal. I t has been possible to uphold the 
contrary thesis only because the concept has been defined by features that are 
not fundamental to it. T h e concept has been identified w i t h the general 
idea
1 3—and w i t h the clearly delimited and circumscribed general idea.
1 4 I n 
that case, the lower societies could appear to be ignorant o f the concept 
properly so-called, for they have only undeveloped processes o f generaliza-
tion, and the notions they use are generally not w e l l defined. Yet most o f our 
present concepts also lack clear definition; we can barely force ourselves to 
define t h e m except i n debate, and w h e n we are operating as scientists. B e -
sides, we have seen that conceptualizing is not the same as generalizing. To 
think conceptually is not merely to isolate and group the features c o m m o n 
to a certain number o f objects. I t is also to subsume the variable under the 
permanent and the individual under the social. A n d since logical thought be-
gins w i t h the concept, it follows that logical thought has always existed; there 
has been no historical period w h e n m e n lived i n chronic confusion and c o n -
tradiction. Certainly, the different features o f logic i n different historical pe-
riods cannot be overemphasized; logic evolves as societies themselves evolve. 
B u t however real, the differences should not cause us to miss the similarities, 
w h i c h are no less fundamental. 
IV 
We can n o w take up a final question, w h i c h was set out i n the I n t r o d u c t i o n
1 5 
and has remained more or less implicit throughout this book. We have seen 
12Cf. above, p. 210. 
13[Lucien] Lévy-Bruhl, Les Fonctions mentales dans les sociétés inférieures [Paris, F. Alcan, 1910], 
pp. 131-138. 
,4Ibid„ p. 446. 
15See above, p. 12. 


Conclusion 
441 
that at least certain o f the categories are social things. T h e question is where 
they got this trait. 
N o doubt, since they are themselves concepts, we easily understand that 
they are the w o r k o f the collectivity. Indeed, no concepts display the distin-
guishing marks o f a collective representation to the same degree. Indeed, 
their stability and impersonality are such that they have often been taken to 
be absolutely universal and immutable. Besides, since they express the funda-
mental conditions o f understanding between minds, it seems obvious that 
they could only have been fashioned by society. 
Yet the problem is more complex, insofar as the categories are c o n -
cerned, for they are social i n another sense and, as i t were, to a higher degree. 
N o t only do they come from society, but the very things they express are so-
cial. It is not only that they are instituted by society but also that their c o n -
tent is various aspects o f the social being. T h e category o f genus was at first 
indistinct from the concept o f human group; the category o f time has the 
r h y t h m o f social life as its basis; the space society occupies provided the raw 
material for the category o f space; collective force was the prototype for the 
concept o f effective force, an essential element i n the category o f causality. 
Nevertheless, application to the social realm is not the only function o f the 
categories; they extend to reality as a whole. W h y is it, then, that the m o d -
els o n w h i c h they were budt have been borrowed from society? 
T h e answer is that these are preeminent concepts that have a preponder-
ant role i n knowledge. Indeed, the function o f the categories is to govern and 
contain the other concepts. T h e y f o r m the permanent framework o f mental 
life. B u t to encompass such an object, they must be modeled o n a reality o f 
equally w i d e scope. 
Doubdess the relations they express exist, imphcidy, i n individual c o n -
sciousnesses. T h e individual lives i n time and, as I have said, has a certain 
sense o f temporal orientation. H e is at a definite point i n space, and it has 
been possible to hold, w i t h good reason, that all sensations have a spatial as-
pect.
1 6 H e has a sense o f similarity. Similar representations attract one another 
and come together w i t h i n h i m , and the new representation formed by their 
c o m i n g together has a certain generic quality. W e also have the sensation o f 
a certain regularity i n the order o f succession i n phenomena; even the animal 
is not incapable o f that. B u t all these relationships are personal to the i n d i -
vidual w h o is involved w i t h them, and hence the n o t i o n he can gain 
from 
t h e m can i n no case stretch beyond his narrow horizon. T h e generic images 
1
6James, Principles of Psychology, vol. I, p. 134. 


442 
Conclusion 
that f o r m i n m y consciousness through the c o m i n g together o f similar images 
represent only those objects that I have perceived direcdy; n o t h i n g is there to 
give me the idea o f a class, that is, a framework able to encompass the whole 
group o f all possible objects that fulfill the same criterion. I w o u l d still need 
to have the idea o f group beforehand, an idea that the mere unfolding o f our 
inner hfe cannot be sufficient to arouse i n us. Above all, there is no i n d i v i d -
ual experience, no matter h o w broad or prolonged, that could make us even 
suspect the existence o f a w h o l e genus embracing the universality o f beings, 
and i n w h i c h the other genera w o u l d be only species coordinated among, or 
subordinated to, one another. This n o t i o n o f the whole, w h i c h lies at the ba-
sis o f the classifications I have cited, cannot come to us from the individual 
himself, w h o is only a part o f the whole and never comes i n contact w i t h 
more than an infinitesimal part o f reality. A n d yet there is perhaps no more 
fundamental category. Since the role o f the categories is to encompass all the 
other concepts, the category par excellence w o u l d indeed seem to be the 
very concept of totality. T h e theorists o f knowledge usually postulate totality 
as i f it is self-evident, but i n fact i t goes infinitely beyond the content o f each 
individual consciousness, taken separately. 
For the same reasons, the space I k n o w through m y senses, where I am 
at the center and where everything is arranged i n relation to me, could not 
be the space as a whole, w h i c h contains all the individual spaces and i n 
w h i c h , moreover, those individual spaces are coordinated i n relation to i m -
personal reference points c o m m o n to all individuals. Similarly, the concrete 
duration that I feel passing w i t h i n and w i t h me could never give me the idea 
o f time as a whole. T h e first expresses only the r h y t h m o f m y individual hfe; 
the second must correspond to the r h y t h m o f a hfe that is not that o f any par-
ticular individual, but one i n w h i c h all participate.
1 7 I n the same way, finally, 
the regularities that I can perceive i n the way m y sensations follow one an-
other may very w e l l have value for me; they explain w h y I tend to wait for 
the second w h e n the first o f t w o phenomena whose constant conjunction I 
have experienced is given to me. B u t that state o f personal expectancy can-
not be assinulated to the conception o f a universal order o f succession that 
imposes itself o n all minds and all events. 
Since the w o r l d expressed by the w h o l e system o f concepts is the w o r l d 
society conceives of, only society can provide us w i t h the most general n o -
17Space and time are often spoken of 
as if they were only concrete extension and duration, such as in-
dividual consciousness can experience them, but impoverished through abstraction. In reality, they are 
representations of an entirely different kind—constructed out of different elements, following a very dif-
ferent plan, and with ends in view that are different as well. 


Conclusion 
443 
tions i n terms o f w h i c h that w o r l d must be conceived. O n l y a subject that 
encompasses every individual subject has the capacity to encompass such an 
object. Since the universe exists only insofar as i t is thought o f and since it is 
thought o f i n its totality only by society, i t takes its place w i t h i n society; it 
becomes an element o f society's inner life, and thus is itself the total genus 
outside w h i c h n o t h i n g exists. T h e concept o f totality is but the concept o f 
society i n abstract f o r m . I t is the w h o l e that includes all things, the supreme 
class that contains all other classes. Such is the underlying principle o n w h i c h 
rest those primitive classifications that situated and classified beings o f all the 
kingdoms, i n the same right as m e n .
1 8 B u t i f the w o r l d is i n the society, the 
space society occupies merges w i t h space as a whole. As we have seen, each 
thing does indeed have its assigned place i n social space. B u t what brings out 
the extent to w h i c h that total space differs from those concrete expanses that 
our senses cause us to perceive is the fact that localization is w h o l l y ideal and 
i n no way resembles what i t m i g h t be i f it was dictated to us by sense expe-
rience.
1 9 For the same reason, the r h y t h m o f collective life governs and con-
tains the various rhythms o f all the elementary lives o f w h i c h it is the result; 
consequendy, the time that expresses i t governs and contains all the i n d i v i d -
ual times. I t is time as a whole. 
For a l o n g time, the world's history was only a different aspect o f soci-
ety's history. T h e one begins w i t h the other; the periods o f the w o r l d are de-
termined by the periods o f the society. Measuring that impersonal and global 
duration and setting reference points i n relation to w h i c h i t is divided and or-
ganized are society's movements o f concentration or dispersal—or, more 
generally, the periodic need for collective renewal. I f those critical moments 
are most often attached to some physical phenomenon, such as the regular 
reappearance o f a certain star or the alternation o f the seasons, it is because 
objective signs are needed to make that essentially social organization tangi-
ble for all. Similarly, the causal relation becomes independent o f any i n d i v i d -
ual consciousness from the m o m e n t i t is collectively established by the group; 
it hovers above all the minds and all the individual events. It is a law having 
impersonal validity. I have shown that the law o f causality seems to have been 
b o r n i n just this way. 
There is another reason w h y the constituent elements o f the categories 
must have been taken from social life: T h e relationships they express could 
l 8In all probability, the concepts of totality, society, and deity are at bottom merely different aspects of 
the same notion. 
"See "Classifications primitives" [Emile Durkheim, "De Quelques formes primitives de classifica-
tion," AS, vol. VI, 1903], pp. 40ff. 


444 
Conclusion 
not become conscious relationships except i n and through society. Even if, i n 
a sense, they are immanent i n the life o f the individual, the individual had 
neither reason nor means to grasp them, think about them, make t h e m ex-
plicit, and build t h e m up into distinct notions. To orient his individual self i n 
space and to k n o w at what times to satisfy various physical needs, he had no 
need for a conceptual representation o f time or space, once and for all. M a n y 
animals k n o w h o w to find their way back to the paths leading to places fa-
miliar to them; they return there at the right time yet w i t h o u t their having 
any category at all; sensations are enough to guide t h e m automatically. These 
w o u l d be sufficient for man as w e l l i f his movements had to satisfy individual 
needs alone. I n order to recognize that one thing resembles others w i t h 
w h i c h we are already acquainted, we need not arrange t h e m i n genera and 
species. T h e way i n w h i c h similar images call one another forth and merge 
are enough to create the feeling o f resemblance. T h e impression of déjà vu, of 
something already experienced, implies no classification. I n order to differ-
entiate between those things we must seek after and those we must flee, we 
have no need to j o i n the effects o f b o t h to their causes w i t h a logical link, i f 
individual convenience alone is at stake. Purely empirical sequences, strong 
connections between concrete representations, are equally sure guides to the 
w i l l . N o t only does the animal have no others, but our o w n individual prac-
tice quite often presupposes n o t h i n g more. T h e wise man is one w h o has a 
very clear sense o f what he must do but one that he w o u l d usually be unable 
to translate into a law. 
It is otherwise w i t h society. Society is possible only i f the individuals and 
things that make i t up are divided among different groups, w h i c h is to say 
genera,* and i f those groups themselves are classified i n relation to one an-
other. Thus, society presupposes a conscious organization o f itself that is 
nothing other than a classification. That organization o f society is naturally 
passed o n to the space it occupies. To forestall conflict, a definite p o r t i o n o f 
space must be assigned to each individual group. I n other words, the space 
must be divided, differentiated, and oriented, and these divisions and o r i e n -
tations must be k n o w n to all. I n addition, every call to a feast, hunt, or m i l -
itary expedition implies that dates are fixed and agreed u p o n and, therefore, 
that a c o m m o n time is established that everyone conceives i n the same way. 
*Here and later in the paragraph (as well as twice previously in this chapter), Durkheim shifts to the 
word classe. Since the English term "class" can imply economic differentiation, which would move the ar-
gument out of its present context, I have used the term "genus" throughout. Nonetheless, what the eco-
nomic sense of "class" would add or subtract should be kept in mind—for example, in the end of the last 
sentence in this paragraph. 


Conclusion 
445 
Finally, the collaboration o f several i n pursuit o f a c o m m o n goal is possible 
only i f there is agreement o n the relation between that goal and the means 
that make its achievement possible—that is, i f a single causal relation is ac-
cepted by all w h o are w o r k i n g together i n the same enterprise. I t is not sur-
prising, then, that social time, social space, social genera [classes], and 
collective causality should be the basis o f the corresponding categories, since 
it is i n their social forms that they were first conceived w i t h any degree o f 
clarity by human consciousness. 
To summarize, society is by no means the illogical or alogical, inconsis-
tent, and changeable being that people too often like to imagine. Quite the 
contrary, the collective consciousness is the highest f o r m o f psychic life, for 
it is a consciousness o f consciousnesses. Being outside and above individual 
and local contingencies, collective consciousness sees things only i n their 
permanent and fundamental aspect, * w h i c h i t crystallizes i n ideas that can be 
communicated. A t the same time as i t sees from above, i t sees far ahead; at 
every moment, i t embraces all k n o w n reality; that is w h y i t alone can furnish ; 
the intellect w i t h frameworks that are applicable to the totality o f beings and ! 
that enable us to b u i l d concepts about them. It does n o t create these frame- \ 
works artificially but finds t h e m w i t h i n itself, merely becoming conscious o f 
them. T h e y express ways Of being that are met w i t h at all levels o f the real but 
that appear w i t h full clarity only at the pinnacle, because the extreme c o m -
plexity o f the psychic life that unfolds there requires a more highly developed 
" consciousness. Therefore, to attribute social origins to logical thought is not > 
to denigrate it, diminish its w o r t h , or reduce i t to n o more than a system o f 
artificial combinations—but is, quite the contrary, to relate logical thought to 
a cause that naturally implies it. Assuredly, this is not to say that notions 
w o r k e d out i n that way could be direcdy adequate to their objects. I f society 
is something universal as compared to the individual, it is still an individual-
i t y , having its o w n f o r m and idiosyncrasies; it is a particular subject and, 
.consequently, one that particularizes what i t thinks of. So even collective 
representations contain subjective elements, and i f they are to become closer 
to things, they must be gradually refined. B u t crude as these representa-
tions m i g h t have been at first, it remains true that w i t h them came the seed 
o f a n e w mode o f thinking, one to w h i c h the individual could never have 
lifted himself o n his o w n . T h e way was open to stable, impersonal, ordered 
thought, w h i c h had only to develop its o w n special nature from then on. 
*Note the similarity between this formulation about conscience collective as "a permanent and funda-
mental" aspect of society and a similar one about religion as a "fundamental and permanent aspect of hu-
manity" in the Introduction (above, p. 1). 
{' 


446 
Conclusion 
Moreover, the factors that have brought about this development seem to 
be no different i n k i n d from those that brought i t forth originally. I f logical 
thought tends more and more to jettison the subjective and personal ele-
ments that were launched w i t h it, the reason is not that extrasocial factors 
have entered i n but far more that a n e w k i n d o f social life gradually devel-
oped: international life, whose effect even then was to universalize religious 
beliefs. As that international life broadens, so does the collective horizon; so-
ciety no longer appears as the whole, par excellence, and becomes part o f a 
w h o l e that is more vast, w i t h 
frontiers 
that are indefinite and capable o f 
rolling back indefinitely. As a result, things can no longer fit w i t h i n the so-
cial frames where they were originally classified; they must be organized w i t h 
principles o f their o w n ; logical organization thus differentiates itself from so-
cial organization and becomes autonomous. This, it seems, is h o w the b o n d 
that at first j o i n e d thought to defined collective entities becomes more and 
more detached and how, consequently, i t becomes ever more impersonal and 
universalizes. * T h o u g h t that is truly and peculiarly human is not a primitive 
given, therefore, but a product o f history; i t is an ideal l i m i t to w h i c h w e 
come ever closer but i n all probability w i l l never attain. 
Thus, the sort o f antimony that has so often been accepted, between sci-
ence o n one hand and religion and morality o n the other, is far from the case. 
I n reality, these different modes o f human activity derive from one and the 
same source. This Kant well understood, and therefore he considered specu-
lative reason and practical reason to be t w o different aspects o f the same fac-
ulty. A c c o r d i n g to h i m , what joins t h e m is that b o t h are oriented toward the 
universal. To think rationally is to think according to the laws that are self-
evident to all reasonable beings; to act morally is to act according to maxims 
that can be extended w i t h o u t contradiction to all wills. I n other words, b o t h 
science and morality i m p l y that the individual is capable o f lifting himself 
above his o w n point o f v i e w and participating i n an impersonal life. A n d , i n -
deed, herein we undoubtedly have a trait that is c o m m o n to all the higher 
forms o f thought and action. B u t what Kantianism does not explain is where 
the sort o f contradiction that man thus embodies comes from. W h y must he 
do violence to himself i n order to transcend his individual nature; and i n -
versely, w h y must impersonal law weaken as i t becomes incarnate i n i n d i v i d -
uals? W i l l i t be said that there are t w o antagonistic worlds i n w h i c h we 
participate equally: the w o r l d o f matter and sense, o n the one hand, and o n 
the other, that o f pure and impersonal reason? B u t that is to repeat the ques-
*This sentence was omitted from the Swain translation but is in both French versions of Formes. 


Conclusion 
447 
t i o n i n terms that are barely different: for the point precisely is to k n o w w h y 
we must* lead those t w o lives concurrently. Since the t w o worlds seem to 
contradict one another, w h y do they not remain separate from one another, 
and what makes i t necessary for t h e m to interpenetrate, despite their antag-
onism? T h e hypothesis o f the Fall, w i t h all its attendant difficulties, is the 
only explanation o f that singular necessity that has ever been offered—and it 
need not be recited here. 
O n the other hand, the mystery dissolves once we have acknowledged 
that impersonal reason is but collective thought by another name. Collective 
thought is possible only through the c o m i n g together o f individuals; hence it 
presupposes the individuals, and they i n t u r n presuppose it, because they 
cannot sustain themselves except by c o m i n g together. T h e realm o f imper-
sonal aims and truths cannot be realized except through the collaboration o f 
individual wills and sensibilities;f the reasons they participate and the reasons 
they collaborate are the same. I n short, there is something impersonal i n us 
because there is something social i n us, and since social life embraces b o t h 
representations and practices, that impersonality extends quite naturally to 
ideas as well as to actions. 
Some w i l l be astonished, perhaps, to see me connecting the highest 
forms o f the human m i n d w i t h society. T h e cause seems quite humble as 
compared to the value we attribute to the effect. So great is the distance be-
tween the w o r l d o f the senses and appetites o n the one hand, and the w o r l d 
o f reason and morality o n the other, that it seems the second could have been 
added to the first only by an act o f creation. B u t to attribute to society this 
dominant role i n the o r i g i n o f our nature is not to deny that creation. Soci-
ety does indeed have at its disposal a creative power that no observable being 
can match. Every creation, unless i t is a mystical procedure that escapes sci-
ence and intellect, is i n fact the product o f a synthesis. I f the syntheses o f par-
ticular representations that occur w i t h i n each individual consciousness are 
already, i n and o f themselves, productive o f novelties, h o w m u c h more effec-
tive must societies be—these vast syntheses o f entire consciousnesses! A soci-
ety is the most powerful collection o f physical and moral forces that we can 
observe i n nature. Such riches o f various materials, so highly concentrated, 
are to be found nowhere else. I t is not surprising, then, that a higher life de-
velops out o f them, a life that acts o n the elements from w h i c h i t is made, 
thereby raising t h e m to a higher f o r m o f life and transforming them. 
*The second edition says U nous 
fait instead of il nous 
faut, surely a typographical error. 
TThe phrase "and sensibilities" does not appear in Swain. 


448 
Conclusion 
Thus, it seems the vocation o f sociology is to open a n e w way to the sci-
ence o f man. U n t i l now, w e stood before these alternatives: either to explain 
the higher and specific faculties o f man by relating t h e m to lower forms o f 
being—reason to sense, m i n d to m a t t e r — w h i c h amounted to denying their 
specificity; or to connect t h e m w i t h some reality above experience that we 
postulated but whose existence no observation can establish. W h a t placed the 
m i n d i n that difficulty is that the individual was taken to be finis naturae. * It 
seemed there was nothing beyond h i m , at least nothing that science might 
discover. B u t a new way o f explaining man becomes possible as soon as we 
recognize that above the individual there is society, and that society is a sys-
tem o f active forces—not a nominal being, and not a creation o f the m i n d . 
To preserve man's distinctive attributes, i t is no longer necessary to place them 
outside experience. Before drawing that extreme conclusion, at any rate, it is 
best to find out whether that w h i c h is i n the individual but surpasses h i m may 
not come to h i m from that supraindividual, yet concretely experienced, real-
ity that is society. To be sure, it cannot be said at this m o m e n t h o w far these 
explanations can be extended and i f they can lay every problem to rest. 
Equally, however, it is impossible to mark i n advance a l i m i t beyond w h i c h 
they cannot go. W h a t must be done is to try out the hypothesis and test it 
against the facts as methodically as possible. This is what I have tried to do. 
*The culmination of nature. 


INDEX 
Abstinences, 303—15. See also Prohibitions 
Agni, 29, 70-71, 83n39 
Alatunja, 333, 335, 338-39, 341, 356 
Alcheringa, 250, 251, 253, 255, 256, 257, 
272, 277, 281, 283, 285, 287, 294, 339, 
358, 378, 380 
Altjira, 258, 262nll0, 289, 289n72, 
295-96 
Altjirangamitjina, 250, 257-58, 260, 277 
Ambiguity: of representative rites, 387-91; 
of sacredness, 412-17 
American Indians: and animals as cosmic 
deities, 64; clans of, 85-86, 93, 94, 
109-10, 109fw47^18, 110; classification 
among, 145; individual totemism in, 
158, 158«2, 159, 160nl8, 162, 163-64, 
165, 175-76, 182«38; initiation rites of, 
44; and kinship between man and 
totemic animal, 135-36, 
135-36rm32—35; orenda of Iroquois, 
195-96, 200, 205-206; and pain, 317; 
and reincarnation, 261, 264-65; space 
conceived of, as circle by, 11; totemic 
emblems of, 112-17, 125; and totemic 
principle, 194-96, 201; totemism of, 87, 
93-95, 100n3, 101, 109-11; wakan of, 
194-95, 198, 203, 205, 327 
Ancestor cult, 49-52, 57, 59, 60-61, 
170-73 
Ancestors: and churinga, 122, 122«126, 
256-57; civilizing heroes as, 286—88; and 
conception, 253-59, 253n59, 255«70, 
277; dramatic depictions of, 378, 
378««10-12; high gods as, 299; mythol-
ogy on, 175—76; as origin of clans, 252, 
279-80; protective relationship to per-
sons, 277-78; and reincarnation, 
249-61, 268, 277-78; relationship be-
tween individual soul, individual totem, 
and, 280-84, 283«30; relationship of, 
to things, 278-79; souls of, 250-52; 
as totem, 103-104, 258, 293-94; to 
tern transmitted from, 105, 105n27, 
105n29, 163; and totemic emblem, 
176 
Anderson, Benedict, xxxiii 
Animal societies, 370n29 
Animals: civilization lacking among, 370, 
370n29; compared with humans, 50-51, 
62; humans as participants in animal na-
ture, 65; mental faculties of, 50-51, 
62, 438, 444; primitive's view of, 172; as 
sacred beings, 64—65; soul in form of, 
263-65, 265nl21; tattooing of, 116n89. 
See also Individual totem; Totem; 
Totemic animal 
Animism: and anthropomorphism, 61-65, 
237; conditions of, 47-51; critique of, 
xlviii, 52-67, 84-85, 226; definition of, 
45-46; and dreaming, 47, 48, 53-56; 
and force, 368; and mentality of chil-
dren, 63; naturism compared with, 
45— 
46, 70, 84; and reduction of religion 
to system of hallucinations, 65—67; and 
soul, 47-48, 52-56, 68; Spencer on, 
46- 
47, 50-52, 66n42; and spirit, 48-50, 
57-61, 68; and transformation of cult of 
spirits into cult of nature, 50-52, 61-65; 
Tylor on, lvii, 46—50, 46n3, 65; univer-
sal animism of Leibniz, 24 
Anje-a, 260-61, 294 
Anjir, 261, 294 
Année sociologique, xxii, 44n68 
Anthropological school, 91 
Anthropomorphism, 61-65, 237, 410 
Antisemitism, Lxviiiri84, 404n 
449 


450 
Index 
Apriorism, 12-16, 14»16, 17w22, 18, 370, 
372 
Aquinas, Thomas, xxxviii 
Aristode, 8 
Aron, Raymond, xx—xxi, xxxi, lxvi«63 
Art, origin of, 385-86 
Arumburinga, 278 
Arúnkulta, 199-200 
Asceticism, 37, 314-21 
Associarion of ideas, 361 
Atnatu, 287, 287n55, 288, 295 
Augustine, St., xxvii 
Australia: early documentation of totemism 
in, 87-90, 88nl6, 89nn20-21; method-
ological reasons for basing study on 
totemism in, 90—93; phases of societies 
in, 216-18. See also Totemism; and 
headings beginning with Totemic 
Authority, 209-11, 210-1 1H6, 224 
Bachofen, Johann, 6, 6n 
Baiame, 289, 292, 295, 297, 298, 309, 315, 
316, 427 
Barclay, Craig, lxviii«87 
Barth, Auguste, 28, 31 
Basedow, H., 263 
Beliefs, 34-38. See also Faith 
Bellah, Robert, 1XVK54 
Bergaigne, Abel, 32-33, 32«38 
Berger, Peter, lxviii«85 
Bewitchment, 361 
Bible, xxiv, xxvii, xxxviii, xliv, xlvi—xlviii, 
32, 32«33, 32«34, 32n38, 341, 346«48 
Blood: atonement for bloodshed, 389; and 
churinga, 125; and expiatory rites, 410; 
fecundating virtues of, 348-49; as life-
principle, 334—36; menstrual blood, 412, 
413; mother's drinking of blood of cir-
cumcision, 137«41; and nurtunja, 136; 
offerings of, 327n25, 346«48; part ver-
sus whole of, 231; prohibitions on, 137, 
307; ritual shedding of, 137, 307, 317, 
317«71, 334-36, 346n48, 347n52, 
348-49, 358, 358wl3, 388, 391, 397¬
400, 406-11, 406n36, 409»51; sacred-
ness of, 125, 136-37, 137»41, 188, 307; 
shedding of, as communion, 410; shed-
ding of, in mourning, 397-400, 406, 
406n36; as symbol, 228-29; totemic 
essence in, 262; of women, 138n50; 
from women's genital organs, 414 
Boas, Franz, 87, 147n24, 175, 178, 182n38 
Body: interdependence and assimilation be-
tween soul and, 245—47, 274; localiza-
tion of soul in, xxvii, 1
, 53, 245—46, 
246n«22-23, 260, 262; sacredness of 
parts of, 136-38; soul separated from, at 
death, 48, 49, 245; soul/body dualism, 
xxvii, 245, 265-67, 274 
Brahma, 31 
Brahmanism, 28, 31 
Bréal, Michel, 69, 74 
Bridgmann, 142 
Brinton, Daniel Garrison, 61 
Buddha, 29-30, 30«26, 30rm26-28 
Buddhism, 28-31, 35, 316 
Bunjil, 289-92, 290n83, 295-97, 309, 315, 
427 
Bureau of American Ethnology, 86 
Burial rites, 49, 117, 150, 185-86. See also 
Death; Funeral rites; Mourning 
Burnouf, Eugène, 28, 29-30, 29nl9, 29«22 
Casimir, St., relics of, xxv, xlv, bdxnlOO 
Categorical imperative, 305 
Categories of undertanding, 8-18, 8M, 
17H22, 372, 421, 440-44 
Category, notion of, 146 
Causality: and collective consciousness, 
443; and force, 368-70, 441; and 
mimetic rites, 363, 367, 371; principle 
of, 367—73; and science, 373, 373«30; 
social origin of, 367-68; sociological 
theory of, 372 
Charcot, Jean-Martin, liii 
Children, 63, 125, 243»4, 246«22, 409, 
414, 438 
Christianity: and anthropomorphic god, 
64; Catholic Church, 43; devil in, 40; 
divinity in, 30, 39, 64, 76n26, 193; and 
equality, 429; and faith, 365; and folk-
lore, 34; individual practices within, 43; 
magical elements in, 40; and missionar-
ies' influence, 248, 248n44; Müller on, 
76n26; mystery in, 23; and pain, 320; 
plurality of sacred things in, 38-39; 


Index 
451 
Protestantism, 41; and Satan, 423; and 
science, 36«45, 431; and seasonal feasts, 
353; and tattoos, 233-34 
Church: centrality of, in religion, 41—43; 
exclusion of, from individual religious, 
43; as imagined community, 42; and in-
dividual cults, 43-44 
Churinga, 115, 118-22, 119«103, 125, 
132-33, 137, 140, 183, 200«41, 229, 
250, 254, 256-59, 268, 269, 281, 287, 
307, 311, 312, 323, 406, 407, 413, 
413«61 
Circumcision, 115«, 120, 137«41, 286, 
287, 297, 319 
Civilizing heroes, 286-88, 287«48, 
287n«54-55, 288«60, 295, 297 
Clans: of American Indians, 85—86, 93, 94, 
109-10, 109n«47-48, 110; ancestors as 
origin of, 252, 279-80; classification of 
things by, 141—45; coherence of, as im-
probable, lxvi«66; definition of, 100, 
100«2, 155; and phratry organization, 
105, 107, 107«40, 142; similarity 
among, 
428; as simplest form of social organiza-
tion, 169; totem as name of, 100-101; 
and totemic principle, 207-208, 223; 
and totemism, 85-86, 93, 94; Tylor on, 
171«8 
Classification: among American Indians, 
145; by clan, phratry, and class, 141-45; 
dichotomous organization of, 146—47, 
147n«22—23; differences between re-
semblance and idea of genus, 146—49, 
147-48n«24—26; and hierarchical order, 
149; modeled on social organization, 
145-46,149; religious meaning of, 
149-57; and society, 444-45; and the 
whole, 442, 443. See also Cosmology 
Clement, E., 359 
Codrington, Robert Henry, 56, 59, 64, 
196-97, 206, 327 
Collective consciousness: and causality, 443; 
and exploration of culture, lvi; and Holy 
Ark, xlviii; and impersonal reason, 445; 
and moral powers, 224; as more than 
epiphenomenon of morphological base, 
426; and Mount Sinai, xlvii; normative 
and cognitive aspects of, li; as not sepa-
rate from individuals, xlii—xliii; and reli-
gion, 239; and representative rites, 379; 
and sacredness, xliii, xliv, xlvi, 
xlviii—xlix, 268-69; and symbols, 232-34 
Collective representations, xviii, xix, xxvi, 
lvi, 15, 228, 230, 273, 349-50, 436-37, 
439, 439«11, 445 
Collective thought, 447 
Collective totem, 162-66, 162«33, 178-82 
Collins, David, 114 
Command, bases of, 209-11 
Communion, 341-44, 347, 389-90, 410, 
414 
Comparative method, proper use of, 90-92 
Comte, Auguste, xxxii, xxxix, xl, xli, 
lxiii«27, lxvn53, lxviiin80, 206, 429 
Conception: and animal form of soul, 264; 
Australian theories of, 253—59, 253«55, 
253«59, 255«68, 255«70, 261, 277; sex-
ual intercourse as insufficient for, 253, 
253«55; and souls, 250; and totem, 263 
Conceptional totemism, 183—84 
Concepts, 434-40, 435n9, 441 
Conscience collective, xl-xliii, xlvii, 
xlviii—xlix, li, lvi, 445«. See also Collec-
tive consciousness 
Consciousness. See Collective conscious-
ness; Individual consciousness 
Consciousness of consciousnesses, 445 
Consecration, 323, 325 
Contagiousness: causes of, 325-29; of feel-
ings associated with symbol, 221-22; of 
magic forces, 328«105, 361; of religious 
forces, 238-39n60, 327-29, 415; of sa-
credness, 224, 281, 322—29; and scien-
tific explanation, 327, 329; of taboos, 
326«100; of totemic principle, 224 
Contrariety, law of, 361 «20 
Copernicus, 1 
Corpses. See Death 
Corroboree, 217, 357, 387, 387«32 
Coser, Lewis A., xxxi 
Cosmology: and classification by clan, 
phratry, and class, 141—45; modeled on 
social organization, 145-46, 149; and 
morality, 1
—
l
i
; morality and history tied 
to, 379; religious meaning of classifica-
tions, 149—57; of totemism, 141-57. See 
also Classification 


452 
Index 
Creation myths, 290-91, 290«83 
Creation science, 1
—
l
i 
Crusades, 213 
Cult: definition of, 59-60, 420, 430; indi-
vidual forms of, 426-27; international 
forms of, 428; meanings and connotations 
of, lvi, lxxi-lxxii«125; periodicity of, 60. 
See also Ancestor cult; Dead, cult of 
Curie, Marie and Pierre, xli 
Curr, Edward Micklethwaite, 143 
Cushing, Frank Hamilton, 11, 86«8, 87 
Dall, 87 
Daramulun, 289, 292, 295, 296, 297, 309, 
315, 323, 427 
Darwin, Charles, 237« 
Dawson, James, 248, 248«44, 324 
De Couianges, Fustel, 46«2 
Dead, cult of, 59, 60-61, 62, 76«26 
Death: belief in life after, 270-72; hair of 
man cut at, 138; honor of dead with 
mana, 59, 61; Millier on, 75, 75«24; 
prohibitions surrounding, 309—10, 324, 
393, 395, 413; responsibility for, 
263-64; sacredness of dead person, 307, 
323; as separation of soul and body, 48, 
49, 245; soul after, 48-49, 57, 59, 
246-50, 252-53, 264-65, 265«121, 
276—77; of totem as threat to individual, 
160, 168; totemic emblem on corpse 
before burial, 117; transformation of soul 
into spirit through, 48-49, 57, 59. See 
also Burial practices; Funeral rites; 
Mourning 
Delusions. See Hallucinations; Illusion 
Demons, 34, 40, 423 
Descartes, René, xxvii, brix«98 
Determinism, 24—25 
Deuteronomy, book of, xxvii, 32, 32n38 
Dietary restrictions, 32, 78n31, 108-109, 
127-31, 140, 151-52, 152«42, 160, 221, 
306«7, 307-308, 307«16, 315, 338, 413 
Divinity. See God 
Domination, 370 
Dorsey, James Owen, 87, 194-95, 194«10 
Double. See Soul 
Douglas, Mary, lxv-lxvi«63 
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan, lx 
Dramatic performances, 376—80, 383—84 
Dreaming, lxviii«84, 47, 48, 53-56, 56«20, 
57«22, 65, 150, 258, 261, 270-71 
Dreyfus Affair, lxviii«84 
Drought, 407-408 
Duality: of body and soul, xxvii, 245, 
265-67, 274; of human nature, 15—16, 
50, 52-53, 134-36, 224n34 
Dueling, 397 
Eating, as profane, 311, 3311 «42. 
See also 
Dietary restrictions 
Ecclesiastes, book of, xxiv 
Economic activity, 421 «4 
Effervescence: collective, xli-xlii, xliv-xlv, 
218-20, 228, 424; in funeral rites, 398, 
399; mental effervescence, 238; and 
mourning, 397-98, 399, 403; of Nazis, 
btix«88; and piacular rite, 397-99, 403, 
411; and representative rites, 385, 
386-87 
Elementary Forms of Religious Life (Dür-
kheim). See Formes élémentaires de la vie 
religieuse (Dürkheim) 
Elementary versus elemental, lix—lxi 
Ellington, Duke, xxiii—xxiv 
Emblem, 231—35. See also Totemic em-
blem 
Empedocles, xxvii, lxiii«33 
Empiricism, 12-18, 12-13«15, 370, 372 
Equation of religion and society. See 
God/society equation 
Ertnatulunga, 119-21, 120«, 281, 281«21, 
312 
Essential, meanings of, lvi—lvii, lxxii«128. 
See also specific ethnographers 
Ethnography, xxxii, 5-6, 8, 27, 27«12, 85, 
101 
Evans-Pritchard, E. E., li 
Evil, 284-86, 285«40, 402, 404-^106, 
412-17, 419, 423-24 
Evolution, 1
—
L
i
» 236-37 
Excrement, sacredness of, 230«43, 334, 
336 
Exodus, book of, xxxviii, xliv, xlvi—xlviii, 
346«48 
Expiatory rites, 131 «18, 151, 409, 410, 
411-12, 414 


Index 
453 
Eylmann, Richard, 244«9, 389«72, 407 
Fables, 80n36. See abo Folklore; Mythology 
Fagan, Garth, xxiii 
Faith, 364-66, 379, 419-20, 427, 432, 433 
Family. See Clans 
Famines, 407-408 
Fertility rites, 354-60 
Festivals, 386-87 
Fetishism, 35-36, 161 «26, 176-77 
Filloux, J. C , lxiv«52 
Fire rituals, 219-20 
First fruits, sacredness of, 342, 343 
Fison, Lorimer, 86, 111, 116, 141-43 
Flag, as symbol, 228, 229, 231 
Fletcher, Alice C , 175, 178, 195nll, 197, 
201, 327 
Folklore, 34, 39, 42, 305«5. See also 
Mythology 
Food restrictions. See Dietary restrictions 
Force: and causality, 368-70; collective 
force as prototype for effective force, 
441; concept of, xl-xlii, 1
, 191-92; and 
domination, 370; magic forces, 328«105; 
mobility of religious forces, 327-28; 
physical contrasted with moral or col-
lective force, 192—93, 369; priority of 
impersonal force over mythical per-
sonalities, 201-205; religious force as 
prototype of force in general, 205— 
206; religious forces as external to 
their substrates, 326-29; social origin of, 
369; of society that raise individual 
above himself, 211—16, 214«; and soul, 
370 
Ford, Harrison, xlviii 
Foreskin, 138, 138«49 
Formalism, religious, 33 
Formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse (Dür-
kheim): critique on, xxxiii; English 
translation of tide of, lix—bei; goals for, 
and approaches to retranslating, 
xxii—xxiv, li—bri; reaction to, as scandal, 
XX—xxi; rhetorical mode of, xxi—xxii, 
liv; second edition of, lxxinl 15; Swain's 
translation of, xviii, xxxiii, li-liv, lvii, lix, 
lxi, brix«98, 211«; "we" used in, lviii, 
lxxii«130 
Foucault, Michel, xxiii, xxix, lxiii«25 
Frazer, Sir James G., 21, 27, 58«24, 86-88, 
90-92, 102«14, 109«46, 129«10, 
132«22, 158«2, 160«18, 161«26, 
162«33, 163«35, 166«54, 167, 175, 
177-78, 182-87, 189, 193«5, 204«56, 
283-84, 361, 366, 422«5 
French Revolution, xlii, 213, 215-16, 
430 
Freud, Sigmund, xlviii, liii, lxx«103, 
lxx—lxxi««113-114, lxxi«122 
Functionalism, xxxii 
Funeral rites, 39«49, 48„58, 59, 225, 
243«4, 246, 305, 395, 397-99, 405«35, 
414. See also Burial rites; Death; Mourn-
ing 
Games, origin of, 385 
Gane, Michael, lviii 
Gason, 259 
Gayandi, 295, 297 
Generic image, 442 
Genital mutilation, 115, 115«, 137, 
137«41, 286, 297, 319 See also Circum-
cision; Subincision 
Genus, idea of, 147-49, 148«26, 441, 442, 
444 
Ghosts, versus spirits, 277 
Gillen, Francis James, 27«12, 88-90, 
102«13, 103, 105, 118, 121, 122, 
123«133, 128-29, 131«14, 134, 135, 
153, 182, 185, 186, 199, 200«41, 
218-20, 247, 248«36, 252, 253, 254, 
255«70, 268, 280, 281, 285, 288«60, 
289, 311, 330, 333, 335«16, 337«25, 
356-57, 374, 376, 381, 382«20, 383, 
387, 388, 393, 394, 398, 408 
God/gods: anthropomorphic god, 64-65; 
authority of, 211; of Christianity, 30, 39, 
64, 76«26, 193; as common noun in na-
turism, 70—71; deification of cosmic 
phenomena, 83; dependence of, on hu-
mans, 345, 349-51; distribution of na-
ture among various gods, 155; divinity 
connected with agency, 83«39; God/so¬
ciety equation, xxxv—xxxviii, 351; Greek 
and Roman gods and goddesses, 64—65, 
71, 79, 80«35, 202, 208; high gods, 


454 
Index 
God/gods: (cont.) 288-99, 309, 315, 
408, 427-28; jealous and terrible gods, 
225-26; Lang on high gods, 188, 
189n62; in mythology, 79-80, 
79-80««33-35; orenda of Iroquois, 
195—96; physical and moral force of, 
192—93; Pickering on God's separateness, 
Lxviin71; reduction of, xxxv—xxxvi, 
Lxvi-lxvii«69; religion as defined in rela-
tion to idea of, 27-33; religions without 
gods, 28—31; rites without gods in deistic 
religions, 32—33; sacrifice to create 
bond between humans and, 344; 
Samoan gods, 193—94; as symbolic ex-
pression of society, 351; of totemism, 
191, 208; wakan of Sioux, 194-95, 
198-98 
Gouldner, Alvin, xxxi 
Grey, George, 85, 111, 200 
Grief. See Mourning; Piacular rites 
Grimm brothers, 68 
Gruppe, Otto, 69 
Habits, 436nl0 
Hair, 137-38, 138»49, 307, 347n52, 
394-95, 397, 398 
Hall, Stuart, Lxiiin25 
Hallucinations, 226, 228-30, 351-52 
Hamelin, Octave, 8«4, 10 
Hardand, Edwin Sidney, 87«14, 293«100 
Hazing, 318n74 
Hearne, Samuel, 112 
Hebrews, 32, 353. See also Judaism 
Heckewelder, John Gotdieb Ernestus, 
164 
Heroes, civilizing, 286-88, 287n48, 
287MK54-55, 288«60, 295, 297 
Hewitt, N.J. B., 201 
Hierarchy, 149 
High gods, 288-99, 293nl00, 309, 315, 
408, 427-28 
Hill Tout, Charles, 87, 165, 166, 175-77, 
178, 179«32, 180-81 
Hindu sacrifice, 389-90 
Historical materialism, 426 
History, 376, 379, 380, 382, 397, 443 
Holy Ark, xliv, xlviii, 121 
Homeopathic magic, 361 
Howitt, Alfred William, 56, 86, 89-90, 
102, 107«40, 111, 116, 142-44, 144nll, 
154, 187, 262, 296, 323«89, 396 
Hubert, Henri, lxxiinl31, 41, 203-204, 
361«20, 366-67,389 
Hugo, Victor, liv 
Human reason. See Reason 
Humans: compared with animal nature, 
50—51, 62; as culmination of nature, 448; 
duality of, 15-16, 50, 52-53, 134-36, 
224n34; gods' dependence on, 345, 
349-51; invalidity of inference from an-
imals and children, 62—63; kinship with 
totemic animal, 133—36, 135«31, 
135n33, 136««34-35, 139-40, 139H55, 
224, 224n32, 307-308, 362, 391; as par-
ticipants in animal nature, 65; sacredness 
of, 133-34, 133n24, 136-40, 138«50. 
See abo Men; Old men; Uninitiated 
men; Women 
Hurston, Zora Neale, xxiv 
Husserl, Edmund, xviii 
Idealization, 229-30, 422-25 
Illness, 49, 408-409, 414 
Illusion, 51-52, 83. See also Delusions; 
Hallucinations 
Imagined communities, xxxii—xxxiii, xlv, 
42 
Imitation. See Mimetic rites 
Immortality, xxix, 270—72. See also Soul 
Indians. See American Indians 
Individual consciousness, 224, 231-32, 
252, 266, 426 
Individual totem: acquisition of, 163—66, 
163«37, 164n40, 165nn46-47, 166M54; 
as alter ego, 160, 161, 282; bonds be-
tween individual and, 159-63; character-
istics of, 282, 426—27; compared with 
collective totem, 162-66; Frazer on, 
162, 177-78, 178n30; name of, 158-59; 
as personal emblem, 159; relationship 
between ancestral spirit, soul, and, 
280-284, 283«30, 284«31; totemism de-
rived from, 174—82 
Individualism, li, 426-27 
Individuation, 273-75, 275«128, 283 
Indo-European languages. See Language 


Index 
455 
Initiation rites, 37, 44, 116-17, 117n95, 
137, 138«50, 163-65, 256-57, 286, 
291-92, 297, 307, 311, 314-15, 317-19, 
318«74, 389n40 
Intelligence. See Thought 
Intichiuma: failures of, 365; first phase of, 
331-37, 345-46; as mimetic rite, 
355—57, 364; as representative or com-
memorative rite, 374, 375-78, 381, 
387-89; ritual eating of totemic plant of 
animal during, 338—44, 340n36; as sacri-
fice, 346-47, 364; seasonal nature of, 
353; second phase of, 338-44, 340n36; 
Strehlow on, 337«25, 340n36; well-be-
ing of totemic animal or plant during, 
331-37, 345-46. See also Sacrifice 
Intoxicating liquors, 228 
Jainism, 31 
James, William, lxviii-lxix«87, 420 
Jay, Nancy, lix, lxviin77 
Jevons, Frank Byron, 25, 26, 46«3, 57»22, 
173-74, 174«17, 326«100 
Jews. See Judaism 
Joan of Arc, 213 
Jones, Robert Alun, lxxinll7 
Jovis, 71 
Judaism, xx, xxix, xxx, xxxi, xliv, lxiii«21, 
32, 33, 352, 353, 429 
Kant, Immanuel, xviii, xxix, xxxii, 8n, 
273, 305, 446 
Kaplan, Mordecai, lxiii«21 
Karween, 296, 297 
Kempe, Rev. H., 119nl03 
Kern, Hendrick, 29, 30n26 
Kerr, John, lxv«54 
Khomeini, Ruhollah, xxv, xliv-xlv 
Kind, idea of, 147-49, 148«26, 441 
Kings, book of, 346n48 
Kinship: in clan, 100, 100«2; man/totemic 
animal kinship, 133-36, 135«31, 
135«33, 136nn34-35, 139-40, 139n55, 
224, 224M32, 307-308, 362, 391; ma-
trihny versus patriarchy, 6, 6n; sacrifice 
and creation of artificial kinship, 341, 
344 
Knowledge, theory of: and apriorism ver-
sus empirisism, 12-18, 12-15n«15-18, 
17«22; and categories of understanding, 
8-18, 8n, 17n22, 372, 421, 440-44; 
fundamental notions in, 8-12, 8nn; ori-
gins of, in religion, 8; and society, 
15-16, 447-48 
Krause, Avrel, 87, 113, 261 
Ku Klux Klan, xlii 
Kuhn, Adalbert, 69, 70 
Kushner, Harold, lxiiin21 
LaCapra, Dominick, xxxvii 
Lalande, André, 237« 
Lang, Andrew, 46nl, 56-57n21, 61, 106, 
186-89, 186-87nn52-53, 292-93, 
292-93«n99-100 
Language: and collective representations, 
436; conceptual organization of, 435; 
Indo-European languages, 73—76; 
metaphors in, 51, 74; Millier on, 72-76; 
and mythology, 75, 78; and natural phe-
nomena, 74-75; and naturism, 72-75; 
sacred language, 310; and speech prohi-
bitions, 309-10, 311 «45, 324, 393, 395, 
395«8; and thought, 73 
Laughing Boy totem, 383 
Laws of nature, 24 
Legends, 79«33. See also Folklore; 
Mythology 
Leibniz, G. W, xxix, 24, 273 
Leonhardi, 263«112 
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, li, lxviii«78, 
lxxii«130 
Leviticus, book of, xxvii, 32, 32«34, 
346«48 
Lévy-Bruhl, Lucien, 9«, 236n58, 269«125, 
365«24 
Lithuania, xxv, xlv, LxixnlOO 
Local totemism, 182-86, 184«43 
Logical norms, versus moral norms, 17, 
17n20 
Logical thought, 433-40, 445-46 
Lombroso, Césare, 234 
Long, John, 85, 101«7 
Looking, prohibitions against, 308-309 
Lukes, Steven, xxvi, xxxiii, xliv, liii, 
lxiinl3, lxviiin87 


456 
Index 
Magic: and asceticism, 316«69; compared 
with religion, lxiinl6, 39-42, 200, 204, 
285-86, 304-305, 361, 366-67, 366»26, 
421; contagiousness and, 328nl05, 361; 
definition of, 39-40; faith in, 366; 
homeopathic magic, 361; origins of, 
366; prohibitions in, 304—305; and spir-
its, 284-86, 286n47; sympathic magic, 
360—61, 366; totemism as, xx 
Malinowski, Bronislaw, li 
Mana: and dead, 59, 61; definition of, 
xxxix, xl, 59, 215nl4; as force, 327; and 
gods, 203; and men of influence, 215; 
Lang on, 188; and magic, 204; rites ad-
dressed to, 203; and soul, 268-70, 
299; 
as totemic principle, 196-200, 206; and 
wealth, 421«4. See also Totemic principle 
Mangarkunjerkunja, 287, 287n54, 294¬
95 
Mannhardt, Wilhelm, 34, 68»1, 87 
Marrett, R. R., 203, 203n49, 204«57 
Marriage classes, 107-108, 108n43, 
108-109n«45-46, 152«42, 253-54, 
254n60, 255n68, 428 
Marsalis, Wynton, xxiii 
Marx, Karl, xix, lxvin65 
Maternal totem, 104, 131, 131«14, 163, 
185-86, 258, 262nll0 
Mathews, Robert Hamilton, 143-44, 
144nll, 163«37, 167, 182n39, 260 
Matriliny, 6, 6« 
Maudsley, 230n41 
Mauss, Marcel, Lxixn88, lxxii«131, 41, 
203-204, 361 n20, 366-67, 389 
McLennan, John Ferguson, 6, 6«, 85, 87 
Medicine bag, 160nl8 
Men: ascetic practices before and after mar-
riage, 316-17n69; batdes between 
women and, 168, 168«62; creation of, 
290, 290«83; lack of respect for senile 
old men, 245; old men and choice of in-
dividual totem, 165; old men exempted 
from prohibitions against eating totemic 
animal, 128, 129, 139, 307, 307«16; pi¬
acular rites and old men, 408; sacredness 
of, compared with women, 138-39; sa-
credness of old men, 129, 139, 244, 245, 
307nl6; sexual totems of, 167—68, 
167«56, 296; uninitiated men, 132-33, 
138, 139, 288, 312, 384 
Menstrual blood, 412, 413 
Mentality. See Thought 
Mestrovic, Stjepan G., bdv«25, lxxi«114, 
lxxinl22 
Metaphors, 51, 74 
Mexico, 204 
Mimetic rites: anthropological explanation 
of, 361-62; and bewitchment, 361; 
and causality, 363, 367, 371; definition 
of, 355; effects on participants, 363-64; 
examples of, 355—60; failures not the 
rule, 365; and faith, 364—66; Intichiuma 
as, 355—57, 364; moral efficacy of, 
363—65; physical efficacy of, 365—66; as 
primitive form of totemic cult, 391; and 
principle of like produces like, 360-61, 
371; reasons for imitation of plant or an-
imal, 362—63 
Mindeleff, 87 
Minkani, 336 
Miracles, 25 
Modeh, xxix 
Monasticism, 37 
Moral authority, 209-11, 210-1 ln6, 224 
Morality, xlviii, lv-lvi, 17, 17n20, 34, 270, 
362 
Morgan, Lewis Henry, 6, 6n, 86, 87 
Mortuary rites. See Burial rites; Death; Fu-
neral rites; Mourning 
Moses, xlvi—xlvii 
Mount Sinai, xlvi-xlviii 
Mourning: anger expressed during, 397, 
404; bloodshedding during, 397-400, 
406, 406n36; as collective expression of 
emotion, 400-401, 403; and double 
transformation of deceased, 402—405; 
dueling during, 397; and effervescence, 
397-98, 399, 403; examples of, 393-99; 
explanation of, 400-406; prohibitions 
during, 309-10, 324, 393, 394, 395«8; 
sadness expressed during, 393-97; self-
mutilation in, 394-99, 402, 404; and 
soul of dead, 252, 404-406, 414; and 
women, 393, 395-96, 395n8, 398-99, 
404. See also Burial rites; Death; Funeral 
rites 
Muk-Kurnai, 260, 277 


Index 
457 
Millier, Max, 23, 46«3, 69-76, 78-79, 
82«38, 83n39 
Mullian, 296 
Mungan-ngaua, 289, 295, 408 
Mura-mura, 259-60, 277, 287, 289, 294, 
336, 407 
Mutilation. See Self-mutilation 
Mystery, in definition of religion, 22-26 
Mythology: of allied totems, 153«51; of 
ancestors, 175-76; contradiction in, 12, 
12«13; creation myths, 290-91, 290n83; 
and eating of totemic animal, 128—29, 
129n9; fables compared with, 80«36; 
formation of international mythology, 
298, 298«131; gods in, 79-80, 
79-80n«33—35; on kinship between man 
and totemic animal, 134—36, 134«28, 
135—36nn31-34, 187; and language, 75, 
78; legends compared with, 79n33; 
Miiller on, 69n5, 70, 75, 78, 79; as not 
historical evidence, 
129; on origin of clan, 252; and poetry, 
386; priority of impersonal force over 
mythical personalities, 201-205; religion 
compared with, 79; scholars on, 68-70; 
vampire myth, 244«9. See also 
Folklore 
Nakedness, 310, 332 
Namatuna, 254, 255, 255n66 
Name: of dead person, 309-10, 324; of in-
dividual and individual totem, 158—59; 
sacredness of, 309; totem as, 100-11, 
186-88 
Natural order of things, 24—26 
Nature: as animate, 57n22; disasters in, 
407-408; distribution of, among various 
gods, 155; man's relationship with, 
81—83; savage's admiration of, 81; and 
society, 17—18; totemism derived from 
cult of nature, 173—74; transformation of 
cult of spirits into cult of nature, 50-52, 
61-65 
Naturism: animism compared with, 45—46, 
70, 84; critique of, xlvih, lxvii«74, 
76-83, 84-85, 226; definition of, 45-46; 
and language, 72-76; Miiller on, 69—76, 
78-79; and mythology distinguished 
from religion, 78-81; as original form of 
religious life, 71-72; principles of, 
70-76; and sacred/profane dichotomy, 
81—83; scholars interested in, 68—70; and 
soul, 75-76; Spencer on, 51 
Nazis, xlii, lxixn88 
Negative rites: and asceticism, 314—21; and 
contagiousness of the sacred, 322—25; 
definition of, 303—304, 306; positive ef-
fects of, 313-21, 417; purpose of, 330; 
as system of abstinences, 303-13. See also 
Prohibitions 
Nisbet, Robert, xxxiii 
Norms, 17, 17n20 
North America. See American Indians 
Nuralie, 289, 296, 297 
Nurtunja, 123-25, 123nl31, 124-25«140, 
132, 133, 136 
Obedience, bases, 209-11 
Ochre, red, 137 
Offerings: in Bible, 346n48; of Intichiuma, 
331-37, 345-46; in piacular sacrifices, 
347«53 
Oknanikilla, 250, 250n49 
Old men: and ability to see souls, 244; and 
choice of individual token, 165; ex-
empted from prohibitions against eating 
totemic animal, 128, 129, 139, 307, 
307nl6; lack of respect for, at senility, 
245; and piacular rites, 408; sacredness 
of, 129, 139, 244, 245, 307nl6 
Oldenberg, Hermann, 28, 31 
Opinion, 210, 439-40 
Order. See Natural order of things 
Orenda, 195-96, 200, 205-206 
Oruncha, 285, 285n40 
Oxley, 113-14 
Pain, religious role of, 317-21, 
317»n70-71, 318M74, 411, 411n57. See 
also Asceticism; Self-mutilation 
Pallyan, 290n83, 296, 297 
Palmer, Edward, 142 
Parker, Mrs., 178«29, 282, 298, 316 
Parsons, Talcott, lxvnn55-56, brixn93 
Pascal, Blaise, 23 


458 
Index 
Paschal meal, 343 
Paternal totem, 104-105, 131, 131«14, 163 
Paul, St., 292n99 
Pearce, Frank, lxiiiii25 
Pensée collective. See Collective thought 
Personal totem. See Individual totem 
Personality, 272-75, 272«127, 275«128 
Philosophy, 4, 8, 206, 438 
Phratries, 105-107, 107n30, 110-11, 
lllnn52-53, 130, 130nnl2-13, 142-47, 
147««22-23, 381, 428 
Piacular rites: and ambiguity of the sacred, 
415-17; and anger, 397, 404, 412; 
bloodshedding during, 397—400, 
406- 
10, 406«36, 409n51; as collective 
expression of emotion, 400-401, 403, 
410-12, 416-17; definition of, 392-93; 
dueling during, 397; and effervescence, 
397-98, 399, 403, 411; efficacy of, 
415—17; explanation of, 400—406; and 
loss ofchuringa, 406—407; mourning, 
393-406; and natural disasters, 407-408; 
offerings in, 347n53; prohibitions in, 
393; and ritual misdeed, 411-12; self-
mutilation in, 394-99, 402, 404, 
407- 
10, 409«51; and sickness, 408-409; 
and southern lights, 408. See also 
Mourning 
Picasso, Pablo, xxii 
Pickering, W. S. F., xxvi, xxxi, xxxiii, hi, 
bdinl5, lxviin71, lxixn98 
Pikler, Julius, 187n53, 208«2 
Plants, as sacred beings, 64. See also 
Totemic plants 
Plato, 437 
Poetry, and religion, 386 
Positive rites: definition of, 330; feelings as-
sociated with, 392; Intichiuma as exam-
ple of, 330-48; mimetic rites, 355-67; 
periodicity of, 350, 353-54; representa-
tive or commemorative rites, 374—91; 
sacrifice, 340—54; as sacrilege, 342-43 
"Positive science." See Science positive 
Powell, John Wesley, 86«8, 162-63 
Power, social origin of, 370 
Preanimism, 203, 204«57, 269 
Preuss, Konrad Theodor, 27nl2, 204, 
204n57, 269nl25, 317, 317n«70-71, 
422»5 
Primitive: and admiration of nature, 81; 
and animals, 172; dreams of, 55-56, 
56«20; mentality of, xxxi, 47, 49-51, 55, 
62, 177-78, 193, 198, 236-41, 326, 
328-29; missionaries' influence on, 
248, 248«44; and soul, 52-53; as term, 
lnl. See also Savage 
Primitive religion: objections to study of, 
1
—
2
; rationale for study of, 1-8, 5«2. See 
also Totemism 
Procopius of Gaza, 233 
Procreation. See Conception 
Profane: cycle of, in Australian societies, 
220-21; eating as, 311, 311«42; 
matter as, 431; prohibitions against sa-
cred life mingling with, 310-13, 
311«45, 312n47; women as, 138, 308, 
308nl8, 384. See also Sacred/profane di-
chotomy 
Prohibitions: and antagonisms between sa-
cred and profane, 306—13, 321—22, 
324-25; of contact, 132, 132n22, 
306—10; and contagiousness of sacred, 
322—25; dietary restrictions, 32, 78n31, 
108-109, 127-31, 140, 151-52, 152«42, 
160, 221, 306«7, 307-308, 307nl6, 315, 
338, 413; against eating or killing 
totemic animal/plant, 127-32, 
131««16-18, 140, 151-52, 152n42, 
160, 160nl8, 221, 307-308, 307nl6, 
338; in folklore, 305M5; as logically en-
tailed by notion of sacred, 321—22; 
against looking, 308—309; magic versus 
religious prohibitions, 304—305; during 
mourning, 393, 395, 395n8; old men 
exempted from, 128, 129, 139; positive 
influences of, 313-15; against profane 
life mingling with sacred life, 310—13, 
311n45, 312«47; and property right, 
312n47; between sacred things of differ-
ent kinds, 305—306, 413; on sexual con-
tact, 308nl8; on speech, 309-10, 
311 «45; on totemic emblem, 132-33; 
types of, 306—11; for uninitiated men, 
132-33, 138, 288, 312; for women, 
32, 125, 132, 137, 138, 288, 308, 
309, 393, 395, 395n8; on work, 
311-12 
Property rights, 140, 312«47 


Index 
459 
Psychology, xlviii, liii, lxviii-lxix«87, 
lxx«103, lxx—ixxin«113—114, lxxi«122, 
69, 69«, 431-32 
Putiaputia, 287, 287«48, 294 
Raiders of the Lost Ark, xlviii 
Rainmaking, 358-59, 358nl3 
Ratapa, 253-54, 253«59, 255, 255«68, 
259, 263 
Ratzel, Friedrich, 230«41 
Reason, xlix—li, lxviii«79, 13—17, 273, 
446 
Red ochre, 137 
Redding, hi, lxii«15, lxix«98 
Reincarnation: among American Indians, 
261, 264—65; in Australian societies, 
249-61, 268, 277-78; facts supporting, 
262-65; and perpetuation of group, 
271-72 
Religion: all religions as true, 2-3; and art, 
385-86; centrality of Church in, 41^13; 
compared with magic, lxii«16, 39-42, 
200, 204, 285-86, 304-305, 361, 
366—67, 366«26, 421; contagiousness of 
religious forces, 238-39«60, 327-29, 
415; defined by supernatural and myste-
rious, 22—26; defined in relation to idea 
of God, 27-33; definition of, xxxiv, 
33-34, 38-39, 44, 44«68; and economic 
activity, 421 «4; eternal nature of, 
429-30, 432-33; feelings released by, 
419-20; function of, 227, 419; as hy-
gienic technique, 78n31; idealization of, 
229-31, 422-25; and individual cults, 
43-44, 426-27; Muller on, 23, 70, 79; 
mythology distinguished from, 78-81; 
needs fulfilled by, xviii; not defined by 
mythical personalities, gods, or spirits, 
202—203; as not originating in fear, 
225-26, 409; origins of, 7-8, 7«3, 
45^16, 220, 225-26; and part as equal to 
whole, 230—31; philosophers on, 4; and 
poetry, 386; prohibitions in, 304—25; 
recreational aspect of, 385—87; rites 
without gods in deistic religions, 32—33; 
as rooted in "the real," xvii—xviii, xxviii, 
xxxvii, 226—28; and science, xxv, xxx, 
xxxvii, xli, xlix-li, 8, 12«13, 25, 36«45, 
77-78, 83, 240-41, 419, 421, 430-33, 
446; in seemingly nonreligious life, 
xlix—li; social aspects of, xix-xx, xlviii, 9, 
238-39, 238-39«60, 351-54, 421-29; 
speculative role of, 430-31, 433; study 
of, through primitive religion, 1
—
8
; Ty-
lor on, 27; universalism in, 427-28, 446; 
without gods, 28-31. See also Brahmin-
ism; Buddhism; Christianity; God/gods; 
Judaism; Primitive religion; Science of 
religions; Totemism 
Religious beliefs. See Beliefs 
Religious formalism, 33 
Religious individualism, 426-27 
Religious rites. See Rites 
Religious universalism, 427-28, 446 
Representations, 349-50, 349«55, 438. See 
also Collective representations 
Representative or commemorative rites: 
ambiguity of, 387-91; Arunta and War-
ramunga compared, 375-80, 388-89; 
definition of, 374-75; dramatic perfor-
mances in, 376-80, 383—84; and effer-
vescence, 385, 386-87;and festival, 
386-87; Intichiuma as, 374, 375-78, 
381, 387-89; nonutilitarian functions of, 
380—87; and periodic reaffirmation of 
society, 390; as recreation and aesthetic 
expression, 383—87; utilitarian interpre-
tation of, 375-80; Wollunqua in, 
380-83 
Réville, Albert, 27, 61, 64, 85«2 
Richard, Gaston, bain 15 
Riggs, Stephen Return, 195 
Rites: as addressed to definite personalities, 
79; arguments against utilitarian view 
of, 382, 384; automatic effects of, 
32—33; compared with moral practices, 
34; cult compared with, 60; definition 
of, 34, 38; function of, 422; inter-
changeability of, 390; as myths in 
action, 79; necessary cyclicity of, xlii; in 
preanirnist religion, 203; as recreation 
and aesthetic expression, 383—87; and re-
ligious formalism, 33; separate from 
deities, 202; without gods, 32-33. See 
also Burial rites; Expiatory rites; Funeral 
rites; Initiation rites; Mimetic rites; Neg-
ative rites; Piacular rites; Positive rites; 


460 
Index 
Rites (cont.) Representative or commem-
orative rites; Sacrifice 
Roche, Maurice, lviii 
Roth, Walter Edmund, 258, 279 
Rules of Sociological Method, The (Dürkheim), 
lviii, lxin4, lxxifil21 
Ryan, Judith, lxiiin24, lxv«54 
Sabatier, Auguste, 43n65 
Sacrament, 127 
Sacred objects and beings, xlii, 58-61, 65. 
See also God/gods; Totem; Totemic ani-
mal; Totemic plant; specific objects, such 
as Churinga; Nurtunja; Waninga 
Sacred/profane dichotomy: absolute het-
erogeneity between, 36, 37, 58; and be-
liefs, 34—38; characteristics of sacred 
versus profane, 35—39; inversions of, 
413—15; and naturism, 81-83; overview 
of, xhii-xlix; passage from profane to sa-
cred, 36—37; prohibitions concerning, 
305-13, 321-22, 324-325 
Sacredness: ambiguity of, 412-17; of 
blood, 125, 136-37, 137«41, 188, 
307; and collective consciousness, 
xliii, xliv, xlvi, xlviii-xlix, 268-69; con-
tagiousness of, 224, 281, 322-29; cre-
ation of, xlv-xlvi, 208-16, 312-13, 
312«47, 328, 349-50; of dead person, 
307, 323; of hair, 137-38, 307; of hu-
mans, 133-34, 133n24, 136-40; as ideal, 
424; of Khomeini, xlv; levels of, 306«7; 
localization of, 134, 137-39; of men, 
138—39; of Mount Sinai, xlvi—xlviii; 
as not physical, xliv, xlvii; of old men, 
129, 139, 244, 245, 307«16; pure and 
impure forms of, 306, 412-17; and sa-
cred/profane dichotomy, xhii-xlix; of 
totemic animal, 127—33; of totemic em-
blems, 118-25, 133; translation of terms 
corresponding to, lxix—lxxnlOl; of 
women as less than men, 138, 138n50, 
243, 243«3. See also Blood; Soul 
Sacrifice: ambiguity of, 389-90; and artifi-
cial kinship among humans, 341, 
344; Bergaine on, 32—33, 32n38; in 
Bible, 341; and circle in which sacrifice 
moves, 350-51; and communion, 
341-44, 347; definition of, 343; food of-
ferings to ancestors, 49; and gods' de-
pendence on humans, 345, 349-51; 
Hindu sacrifice, 389—90; as hygienic 
technique, 78n31; Intichiuma as, 
346-47, 364; and kinship between hu-
mans and gods, 344; offerings of, 
345-54; periodicity of, 350, 353-54; 
seeming contradictions in, 344-45, 
348-49; Smith on, 340-41, 343-45, 
350, 351, 357; and soul, 341-42; and 
suffering, 320; theory of, 347-48; and 
transformation, 37»46; in Vedic 
religion, 32—33, 35; without deities, 
32-33 
Sacrilege, 304-305, 342^13, 414 
Sadness. See Mourning; Piacular rites 
Salvation by faith, 419 
Samoa, 193-94, 193n5 
Samuel, book of, 32, 32n33 
Savage: and admiration of nature, 81; and 
animals, 172; dreams of, 47; as term, 
47«6, 91. See also Primitive 
Say, 198 
Scapegoating, 404, 404« 
Schmidt, Wilhelm, 46nl, 293«100 
Scholasticism, 23«5 
Schoolcraft, Henry Rowe, 101, 111 
Schulze, Rev. Louis, 185, 255, 330, 357 
Schutz, Alfred, xviii 
Schwartz, Friedrich, 69 
Science: authority of, 210; and causality, 
373, 373«30; concepts in, 434, 439; and 
contagiousness, 327, 329; as discipline 
applying to reality, 66-67; and duality of 
human nature, 224«34; and faith, 365; 
and magic, 366; and notion of necessary 
order, 26; of opinion, 439—40; profane 
character of, 36«45; and religion, xxv, 
xxx, xxxvii, xli, xlix-li, 8, 12nl3, 25, 
36«45, 77-78, 83, 240-41, 419, 421, 
430-33, 446; and single well-made ex-
periment, 249, 418-19 
Science of religions, 66—67, 91, 91n33 
Science positive, xxiv—xxv, xxvi, xxxv—xxxvi, 
lxiii«27, 1, in, 26 
Secular. See Profane 
Self-mutilation, 394-99, 402, 404, 407-11, 
409« 


Index 
461 
Sense perceptions, 82n38, 275, 434—35, 
438, 444 
Sexual communism, 62, 62n35 
Sexual intercourse: as insufficient for pro-
creation, 253, 253n55; prohibitions on, 
308nl8; and sexual license, 219, 
387nn32-33, 408, 411 
Sexual totem, 166-68, 167rm56-57, 296 
Shestov, Lev, 1 
Sickness, 49, 408-409, 414 
Simplifying case, logic/methodology of, 
xxxii, xxxviii-xl, lx-bri, lxviiinn83—84, 
1, 4-8 
Sin, xxix, 409 
Single well-made experiment, 249, 418—19 
Smith, William Robertson, Lxvin65, 42«62, 
61, 86-87, 340-41, 343-45, 347n52, 
348, 350, 351, 357, 410-12, 415 
Smyth, Brough, 396 
Society: and asceticism, 321; authority of, 
16- 17, 209-11, 210-lln6, 224, 266; 
and categories of understanding, 442—44; 
classification in, 444-45; as consciousness 
of consciousnesses, 445; and duality of 
human nature, 15—17; as force raising 
individual above himself, 211-16, 
214«13; and fusion of objects and ideas, 
238-39; God/society equation, 
XXXV—xxxviii, 351; as highest form of 
human mind, 447-48; ideal society, 
422—23, 425; and imperative norms, 
266; individuals in, 252; and logical 
thought, 433—40; mourning and affirma-
tion of, 403, 405, 416; and nature, 
17- 18; nature of, 266; periodic reaffir-
mation of, 350—54, 390; phases of Aus-
tralian societies, 216—18; and power, 
370; as reality sui generis, 15; and reli-
gion, xix-xx, xlviii, 9, 238—39, 
238-39n60, 351-54, 427-29; sacredness 
created by, 208-16; and soul, 274-75, 
275nl28 
Sociology, 1, 2, 448 
Socrates, li 
Soul: analysis of notion of, in Australian so-
cieties, 242—48; animal form of, 263-65, 
265nl21; of animate and inanimate 
things, 49—50; animist theory of, 47—48, 
52-56, 65, 68; and belief in life after 
death, 270—72; body/soul dualism, xxvii, 
245, 265-67, 274; of children, 243«4; 
after death, 48-49, 57, 59, 246-50, 
264-65, 265«121, 276-77, 414; 
Descartes on, xxvii; as double, xxviii, 
47-48, 52-54, 57, 58, 65, 283-84, 
284n31; and dreaming, 53-56, 57n22, 
65, 270-71; dual individual and collec-
tive aspect of, 267-69; Durkheim on, 
xxvi-xxxii; exchange of, 414; as expla-
nation of perpetuation of group, 271—72; 
facts supporting origin of, 262-65; and 
force, 370; hiding of, for safety, 177-78, 
178»30; immortality of, xxix, 270-72; 
and individual cults, 43; individuation 
of, 283; interdependence and assimila-
tion between body and, 245-47, 274; 
Jewish view of, xxx; localization of, 
xxvii, 1
, 53, 245-46, 246««22-23, 260, 
262; and mana, 268-70, 299; mobility 
of, 245, 327—28; and mourning, 252, 
404-406, 414; and naturism, 75-76; ori-
gin of idea of, 249-59; parts of, 231; 
and personality, 272-75, 272«127; and 
positive rites, 353; pregnancy as result 
of soul entering woman's body, 250; 
primitive's idea of, 52-53; as principle 
of explanation, 50; and reincarnation, 
249-61, 268; relationship between an-
cestral spirit, individual totem, and, 
280-84, 283«30, 284M31; relationship 
of, to body's life, 57-58; residences of, 
after death, 247-48, 248n36; and sacri-
fice, 341-42; separation from body at 
death, 48, 49, 245; and sin, xxix; and 
society, 274—75, 275nl28; Spencer 
and Gillen on, 249-52, 257n78; spirit 
distinguished from, 48, 63-64, 276-84; 
and stars, 235n55; Strehlow on, 252-59, 
257«78; totemic nature of, 249-59, 
262-65; traits of, 243-44, 244«9; as 
transformation of impersonal power 
and force, 204; transformation of spirit 
into, through death, 48-49, 57, 59, 
276-77; Tylor on, xxvi-xxvii, 47-48, 
52-56, 65; and vampire myth, 244n9; 
women's lack of, 243, 243n3; Wundt on, 
172nl2. See also Sacredness 
Southern lights, 408 


462 
Index 
Space, 8, 8«, 10-12, 11«8, 82, 441, 442, 
442«17, 444 
Speech, prohibitions on, 309—10, 311 «45, 
324, 393, 395, 395«8 
Spencer, Sir Baldwin, 27nl2, 58«23, 
88-90, 102«13, 103, 105, 118, 121, 
122, 122«127, 123«133, 128-29, 
131«14, 134, 135, 153, 182, 185, 
186, 199, 200«41, 218-20, 247, 248«36, 
252, 253, 254, 255«70, 257«78, 268, 
280, 281, 285, 288«60, 289, 311, 330, 
333, 335«16, 337«25, 374, 376, 381, 
382«20, 383, 387, 388, 393, 394, 398, 
408 
Spencer, Herbert, xx, xxviii, 12-13« 15, 
43«65, 46-47, 50-52, 62-63, 66«42 
Spielberg, Stephen, xlviii 
Spirits: of ancestors, 277—80; and animism, 
48-50, 57-61, 63-64, 68; and civilizing 
heroes, 286-88; evil spirits, 284-86, 
285«40; ghosts versus, 277; and magic, 
284—86, 286«47; of natural phenomena, 
63-64; relationship between ancestral 
spirit, individual soul, and individual 
totem, 280—84; Roman and Greek be-
liefs on, 278, 281«, 283; soul distin-
guished from, 48, 63-64, 276-84; 
Spencer on, 66«42; and transformation 
of cult of spirits into cult of nature, 
50-52, 61-65; as transformation of im-
personal power and force, 204; transfor-
mation of soul to, through death, 48—49, 
57, 59, 276-77; Tylor on, 27 
Split-totems, 102«14 
Stanner, W. E. H., xliii, xliv 
Steinthal, Hymann, 69 
Stevenson, Mrs., 87 
Strehlow, Carl, 89, 102-104, 105«27, 118, 
119nl03, 120«108, 121-22, 132«22, 
153, 185, 199-200, 236, 248, 252-59, 
263, 268, 272, 279, 281, 282, 285«40, 
289, 330, 337«25, 346, 347«51, 357, 
374-75, 378«10, 378«12, 380«15, 
388 
Subincision, 115, 115«, 137, 137«, 286, 
297, 319 
Subtotem, 152-54, 224 
Suffering: and mourning, 394-99; religious 
role of, 317-21, 317««70-71, 318«74, 
411, 411 «57. See also Asceticism; Self-
mutilation 
Suicide (Dürkheim), xxii, lxi-lxii«4 
Suicide, religious, 37 
Supernatural: in definition of religion, 
22-26; and mana, 206. See also 
God/gods; Spirits 
Swain, Joseph Ward, xviii, xxxiii, li-liv, 
lvii, lix, lxi, lxix«98, 211« 
Swanton.John Reed, 87, 145«17, 147«22, 
175 
Symbols, 221-23, 232-34 
Sympathetic magic, 360-61, 366 
Taboos, 188, 304, 326«100. See also Prohi-
bitions 
Taplin, George, 260 
Tarlow, 359-60 
Tattooing, 116-17, 116«89, 
116-17n«92-93, 132, 159, 233-34 
Technology, 93-94 
Ten Commandments, xxxviii 
Thalaualla, 376, 377 
Thomas, Northcote Whitridge, 147«23, 
235«54 
Thomas, W. I., xxxvi, xlvi 
Thought: of animals, 50-51, 62, 438, 444; 
of children, 63, 438; collective 
thought, 447; and language, 73; logical 
thought, 433—40, 445—46; of primitive, 
xxxi, 47, 49-51, 55, 62, 177-78, 193, 
198, 236-11, 326, 328-29 
Time, 8, 8«, 9-10, 10«6, 18«23, 82, 311, 
353-54, 441, 442, 442«17, 444 
Tindalo, 59 
Tjurunga. See Churingas 
Tools, 18«24 
Tooth extraction, 115, 165, 286, 319, 323, 
407 
Totality, concept of, 442, 443 
Totem: acquiring of, 104-105; allied 
totem, 153-54, 153«51; of American In-
dians, 109-11, 109-10««47-48, 
111 ««52-53, 112-13; ancestor transmis-
sion of, 105, 105«27, 105«29, 163; col-
lective totem, 162-66, 178-82; 
conceptional totemism, 183-84; 
cosmic phenomena not seen as, 83, 235; 


Index 
463 
and cosmological system, 142—45, 147, 
147««24-25, 149-56; definition of, 
101«7, 191, 208; as emblem, 111-26, 
221-25; etymology of term, 111-12; 
first use of term, 85; and high gods, 
295-98; individual totem, 158-66, 
174-82, 282-84, 426-27; local 
totemism, 182-86, 184«43; of 
marriage class, 107—108, 
108-109««45-46; maternal totem, 
104, 131, 131«14, 163, 185-86, 
258, 262«110; as name, 100-11, 
186—88; nature of objects 
serving as, 101-104, 102««13-16, 
103«18, 103«20, 104«22; paternal 
totem, 104-105, 131, 131«14, 163 
of phratries, 105-107; phratry versus 
clan totems, 107; property rights in, 
140; sexual totem, 166-68, 296; 
soul's totemic nature, 249—59, 
262-65; spelling of, 101 «7; split-
totems, 102«14; subtotem, 152-54, 
224 
Totemic animal: compared with totemic 
emblem, 132—33; Intichiuma for well-
being of, 331-37, 345-46; man's 
kinship with, 133-36, 135«31, 135«33, 
136««34-35, 139-40, 139«55, 224, 
224«32, 307-308, 362, 391; obligatory 
eating of, 128-30, 152«42; old men 
exempted from dietary restrictions on, 
128, 129, 139, 307, 307«16; origin 
of, 234-36; prohibitions against contact 
with, 132, 132«22; prohibitions against 
eating, 127-31, 140, 151-52, 152«42, 
160, 221, 307-308, 307«16; prohibi-
tions against killing, 131-32, 
131««16-18, 140, 160, 160«18, 
221; restrictions on amount eaten, 128, 
128«4, 130; ritual eating of, in Intichi-
uma, 338—44, 340«36; sacredness of, 
127-33 
Totemic centers, 236, 250 
Totemic costumes, 115-16, 132, 159 
Totemic emblem: and ancestors, 176; on 
bodies, 114—17; on churingas, 118-22, 
125; conventional nature of, 125-26, 
126«150; feelings aroused by, 221-23; 
origin of, 234—36; prohibitions concern-
ing, 132-33; sacredness of, 118-25, 133; 
on things, 112-14 
Totemic object, xli 
Totemic plant, 127-29, 131, 133, 140, 151, 
235-36, 307-308, 307«16, 331-46, 
340«36 
Totemic principle: Arunkulta as, 199—200; 
and clan, 207-208, 223; contagiousness 
of, 224; description of, 190-91; essence 
of, 223-25; and idea of force, 191-93; 
localization of, 224, 230; mana as, 
196-200, 206; orenda as, 195-96, 200, 
205-206; origin of notion of, 207-41; 
and primitive's mentality, 236-41; prior-
ity of impersonal force over mythical 
personalities, 201-205; in Samoa, 
193-94; secular aspect of, 205-206; si-
multaneously physical and moral charac-
ter of, 191—92; ubiquity of, 191; wakan 
as, 194-95, 197-98, 203, 205 
Totemic representations, xli-xlii 
Totemism: clan associated with, 155; co-
herence of, 298—99; collective totem, 
162-66, 178-82; conceptional totemism, 
183-84; as confederated religion, 
155-57, 199; as containing all elements 
of religion, 418—19; cosmological system 
of, 141—57; critique of theories of origin 
of, 169-89; derived from ancestor cult, 
170-73; derived from cult of nature, 
173—74; derived 
from 
individual 
totemism, 174—82; as embryonic Chris-
tianity, xx ; essence of, 223-26, 238; 
ethnograhies on, xxxii; and high gods, 
295-98; history of question of, 85-90; 
individual totem, 158-66, 174-82; local 
totemism, 182-86, 184«43; as magic, xx; 
man's kinship with totemic animal, 
133-36; man's sacredness, 136-40; 
methodological reasons for basing study 
on Australian totemism, 90-93; as not 
zoolatry, 139-40, 173; and origin of no-
tion of totemic principle, 207-41; rarity 
of expiatory rites in, 409; as religion 
based on Durkheim's definition, 
xviii—xxii; sexual totem, 166-68; as sim-
plifying case, xxxii, xxxviii-xl; totem as 
emblem, 111-26; totem as name, 
100-11; and totem as name only, 


464 
Index 
Totemism (cont.) 186—88; totemic ani-
mals and plants, 127-33; totemic princi-
ple and idea of force, 190-206; as tribal 
religion, 155-57, 299. See also American 
Indians; and headings beginnnig with 
Totem and Totemic 
Transformism, 236-37, 237n 
Tregear, E, 268 
Tribe, 155-57, 156-57«61, 168, 297-99, 
299 
Tundun, 287, 287«55, 295, 297 
Tylor, Edward Burnett, xxvi—xxviii, lvii, 
27, 46-50, 52-56, 65, 86«10, 162-63, 
170-73, 292, 361 
Type-ideas, 436, 438 
Umbana, 355—56 
Umbilical cord, 414, 414«67 
Understanding. See categories of under-
standing 
Uninitiated men, 132-33, 138, 139, 288, 
312, 384 
Universal animism, 24 
Universal determinism, 24 
Universalism, religious, 427—28, 446 
Urine, 312«47 
Urpmilchima, 397-98 
Usener, Hermann Karl, 46«3 
Vampire myth, 244«9 
Varuna, 29 
Vedas, 69, 70, 71, 75 
Vedic religion, 32—33, 35 
Wadnungadni, 408 
Wakan, 188, 194-95, 194«10, 197-98, 
203, 205, 327 
Waninga, 123-25, 132 
Weber, Max, xxxi 
White Cockatoo, 357 
Whole, notion of, 442, 443 
Wife exchange, 219, 408 
Wilkin, Albertus Christian Kruijt, 
170-73 
Will, 273, 369 
Witchetty Grub, 332-33, 338-39, 355-56 
Witurna, 287, 287«55 
Wollunqua, 219, 280, 309, 380-83, 
380«16, 381««17-18, 382«20 
Women: battles between men and, 168, 
168n62; blood from genital organs of, 
414; blood of, 138«50; conception and 
pregnancy of, 183-84, 250, 253-59, 
255«68, 255«70, 261, 263, 264, 277, 
278; creation of, 290«83; dreams of 
pregnant women, 261; Dürkheims 
view of, fix; exclusion of, 
from 
represen-
tative rites, 384; food for, 308; funeral 
rite of, 398-99; and initiation rites, 
138«50, 319; lack of soul of, 243, 
243«3; menstrual blood of, 412, 
413; mother's drinking of blood of 
circumcsion, 137 «41; and mourning, 
393, 395-96, 395«8, 398-99, 404; old 
women and choice of individual 
totem, 164-65; and piacular rites other 
than mourning,407; as profane, 138, 
138«50, 243, 243«3, 308, 308«18, 384; 
prohibitions for, 32, 125, 132, 137, 138, 
288, 308, 309, 393, 395, 395«8; scape-
goating of, 404; sexual totems of, 
167-168, 167«56, 296; wife exchange, 
219, 408 
Work, prohibitions on, 311—12 
Wundt, Wilhelm, Lxviii«87, 69«, 172« 
12 
Zeus, 71, 79, 80«35, 202, 20 


The Elementary Forms 
of Religious Life 
". . . [T]he argument of Formes 
is markedly personal i n both 
rhetorical style and scientific substance; and it reveals a m a n w h o 
was far more than the hard-nosed opponent of the second-rate 
and the sentimental i n social science, although he was that t o o . . . 
Formes 
is like a virtuoso performance that builds u p o n but leaps 
beyond the technical limits of the artist's discipline, beyond the 
safe striving merely to hit the correct notes, into felt reality of ele-
mental truth. To read it is to witness s u c h a performance. The illu-
minations are public, the performance, personal." 
—from the Introduction by Karen E. Fields 
" K a r e n Fields has given us a splendid n e w translation of the 
greatest w o r k of sociology ever written, one w e w i l l not be 
embarrassed to assign to our students. I n addition she has writ-
ten a brilliant and profound introduction. T h e public ation of this 
translation is a n occasion for general celebration, for a veritable 
'collective 
effervescence.'" 
— R O B E R T N. B E L L A H 
co-author o f Habits of the Heart, a n d 
e d i t o r o f Entile Durkheim on Morality and Society 
"This superb n e w translation finally allows n o n - F r e n c h speaking 
A m e r i c a n readers fully to appreciate Durkheim's genius. It is a 
labor o f love for w h i c h all scholars must be grateful." 
— L E W I S A . C O S E R