Analysis of legal article




Abstract 

China’s regulatory framework on assisted reproductive technologies (henceforth ARTs) has remained unchanged and unchallenged for over two decades, prohibiting unmarried women from accessing any form of ARTs. Section 1 Article 4(1) of the Ethical Principles for Human Reproductive Technologies and Human Sperm Banks explicitly stipulates that ‘couples who do not comply with national population and family planning laws and regulations and single women’ are prohibited from accessing ARTs. However, unmarried men are allowed to freeze sperm regardless of their marital status, constituting direct discrimination against women. Furthermore, significant legislative conflicts exist between local regulations and departmental rules in this area, hindering the consistent application of ART norms in China and substantially limiting the reproductive rights of Chinese women. Zaozao Xu’s case is the first case in China directly challenging the current prohibitive regulations on egg freezing and may signify a crucial turning point in China’s reform of ARTs legislation. This commentary provides an overview of the case and examines various issues associated with the existing regulatory framework, including the vagueness of the legislation and regulation, legislative conflicts in the current framework, deeply rooted discrimination against women, and the regulator’s problematic conception of ARTs. This commentary emphasises the urgent need for China to re-evaluate and reform its ARTs regulatory framework to allow unmarried women to access ARTs, or at least egg-freezing services as the first step.

Keywords: Assisted reproductive technologies, egg freezing, unmarried women’s reproductive rights,legislative conflicts,discrimination against women



Introduction

Although practised with increasing success since the birth of the first Chinese IVF baby Mengzhu Zheng in 1988, assisted reproductive technologies (henceforth ARTs) were not regulated in China’s Mainland until 2001. Due to potential ethical, cultural, and public health concerns, China has historically maintained strict regulations regarding the application of ARTs. Notably, unmarried women have always been and are still prohibited from accessing any ARTs, including egg freezing in China. It has been claimed that the legislation was drafted on the basis of principles and reasoning relating to safeguarding public interests and maintaining ethical standards. However, recently, this prohibition has been challenged in court.

In 2019, Zaozao Xu, an unmarried Chinese woman, brought a case to the Chaoyang District People’s Court in Beijing (henceforth the District Court) after being refused access to egg freezing at the Beijing Obstetrics and Gynaecology Hospital Affiliated with Capital Medical University (henceforth ‘the Hospital’). Xu maintained that the Hospital’s refusal to provide egg-freezing services for her constituted violations of her general personality rights. The District Court ruled that the Hospital’s refusal did not violate Xu’s rights. Xu appealed. Appeal officially began in Beijing No. 3 Intermediate Court in May 2023, and the appellate court has not yet reached a decision. Given the current regulations on ARTs, the final outcome of Xu’s appeal is likely to be the same as the decision reached in the District Court. Nevertheless, this case is important as it is the first in which an unmarried woman has challenged the current regulatory framework of ARTs, especially the Rules governing egg freezing in China.

In this commentary, we reflect on the implications of this case for egg-freezing services and other forms of ARTs. First, we set out the relevant facts of Xu’s case and the key points raised by the trial court. Second, we reflect on the intersection between the regulatory governance of ARTs and other areas of law pertaining to the protection of procreative rights of women, in particular those of unmarried women. Finally, we argue that Xu’s case exemplifies the urgency of reforming the current legislation and regulation in China to allow unmarried women to access ARTs, at least egg-freezing services and to equally exercise their reproductive rights in due course.



Facts and legal process

In 2018, a 30-year-old unmarried woman (Xu) sought egg-freezing services at the Hospital. After undergoing various health checks, the results showed that her physical condition was suitable for undergoing egg-freezing treatment. However, the Hospital refused her request due to her marital status as unmarried. Xu was not happy with the rejection. After consulting with legal experts, Xu brought a case against the Hospital arguing that her general personality rights have been unduly infringed by such refusal. On 23 December 2019, the District Court heard this case. During the trial, both parties presented their cases, and the court conducted a session of evidence presentation and cross-examination. After the first hearing, the court held that the case involved so many issues such as medical law and ethics, public policy, and egg-freezing technology that it could not reach a decision on the day and decided to adjourn the case.

On 17 September 2021, the District Court conducted another hearing and announced that a judgement would be issued later. On 22 July 2022, the court dismissed Xu’s entire claim and held that the Administrative Measures for Human Assisted Reproductive Technologies  (henceforth the Administrative Measures for ARTs) clearly stipulates that the application of ARTs must be for ‘medical purposes’ and comply with the state’s birth planning policies. The Hospital must have reached its decision while taking into account factors such as her diagnosis, and treatment in question, and the relevant laws, regulations, and rules. Moreover, Section 1 Article 4(1) of the Ethical Principles for Human Reproductive Technologies and Human Sperm Banks  (henceforth the Ethical Principles) explicitly stipulates that ‘couples who do not comply with national population and family planning laws and regulations and single women’ are prohibited from accessing ARTs. It follows that Xu, as an unmarried woman, was seen as a single woman in law and that she failed to satisfy the requirements set out in the Ethical Principles to receive egg-freezing services. Therefore, the District Court found that the hospital’s refusal in providing egg-freezing services for Xu did not constitute a violation of law and an infringement on her general personality rights.

Following the widespread media coverage of this case, the topic of unmarried women’s reproductive rights in China has sparked widespread debate. After the District Court had found in favour of the Hospital, Xu filed an appeal to Beijing No. 3 Intermediate People’s Court (henceforth the Intermediate Court). In the afternoon of 9 May 2023, Xu’s appeal was heard by the Intermediate Court. Xu applied for expert witnesses to testify their views on medical ethics and supplemented her case with public opinions, local policies, and her recent physical examination reports. The Hospital maintained that protecting reproductive rights should start from age-appropriate fertility rather than delaying fertility. The Intermediate Court has yet to rule the case. It remains to be seen how it will ultimately decide and reason this case. It should be noted that Xu will have no further right to appeal if she loses again. However, under the Civil Procedure Law 2021, she may apply for a retrial under the procedure for trial supervision if she can establish a case satisfying one of the criteria laid down in Article 207 of the Civil Procedure Law 2021.



The Law

General background of the Chinese legal system

In order to understand the legal regime governing ARTs in China, it is necessary to have some background information and knowledge about the Chinese legal system. The Legislation Law of the People’s Republic of China, which was promulgated in 2000 and has been recently revised in 2023 clarifies the categories of formal legislation and corresponding authorities in China. Under the Legislation Law framework, the National People’s Congress (henceforth NPC) as the national legislator adopts basic laws (laws governing criminal offences, civil affairs, state organs, and other matters) and (other) laws. The Standing Committee of the NPC (henceforth NPCSC) adopts laws  and may supplement or amend laws adopted by the NPC. The State Council (henceforth SC) adopts administrative regulations , and the SC ministries and commissions as well as provincial-level people’s governments issue rules. The people’s congresses of provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities directly under the Central Government, and the standing committees of these people’s congresses adopt local regulations ; autonomous regions adopt autonomous regulations or separate regulations ; special economic zones adopt regulations.

Chapter V of the Legislation Law clarifies China’s legislative hierarchy. Article 98 declares that the Constitution possesses the highest legal effect. The legal effect of laws is higher than that of administrative regulations, local regulations, and rules, and the legal force of administrative regulations is higher than that of local regulations and rules. The legal effect of local regulations is higher than that of the local government rules at or below the same level, and the legal effect of the rules issued by provincial-level governments is higher than that of the rules issued by districted cities or autonomous prefectures within their administrative region. Finally, departmental rules and local governmental rules have the same legal status.

The types of legislation that are concerned in the area of ARTs include departmental rules issued by the former Ministry of Health (now the National Health Commission, henceforth NHC), the local regulations issued by the people’s congresses, especially the People’s Congress of Jilin Province, and a number of laws in relevant areas, which will be explored and examined in detail below.



The rules governing ARTs in China

In February 2001, the former Ministry of Health issued two departmental rules: the Administrative Measures for Human Assisted Reproductive Technologies  and the Administrative Measures for Human Sperm Banks . In the same year, the former Ministry of Health, issued another four departmental rules in May, including the Technical Specifications for Human Reproductive Technologies , the Basic Standards for Human Sperm Banks , the Technical Specifications for Human Sperm Banks , and the Ethical Principles for Performing Human Reproductive Technologies  in May 2001.

However, the four Rules published in May 2001 were all abolished in 2003. Instead, the former Ministry of Health codified those old departmental rules into three new departmental rules, namely, the Technical Specifications for Human Reproductive Technologies , the Basic Standards and the Technical Specifications for Human Sperm Banks , and the Ethical Principles for Human Reproductive Technologies and Human Sperm Banks (henceforth the Ethical Principles).

These five departmental rules, including the two published in February 2001 and three published in 2003, are the only national legal norms governing ARTs in China. It should be noted that it has been more than 20 years since those Departmental Rules were drafted and reviewed. Technologies have advanced, and success rates have also soared in that time. However, so far, there still has been no national law passed to regulate ARTs. Most importantly, women, particularly unmarried women, have always experienced great obstacles to access ARTs in China, leading to the main argument that the current regulatory framework on ARTs urgently needs to be reformed.



The need for a reform

The vagueness of the regulations

When we have a closer look at the regulations surrounding Xu’s case, the first point that deserves attention is Section 1 Article 3 of the Administrative Measures for ARTs, which clearly states that the application of ARTs should only be ‘carried out in medical institutions’ and ‘for medical purposes’. However, what amounts to ‘medical purposes’ is not defined or explained in the legislation, allowing latitude to restrict access to ARTs. The interpretation of ‘medical purposes’ directly bears on whether aims such as the preservation of fertility and promotion of physical and mental well-being fall within the scope of the Administrative Measures. In Xu’s Case, the District Court used a rather narrow approach, interpreting ‘medical purposes’ to only include treating diseases such as infertility. The District Court believed that Xu’s reason for accessing egg freezing was to preserve her eggs and to allow her to conceive a biologically related child at a later and preferred age. In the eyes of the District Court, this failed to constitute a ‘medical purpose’, and Xu’s decision to access egg freezing was made on a ‘social’ rather than on a ‘medical’ basis. Therefore, failure to have a proper ‘medical purpose’ was used by the District Court as one of the important reasons for denying Xu’s claims.



The current framework constitutes state-authorised discrimination against women

Section 1 Article 4(1) of the Ethical Principles directly stipulates that couples who do not comply with national population and family planning laws and regulations and unmarried women are prohibited from accessing ARTs, and this also constitutes part of the code of conduct for medical personnel when carrying out any ARTs procedures. By disallowing unmarried women to access any form of ARTs, this constitutes a substantial restriction and obstacle to the rights of women to freely decide whether, when, and with whom to give birth and found a family.

Furthermore, following Section 1 Article 3 of the Administrative Measures for ARTs, sperm freezing should have also been restricted to married men, but Section 2 Article 2(2) of the Basic Standards allows men to freeze their sperm irrespective of their marital status. Such relaxation on sperm freezing has inevitably led to questions of sexism and discrimination. Why can unmarried men freeze their sperm whenever they feel like doing so, whereas unmarried women can only do so after getting married? Do such provisions constitute direct state-authorised discrimination against women, especially the unmarried ones? Looking at the language and the effects of the current regulatory framework, the answer is, certainly, yes. Within the group of unmarried persons, only men are allowed to freely choose when to exercise their procreative rights and delay reproduction by freezing their sperm. In the eyes of the regulator, unmarried women should not and cannot freeze their eggs to delay parenthood like unmarried men. Such Rules, undoubtedly and bluntly, have infringed the principle of equality as well as one of the most basic fundamental rights of women–the right to found a family. Such discriminatory regulations not only fail to protect and facilitate the reproductive rights of women but also create several legislative conflicts, which will now be explored.



The legislative conflicts

First, there is a clear conflict between those departmental rules and their superior laws.The Constitution 2018, the Civil Code 2020, the Law on the Protection of the Right and Interests of Women 2022, and the Population and Family Planning Law 2021 do not distinguish between the protection afforded to married women and unmarried women, and at least in those laws, unmarried women do not receive a weaker level of protection of their rights just because of their marital status.

Since egg freezing naturally belongs to the content of the reproductive rights of women and those rights are guaranteed by those laws to all women, it should be said that women, regardless of their marital status, should be able to access egg freezing and other forms of ARTs legally because their reproductive rights under those laws encompass such access. Clearly, those Departmental Rules directly contravene the protection of women’s reproductive rights as laid down in the laws. In principle, such conflict between the laws and departmental rules would have naturally invalidated the departmental rules as an inferior type of legislation to the laws. However, in practice, the departmental rules may still be in force and can be enforced regardless of the legislative conflict between the laws and them. As all the aforementioned laws and the Constitution have only been revised very recently, the NPC and NPCSC chose to ignore or failed to recognise and acknowledge the existence of such legislative conflict. Also, courts in China cannot invalidate departmental rules due to a conflict with their superior laws. Nor can the people’s courts declare a piece of legislation to be unconstitutional and invalidate it due to the limited power and jurisdiction that they enjoy in theory and in practice and the non-justiciable nature of the Constitution. As a result, these legislative conflicts remain unrecognised and unresolved, leading to an awkward fact that those Departmental Rules are legally enforceable, so are the laws.

Second, there is a clear legislative conflict between a local regulation and those Departmental Rules. Apart from the department rules, local regulations in different provinces also play a vital role in regulating ARTs in their respective jurisdictions. Interestingly, under Article 30 of the Regulation of Jilin Province on Population and Family Planning 2002 (henceforth the Jilin Regulation), unmarried women could access ARTs. Article 30 was the first and the only attempt, so far, in China, to grant unmarried women the right to access ARTs. When the Jilin Regulation was sent to the former National Family Planning Commission (was then a department of the SC but now part of the NHC) for filing, the National Family Planning Committee explicitly expressed their strong willingness to delete Article 30. Nevertheless, the Jilin People’s Congress decided to keep Article 30, notwithstanding that Article 30 directly and vividly contradicted the basic state policy of ‘one child policy’ and the Departmental Rules issued by the former Ministry of Health.

It should be noted that Article 30 did not allow all unmarried women across China to access ARTs in Jilin, but only the ones who have hukou in Jilin to legally access ARTs in Jilin fertility clinics. Hukou is a system of household registration in China, and it is an essential document for Chinese citizens to establish identity. People without hukou would find it extremely hard to establish eligibility for going to school, getting a job, and applying a passport. Hukou in China is very much like the immigration system in many other countries through which you can acquire rights such as the right to reside and the right to work through investing in a local business, buying a property, having a degree, holding a qualified job, or having been born in a family in which the mother and/or the father has the local hukou. And in this case, only the unmarried women with their hukou being registered in Jilin Province could, in theory, access ARTs. However, due to the inconsistency between the Departmental Rules and the Jilin Regulation (which have the same level of legal force) as well as the lack of clear guidance from national and local health bureaus, fertility clinics in Jilin would still refuse unmarried women to access ARTs in practice.

Notably, the People’s Congress of Jilin Province amended the 2002 Jilin Regulation in 2004, 2011, 2014, 2016, and 2021. Yet today, notwithstanding the conflict between the Jilin Regulation and the Rules issued by the former Ministry of Health, the Jilin Regulation has not been amended or annulled by the NPCSC, and it is still in force, so is Article 29 of the 2021 Jilin Regulation, which allows unmarried women in Jilin to access ARTs. Many scholars have argued that the Jilin Regulation has gone too far and is not compatible with China’s family planning policies. However, it should be pointed out that the Jilin Regulation constitutes a major step forward in the protection of reproductive rights, albeit one that has been the subject of great controversy.

The important question to be asked here is how to resolve those legislative conflicts and provide clear guidance for fertility clinics in Jilin. Where two effective legislative provisions conflict, Chapter V of the Legislation Law 2023 provides a clear hierarchy of legislation and rules for applying legislation. However, it is not sufficiently clear as to the legal effectiveness of the legislative provisions in the event of conflict or inconsistency between local regulations and the rules of SC ministries. Under such circumstances, the SC makes a recommendation. If the SC finds the local rule should be applied, then the local rule shall be applied in its local jurisdiction (i.e. Jilin Province); if the SC recommends prioritising the Departmental Rule, it will be up to the NPCSC to decide which legislation should be applied. Unfortunately, the legislative conflict between the Jilin Regulation and the Departmental Rules has yet to attract the attention of the SC and the NPCSC, and therefore, the inconsistency remains. Since the internal incoherence of legislation is so apparent, the national legislature – NPC or its Standing Committee – should find a way to resolve those conflicts and evaluate the possibility of potential reform of the current framework on ARTs.



The regulator’s problematic conception of ARTs

Access to ARTs raises not only legal but moral, ethical, and societal questions. Unlike many other countries, religious reasons are not one of the main concerns for regulating fertility, including ARTs in China. Instead, social, cultural, and legal reasons are the primary reasons why there is still a national blanket ban on allowing unmarried women to access ARTs.

Some members of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (hence-forth CPPCC) have asked the NHC if it is possible to relax the current blanket ban and allow unmarried women to access egg freezing. It is clear from the NHC’s official Reply that the true rationale behind the blanket ban is the fear of destruction of traditional family units, the emergence and the rise of complex family law matters after allowing unmarried women to have babies before marriage, and ultimately the damage or destruction of so-called social stability. All of these reasons are hidden under the disguise of preventing bodily harm to unmarried women due to long-term hormonal treatment caused by the egg-freezing procedure.

Indeed, the process of getting any ART treatment is far more burdensome for women than men. Women must bear the discomfort or long-term impact on their bodies and fertility as a result of intensive hormonal treatment, whereas men barely need to go through any discomfort or encounter any long-term impact. However, if what NHC has claimed is really the case that ARTs are harmful for unmarried women’s bodies to the extent that they should be banned from accessing such services for the sake of protecting their own health, then ARTs should not be allowed for any women to access, including the married ones. Instead, the current regulatory framework seems to suggest that ARTs only cause harm to unmarried women, not to the married ones or not as significantly as to the married ones, as if marriage could shield married women from being harmed by ARTs.

Clearly, the national and provincial regulators in many cases have behaved as if they were regulating ARTs on the basis of medical science. However, in fact, the regulators only have given the appearance of regulating ARTs based on medical science, when they have been regulating on the grounds of political and social reasons. Many of them have ignored everything but the main political agendas, such as social stability and strong emphasis on the traditional form of families. The regulator, over the past decades, has created many obstacles for women to access ARTs, and in doing so, it essentially created risks for pushing women to go to the underground market to pursue such treatment. Moreover, the greater health risks caused by ART procedures should have given women a stronger interest than any other persons in making decisions surrounding ARTs and their fertility. However, the patriarchal values that are deeply rooted in the law-making culture direct the decision-making power to the men, who can freely decide whether and when to access ARTs to preserve their sperms and delay their reproduction to a preferred timing, instead of the women who, in fact, have more interests in claiming such decision-making power to decide what should be done to their bodies.



Conclusion

Xu’s case provides a vivid depiction of the problems existing in the current regulatory framework on ARTs and highlights the urgency of amending and potentially reforming the ARTs framework to allow unmarried women to access ARTs. By denying unmarried women’s right to freeze their eggs, this has actively constituted violation and infringement of their reproductive rights, and this should no longer be overlooked by the legislator and the regulator, and it is the time to re-examine the current framework on ARTs and reform it in due course.

Furthermore, procreation is fundamental to the very existence and survival of the human race. The desires and reasons for wishing to have children do not differ according to a person’s marital status, sexual orientation, or gender identity. More importantly, there is no sound basis to conclude that marital status, gender identity, or sexual orientation can impact a person’s reproductive interests. Unmarried persons or couples may have the same wish to have genetically related children. Therefore, it is important to at least start considering reforming the current discriminatory regulatory regime and stopping denying unmarried women from accessing ARTs. At least, it can be started by allowing unmarried women to legally access egg-freezing services in China.

Analysis of legal article



Equality and choice: sex equality perspectives on reproductive rights in the work of Ruth Bader Ginsburg

“My mother told me two things constantly. One was to be a lady, and the other was to be independent. The study of law was unusual for my generation. For most girls growing up in the Forties, the most important degree was not your B.A. but your M.R.S.”—— Ruth Bader Ginsburg

Not only the sex discrimination cases, but the cases on contraception, abortion, and illegitimacy as well, present various faces of a single issue: the roles women are to play in society. Are women to have the opportunity to participate in full partnership with men in the nation’s social, political, and economic life? This is a constitutional issue, ... surely one of the most important in this final quarter of the twentieth century.

Ruth Bader Ginsburg, 1978

This brief essay explores the sex-equality perspective on reproductive rights that Ruth Bader Ginsburg has articulated over four decades as lawyer, law professor, judge, and Justice. Throughout her career, Ginsburg has viewed laws that deprive women of control over whether and when they bear children as raising questions of equality, as well as liberty and privacy. Ginsburg and other feminists of the 1970s argued that, given the social organization of caregiving work, the state may not deprive women of control over the decision to become mothers without depriving them of equal citizenship.

Over the decades, United States constitutional law has slowly responded to Ginsburg and the movement she helped lead, initially resisting sex-equality claims for reproductive choice, and then partly internalizing these values. Sex-equality reasoning about reproduction now informs the constitutional law of abortion and shapes legislated approaches to pregnancy discrimination, yet plays little role in doctrines protecting women’s access to contraception. Sex equality reasoning about reproduction is at the center of the Court’s holding in Nevada Department of Human Resources v. Hibbs that Congress had power under the Fourteenth Amendment to enact the family leave provisions of the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), yet is wholly absent in the plurality and concurring opinions in Coleman v. Court of Appeals of Maryland that Congress lacked power under the Fourteenth Amendment to enact the self-care provisions of the FMLA--a judgment from which Justice Ginsburg dissented passionately and at length.

I. As an ACLU Lawyer: Struck v. Secretary of Defenses

From the beginning, Justice Ginsburg understood government regulation of women’s reproductive choices as presenting core questions of sex equality. One of Ginsburg’s earliest Supreme Court briefs for the ACLU, filed in Struck v. Secretary of Defense, advanced the cause of a woman who had been forcibly discharged from the Air Force because she was pregnant. Under then-prevailing government policy, new mothers could not serve in the armed services, while new fathers could; a pregnant service woman could avoid discharge only if she aborted the pregnancy.

As Justice Ginsburg recently recalled:

The ACLU had taken on, along with Struck, several other cases challenging the rule, then maintained by all the Armed Forces, requiring pregnant service members to choose between abortion and ouster from the military. But Captain Struck’s case was our frontrunner. We aimed to present the issue of reproductive choice through her eyes and experience. Captain Struck chose birth, but her Government made that choice a mandatory ground for discharge.

Ginsburg’s merits brief challenged Struck’s exclusion from military service on equal protection and due process privacy grounds. Ultimately, the government would change its policy with the aim of mooting Struck’s case.

Ginsburg’s 1972 brief argued that Struck’s discharge for pregnancy violated the Equal Protection Clause. The brief appeals to several conceptually distinct understandings of equality, which together interact to produce a compelling argument for sex equality in the regulation of women’s reproductive choices:

A. The familiar demand for equal treatment: In the Struck brief, Ginsburg argued that mandatory discharge from the military for mothers-to-be, but not fathers-to-be, enforced a double standard in matters of sex and family roles. As the brief wryly observed, unlike women in the Air Force, “[m]en in the Air Force are not constrained to avoid the pleasures and responsibilities of procreation and parenthood.”

B. The anti-stereotyping principle: Ginsburg’s equal protection argument objected to different treatment, and something more. It challenged (1) government imposition of (2) traditional, stereotypical sex roles on men and women. Ginsburg argued, “Mandatory pregnancy discharge reinforces societal pressure [on women] to relinquish career aspirations for a hearth-centered existence.” Air Force policy enforced the “discredited notion that a woman who becomes pregnant is not fit for duty, but should be confined at home to await childbirth and thereafter devote herself to child care.” As the quoted passages illustrate, the brief’s challenge to state-imposed sex roles was especially concerned with legal imposition of the breadwinner/caregiver family roles historically associated with the separate spheres tradition.

C. The anti-subordination principle: The Struck brief characterized the harm of government-imposed sex roles in the language of subordination. Ginsburg argued that the law's “[p]resumably well-meaning exaltation of women's unique role in bearing children has, in effect, denied women equal opportunity to develop their individual talents and capacities and has impelled them to accept a dependent, subordinate status in society." The harm described here is dignitary as well as material: the law denies women the capacity to lead autonomous self-governing lives, and instead imposes on women, as a group, a dependent subordinate status.

Another groundbreaking aspect of the Struck brief is the way it connects liberty and equality. Most simply, the brief connects liberty and equality in challenging the Air Force policy by appealing to the equal protection and substantive due process components of the Fifth Amendment's Due Process Clause. But the brief does not simply challenge the Air Force policy on two different constitutional grounds; it shows how each constitutional concern implicates the other. The brief demonstrates how practices that deny women equal treatment limit their freedom, and how practices that constrain women's liberty deny women equality. A recurring theme of the brief is that laws that stereotype--that constrain women's freedom in the choice of social roles--deprive women of equal citizenship. In so arguing, Ginsburg was giving early and especially forceful legal expression to equality arguments for reproductive rights advanced by feminists as they joined the campaign in the early 1970s to repeal abortion restrictions.

II. Over the Decades: As a Professor and Judge

Ginsburg's 1972 brief in Struck opened themes she would pursue as an advocate, as a professor, as an appellate judge, and as a Supreme Court justice. From the very beginning, Ginsburg saw regulation constraining women's reproductive choices as presenting equal protection questions. And from the very beginning, the United States Supreme Court resisted the claims of the women's movement that the regulation of women's reproductive lives should be analyzed in an equal protection framework. In 1974, the Supreme Court ruled in Geduldig v. Aiello (a movement case litigated by Wendy Williams) that exclusion of pregnancy from a comprehensive disability benefits program did not violate the Equal Protection Clause because discrimination on the basis of pregnancy was not necessarily “discrimination based upon gender as such.” Professor Ginsburg objected, in exasperation, in the 1975 Supreme Court Review: “Is the answer that pregnancy can't happen to man, therefore pregnancy classifications can't discriminate on the basis of sex? Or because they affect women exclusively do pregnancy classifications merit particularly careful inspection?” She then emphasized: “Discussed at length in Appellees' brief were the stereotypical attitudes and generalizations about sex roles in society underlying disadvantageous job-related treatment of pregnant women.”

In a series of papers published in 1978 after Kenneth Karst's groundbreaking Harvard Law Review Foreword, Professor Ginsburg further raised the stakes, insisting that the Court was misapprehending the sex-role logic of laws that excluded pregnant employees from work and that criminalized women's access to contraception and abortion:

The High Court has not yet perceived the full dimension of current controversy surrounding gender-based discrimination.... Not only the Sex discrimination cases, but the cases on contraception, abortion, and illegitimacy as well, present various faces of a single issue: the roles women are to play in society. Are women to have the.opportunity.to participate in full partnership with men in the nation's social, political, and economic life? This is ad constitutional issue, Professor Karst underscored, surely one of the most important in this final quarter of the twentieth century.

Ginsburg was concerned about the Court's failure to recognize that there was textual authority for the movement's constitutional claims--the Court's failure to base its decisions about contraception and abortion on the Equal Protection Clause. But she was also concerned about the Court's grasp of the social concerns at stake in the regulation of contraception and abortion, the Court's inability to appreciate that laws criminalizing contraception and abortion define the roles women are to play in society.

Professor Ginsburg continued: Unlike Professor Karst, the Supreme Court either does not see, or is unwilling to acknowledge, all of these cases as part and parcel of a single large issue. Precedent to date generally places explicit gender-based differentials, illegitimacy, pregnancy, and abortion in separate cubbyholes. Roe v. Wade and Doe v. Bolton, the 1973 abortion decisions, for example, barely mention women's rights. They are not tied to equal protection or equal rights theory. Rather, the Supreme Court anchored stringent review to concepts of personal privacy or autonomy derived from the due process guarantee. Prof. Laurence Tribe pointed out that nothing in the Supreme Court analysis in Roe v. Wade and Doe v. Bolion tumed on the sex specific impact of abortion restrictions. A broader frame for these decisions might have made it more difficult for the Court to rule, as it did stunningly in June 1977, that neither the Constitution nor federal statute requires medicaid reimbursement for elective abortions.

In the Tulane Law Review later that year, she observed: Eventually, the Court may take abortion, pregnancy, out-of-wedlock birth, and explicit gender-based differentials out of the separate cubbyholes in which they now rest, acknowledge the practical interrelationships, and treat these matters as part and parcel of a single, large, sex equality issue. That synthesis perhaps depends on clearer directions from the political arena, but it seems a likely candidate for 1980’s development.

But something else happened instead, dynamics that Susan Faludi memorably termed "backlash." By the late 1970s, evangelical Protestants began to join conservative Catholics in attacking Roe. These and other developments led Phyllis Schlafly to focus her campaign against the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) on the claim that the ERA would constitutionalize abortion and same-sex marriage. In response, many feminist advocates sought to disassociate abortion and equality during the last years of the ratification campaign-a strategy that Professor Ginsburg appears at least indirectly to have supported.

In 1980, the year of Ginsburg's nomination by President Carter to the federal bench, Ronald Reagan was elected on a Republican platform that promised to appoint judges "who respect traditional family values and the sanctity of innocent human life." (Note how the platform attacks the ERA and abortion and associates "pro-family"and "prolife"values.) The time for ratification of the ERA expired and through twelve years of conservative governance, the composition of the federal bench began fatefully to change.

As a sitting federal judge in the 1980s and 1990s, Ginsburg lamented the Court's failure to ground the abortion right in sex equality. As she put it in 1985:

The Court's Roe position is weakened, I believe, by the opinion's concentration on a medically approved autonomy idea, to the exclusion of a constitutionally based sex-equality perspective. I understand the view that for political reasons the reproductive autonomy controversy should be isolated from the general debate on equal rights, responsibilities, and opportunities for women and men. I expect, however, that organized and determined opposing efforts to inform and persuade the public on the abortion issue will continue through the 1980s. In that process there will be opportunities for elaborating in public forums the equal-regard conception of women's claims to reproductive choice uncoerced and unsteered by government.

With prospects for renewing the ERA campaign receding, feminists became more vocal in advancing equality arguments for reproductive freedom.While discussing the Struck case during her Supreme Court confirmation hearing in 1993, Judge Ginsburg was asked by Senator Hank Brown whether the equality reasoning extended to abortion, as well. Ginsburg answered:

You asked me about my thinking about equal protection versus individual autonomy, and my answer to you is it's both. This is something central to a woman's life, to her dignity. It's a decision that she must make for herself. And when Government controls that decision for her, she's being treated as less than a fully adult human responsible for her own choices.

III. Reproductive Rights in the Supreme Court

Has United States law responded to the equality claims for reproductive rights that Justice Ginsburg and the United States women's movement have been making since the early 1970s? Roe scarcely acknowledges feminist arguments of the era. The feminist arguments associating abortion and sex equality are more legible in the campaign against the ERA, where opponents invoked the association as reason to oppose ratification.

Yet by the 1980s, the Supreme Court decisions concerning abortion quietly began to incorporate feminist equality claims for reproductive rights. In 1986, Justice Blackmun concluded Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists by rejecting legislation seeking to narrow the abortion right, writing:

Few decisions are more personal and intimate, more properly private, or more basic to individual dignity and autonomy, than a woman's decision— with the guidance of her physician and within the limits specified in Roe-whether to end her pregnancy. A woman's right to make that choice freely is fundamental. Any other result, in our view, would protect inadequately a central part of the sphere of liberty that our law guarantees equally to all.

In the last words of his opinion, Justice Blackman emphasized that the abortion right concerned equality as well as autonomy: women's equal freedom with men to be self-governing.

In the Supreme Court's 1992 decision in Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey, (43) the Court reaffirmed, while significantly narrowing, the abortion right, in a decision that repeatedly reasoned about the abortion right as respecting women's equality.

The portion of the plurality opinion attributed to Justice Kennedy invoked dignity to explain why the Constitution protects decisions regarding family life: "These matters, involving the most intimate and personal choices a person may make in a lifetime, choices central to personal dignity and autonomy, are central to the liberty protected by the Fourteenth Amendment." (44) Kennedy explained that the State could not impose "its own vision of the woman's role, however dominant that vision has been in the course of our history and our culture." (45) This is a sex equality understanding of dignity, resonant with themes that Ginsburg as a lawyer, professor, judge, and Justice wove through the Court's equal protection sex discrimination cases. The joint opinion recognized that "the ability of women to participate equally in the economic and social life of the Nation has been facilitated by their ability to control their reproductive lives." (46) The joint opinion's invalidation of spousal notification requirements similarly invoked sex equality principles, which it associated with freedom from laws enforcing traditional gender roles in the family. (47) As I have elsewhere written, the joint opinion expressed "constitutional limitations on abortion laws in the language of its equal protection sex discrimination opinions, illuminating liberty concerns at the heart of the sex equality cases in the very act of recognizing equality concerns at the root of the liberty cases." (48)

Despite the sex equality reasoning threading through Casey's due process analysis, the Court has never done what Justice Ginsburg imagined: taken "abortion, pregnancy, out-of-wedlock  birth, and explicit gender-based differentials out of the separate cubbyholes in which they now  rest, acknowledge[d] the practical interrelationships, and treat[ed] these matters as part and parcel of a single, large, sex equality issue." (49)

That was terrain for Justice Ginsburg to cross in her 2007 dissent, joined by three other Justices, in Gonzales v. Carhart, (50) the so-called partial birth abortion ban case. Justice Ginsburg quoted Casey's sex equality reasoning in her Gonzales v. Carhart dissent. (51) But she went even further. Where Casev drew upon the conceptual framework of the sex equality argument for abortion rights--that government cannot use the power of the state to enforce traditional sex roles on women--Justice Ginsburg's Carhart dissent cited key equal protection sex discrimination precedents, including decisions she litigated and wrote, fusing the normative power of equality arguments with the textual authority of the Equal Protection Clause. (52)

The Court's liberal Justices have now begun to reason about abortion by appeal to the authority of the Equal Protection Clause; the question is whether Justice Kennedy might ever be moved to do so. James Bopp, Jr., (53) longtime lawyer for the National Right to Life Committee (and architect of Citizens United (54)), has urged anti-abortion advocates to challenge Roe incrementally and cautioned against pressing personhood amendments; in Bopp's view a constitutional challenge to a personhood amendment might provide the occasion for Justice Kennedy to endorse Justice Ginsburg's understanding of the abortion right. (55) In a strategy memo to the anti-abortion movement, Bopp warned:

But if the U.S. Supreme Court, as presently constituted, were to actually accept a case challenging the declared constitutional right to abortion, there is the potential danger that the Court might actually make things worse than they presently are. The majority might abandon its current "substantive due process" analysis (i.e., reading "fundamental" rights into the "liberty" guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment against infringement without due process) in favor of what Justice Ginsberg [sic] has long advocated--an "equal protection" analysis under the Fourteenth Amendment. In Gonzales v. Carhart, 127 S. Ct. 1610 (2007), the dissent, written by Justice Ginsberg [sic], in fact did so. See id. at 1641 (Ginsberg, [sic] J., joined by Stevens, Souter, and Breyer, JJ.) ("[L]egal challenges to undue restrictions on abortion procedures do not seek to vindicate some generalized notion of privacy; rather, they center on a woman's autonomy to determine her life's course, and thus to enjoy equal citizenship stature.") ... A law prohibiting abortion would force Justice Kennedy to vote to strike down the law, giving Justice Ginsberg [sic] the opportunity to rewrite the justification for the right to abortion for the Court. This is highly unlikely in a case that decides the  constitutionality of such things as PBA bans, parental involvement laws, women's right to-know laws, waiting periods, and other legislative acts that do not prohibit abortion in any way, since Justice Kennedy is likely to approve such laws. (56)

Like Justice Ginsburg, James Bopp believes that an abortion right expressly and textually  anchored in the Equal Protection Clause would be much harder to disentrench.

IV. Sex-Equality Perspectives on Reproductive Regulation Today

Over the last several decades, the anti-stereotyping understanding of equality that informed Ginsburg's work as an advocate, academic, and judge has increasingly come to guide Supreme Court decisions about the regulation of reproduction* As we have seen, Casey drew on anti-stereotyping concepts to restate and reaffirm substantive due process doctrines that protect women's freedom to make decisions about whether to carry a pregnancy to term. (57) Even as contest narrows the abortion right; United States constitutional law remains distinctive in its concern to protect women's role-autonomy in making decisions about  motherhood. (58) And, after three decades of litigation under the Pregnancy Discrimination Amendment (PDA), the exclusion of pregnant women from employment is regularly analyzed on sex-equality and sex-stereotyping grounds. PDA case law has in turn begun to shape constitutional understandings of pregnancy in the workplace. (59)

That said, courts still cannot decide whether the restriction of contraceptive benefits raises a problem of sex discrimination under Title VII, and if so, why. The only sustained account of pregnancy-related discrimination as unconstitutional sex discrimination that the Court has provided appears in Nevada Department of Human Resources v. Hibbs  where the Court upheld Congress's power to enact the family-care provisions of the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) under Section Five of the Fourteenth Amendment. At the heart of Hibbs's holding that Congress had power to enact the FMLA's family leave provisions to remedy equal protection violations is the recognition that stereotyping of "women when they are mothers and mothers-to-be" plays a central role in discrimination against women at work.

Hibbs represents a crucial development in the Court's equal protection sex discrimination jurisprudence precisely because Hibbs recognizes pregnancy as a key locus of sex stereotyping directed against women who "are mothers or mother-to-be" (and does not simply treat pregnancy as a ground of "real difference" between the sexes). Hibbs opens the door to a new generation of equal protection cases arising out of stereotypes about, or animus against, women who "are mothers or mothers-to-be." In the wake of Hibbs, the Court can read Geduldig more narrowly--and accurately--as allowing courts to find that under the Equal Protection Clause, certain acts of discrimination relating to pregnancy are discrimination on the basis of sex. Hibbs' understanding of discrimination--focused on young women who are or who are about to become mothers--was painstakingly forged through decades of litigation under the Pregnancy Discrimination Act and in conflicts over the Court's privacy and equal protection cases.

But Hibbs's understanding of the dynamics of sex stereotyping is conspicuously absent in the Court's recent ruling in Coleman v. Court of Appeals of Maryland that Congress lacked power under Section Five to enact the medical leave provisions of the Family Medical Leave Act--a decision from which Justice Ginsburg forcefully dissented. Justice Kennedy, writing for a plurality of the Court, voted to deny Section Five enforcement power for the medical leave provision, asserting that Congress had failed to document how providing sick-leave deterred or remedied sex discriminatory state action. In a lengthy account of the deliberations shaping design of the FMLA, Justice Ginsburg demonstrated that the genderneutral self-care and family-care provisions of the statute advanced Congress's goal of integrating work and family by means that would alleviate rather than exacerbate discrimination against women.

As Justice Ginsburg showed, Congress heard testimony that adding self-care leave to the statute would serve these ends in at least two ways. Requiring employers to provide employees self-care leave would provide female employees pregnancy-related leave, while "ward[ing] off the unconstitutional discrimination [Congress] believed would attend a pregnancy-only leave requirement." Further, adding self-care leave would balance the Act's gender-neutral family leave provisions, which employers might view as protecting women's leave, with a form of leave employers would expect employees of both sexes to use, thereby diminishing the risk that the employers would view the new federal legislation as guaranteeing leave to women only. "By reducing an employer's perceived incentive to avoid hiring women, [self-care leave] lessens the risk that the FMLA as a whole would give rise to the very sex discrimination that it was enacted to thwart." The Act's gender-neutral selfcare and family leave provisions worked together, Justice Ginsburg concluded:

Essential to its design, Congress assiduously avoided a legislative package that, overall, was or would be seen as geared to women only. Congress thereby reduced employers' incentives to prefer men over women, advanced women's economic opportunities, and laid the foundation for more egalitarian relationship at home and at work. The self-care provision is a key part of that endeavor, and, in my view, a valid exercise of congressional power under [section] 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment.

The understanding of sex discrimination that Justice Ginsburg recognized in the design of the FMLA has animated her own work for decades. On this understanding, discrimination arises out of the interplay of real and imputed role conflicts. Employment is understood as inconsistent with pregnancy and caregiving responsibilities, and women are viewed as likely to become pregnant and engage in primary caregiving. Persisting role conflicts between caregiving and breadwinning and persisting sex-differentiated role expectations for men and women continuously interact to fuel sex stereotyping. Law can entrench the role conflicts and sex-differentiated role expectations that have long fueled sex stereotyping--or law can support individuals and households in making their own choices about the coordination of work and family.

Justice Ginsburg made sense of the self-care provisions of the FMLA in light of these understandings. She understood the FMLA's self-care provisions as part of a set of leave protections that Congress enacted in an effort to support men and women in making their own choices about the coordination of work and family in a form that would disrupt rather than entrench sex-stereotypical conflicts and expectations--and so alleviate rather than exacerbate discrimination against women. Given her understanding of the dynamics of sex discrimination, Justice Ginsburg well appreciated why Congress made self-care leave available for all—rather than offering pregnancy leave to women only. Universal benefits break would down actual conflicts between work and family without triggering historic assumptions about sex roles. Targeted benefits, by contrast, might exacerbate employers' longstanding disposition to discriminate against young women in the workforce as unreliable or expensive hires because they are presumed to be "mothers or mothers-to-be." Justice Ginsburg reasoned about the concerns, aspirations, and commitments animating the FMLA's design in terms the plurality seems not to have found sufficiently intelligible even to address.



Conclusion

From time to time, courts and the general public view laws depriving women of control over contraception, abortion, and pregnancy as presenting questions of equal citizenship for women. Indeed we have recently witnessed conservative efforts to reassert traditional controls on women's reproductive lives colloquially termed a "war on women." But today, as several decades ago, courts and the nation often do not grasp the relationships. Thirty-five years ago, Professor Ginsburg observed:

Eventually, the Court may take abortion, pregnancy, out-of-wedlock birth, and explicit gender-based differentials out of the separate cubbyholes in which they now rest, acknowledge the practical interrelationships, and treat these matters as part and parcel of a single, large, sex equality issue. That synthesis perhaps depends on clearer directions from the political arena, but it seems a likely candidate for 1980's development.

In 2012, we are still waiting.