Low-cost solutions can give billions access to modern cooking by 2030, but the world is failing to deliver
News
26 July 2023
Women and children bear brunt of harm from lack of clean cooking, which can be solved with modest investment, bringing major benefits in terms of health,
development, gender equality and climate
Nearly one in three people around the world still cook their meals over open fires or on basic stoves, resulting in significant damage to health, living standards and gender equality – and yet this
challenge can be overcome this decade through a relatively modest amount of investment, according to a new IEA report, produced in partnership with the African Development Bank Group.
Today, 2.3 billion people rely on charcoal, firewood, coal, agricultural waste and animal dung as fuel to prepare meals, causing them to breathe in harmful smoke in the process. Air pollution
from these rudimentary cooking methods causes 3.7 million premature deaths per year, ranking it the third largest cause of premature death globally. Women suffer the worst impacts from the
lack of clean cooking. The burden of fuel collection and making meals typically falls on women and takes on average 5 hours a day. This prevents many women from pursuing education and
employment or from starting a business that could deliver financial independence.
The new report, A Vision for Clean Cooking Access for All, offers a practical guide to bring the tools and fuels needed for every household worldwide to have access to clean cooking by 2030.
“Clean cooking is a topic that rarely hits the headlines or makes it onto the political agenda,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “And yet, it’s a cornerstone of global efforts to improve
energy access, gender equity, economic development and human dignity. This report shows universal clean cooking access could be reached worldwide by 2030 with annual investment of
USD 8 billion, which is just a tiny fraction of what the world spends on energy each year. Tackling this injustice is affordable and achievable.”
Basic cooking methods that are widely used by populations that lack access to clean cooking also contribute to greenhouse gas emissions. The collection of wood and charcoal for cooking
results in the loss of areas of forest the size of Ireland each year.
In the last decade, global progress on clean cooking has been slow, with progress restricted to a handful of countries. Since 2010, China, India and Indonesia all halved the number of their
citizens who lack clean cooking access. These efforts relied largely on providing free stoves and subsidised canisters of liquefied petroleum gas. However, during the same period, Africa’s
population without clean cooking access continued to climb. Under today's policy settings, most African countries are not expected to reach full clean cooking access even in the 2050s.
“The lack of access to clean cooking negatively impacts public health, perpetuates deforestation, and increases greenhouse gas emissions. Universal access to modern energy by 2030 is
imperative and requires game-changing approaches,” said President Akinwumi Adesina of the African Development Bank Group. “I am confident that the rich data and insights from this
report will inform and shape our collective approaches to this noble goal of universal access to clean cooking in Africa.”
To achieve the universal access target laid out in the UN’s Sustainable Development Goal 7, nearly 300 million people need to gain access to clean cooking means each year between now and
2030. People in sub-Saharan Africa represent half of this amount, highlighting where international efforts need to focus.


The benefits in terms of gender equality, health and time-savings from reaching universal access to clean cooking would be immense. The report finds, for example, that premature deaths from
poor indoor air quality would drop by 2.5 million annually. The average household would save at least 1.5 hours of time a day, freeing up time for other pursuits such as education or work,
especially for women. The total time-savings globally would be equal to the annual working hours of a labour force the size of Japan’s. And the reduction in global greenhouse gas emissions
would reach 1.5 billion tonnes a year, equivalent to the current emissions from all ships and planes combined.
Achieving universal access to clean cooking would require investment of USD 8 billion annually in stoves and infrastructure between now and 2030. This is less than 1% of what governments
spent in 2022 globally on measures to keep energy affordable for their citizens. Public and private finance have a key role to play in advancing clean cooking, especially in regions without the
fiscal space to drive the required investment through public funds. Concessional and climate financing will be needed to support projects in the poorest regions, notably in sub-Saharan Africa.
Concessional finance would need to make up around half of the annual investment.
“Solving access to clean cooking does not require a technological breakthrough,” Dr Birol said. “It comes down to political will from governments, development banks and other entities seeking
to eradicate poverty and gender inequality. But today, we are failing women in some of the most vulnerable areas of the world.”
A Vision for Clean Cooking Access for All
Explore report
The Energy Mix
Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly.
Your email
Subscribe
Browse
Topics
Countries & regions
Energy system
Programmes
Explore
Reports
Data & statistics
Follow
Learn
About
News and commentaries
Events
Glossary
Connect
Contact
Press
View sample
Explore our other newsletters
Jobs
Delegates


Terms
Privacy


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
1 
Summit on Clean Cooking in Africa 
14 May 2024 
 
Summit Outcome Document and Action Plan  
This document reflects the outcomes and discussions from the Summit on Clean Cooking in 
Africa, held in Paris on 14 May 2024. It provides: 
First, a summary of the key outcomes of the summit, as contained in the Chair Summary. 
Second, it documents the key themes and actions discussed to advance the clean cooking 
agenda across each key pillar: Finance, Policy, and Partnerships. 
Third, it catalogues all the pledges, announcements, and commitments made at the Summit, 
providing a comprehensive overview of the proceedings. 
Chairs’ Summary of the Summit on Clean Cooking in Africa 
A broad coalition of stakeholders on clean cooking1 met in Paris on 14 May, at the Summit on 
Clean Cooking in Africa, co-chaired by the President of the United Republic of Tanzania 
H.E. Samia Suluhu Hassan, the Prime Minister of Norway H.E. Jonas Gahr Støre, the 
President of the African Development Bank Group Dr. Akinwumi A. Adesina, and the Executive 
Director of the International Energy Agency Dr. Fatih Birol. 
The world is way behind on its goal to deliver affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern 
energy for all as stipulated in Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 7. One area in particular 
– clean cooking – has seen a concerning lack of progress, particularly in Africa. According to 
the IEA, nearly four in five people in Africa still cook their meals over open fires and traditional 
stoves using polluting fuels. The lack of clean cooking has dire consequences for health, 
gender equality and the climate, contributing to nearly half a million premature deaths of 
women and children annually in Africa alone.  
We know that the solutions are well known, and we affirm that our primary focus should be on 
ensuring affordable access in a timely manner to cleaner and modern cooking solutions – 
which include biomass in high performance stoves, biogas, bioethanol, liquified petroleum gas 
(LPG), electric – all of which can deliver benefits in terms of health, productivity, gender 
equality, forest preservation, biodiversity, and emissions reductions. We affirm that the 
strategies taken by countries to advance clean cooking will depend on local context, and that 
each country has sovereignty to shape this agenda in a manner consistent with people-centred 
energy transitions. 
The cost of solving this issue is relatively small, with the IEA estimating that USD 4 billion of 
capital investments would be required annually to achieve clean cooking access for all African 
 
1 Clean cooking refers to a household that primarily relies on “clean” cooking solutions where “clean” is defined as those 
technologies and fuel combinations that meet the recommendations of WHO guidelines for indoor air quality: household fuel 
combustion. Common fuels and technologies considered “clean” at point-of-use include electricity, natural gas, liquified petroleum 
gas, biogas, alcohol fuels, solar cookers, and low-emission biomass stoves meeting the multi-tier tracking framework Tier 3. 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
2 
people by 2030. Reaching universal access to clean cooking fuels and technologies will 
depend on strong national and regional leadership, and programmes that are reinforced by 
international financial support, partnerships, and industry efforts.  
The Summit on Clean Cooking in Africa brought together over 1000 delegates, including 
55 government delegations, convening 4 Heads of Government in Paris, with 23 ministers in 
attendance, and several Heads of international organisation. The Summit was also attended 
by high-level representatives from industry, development partners, philanthropies, and civil 
society, making it the largest-ever gathering dedicated to the shared objective of advancing 
clean cooking access in Africa. Additionally, President Macron of France hosted a special 
session at the Elysée on the occasion of the Summit. 
At the Summit, USD 2.2 billion worth of financing and investments was mobilised from 
government and private sector sources, with many announcing their intention to expand their 
support for clean cooking in Africa in the future. We welcome in particular several new 
providers of finance and funding who have previously not been a major provider for clean 
cooking. These new announcements are in addition to the African Development Bank Group’s 
commitment at COP28 to channel USD 2 billion for clean cooking over 10 years and will boost 
the existing direct development assistance already available via other government and multi-
lateral sources. We call upon others to reinforce these efforts and allocate additional financial 
resources to clean cooking in the coming years, through development finance, private sector 
engagement, and carbon credits. In particular, President Samia Suluhu Hassan called for a 
generous next replenishment of the African Development Fund, earmarking USD 12 billion for 
clean cooking, in her remarks. 
There was also broad acknowledgement of the significant role that carbon credits and climate 
finance have already played in scaling clean cooking efforts, recognising the potential for 
further expansion of this support, within the context of Article 6 and voluntary markets, provided 
these are met with high-integrity credits used responsibly. To that end, at the Summit, over 
forty organisations decided to establish a Collaborative Task Force committed to the 
generation of and demand for high-integrity carbon credits from clean cooking activities based 
on updated methodologies that address the concerns of carbon credit integrity, noting in 
particularly the momentum building around the Clean Cooking Alliance-led Clean Cooking and 
Climate Consortium (4C) initiative. 
At the Summit, nine African governments have publicly committed to making access to clean 
cooking a national priority and are taking necessary steps to implement proven policy 
measures in their countries to usher greater progress. We note with great appreciation the 
African Heads of State and government leaders present at the Summit, noting with gratitude 
the role of President of the United Republic of Tanzania H.E. Samia Suluhu Hassan as a 
champion of clean cooking on the continent for making clean cooking a pan African priority 
through the African Women Clean Cooking Support Programme – a gender responsive just 
energy transition programme in Africa launched at COP28. We equally applaud Tanzania for 
the launch of a 10-year National Clean Cooking Strategy for the country and call upon all 
African governments to push clean cooking towards the top of their national agendas and 
implement policy approaches that have proven successful in the past, including in India, Brazil, 
Egypt, India, and Indonesia.  
At the Summit, participants welcomed the recent commitment by the G7 Climate, Energy, and 
the Environment Ministers to promote clean cooking, the announcement by the Brazil G20 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Presidency that clean cooking will feature prominently in its G20 agenda, and the recognition 
of clean cooking as one of the priority issues for Azerbaijan’s COP29 Presidency. This Summit 
also carries forward the important development agenda laid out in the Paris Pact for People 
and the Planet and can be seen as a milestone under the umbrella of that broader agenda. 
We will continue to advance the clean cooking agenda with a coalition of committed actors 
within the context of these initiatives, including at the Summit for the Future and the 2025 
Financing for Development Conference. At the Summit, participants also emphasised the 
importance of building on existing partnerships and initiatives rather than creating new ones 
that potentially duplicate existing efforts. 
The Summit on Clean Cooking in Africa is a pivotal milestone in the collective journey towards 
universal access to clean cooking. Stakeholders at the Summit agreed to support further efforts 
to increase delivery capacity for clean cooking in Africa and many participants announced 
concrete actions and commitments, representing important steps toward this end. We applaud 
the 130 delegations who, at the Summit, joined us in a statement of commitment to advance 
clean cooking efforts in Africa, through their endorsement of the high-level Clean Cooking 
Declaration. This group included 28 governments, as well as many international organisations, 
governments, and civil society. The declaration is a clear demonstration of our shared 
commitment and resolve to collective action, and progressing this important agenda through 
various fora until this issue is finally solved. 
Following the Summit, attention must now turn to implementation of commitments and 
outcomes – a task that the Summit co-chairs commit to support. Many actors will take forward 
pieces of the agenda identified at the Summit, including within the context of the African Clean 
Cooking Consortium (ACCC) and the Africa Women Clean Cooking Support Programme 
(AWCCSP). Key follow-on actions include supporting policy implementation, mobilising more 
financial commitments and investments, convening stakeholders on clean cooking at future 
events and Summits, a new task force committed to enhancing the generation of and demand 
for carbon credit from clean cooking. We will ensure the continuing of IEA’s tracking of clean 
cooking progress, investment, and energy demand, which will be provided annually as a 
means of gauging progress against commitments made at the Summit and future events.  
Summit Discussions and Action Plan 
At the Summit, the major themes to advance the clean cooking agenda were discussed across 
the three sessions of the Summit, namely: (i) scaling up Finance for Clean Cooking in Africa, 
(ii) Making Clean Cooking a Policy Priority, and (iii) Catalysing Multi-stakeholder Partnerships. 
The discussions that took place and the key action items raised by stakeholders throughout 
the Summit preparations are captured in the below sections, grouped accordingly. 
Mobilising Public and Private Sector Financing for Clean Cooking  
The first part of the financing session addressed the need for additional investments in clean 
cooking, as well as the conditions that must exist for different financiers to increase their 
investments. Relevant conditions include political willingness to tackle the issue, the existence 
of national strategies and plans to do so, proper institutional frameworks and adequate market 
conditions - factors that are intertwined with policies, and therefore were also discussed in the 
Policy track. The session also discussed the proposed measures that donors and development 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
4 
finance institutions (DFIs), private sector finance providers, philanthropies and civil society can 
take to mobilise more direct financing for clean cooking. 
Key themes discussed 
Summit participants discussed the following themes in this session. It was recognised that: 
1. More financing is required to accelerate clean cooking across Africa, with both public and 
private sources playing a role. The IEA has estimated that for all Africans to gain access to 
clean cooking by 2030, a capital investment of USD 4 billion a year is required. Reaching 
USD 4 billion per year requires a marked increase above today's levels of financing and 
investment in clean cooking on the continent. 
2. Increasing investment in clean cooking projects and infrastructure will rely on numerous 
sources of finance – concessional, commercial and philanthropic. In the context of sub-
Saharan Africa, concessional support can play a particularly important role in delivering 
needed technical assistance, addressing the affordability gap that many households in 
Africa face, and reducing the high cost of capital faced by African energy companies. A 
large portion of this concessional support would need to come from international sources. 
However, it was also acknowledged that development finance is a limited pool that is 
frequently called upon for other urgent priorities. There is therefore a crucial need to better 
leverage this capital to attract commercial investment via blended finance solutions – an 
approach which has a growing number of successful examples on the ground in Africa. 
3. The primary source of international development finance for clean cooking funding has 
come from energy and climate initiatives. Clean cooking has impacts outside of these 
areas, most notably on health, gender equity, humanitarian needs and ecological 
preservation, which could present an opportunity to tap into additional pools of development 
aid. Inclusion of displaced communities into national energy planning is urgently needed to 
break the humanitarian-development divide. 
4. To ensure speed of delivery, participants emphasised the importance of prioritising existing 
financing vehicles with a proven track record of delivery. Regular reviews and adjustments 
to these mechanisms should also be conducted as needed to improve effectiveness. 
5. The lack of bankable projects presents a serious challenge, with further efforts needed to 
support businesses in early-stage development. Local small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs) represent a particularly important part of the clean cooking ecosystem. However, 
they often struggle to access financing and can lack the business skills to put together 
investment proposals. 
Ways forward discussed 
In discussing potential ways to mobilise more direct financing for clean cooking, participants 
agreed on three key focus areas: (a) increasing the total funding available for clean cooking; 
(b) channelling funding through an effective suite of financial support; and (c) improving 
coordination and the effectiveness of delivery. 
1. To increase the total funding available for clean cooking, measures discussed include: 
i. 
Setting clear targets for clean cooking allocations in existing energy access and 
climate funds, particularly those supported by development finance that have a 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
5 
track record of success. In some cases, this may require an effort to expand fund 
mandates.  
ii. 
Including clean cooking in the mandates of other development financing 
instruments focused on areas such as health, gender and education. Options to 
implement this include requiring that all relevant spheres consider clean cooking in 
project proposals (mainstreaming), carving out a portion of relevant budgets 
explicitly for clean cooking, or pooling funds. 
iii. 
Prioritising financing mechanisms that crowd in more private capital, such as 
guarantees, first loss loans, price minimums, or concessions for clean cooking 
operators. New mechanisms that have proved successful in the electricity access 
space, such as aggregation and securitisation, can also be piloted.  
iv. 
Increasing the flow of financing specifically targeting clean cooking SMEs. This 
includes support for local commercial banks such as capacity building and 
concessional loans for on-lending. Private equity funds, primarily from impact 
investors, can provide early-stage seed capital when backed by de-risking support 
from donors, notably the provision of first-loss tranches. Concessional finance is 
also likely necessary to provide business skill development at SMEs and other 
services to facilitate investment.  
2. To channel funding through an effective suite of financial support, measures discussed 
included: 
i. 
Ensuring funding is available to address affordability challenges faced by 
consumers, in relation to both upfront costs and ongoing fuel costs, with a 
recognition that broad-based consumer support helps address a number of 
upstream risks faced by the private sector. Financing solutions that can support 
affordability include results-based financing, carbon credits to reduce costs, grants, 
and cash transfers to country funds. Affordability support should be technology 
neutral but designed to encourage higher-tiers of clean cooking solutions. Where 
consumer subsidies are included, it is vital to design these to ensure that they 
benefit the poorest consumers first and that they will ultimately serve to cultivate a 
paying consumer base to ensure access is sustainable. 
ii. 
Increasing the provision of technical assistance that directly supports deployment, 
including on project preparation, direct support for African ministries, and the 
development of benchmarking data and performance testing. This is in addition to 
the assistance provided to governments to support with policy development and 
institutional reforms. 
iii. 
Increasing the availability of equity and equity-like instruments for local clean 
cooking companies, including the provision of de-risking support from DFIs and 
donors to specialised intermediary funds. Equity capital should be included 
alongside institutional support for these companies, such as accelerators, 
incubators, networks to share best practices. 
 
 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
6 
3. To improve coordination and the effectiveness of delivery, measures discussed included: 
i. 
Improving transparency on projects that have proved successful. This could include 
the creation of a financing database for successful projects to develop benchmarks, 
such as for lending rates and strike prices for carbon credit deals.  
ii. 
Creating a forum to ensuring ongoing coordination among funders across the value 
chain of clean cooking funding support. The platform should also facilitate the 
sharing of knowledge and best practices. 
iii. 
Setting incentives or specific targets that ensure a higher share of financing 
provided goes to African-based entities, and that local entities have direct input into 
the decision-making process of allocations. 
Scaling up Finance for Clean Cooking in Africa: Unlocking Carbon 
Finance for Clean Cooking 
The second part of the Financing session addressed the role carbon credit markets can play 
in filling the financing gap for capital investments in clean cooking in Africa, and in closing the 
affordability gap for accessing clean cookstoves and fuels.  
Key themes discussed 
Summit participants discussed the following themes in the Carbon Credit session. It was 
generally recognised that: 
1. Carbon credit markets (hereinafter “carbon markets”) can play a role in filling the financing 
gap for capital investments in clean cooking in Africa, and in closing the affordability gap 
for accessing clean cookstoves and fuels. Participants also acknowledged the existence of 
a capacity gap for host governments and local actors to access carbon markets at scale. 
Carbon credits can represent an important source of revenues to accelerate the 
development of clean cooking activities in Africa. However, the carbon credit community 
needs to overcome some challenges to enable finance at greater scale to flow towards 
clean cooking projects in Africa through carbon credits. 
2. Carbon markets have successfully channelled pay-for-performance finance for clean 
cooking expansion through private and public emission reduction purchase agreements, 
with nearly 70% of global clean cooking carbon credits in the voluntary carbon market 
originating from African activities. However, more needs to be done to address the full scale 
of the challenge. Participants noted with concern that African countries have not yet 
benefitted at scale from carbon markets. IEA analysis has shown that all African countries 
combined account for only 3% of the credits issued globally in the more than 20 years the 
UN Clean Development Mechanism has existed, and that carbon finance could fill over 
20% of the clean energy investment gap in Africa by 2030.  
3. Carbon finance on its own is not sufficient to achieve the long-term scale and financial 
sustainability required to provide clean and improved cooking solutions to the billions of 
 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
7 
people who lack access to electricity. Participants recognised that revenues from carbon 
credits need to be complemented by other types of financing instruments from traditional 
banking and capital markets.  
4. Several critical issues have hindered greater financing flows to clean cooking activities in 
Africa through carbon credits. However, in most cases, solutions to these issues are within 
reach. The success of channelling finance through carbon markets hinges on demand for 
credits and the reputation, transparency and quality of the carbon credits offered. If either 
is compromised, the perceived risks outweigh the benefits and investors lose confidence 
and trust in these markets.  
Ways forward discussed 
In discussing potential ways forward, it was acknowledged that there is no simple, solution to 
these issues, and that a multi-stakeholder approach is needed. Participants also recognised 
that the current landscape of carbon markets for clean cooking in Africa is very fragmented 
and that a lack of a comprehensive map of stakeholders and initiatives hinders efficient co-
operation. Participants also recognised with appreciation that various stakeholders have put in 
place several initiatives to address many of these issues. Participants generally agreed to 
prioritise two key areas: (a) ensuring a sustained high quality and impact of carbon credits from 
clean cooking; and (b) building up confidence and demand for high-quality carbon credits from 
clean cooking.  
1. To ensure a sustained high quality and impact of carbon credits from clean cooking, 
suggestions from stakeholders included: 
i. 
Strengthening and harmonising carbon credit methodological approaches for clean 
cooking activities to provide clarity to purchasers, ensure accurate estimates of 
emission 
reductions 
and 
reduce 
risks 
of 
over-crediting. 
Stakeholders 
acknowledged efforts to enhance clean cooking carbon credit methodologies, such 
as new and revised methodologies introduced by Gold Standard to maintain 
integrity and enable the use of technology for monitoring. Stakeholders also 
welcomed ongoing work on the Clean Cooking and Climate Consortium (4C) 
methodology, led by the Clean Cooking Alliance (CCA), which aims to incentivise 
best practices and increase consistency across standards bodies and the wider 
ecosystem, as well as the draft Verra-led improved cookstove methodology that 
enhances usability and integrity for project design, monitoring, and quantifying 
emission reductions. Methodological alignment with the Integrity Council for the 
Voluntary Carbon Market’s Core Carbon Principles and potential methodologies 
that will be developed under the Article 6.4 mechanism is also important. 
ii. 
Promoting improved, robust, accessible and more transparent monitoring, reporting 
and verification (MRV) practices, to improve estimations of project performance, 
such as the further development and widespread use of digital MRV, including in-
built metering of usage and, where applicable and relevant, accompanied by 
representative sampling backed by robust and frequent site visit plans. 
iii. 
Developing and mainstreaming approaches to (i) link sustainable development 
benefits to clean cooking carbon credit value, recognising that for many buyers the 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
8 
positive impacts on health, gender, environment and development represent an 
important value add; and (ii) harmonise quantified revenue benefit sharing. To that 
end, participants acknowledged ongoing efforts to improve the quantification of the 
SDG benefits of clean cooking projects and the shared value that they create, such 
the Sustainable Development Goal tool established by Gold Standard. 
iv. 
Improving the quality and availability of the data used to calculate baselines, 
including through national and regionally co-ordinated and peer-reviewed research 
efforts aimed at improving and enabling the use of primary data sources that are 
crucial to the calculation of carbon credits, such as those parameters critical to the 
determination of the fraction of non-renewable biomass and other parameters 
relevant for key calculations. 
2. To create greater, sustained demand for high-quality carbon credits from clean cooking, 
stakeholders suggested   potential ways forward that include: 
i. 
Cultivating demand from sovereign, corporate and compliance buyers for high-quality 
carbon credits from clean cooking activities, including by instilling confidence in the 
credibility of clean cooking credits through the actions set forth above, by addressing 
the lack of consensus on the use case by corporates to use carbon credits to support 
net zero strategies, which is being debated by the community, and through dedicated 
initiatives and forums that work to bring more of these actors into the market. For 
instance, (i) governments could establish further Article 6.2 co-operative approaches 
and African host-country partnerships; (ii) corporate buyers could put forward advance 
purchase commitments to augment their participation in such activities; and (iii) airlines 
and aircraft leasing companies could pledge to purchase high-impact, high-quality 
carbon credits from clean cookstoves activities for compliance under CORSIA. These 
actions would also promote the enhanced predictability of clean cooking carbon credit 
prices and the transparency of price discovery, helping to foster long-term demand, 
allow for better planning for project developers and local stakeholders, and reduce risks 
that can lower costs and increase investors’ confidence. 
ii. 
Addressing the surplus of legacy carbon credits in the carbon market, especially of 
credits from clean cookstoves which could contribute to below-cost pricing for credits 
that do not reflect the real costs of implementing projects and the wider value delivered 
- and do not allow for the high-quality monitoring, reporting and verification needed to 
ensure the accuracy of emissions reductions estimates. This could include programmes 
to purchase legacy credits from clean cookstoves by governments, DFIs and other 
actors including project developers, who in parallel could also consider voluntarily 
cancelling them without making a mitigation claim. This may help address questions 
that some have raised regarding the integrity of some legacy credits. 
iii. 
Developing standardised risk mitigation tools, both for project developers and 
purchasers to de-risk entry into the market. This could include measures such as (i) 
contract clauses to cover the risk of non-issuance; (ii) guarantees and insurance 
products to cover risks such as political risks, non- and under-deliverance risks, the risk 
of withdrawal of a letter of authorisation, and risks of changes in national legislation; (iii) 
the identification of trusted intermediaries of high-quality cookstove credits, which would 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
9 
help interested buyers and sellers to connect; and (iv) the capitalisation of 
existing facilities to provide guarantee price minimums. 
iv. 
Co-operating with key stakeholders to empower host country governments and local 
actors to more easily access and capitalise on carbon market opportunities and 
establish positive enabling environments. This includes (i) targeted in-country and 
regional capacity building programmes; (ii) technical assistance to host country 
governments for regulatory frameworks; and (iii) convening forums among African 
governments to share best practices to participate in Article 6 co-operation.  
v. 
Adopting principles for the responsible use of carbon credits, such as efforts from CCA’s 
Principles for Responsible Carbon Finance in Clean Cooking, which are aimed at 
improving norms, instilling confidence, and incentivising investment in clean cooking 
carbon markets; or IETA’s Guidelines for the High Integrity Use of Carbon Credits, 
aimed at promoting the use of carbon markets to accelerate net zero delivery with high 
integrity.  
Making Clean Cooking a Policy Priority  
In this session, participants acknowledged the various ongoing policy and programme 
initiatives at the country and continent level aimed at advancing clean cooking. The 
discussions emphasized the importance of African countries continuing to establish the 
necessary and conducive conditions to enhance access to clean cooking, along with the 
appropriate policies.  
Key themes discussed 
Summit participants explored various themes in the Policies session. It was generally 
recognised that: 
1. Laying down foundational policies contributes significantly to unlocking additional financial 
flows into the clean cooking sector.  
2. Two clear priorities to create an enabling environment for advancing clean cooking access 
include: 
i. 
The need for African countries to make clean cooking a national, sub-regional, regional 
and continental priority issue and to work with the African Union (AU), other pan-African 
institutions, and across African countries to take concrete actions to accelerate clean 
cooking access. 
ii. 
The imperative to create the necessary, appropriate, and enabling policies and 
conditions to advance clean cooking access. This can be done by adopting - where 
necessary - and implementing a suite of policies and regulations adapted to national 
circumstances, which support scaling up clean cooking and attracting new innovations, 
technologies, institutions, firms, and investments. 
Ways forward discussed 
In discussing potential ways forward, participants identified concrete priority actions in two 
key areas: (a) ensuring the efficient implementation of clean cooking programmes as part of 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
10 
a national priority programme; and (b) creating a conducive policy environment to support 
advancing clean cooking access. The policies and regulations need to be adapted to national 
circumstances and can include: 
1. To ensure efficient adoption and implementation of clean cooking programmes as part of a 
national priority programme: 
i. 
In countries where they are not yet established, encourage the appointment of a clean 
cooking champion and / or focal point and the setting up of a  dedicated clean cooking 
delivery unit  on national clean cooking initiatives at the highest or strategic levels of 
government to ensure effective coordination and implementation across departments, 
sectors, and financing partners. 
ii. 
Develop a clean cooking strategy, or enhance clean cooking in existing strategies, 
clearly identifying the solutions included in the official national strategy and the 
evolution of the mix of cooking solutions over time to provide long-term visibility to 
enterprises and investors on welcome investment areas. 
iii. 
Integrate clean cooking directly and consistently into other national planning and budget 
exercises across sectors (e.g. energy, climate, health, infrastructure, education, digital 
infrastructure, etc.). 
iv. 
Integrate clean cooking into energy access programmes and projects on a holistic and 
systematic basis, encouraging local inputs. 
v. 
Create a funded national implementation programme or support existing delivery 
programmes, with the objective of allocating an increasing share of national energy 
investment support toward clean cooking related activities. 
vi. 
Include clean cooking explicitly in funding requests to development partners, 
multilateral development banks, climate funds, as well as other multilateral 
Environmental Agreements Funds for implementing SDGs relevant for clean cooking. 
Specifically consider allocating portions of MDB development finance for clean cooking 
programmes. 
2. To create a conducive policy environment to support advancing clean cooking access: 
i. 
Consider tax and import duty reductions or exemptions on eligible clean cooking 
technologies and fuels, for a fixed, multi-year period that helps jump start clean cooking 
progress that could encourage companies to set up local manufacturing supply chains. 
ii. 
Support actors across the clean cooking value chain, including 1) incentivizing 
manufacturers, retailers and fuelling station to facilitate the promotion of manufacturing, 
assembly and sale of clean cooking equipment, 2) supporting local joint ventures and 
start-ups, 3) enhancing the capacity of research and development institutions to 
develop tailor-made clean cooking solutions, 4) implementing and supporting clean 
cooking awareness programmes starting from the grassroots level, including primary 
schools, and 5) incentivise the expansion of supply chains to reach last-mile customers 
with stable and consistent energy supply. 
iii. 
Develop targeted and carefully-designed affordability support, including by drawing 
upon successful practices observed in already established markets and similar projects 
in closely related sectors. 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
11 
iv. 
Develop skilling programmes to train the personnel needed to transport, refill, connect, 
install, manufacture, assemble, maintain, and repair new clean cooking technologies 
and fuels in conjunction with relevant industries, thereby strengthening local expertise 
and Research and Development (R&D) capacity. 
v. 
Put in place and enforce standards on clean cooking technologies, including safety and 
performance and quality testing, and consider linking incentives / tax exemptions to 
meeting these standards. 
vi. 
Require that all public institutions, such as schools, prisons, and government facilities, 
and state-owned enterprises use clean fuels and technologies in their meal 
preparations. Incentivise private owned institutions to switch to clean cooking fuels and 
encourage all new commercial and residential buildings to incorporate provisions for 
the installation of clean cooking facilities. 
vii. 
Design policies to facilitate the transition from illegal/informal charcoal markets, 
incentivizing operators to become part of the clean fuel/cooking market ecosystem.  
viii. 
Encourage specific clean cooking and related measures in updated Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDC’s) under the Energy Mitigation and Adaptation areas 
including a clarification on the eligibility of carbon credits from clean cooking projects 
for internationally traded mitigation outcomes.  
ix. 
Include specific clean cooking and related measures in National Adaptation Plans 
(NAPs) and Adaptation Communications to facilitate the creation of adaptation benefits 
that may be monetised via non-market approaches. 
x. 
Enable the development of carbon financing, encourage the inclusion of clean cooking 
as one of the areas of focus by national relevant carbon credit authorities and 
implement legislation that enables African countries to be host countries for high quality 
clean cooking carbon projects. 
xi. 
Continue the ongoing efforts to implement broader governance reform, which have 
been recognised as a significant factor influencing investments levels across various 
sectors, including clean cooking.  
xii. 
Establish, and support where such efforts already exist, a mechanism to produce 
statistics and a database on access to clean cooking across African countries and 
institute annual review to make routine updates and revisions to clean cooking 
programmes, policies, and regulations.  
xiii. 
Leverage regional collaboration and free trade agreements to build stronger markets 
across the continent, benefitting from scale and knowledge exchanges. 
Catalysing Multi-stakeholder Partnerships  
In this session, the need to enhance collaboration in the clean cooking sector was discussed. 
The discussion focused on partnerships among key stakeholders that are needed to accelerate 
and strengthen progress on clean cooking and can advance the Summit’s key outcomes. 
These partnerships span all stakeholders, including industry, international and regional 
organisations, governments, local institutions, civil society, and research institutions.  
 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
12 
Key themes discussed 
In the discussion around catalysing multi-stakeholder partnerships, several key themes 
emerged that can make a lasting impact on accelerating clean cooking access. These include 
the importance of: 
1. Working within the context of the African Union, G7, G20, COP Presidencies, and other 
international and regional fora to ensure clean cooking is included in their agendas, ideally 
with a multi-year focus.   
2. Cultivating increased collaboration among industry partners, governments, local 
champions, financing institutions and civil society.   
3. Enhancing awareness and coordination among various actors in the clean cooking 
ecosystem and adjacent spaces to reduce duplication or conflicting efforts and to build on 
synergies and existing initiatives where possible.  
4. Facilitating the dissemination and exchange of lessons learned and best practices 
regarding policies, financing tools and business models, as well as data, tools and research 
among all relevant international and local stakeholders. 
Ways forward discussed 
In discussing potential ways forward, participants identified the following priority actions: 
1. Connect clean cooking to a broader agenda and build alliances with adjacent initiatives 
such as developing energy infrastructures; expanding electricity access; promoting health; 
advancing gender equality fighting climate change; expanding financial services, advancing 
forest and biodiversity conservation; restoring landscapes; conducting crisis management; 
improving conditions in displacement settlements, building resilient cities; improving food 
security; and fostering inclusive youth engagement.  
2. Foster greater collaboration with industry partners, including through efforts to:   
i. 
Improve international and local companies' ability to develop operational partnerships 
to more effectively source fuels and identify manufacturers, dealers, and distributors, 
as well as share investments. 
ii. 
Deepen industry-led vertical collaboration across the whole supply chain within each 
and across all clean cooking technologies. 
iii. 
Develop joint-ventures and public-private partnerships.  
iv. 
Align on standards and regulations that create an even playing field and allow 
consumer choice and healthy competition. 
v. 
Enable arrangements for collaborative investment to mitigate financial risks and build 
on synergies in shared ownership projects. 
3. Promote knowledge-sharing among countries, companies, and other stakeholders to learn 
from observed policy, legal, and regulatory successes, as well as the most effective 
technologies and business models. This includes efforts to also engage sub-national 
actors, with a focus on cities and smaller communities.  


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
13 
4. Advance and coordinate analysis and research initiatives aimed at providing foundations 
which are beneficial to the whole clean cooking ecosystem. This can include developing 
clean cooking access planning tools, as well as new data and analysis - including research 
on specific impact factors (e.g., fraction of non-renewable biomass and emission factors) 
users’ needs and common barriers, such as cooking behaviours and affordability. Other 
suggested activities include local market assessments, stove testing labs, research on 
innovative technologies, policies and business models (including monitoring, reporting and 
verification), and integrating clean cooking planning into education and capacity-building 
programs. 
5. Increase collaboration, partnerships and data and information sharing between 
stakeholders. This includes periodic coordination, possibly on the sidelines of other major 
international events related to clean cooking, and should engage the private and public 
sector, civil society, and international organizations. 
Ensuring Continued Momentum for Clean Cooking 
We acknowledge the significance of several major global events leading up to COP 30, where 
clean cooking will feature prominently on the agenda. These events serve as crucial 
milestones to propel the agenda forward, unveil new commitments, assess progress, and 
reunite stakeholders following the Summit, ensuring the continued momentum of our collective 
efforts. 
• 
June 2024: Africa Energy Forum, Spain 
• 
July 2024: UN High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development, USA 
• 
September 2024: SEforALL Global Forum, Barbados 
• 
September 2024: UNSG Summit, USA 
• 
September 2024: Summit for the Future, USA 
• 
October 2024: United Nations Biodiversity COP16, Colombia 
• 
November 2024: G20 Summit, Brazil 
• 
November 2024: COP29, Azerbaijan 
• 
November 2024: WLGA LPG Week, South Africa 
• 
December 2024: AfDB’s 2024 Africa Investment Forum Market Days, Morocco 
• 
January 2025: World Economic Forum Annual Meeting, Switzerland 
• 
March 2025: WHO’s 2nd Global Conference on Air Pollution and Health 
• 
June/July 2025: Financing for Development Conference, Spain  
• 
Fall 2025: G20, South Africa 
• 
November 2025: COP30, Brazil  
 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
14 
Clean Cooking Announcements 
Many Summit participants made announcements associated with the various themes and 
ways forward discussed in the different sessions. New announcements for financing dedicated 
specifically to advancing clean cooking in Africa were included in the overall aggregate of 
USD 2.2 billion in financial announcements.  Additionally, numerous participants presented 
important targets and goals, and re-affirmed previous commitments. These were not included 
in the total mentioned during the Summit, but represent in their own way increasing ambition, 
if not yet fulfilled, or prior commitments which still have on offer resources for countries, 
companies, and civil society actors looking to advance the clean cooking agenda. All the below 
commitments and pledges are exact statements provided by the organisation making the 
announcement, to reflect these statements for posterity. 
(The announcements detailed below are accurate and comprehensive as of 15 May 2024 and 
do not include pledges pending from other countries and organisations) 
High Level Declaration 
The following 130 countries, organisations and companies explicitly endorsed the High Level 
Declaration on Making Clean Cooking a Priority. The declaration is a clear demonstration of 
shared commitments and resolve that reaffirms the leader’s dedication to collective action and 
co-operation in addressing the lack of clean cooking access:  
Countries and International Organisations 
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, Ghana, Greece, 
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, The Netherlands, Norway, 
Portugal, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Switzerland, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, United Kingdom, 
United States, African Development Bank Group (AfDB), ECOWAS Center for Renewable 
Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE), SEforAll, UNFCCC, UNHCR, UNIDO. 
Civil society, Organisations and Companies 
4R Digital, ACMI, ACT Commodities Group, Africa50, Africa-Europe Foundation (AEF), Africa 
Finance Corporation, Africa Grant Advisors, African Clean Energy, African Wildlife Foundation, 
African Refiners and Distributors Association (ARDA), Amtrol-Alfa, Arancha Gonzalez (Dean 
of the Paris School of International Affairs at Sciences Po, former Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Spain), ASAS Group, ATEC Global, AVSI Foundation, BGN, Bidhaa Sasa, C-Quest Capital, 
CEEW, Circle Gas, CITAC Africa, CLASP, Cleancook, Clean Cooking Alliance (CCA), Clean 
Cooking Technologies Srl, Climate Impact Partners, CO2 balance UK Ltd, CRDB Bank, Daniel 
M Kammen  Lau (Distinguished Professor of Sustainability, University of California, Berkeley 
USA, Former Science Envoy, Obama Administration), Development Bank of Rwanda (BRD), 
EcoAct, EKI Energy Services Ltd, Emerging Cooking Solutions (SupaMoto), Energia 
International Network on Gender and Sustainable Energy, Energy and Climate Change 
Division at the University of Southampton, Engineers Without Borders Canada, Engie Energy 
Access, ENI, Envirofit International, Fair Climate Fund, Fenem Mali, GET.invest, Geocene Inc, 
Global LPG Partnership (GLPG), Gold Standard, GPA Coordination Unit at UNITAR, Hakika 
Group, Homebiogas Ltd, Husk Power Systems, IEC Global Impact Fund, Imperative, IXO, KTH 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
15 
Royal Institute of Technology, Leading Light Initiative, Mercuria, Mercy Corps, Mimi Moto, 
Mizuho Financial Group, Inc., Mo Ibrahim (Founder and Chair of the Mo Ibrahim Foundation, 
co-Founder and co-Chair of the Africa-Europe foundation), Modern Energy Cooking Services 
(MECS), Mrs Samira R Bawumia (2nd lady of Ghana, Global Ambassador for CCA and Chair 
of the Africa Women and Children Conference), Nithio, Nordic Environment Finance 
Corporation (Nefco), OPEC Fund for International Development, ORI Partners, Paygas, 
Petredec, Philip Lee LLP, Pivot Clean Energy Co, PowerUp, Practical Action, Project 
Developer Forum, Puma Energy, Reign Consultancy Limited, Removall Carbon, RES4Africa 
Foundation, Rungas Group, Simoshi, SNV, Sistema.bio, Solar Cookers Internation al, Spark+, 
Stakeholder Democracy Network (SDN), Stanbic Bank Tanzania, Taifa Group, TaTEDO - 
Sustainable Energy Services Organization, TASC, Universidad Pontificia Comillas, UpEnergy, 
Verra, Vital Strategies, WLGA, Wonderbag, World Bioenergy Association, World Biogas 
Association, World Central Kitchen 
Announcements associated with mobilising public and private 
sector financing for clean cooking  
Africa50 will mobilize up to USD 500 million in blended finance, project development funding, 
equity and debt investments to support LPG infrastructure and value chain expansion in 
several African countries. 
Leveraging its role in Africa’s largest Renewable Energy platform, the Africa Finance 
Corporation (AFC) commits to driving the development of clean cooking solutions through its 
Renewables and LPG investment activities across Africa in order to help develop the clean 
energy sources that are needed to substitute woodfuel and reduce related deforestation on the 
continent. AFC also acknowledge the role of the Africa Finance Corporation’s positioning paper 
[“How African Can Unlock World’s Most Promising Net-Zero Solution”], released at COP28, in 
centering clean cooking as fundamental to preserving Africa’s forests as the world’s most 
promising Net-Zero solution. 
The African Development Bank commits to channel USD 2 billion for clean cooking over the 
next decade, an average of USD 200 million annually. The Bank will create a dedicated Africa 
Clean Cooking Programme through the Bank’s Sustainable Energy Fund for Africa (SEFA) to 
provide blended finance for clean cooking projects with an initial envisaged capitalization of 
USD 50 million. The African Development Bank in collaboration with the International Energy 
Agency, the Clean Cooking Alliance, and the African Women's Clean Cooking Support 
Programme, among others, will support the operationalization and tracking of the outcomes of 
the Clean Cooking Summit through the Africa Clean Cooking Consortium. 
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) commits to implement the roadmap dedicated 
to clean cooking that was developed as a deliverable of the Summit in order to mainstream 
and scale up Clean Cooking in its operations. 
BIX commit to channel USD 10 million annually for clean cooking support within existing 
facilities. BIX also commit to mainstream clean cooking in its gender related funding stream 
such that all projects applying for funding need to consider clean cooking. Additionally, BIX 
commits to build expertise with local financing institutions to build familiarity with providing 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
16 
loans and other financial products to clean cooking companies and projects. Research the 
potential for aggregation and securitisation solutions to enable a wider range of private finance 
providers to invest in small scale clean cooking projects. 
The Clean Cooking Alliance's Catalytic Finance Accelerator aims to secure at least 
USD 100 million in new commitments by 2026 and USD 500 million by 2030 through smarter 
policies, actionable information, capable project developers and capital providers, and 
transformative innovative solutions. Together, its targeted projects, including a new Financing 
Partnership Platform, in partnership with the Africa Guarantee Fund and the UN Capital 
Dvelopment Fund, seek to increase the willingness and ability of funders to invest in clean 
cooking companies and projects.  
Denmark will provide at least DKK 500 million (Danish kroner; USD 70-75 million) over the 
coming years, starting with USD 20 million new funding for the World Bank Clean Cooking 
Fund. 
The EU/Team Europe is currently implementing under AEGEI, the Africa Europe Green 
Energy Initiative, actions on clean cooking amounting up to more than EUR 400 million, with 
an EU contribution of EUR 150 million. The EU/Team Europe will soon launch a new initiative, 
the Regional Clean Cooking Action for West Africa – RECCAWA, with an EU contribution of 
EUR 12 million, co-financed by the Netherlands with EUR 5 million. 
France pledges to invest EUR 100 million over five years in clean cooking methods and will 
mobilize even more through the Paris Pact for People and the Planet and Finance in Common. 
GET.invest - as part of the European multi-donor platform GET.pro, and with funding from the 
EU, Germany, Norway, Sweden, the Netherlands and Austria, implemented by GIZ – stands 
ready to support companies in the clean cooking and clean fuels space to become investment 
ready as well as to raise funding from investors or other sources of capital.   
The International Energy Agency (IEA) commit to develop analysis on expenditure 
requirements categorised by technology and by finance type to support concessional finance 
providers in pinpointing the most catalytic investment areas.  
Ireland disbursed EUR 750 000 to Clean Cooking Alliance for the Delivery Units Network in 
Africa. The Delivery Units will be located within the President’s offices – first countries to 
establish Units include Sierra Leone, Kenya and Rwanda. With Ireland’s funding, CCA plans 
to provide a range of network services to the Clean Cooking Delivery Units Network, through 
the CCA Delivery Units Network Secretariat. These services include: technical assistance to 
national governments; resource mobilization support; catalytic funding for special projects; 
leadership training and professional development for Delivery Unit staff; and a peer-to-peer 
action network to accelerate knowledge transfer and regional coalition-building. Ireland is 
currently the sole funder. 
Liechtenstein Bankers Association as part of the Youth Green Finance Initiative 
Liechtenstein together with the University of Liechtenstein commits to working with private 
banks and financial institutions and international organisations, to promote private capital 
investments into Clean Cooking, through the Liechtenstein Finance Centre. 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
17 
The Netherlands will dedicate EUR 5 million to RECCAWA – a new initiative with the 
European Commission, AECID, SIDA and RVO focused on supporting CC in W-Africa 
Norway has committed to provide about USD 50 million in support for clean cooking. 
Spark+ commit to channelling the USD 64 million in the current fund, Spark+ Africa Fund, as 
well as further funding we may raise in partnership with either our current or future investors, 
for the benefit of addressing the lack of access to clean cooking in Africa. 
The United Kingdom (UK) announced the delivery of GBP 8.5 million on Modern Energy 
Cooking Services (MECS) programme from 2024 – 2026 in two African countries. 
The United Kingdom is committed to expanding accelerator programmes; our demonstrators 
in Uganda and Tanzania which we announced at this Summit are doing just this, and the United 
Kingdom will continue to drive this agenda forward. Since 2016 our Transforming Energy 
Access programme has been delivering GBP 265 million of UK support through effective 
partnerships and collaboration with country institutions, academics, and small businesses to 
support incubation, acceleration, and scaling of innovative solutions to long term financing 
challenges. 
The United States announced it is increasing its ambitions in the field of clean cooking through 
policy or programmatic support totaling some USD 40 million, which will encompass 
complementary and wide-ranging activities across the White House, EPA, USAID, DOE, NIH, 
Agriculture, and other agencies. The United States announced that the Clean Cooking and 
Climate Consortium, which it helped launch and support, will release their draft Cooking and 
Carbon methodology for public comment this summer. This methodology is designed to cover 
all cooking transition scenarios, incentivize best practices, and incorporates latest science on 
key parameters. The methodology will set a level playing field for project developers and 
standards bodies and will build certainty, confidence, consistency, and transparency in the 
cooking and carbon market, which the United States believes will attract more investment to 
the clean cooking sector and result in proper credit for each ton of carbon offset.  
Announcements associated with unlocking carbon finance for 
clean cooking 
The following 41 organisations decided to establish a collaborative Task Force committed to 
mobilising public and private finance through supporting the generation of high-integrity carbon 
credits from clean cooking activities: the Africa Carbon Markets Initiative (ACMI), Africa 
Finance Corporation (AFC), African Development Bank Group (AfDB), ATEC Global, AVSI 
Foundation, Bidhaa Sasa, BIX Capital, BURN, Clean Cooking Alliance (CCA), Climate Impact 
Partners, C-Quest Capital, DelAgua Group, EcoAct, EcoSafi, EKI Energy Services Limited, 
Energy Commission of Ghana, Envirofit International, GET.invest, The Global Green Growth 
Institute (GGGI), Energising Development (EnDev), Gold Standard, Hestian Innovation 
Limited, the International Energy Agency (IEA), the International Emissions Trading 
Association (IETA), IXO, Macquarie Bank Limited, Modern Energy Cooking Services (MECS), 
Nordic Environment Finance Corporation (Nefco), ORI Partners, Perspectives Climate Group, 
SNV Netherlands Development Organisation, South Pole, TASC, TotalEnergies, UNFCCC, 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
18 
UNICEF -Youth Agency Market Place Yoma, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Verra, 
Verst Carbon Limited, World Bank (IBRD), World Bioenergy Association. 
The Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) commits to launching the AFC Fellowship to bring 
together emerging leaders from the Global North and South to come up with mutually beneficial 
solutions that bridge the gap between these regions on issues relating to nature-based carbon 
credits and clean cooking, inspired by AFC’s paper “How Africa Can Unlock the World’s Most 
Promising Net-Zero Solution”. 
We [Bidhaa Sasa] endorse the development of the new clean cooking carbon project 
methodology, currently being developed by the CCA-led Clean Cooking & Climate Consortium 
(4C), for all cooking projects under Article 6.2 and Article 6.4 of the Paris Agreement, as well 
as the Voluntary Carbon Market. We commit to working towards a widespread application of 
digital MRV and improvement of data from clean cooking activities. We commit to working 
towards creating approaches to value sustainable development co-benefits. 
BIX commits to engage in further dialogues to advance on these challenges, for instance at 
the 24th IEA-IETA-EPRI GHG Emissions Trading Workshop on 1-3 October in Paris and at 
other dedicated fora. BIX also endorse[s] the development of the new clean cooking carbon 
project methodology, currently being developed by the CCA-led Clean Cooking & Climate 
Consortium (4C), for all cooking projects under Article 6.2 and Article 6.4 of the Paris 
Agreement, as well as the Voluntary Carbon Market. This methodology aims to incorporate the 
latest science, increasing the requirements for substantiating realistic input parameters; 
conservative default values and flagged upper bounds incentivise direct measurements. As a 
result, it is likely to generate the most realistic emission reductions to date, reduce integrity 
risks, incentivise best practices, and increase consistency across standard bodies and 
throughout the ecosystem. BIX also commits to working towards a widespread application of 
digital MRV and improvement of data from clean cooking activities. BIX also commits to 
working towards creating approaches to value sustainable development co-benefits. BIX also 
announces to work towards creating a “coalition of the willing” to purchase high-quality carbon 
credits from clean cookstoves activities through advance purchase commitments. BIX 
endorse[s] the Principles for Responsible Carbon Finance in clean cooking. 
BURN would like to commit to engage in further dialogues to advance on these challenges, 
for instance at the 24th IEA-IETA-EPRI GHG Emissions Trading Workshop on 1-3 October in 
Paris and at other dedicated fora. BURN would like to commit to endorse the development of 
the new clean cooking carbon project methodology, currently being developed by the CCA-led 
Clean Cooking & Climate Consortium (4C), for all cooking projects under Article 6.2 and 
Article 6.4 of the Paris Agreement, as well as the Voluntary Carbon Market. This methodology 
aims to incorporate the latest science, increasing the requirements for substantiating realistic 
input parameters; conservative default values and flagged upper bounds incentivise direct 
measurements. As a result, it is likely to generate the most realistic emission reductions to 
date, reduce integrity risks, incentivise best practices, and increase consistency across 
standard bodies and throughout the ecosystem. BURN would like to commit to working 
towards a widespread application of digital MRV and improvement of data from clean cooking 
activities. BURN would like to commit to working towards creating approaches to value 
sustainable development co-benefits. BURN would like to commit to announce to work towards 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
19 
creating a “coalition of the willing” to purchase high-quality carbon credits from clean 
cookstoves activities through advance purchase commitments. BURN would like to commit to 
endorse the Principles for Responsible Carbon Finance in clean cooking. 
We [C-Quest Capital] endorse the following commitments: commit to engage in further 
dialogues to advance on these challenges, for instance at the 24th IEA-IETA-EPRI GHG 
Emissions Trading Workshop on 1-3 October in Paris and at other dedicated fora;  endorse 
the development of the new clean cooking carbon project methodology, currently being 
developed by the CCA-led Clean Cooking & Climate Consortium (4C), for all cooking projects 
under Article 6.2 and Article 6.4 of the Paris Agreement, as well as the Voluntary Carbon 
Market. This methodology aims to incorporate the latest science, increasing the requirements 
for substantiating realistic input parameters; conservative default values and flagged upper 
bounds incentivise direct measurements. As a result, it is likely to generate the most realistic 
emission reductions to date, reduce integrity risks, incentivise best practices, and increase 
consistency across standard bodies and throughout the ecosystem; commit to working towards 
creating approaches to value sustainable development co-benefits; endorse the Principles for 
Responsible Carbon Finance in clean cooking; commit to providing funding (quantum to be 
confirmed) to fund activities to support the work of the Collaborative Task Force , and the CCA. 
Through the Principles for Responsible Carbon Finance in Clean Cooking, the Clean Cooking 
Alliance is increasing the confidence of buyers, governments, and households in clean 
cooking carbon projects by driving actions to improve integrity, transparency, fairness and 
sustainability. The Principles are backed by a high-level Advisory Council drawn from across 
the clean cooking carbon market ecosystem, including leading registries, project developers, 
investors, development partners, and market facilitators. The final Principles were publicly 
launched at the Summit, having already gained the endorsement of more than 100 
organisations working in the clean cooking and carbon ecosystems. 
Through the Clean Cooking & Climate Consortium (4C), the Clean Cooking Alliance is 
leading the development of the first ever carbon methodology designed to cover all cooking 
transition scenarios, eliminating the need for multiple methodologies for clean cooking carbon 
projects. This methodology is intended to become the standard for all cooking projects under 
Article 6.2 and Article 6.4 of the Paris Agreement, as well as the Voluntary Carbon Market. It 
incorporates the latest science, increasing the requirements for substantiating realistic input 
parameters; conservative default values and flagged upper bounds incentivize direct 
measurements. As a result, it will generate the most realistic emission reductions to date, 
reduce integrity risks, incentivize best practices, and increase consistency across standard 
bodies and throughout the ecosystem. 
EcoAct commits to engage in further dialogues to advance on these challenges, for instance 
at the 24th IEA-IETA-EPRI GHG Emissions Trading Workshop on 1-3 October in Paris and at 
other dedicated fora. EcoAct endorses the development of the new clean cooking carbon 
project methodology, currently being developed by the CCA-led Clean Cooking & Climate 
Consortium (4C), for all cooking projects under Article 6.2 and Article 6.4 of the Paris 
Agreement, as well as the Voluntary Carbon Market. This methodology aims to incorporate the 
latest science, increasing the requirements for substantiating realistic input parameters; 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
20 
conservative default values and flagged upper bounds incentivise direct measurements. As a 
result, it is likely to generate the most realistic emission reductions to date, reduce integrity 
risks, incentivise best practices, and increase consistency across standard bodies and 
throughout the ecosystem. EcoAct commits to working towards a widespread application of 
digital MRV and improvement of data from clean cooking activities. EcoAct commits to working 
towards creating approaches to value sustainable development co-benefits. EcoAct endorses 
the Principles for Responsible Carbon Finance in clean cooking. EcoAct commits to working 
towards the development of standardised risk mitigation tools, such as guarantees and 
insurance products. 
EcoSafi commits to being a champion for integrity in carbon markets, and to leading by 
example in its pursuit of the most robustly accurate carbon credits possible. It commits to 
generating best-in-class carbon within the cooking sector, utilizing the strictest methodology 
and metrics available that incorporate the latest and best science (including and especially for 
fNRB and for baselines) and that calculate ERs using digital MRV systems and based on fuel 
sales and/or use. The company will submit each of its projects to evaluation by an independent 
ratings agency (aiming to earn the highest rating tier available), and seek to align with IC-
VCM’s Core Carbon Principles. EcoSafi will further seek to secure host country authorizations 
for all its credits (once regulations and procedures are available), to ensure that no double 
counting occurs. 
EKI Energy Services Limited commits to engage in further dialogues to advance on these 
challenges, for instance at the 24th IEA-IETA-EPRI GHG Emissions Trading Workshop on 1-
3 October in Paris and at other dedicated fora. EKI Energy Services Limited endorses the 
development of the new clean cooking carbon project methodology, currently being developed 
by the CCA-led Clean Cooking & Climate Consortium (4C), for all cooking projects under 
Article 6.2 and Article 6.4 of the Paris Agreement, as well as the Voluntary Carbon Market. 
This methodology aims to incorporate the latest science, increasing the requirements for 
substantiating realistic input parameters; conservative default values and flagged upper 
bounds incentivise direct measurements. As a result, it is likely to generate the most realistic 
emission reductions to date, reduce integrity risks, incentivise best practices, and increase 
consistency across standard bodies and throughout the ecosystem. EKI Energy Services 
Limited commits to working towards a widespread application of digital MRV and improvement 
of data from clean cooking activities. EKI Energy Services Limited announces to work towards 
creating a “coalition of the willing” to purchase high-quality carbon credits from clean 
cookstoves activities through advance purchase commitments. EKI Energy Services Limited 
endorses the Principles for Responsible Carbon Finance in clean cooking. EKI Energy 
Services Limited commits to working towards the development of standardised risk mitigation 
tools, such as guarantees and insurance products. EKI Energy Services Limited wishes to 
commit: 1) To reach a target distribution of 1 million (from existing 300 000 in Ghana, Kenya, 
Malawi & Nigeria) improved cook stoves across at least 6 different African countries in next 2 
years. 2) That, through its association with Jospong Group (one of the largest business 
conglomerates of Western Africa) in Ghana, EKI shall distribute another 300 000 cook stoves 
in next 1 year. 3) That, through its association with Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL, 
ranked 94th on Fortune 500 Global list), EKI Shall endeavor to reach out to at least 4 countries 
in next 2 years with the IOCL developed "Surya Nutan" solar cook stove 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
21 
(https://iocl.com/pages/SuryaNutan). All the above activities shall also bring livelihood to more 
than 10 000 local community members since most of the activities (from inception to 
manufacturing to distribution to monitoring) shall be done by local skilled manpower. The scale 
shall also help in contributing to associated SDGs. These activities shall generate carbon 
revenue in excess of USD 600 million over the lifetime of the project apart from the usual 
benefits to the community and environment. EKI shall also endeavor to set up a factory in West 
Africa for the manufacturing of cook stoves. EKI also takes this opportunity to formally launch 
the woody Biomass cookstove "GHG OORJA" in Africa, our latest cook stove boasting an 
efficiency of 46.18%. EKI Energy Services Limited wishes to commit to providing EUR 10 000 
to fund activities to support the work of the Collaborative Task Force. 
Envirofit is committed to supporting the Chair’s Summary outcomes on carbon markets to the 
fullest extent possible. 
Gold Standard  is willing to be part of the following pledges: to engage in further dialogues to 
advance on these challenges, for instance at the 24th IEA-IETA-EPRI GHG Emissions Trading 
Workshop on 1-3 October in Paris and at other dedicated fora;  to working towards a 
widespread application of digital MRV and improvement of data from clean cooking activities; 
to working towards creating approaches to value sustainable development co-benefits. 
IXO offers to provide an open standards-based digital public goods infrastructure that can be 
freely used to create decentralised registries of projects, cookstove devices, and carbon 
credits. 
The Nordic Environment Finance Corporation (Nefco) in its capacity as the fund manager 
of the Modern Cooking Facility for Africa is wholly supportive of the aspirations and objectives 
of the Carbon Markets track of the Summit on Clean Cooking in Africa.Nefco would be happy 
to engage in further dialogues to advance on these challenges. In particular, Nefco commits 
to endorse the development of the new clean cooking carbon project methodology, currently 
being developed by the CCA-led Clean Cooking & Climate Consortium (4C), for all cooking 
projects under Article 6.2 and Article 6.4 of the Paris Agreement, as well as the Voluntary 
Carbon Market. This methodology aims to incorporate the latest science, increasing the 
requirements for substantiating realistic input parameters; conservative default values and 
flagged upper bounds incentivise direct measurements. As a result, it is likely to generate the 
most realistic emission reductions to date, reduce integrity risks, incentivise best practices, and 
increase consistency across standard bodies and throughout the ecosystem. Nefco commits 
to working towards a widespread application of digital MRV and improvement of data from 
clean cooking activities – actively pursued by many of our MCFA investees. Nefco commits to 
endorse the Principles for Responsible Carbon Finance in clean cooking. 
ORI Partners, pledge to work towards creating approaches with the Collaborative Task Force 
in a view to develop innovative approaches maximizing sustainable development co-benefits 
and standardized risk mitigation tools like guarantees and insurance. We prioritize 
sustainability, delivering substantial benefits while effectively managing risk, driving progress 
towards a more sustainable, resilient, and equitable future. 
TASC commits to leading initiatives enhancing the quality of carbon credits from clean and 
efficient cooking. We commit to endorse the development of the new clean cooking carbon 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
22 
project methodology and to engage in further dialogues to advance on these challenges, for 
instance at the 24th IEA-IETA-EPRI GHG Emissions Trading Workshop. 
Verst Carbon pledges to enhance global clean cooking practices by developing and 
disseminating state-of-the-art digital Measurement, Reporting, and Verification (dMRV) 
systems. We are dedicated to fostering transparency across all clean cooking projects by 
contributing to the International Energy Agency's working groups and formulating robust 
carbon methodologies. Verst Carbon commits to equipping projects in the global south with 
necessary dMRV expertise and infrastructure, bridging the gap in access to carbon market 
participation. 
Announcements associated with making clean cooking a policy 
priority  
Ghana, Malawi, Mozambique, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, and 
Zambia endorsed the policy pledge and commit to adopt and implement a suite of policies and 
regulations adapted to national circumstances, which support scaling up clean cooking and 
attracting new innovations, technologies, institutions, firms, and investments. 
May 2024 marks the eighth year of India’s Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana program, which has 
provided clean cooking access of LPG to over 103 million deprived households predominantly 
from rural areas, safeguarding both women’s health and the environment. Recognising the 
crucial role of effective and proven policies in advancing access to clean cooking, and the 
significance of exchanging experiences, the Government of India intends to share the 
successful elements of PMUY and collaborating with African governments on the design and 
implementation of policy measures aimed at addressing clean cooking challenges in sub-
Saharan Africa. 
The Clean Cooking Alliance (CCA) is supporting countries to establish national clean cooking 
Delivery Units, a dedicated team of experts at the highest level of government, to accelerate 
access to clean cooking. Sierra Leone, Kenya and Rwanda have pledged to join Africa’s first 
Delivery Units Network on clean cooking, a new platform established and administered by the 
Clean Cooking Alliance to support each government’s Delivery Unit. An additional 14 countries 
across Africa have requested to join the Delivery Units Network and CCA has the ambition to 
establish at least 10 Delivery Units across Africa, Asia, and Latin America by 2027. 
Announcements associated with private sector investments and 
catalysing multi-stakeholder partnerships 
Private sector actions and investments are critical to advance clean cooking. 
Companies announced the following commitments at the Summit: 
ATEC Global has agreed terms for a USD 3.75 million investment round with Schneider 
Electric, Spark+, DRW, SCGV and others to expand access for distributors and carbon 
partners to ATEC's IoT induction stoves across Sub-Saharan Africa. 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
23 
BioLite commits to expanding our distribution partnerships and carbon credits program in an 
effort to deliver clean cookstoves to an additional three million households in sub-Saharan 
Africa by 2030.  BioLite plans to deploy USD 60 million to deliver this scale of energy access. 
Circle Gas Limited has launched MGas Resources in Tanzania and will be investing 
USD 75 million to expand its total customer base in East Africa from current 350 000 to 
750 000 by the end of 2025, in both Kenya and Tanzania. By doing so, Circle Gas 
investments in Clean Cooking will increase to over USD 230 million. Circle Gas Limited has 
launched their latest generation LPG Pay As you Go smart meter the “PX”, which is being 
manufactured in Italy by their subsidiary Circle Manufacturing Italia Srl. The production of the 
new generation PX meter has enabled improved durability, prolonged battery life and 
substantial enhanced user interface. 
Eni voluntarily launched its Clean Cooking Program in 2018 and has already involved about 
500 thousand beneficiaries located in Côte d'Ivoire, Mozambique, Rwanda, Angola and the 
Republic of Congo. Our plan is to provide access to clean cooking to more than 10 million 
beneficiaries in Sub – Saharan Africa by 2027. Fostering the shift from improved to clean 
cooking solutions, Eni’s ambition is to reach 20 million beneficiaries by 2030, associated to an 
estimated spending of USD 300 million, and even more in the following years. 
As the owner and operator of the world's largest fleet of renewable energy minigrids, Husk 
Power Systems ("Husk") supplies reliable, quality, modern and clean power to off-grid and 
weak grid communities in rural and peri-urban Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. But Husk is also 
committed to providing unserved communities with the ability to use that electricity to improve 
their lives. To mark the Summit on Clean Cooking in Africa, Husk pledges to launch in 2024 
the first-ever rural e-commerce platform dedicated to the distribution, sales and financing of 
energy efficient appliances. This will include making clean cooking products available to 
consumers across the continent. Husk looks forward to working closely with the IEA and other 
partners to scale this new platform.   
Key Carbon has provided USD 36.5 million of financing to date for the manufacture and 
distribution of clean cookstoves. Key Carbon has an ultimate goal of providing USD 1 billion of 
carbon finance to support the global transition to clean cooking. 
KOKO Networks is the global leader in bioethanol cooking fuel, now serving 5 million people 
in Kenya and Rwanda. By partnering with global corporate and government buyers of energy-
transition carbon, and fuel infrastructure operators, it has now invested USD 200 million in the 
expansion of its cooking fuel utility and has plans to increase this by 10x. We are encouraged 
by the IEA's projections that bioethanol and biogas could grow to serve 100 million people by 
2030, and 500 million people by 2040. KOKO stands committed to working with its partners, 
current and future, to help make this a reality.  
Since 2015, Oryx Energies has invested approximately USD 100 million, in Tanzanian LPG 
market, through its local affiliate Oryx Gas Tanzania Ltd “OGTL”. OGTL, pioneer of Clean 
Cooking in Tanzania, is committed to convert further 6 million Tanzanian households from 
 
 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
24 
charcoal and firewood to LPG by the year 2032. Such pledge implies OGTL to continue to 
invest in the necessary infrastructure to reach this goal at an approximate value of 
USD 50 million by 2030.  
Shell recognises the importance of closing energy access gaps.  Shell is pleased to share 
today at the Summit hosted by IEA, AFDB, Tanzania and Norway governments that it has 
pledged USD 200 million as part of a broader initiative to help people get access to energy in 
the near and medium terms. The initiative will focus on several regions including sub-Saharan 
Africa, and aims to help millions of people in underserved communities get access to electricity 
and improved cooking conditions (as defined by the World Bank Multi-Tier Framework). The 
energy access challenge requires collaboration between private sector, governments, civil 
society and international organisations.  The IEA plays an important role in providing analysis 
and convening discussions with key players in the ecosystem.  
Sistema.bio is proud to announce it has launched a program to provide renewable energy 
cooking solutions through biogas to more than 1 million people in 200 000 households. This 
creates health, gender, climate and agriculture outcomes across 10 countries in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. Sistema.bio will bring over USD 20 million in outside financing to discount the 
investment by family farmers in rural areas. Sistema.bio will provide unprecedented 
transparency and integrity in reporting through a fully digital measurement, reporting and 
verification (MRV) structure for its carbon credits. 
To increase clean cooking access, TotalEnergies announced at the Summit on Clean 
Cooking hosted by IEA, AFDB and the governments of Tanzania and Norway, its ambition to 
impact 100 million people by investing over USD 400 million in LPG for Clean Cooking in Africa 
and in India, focused on investing in additional assets (storage, filling, bottles). In addition, the 
Company will partner to develop pay-as-you-cook technologies in order to increase access to 
clean cooking.  
Vitol, and its daughter company, Vivo Energy, announced today at the Summit hosted by the 
IEA, AFDB and governments of Tanzania and Norway, their intention to invest USD 550+ 
million by 2030 in the infrastructure required to facilitate cleaner cooking solutions in  
 
 
Africa.  This pan-African investment comprises both LPG infrastructure, from marine terminals 
to the high-quality cylinders required for the safe distribution of LPG, and investment in clean 
cooking carbon projects. 
Multilateral partners and Stakeholders announced new strategic partnerships at 
the Summit: 
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) commits to implement the roadmap dedicated 
to clean cooking that was developed as a deliverable of the Summit in order to mainstream 
 
 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
25 
and scale up Clean Cooking in its operations. AFD commits to mobilize existing IDFC and 
FICS relevant coalitions in order to mainstream clean cooking financing within the activities of 
the networks members.  
The African Energy Commission (AFREC) a body of the African Union (AU) together with 
its partners commits to establish an African Clean Cooking Programme to support African 
Union Member States in the transition to clean cooking fuels and technologies through 
advocacy and public awareness, policy and regulatory interventions, capacity development for 
manufacturing and maintenance of clean cooking technologies, mobilization of financial 
resources and establishment of clean cooking facility for supporting African Member States. 
AFREC also announces the launch of the joint publication with MECS and ESMAP: 
“Sustainable Scaling: Meeting the Cooking Challenge in Africa” and the African Clean Cooking 
Programme and its Facility during the African Union Summit in July 2024. 
African Refiners & Distributors Association (ARDA) announces the first ARDA LPG Forum 
to be held in October 2024 in Abidjan to align on critical areas of collaboration and 
implementation. ARDA also announces the first ARDA Investment Forum held in Cape Town 
in April 2024 with the key objective of building a consolidated register of investable energy 
infrastructure projects in Africa. 
AVSI Foundation and the Dept. of Management of the University of Verona commit to 
disseminate a study on households’ cooking behaviour realized in 8 African countries to 
identify context-specific barriers and enablers towards the adoption of cleaner cooking 
solutions. 
The Clean Cooking Alliance is establishing a cutting-edge User-Insights Lab to drive demand 
and catalyse a transformational shift in the market by surfacing insights into clean cooking end-
users’ needs, behaviours, and preferences, and embedding these insights into the design and 
implementation of clean cooking products, programs, and policies. It does so through 
multidisciplinary action-research, bringing together ideas and tools from fields such as 
behavioural economics, data science, product and user experience design, consumer insights, 
and diffusion of innovation. 
The Clean Cooking Alliance and BIX will work together to develop a strategy and 
implementation plan for transitioning schools in Sierra Leone to clean cooking technologies by 
leveraging carbon finance. 
The Clean Cooking Alliance and World Resources Institute (WRI) are initiating a strategic 
partnership to further embed clean cooking into a broad range of sustainable development 
initiatives across Africa and Asia. This builds on a successful collaboration incorporating clean 
cooking data from Nepal into the Energy Access Explorer, a geospatial energy planning 
platform. This partnership will bolster WRI’s work in Africa and Nepal and spotlight the 
interconnections of cooking, forest conservation, restoring landscapes, building resilient cities, 
improving food security, planning for energy futures, and fostering inclusive youth 
engagement. Together with local stakeholders and governments, we can advance and 
accelerate clean cooking transitions. 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
26 
The Clean Cooking Alliance, African Wildlife Foundation and African Development 
Bank are leading the African Conservation and Clean Cooking Collective to accelerate 
landscape-scale clean cooking transition programs to safeguard and enhance nature-based 
conservation and restoration across the continent.  
The Clean Energy Ministerial Biofuture Campaign, Pivot Clean Energy, and World 
Bioenergy Association announce their support for Bio-based Clean Cooking to be a 
prominent part of the agenda of the 2024 G20 Energy Transition Working Group 
Ministers’ Meeting in Foz do Iguaçu, Brazil on 1-4 October as an important opportunity to 
further the Clean Cooking agenda, announce new commitments, take stock of progress, and 
reconvene stakeholders from the IEA Summit. 
The multi-donor partnership Energising Development (EnDev), funded by German Federal 
Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ), the Netherlands Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs (DGIS), the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Norwegian Agency 
for Development Cooperation (NORAD) and the Swiss Agency for Development and 
Cooperation (SDC), contributes to SDG 7 by providing access to electrification and clean 
cooking. The "Promotion of Climate-Friendly Cooking: Kenya and Senegal" is financed by the 
German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) and the Green 
Climate Fund (GCF). It is contributing to reducing Green House Gas (GHG) emissions and 
improving people’s – and especially women’s – living conditions by transforming the improved 
cookstoves (ICS) markets in both countries, to achieve a sustainable long-term market growth. 
Thereby also contributing to reaching the NDC targets in the energy sector of both countries. 
It commits to supporting access to clean and improved cooking solutions for 11.2 million 
people by 2025 and has reached more than 7.76 million people already by end 2023 
(3.9 million of which were women). EnDev is committed to supporting access to modern 
cooking energy services for 28.3 million people by 2025. EnDev enhances market 
development, by strengthening clean cooking companies, creating demand and supporting an 
enabling environment and has provided access to 24.2 million people in more than 20 
countries worldwide by 2023. 
The Global eCooking Accelerator (GeCA), an implementation instrument under GeCCo, is 
committed to reach 5 million people with access to electric cooking in the coming 5 years. 
EnDev provides the foundation for GeCA with a first commitment of EUR 10 million aiming at 
providing 500 000 people with access to eCooking until 2025. GeCA seeks additional funding 
of at least EUR 50 million. 
The Global Electric Cooking Coalition (GeCCo), founded by SEforALL, MECS, EnDev and 
GEAPP, confirm the COP28 pledge to support a transition into electric cooking for a significant 
(>10%) proportion of households and institutions in at least 10 countries by 2030. As of 
April 2024, Readiness Assessments have been initiated in Uganda, Kenya, India, Malawi, 
Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Laos and Nepal, and additionally the governments of Laos, Nigeria and 
Somalia have submitted Letters of Intent in support of the coalition.  
The Global LPG Partnership (GLPGP) and African Refiners & Distributors Association 
(ARDA) announce their intention to raise a USD 1 billion fund to enable clean cooking with 
LPG.  


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
27 
The Global Platform for Action (GPA)2 partner organisations commit to advocate locally and 
internationally to integrate clean cooking solutions for displaced people into national 
development and energy policies and associated funding strategies, with a goal of inclusive 
policies developed in 10 countries by 2030. The GPA partner organisations affirms its 
commitments to deliver collective actions on clean cooking solutions in displacement settings 
and hosting communities by providing supporting services to mainstream sustainable, 
affordable, and reliable energy access for crisis affected and hosting communities, aiming to 
meet the clean cooking needs of 25 million people by 2030. The GPA partner organisations 
aim to collectively mobilise financing of USD 650 million by 2030 for improved and modern 
cooking solutions in displacement settings and hosting communities through an increase in 
integrated humanitarian-development partnerships, enhanced engagement with the private 
sector and collective resource mobilisation efforts. 
KTH Royal Institute of Technology announces the establishment of an inclusive and open 
coalition of universities and research-focused institutions, including the AVSI Foundation, the 
Kenya Medical Research Institute, the Modern Energy Cooking Services (MECS) programme, 
Sustainable Energy for All, the UNEP Copenhagen Climate Centre, the University of Liverpool, 
the University of Strathmore, and the World Resources Institute, with the ambition of reinforcing 
and reinvigorating global efforts in clean cooking research and innovation research efforts on 
clean cooking. This coalition will facilitate joint research projects and the sharing of analysis, 
data, and other materials. The group will initiate the effort by releasing a white paper outlining 
a roadmap for research activities to support progress in clean cooking initiatives. 
Modern Energy Cooking Services (MECS) announces that the COP28 pledge of additional 
funding from the UK’s FCDO is already being implemented, initially in the form of country 
demonstrators in Tanzania and Uganda.  
Mercy Corps announces the commitment to facilitate Africa-led partnerships in at least five of 
the most crises-affected countries in the continent, to bridge public and private initiatives to 
support the market penetration of reliable, reputable, and certified clean cooking products in 
humanitarian, rural, and urban settings. These partnerships include local governments, 
inclusive representations of the end-users, private sector actors, UN agencies, research 
bodies, and financial institutions. The first commitment is to lead the Solar-Electric Cooking 
Partnership (SOLCO) in Uganda to facilitate the acquisition of e-cooking devices for 150 000 
families in displacement settlements by 2027. To this end, Mercy Corps is excited to announce 
that we are exploring two potential cornerstone partnerships with the Embassy of the 
Netherlands in Uganda and with the World Bank/UECCC to support this initiative.  
Pivot Clean Energy, Biofutures Campaign, KOKO Networks announce the formation of an 
industry working group to support the growth of bioethanol fuel for the cooking sector, 
promoting sustainable production and affordable clean fuel distribution. 
 
2 Please note that the above targets are developed to advance the collective advocacy campaign of the GPA and humanitarian 
energy community. Therefore, such commitments may differ from the individual organisational targets of the members of the 
GPA. These are not binding for individual organizations of the GPA and does not show a formal commitment of the 
organizations. Organisations beyond the GPA community have showed interest in joining this advocacy campaign as mentioned 
in the following page. 


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
28 
SEforAll and the IEA join forces in a collaboration to monitor and analyse financial investments 
directed towards clean cooking projects. This strategic partnership aims to enhance the 
transparency and efficacy of funding allocation. SEforALL announces the Sustainable Energy 
for All Global Forum to take stock of the Summit actions and enticing new announcements in 
support of clean cooking. SEforALL and partners announce the upcoming launch of a new 
round of call for proposals under the Energy Access Booster, including on electric cooking in 
institutional settings. 
The Solar-Electric Cooking Partnership (SOLCO), a multi-stakeholder platform, pledges to 
transition 250 000 households to solar-electric cooking across refugee-hosting communities in 
Africa by 2027, raising USD 20 million in funding and USD 80 million in financing. SOLCO 
partners, whom each fulfil a sub-component towards the global commitment of SOLCO, to 
date include the following: Government of Uganda; Government of Zambia; Government of 
Nigeria; GeCCo – the Global Electric Cooking Coalition; WFP; UNEP; GPA; IKEA Foundation; 
Mercy Corps; Instiglio; Kiva; Mission East; Pesitho; Ecoca East Africa; ATEC-Global; Burn 
Manufacturing; Village Infrastructure Angels; African Youth Action Network; CECI Uganda; 
Live in Green; Vision Fund Uganda; Finnish Church Aid; HCBL; Last Mile Climate. 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) is supporting regional, country, and 
community level-action to expand solar electric cooking technology markets, and to build 
national capacity on clean cooking. The Integrated Assessment of Air Pollution and Climate 
Change for Sustainable Development in Africa produced by UNEP, the Climate and Clean Air 
Coalition (CCAC), and the African Union Commission (AUC) identified clean cooking and 
efficient household appliances for refrigeration and air conditioning as vital to meeting 
Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want, and recommended the development of an Africa Clean Air 
Programme to address indoor and ambient air pollution. This programme is now being 
developed by UNEP, the CCAC, and AUC, additionally advancing implementation of the 
UNEA 6 resolution on regional air quality. The UNEP-convened Climate and Clean Air 
Coalition (CCAC) is additionally providing support through the CCAC Household Energy Hub 
to developing country partners to scale clean cooking, lighting, and heating solutions to reduce 
short-lived climate pollutants, including through the development of innovative finance 
mechanisms, especially to promote renewable energy e-cooking solutions, and support for 
household energy NDC commitments. The UNEP Copenhagen Climate Centre (CCC) is 
collaborating with the WHO and the MECS research team to support a group of countries that 
signed up to the GeCCo initiative launched at COP28, specifically to convene climate and 
health sector stakeholders and investors to articulate investment strategies in support of e-
cooking technology targets in the revised NDCs. 
The U.S. Grains Council (USGC) represents the US corn industry that stands ready to support 
clean cooking with sustainable supplies of bioethanol, which can supplement local production 
as needed. Promoting clean cooking fuelled by bioethanol aligns with USGC’s mission to 
develop markets, enable trade, and improve lives. USGC anticipates dedicating 
USD 1.75 million to advance clean cooking globally over a period of five years. We anticipate 
approximately 50% will be allocated to Sub-Saharan Africa. We intend to collaborate with 
regional, national, and local stakeholders in Sub-Saharan Africa to champion clean cooking 
with bioethanol through policy reform and infrastructure development.  


      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
29 
West and Central Africa Alliance for Biodigester (WCA/AB), as strategic partner, commits 
to build an enabling environment for broad dissemination of biodigesters in his region as tool 
of rural development in align with socio economic priorities. Every two years, the West and 
Central African Alliance for Biodigesters (WCA/AB) organizes the International Biodigester 
Technology Conference. This event provides an opportunity for member states of this 
organization and for African countries in general to share their experiences and advance the 
issue of clean cooking, while calling for greater commitment from states and increased 
investment in the sector from partners. 
The World Bioenergy Association commits to support the dissemination of clean cooking 
with pellets from agricultural residues by providing a comprehensive platform of information 
and support for project developers and operators of pelleting operations. 
School meal programmes can advance environmental objectives by incorporating planet-
friendly actions such as clean cooking solutions in schools. Schools are an ideal entry point 
for cross cutting SDG action to reach further into communities diffusing clean cooking 
knowledge through examples and education. Recognizing the importance of taking swift 
action, World Food Programme (WFP) has entered into a framework agreement with 
Sustainable Energy for All (SEforALL). This collaboration underscores our commitment to 
advancing sustainable energy initiatives in schools. In collaboration with SEforAll, the UK-
funded MECS programme, and the Government of Tanzania, a first joint institutional eCooking 
program is set to commence in Tanzania, targeting 50 schools. The initiative has the potential 
to expand to over 5 000 grid-connected schools. To scale implementation, WFP and partners 
aim to reach 10 000 schools and 5 million children globally in the next 3 years, calling for an 
investment of about USD 100 million combined with carbon credit to achieve this. Furthermore, 
leveraging its six decades of school meals expertise, WFP will advocate to governments and 
other stakeholders on the need to scale the ambition for clean cooking in schools – an issue 
area in the clean cooking space that has the potential to accelerate change for policy and 
decision-makers. 
The World Liquid Gas Association (WLGA) the global industry body representing the LPG 
sector, announces the establishment of the Cooking For Life Africa Task Force (CFLA), an 
industry-wide initiative dedicated to promoting and coordinating actions for affordable and 
sustainable LPG use for cooking across Africa. This effort includes developing an Africa LPG 
roadmap, which will be launched at COP29, and a commitment to gather and share market 
data and other key safety and operational and good practices information that pertains to the 
LPG business. The Task Force currently comprises 6 permanent members (Equinor, Petredec, 
Oryx Energies, NNPC, S&P Global, TotalEnergies). In addition, the Task Force will engage 
with other stakeholders such as ARDA and GLPGP. Regular progress assessments and 
periodic working groups will be convened to ensure effective implementation of commitments.  
The Yoma Youth Opportunity Market, initiated by UNICEF and its Consortium Partners, 
commits to mobilizing a youth workforce for clean cooking and as a way to generate green 
jobs for youth in Africa.  
 


Chairs' summary for the Summit on Clean Cooking in Africa
News
14 May 2024
A broad coalition of stakeholders on clean cooking met in Paris on 14 May, at the Summit on Clean Cooking in Africa, co-chaired by the
President of the United Republic of Tanzania H.E. Samia Suluhu Hassan, the Prime Minister of Norway H.E. Jonas Gahr Støre, the President of
the African Development Bank Group Dr. Akinwumi A. Adesina, and the Executive Director of the International Energy Agency Dr. Fatih Birol.
The world is way behind on its goal to deliver affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern energy for all as stipulated in Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) 7. One area in particular – clean cooking – has seen a concerning lack of progress, particularly in Africa. According
to the IEA, nearly four in five people in Africa still cook their meals over open fires and traditional stoves using polluting fuels. The lack of
clean cooking has dire consequences for health, gender equality and the climate, contributing to nearly half a million premature deaths of
women and children annually in Africa alone.
We know that the solutions are well known, and we affirm that our primary focus should be on ensuring affordable access in a timely manner
to cleaner and modern cooking solutions – which include biomass in high performance stoves, biogas, bioethanol, liquified petroleum gas
(LPG), electric – all of which can deliver benefits in terms of health, productivity, gender equality, forest preservation, biodiversity, and
emissions reductions. We affirm that the strategies taken by countries to advance clean cooking will depend on local context, and that each
country has sovereignty to shape this agenda in a manner consistent with people-centred energy transitions.
The cost of solving this issue is relatively small, with the IEA estimating that USD 4 billion of capital investments would be required annually
to achieve clean cooking access for all African people by 2030. Reaching universal access to clean cooking fuels and technologies will
depend on strong national and regional leadership, and programmes that are reinforced by international financial support, partnerships, and
industry efforts.


The Summit on Clean Cooking in Africa brought together over 1000 delegates, including 55 government delegations, convening 4 Heads of
Government in Paris, with 23 ministers in attendance, and several Heads of international organisations. The Summit was also attended by
high-level representatives from industry, development partners, philanthropies, and civil society, making it the largest-ever gathering
dedicated to the shared objective of advancing clean cooking access in Africa. Additionally, President Macron of France hosted a special
session at the Elysée on the occasion of the Summit.
At the Summit, USD 2.2 billion worth of financing and investments was mobilised from government and private sector sources, with many
announcing their intention to expand their support for clean cooking in Africa in the future. We welcome, in particular, several new providers
of finance and funding who have previously not been a major provider for clean cooking. These new announcements are in addition to the
African Development Bank Group’s commitment at COP28 to channel USD 2 billion for clean cooking over 10 years and will boost the
existing direct development assistance already available via other government and multi-lateral sources. We call upon others to reinforce
these efforts and allocate additional financial resources to clean cooking in the coming years, through development finance, private sector
engagement, and carbon credits. In particular, President Samia Suluhu Hassan called for a generous next replenishment of the African
Development Fund, earmarking USD 12 billion for clean cooking, in her remarks.
There was also broad acknowledgement of the significant role that carbon credits and climate finance have already played in scaling clean
cooking efforts, recognising the potential for further expansion of this support, within the context of Article 6 and voluntary markets,
provided these are met with high-integrity credits used responsibly. To that end, at the Summit, over forty organisations decided to establish
a Collaborative Task Force committed to the generation of and demand for high-integrity carbon credits from clean cooking activities based
on updated methodologies that address the concerns of carbon credit integrity, noting in particularly the momentum building around the
Clean Cooking Alliance-led Clean Cooking and Climate Consortium (4C) initiative.
At the Summit, nine African governments have publicly committed to making access to clean cooking a national priority and are taking
necessary steps to implement proven policy measures in their countries to usher greater progress. We note with great appreciation the
African Heads of State and government leaders present at the Summit, noting with gratitude the role of President of the United Republic of
Tanzania H.E. Samia Suluhu Hassan as a champion of clean cooking on the continent for making clean cooking a pan African priority through
the African Women Clean Cooking Support Programme – a gender responsive just energy transition programme in Africa launched at
COP28. We equally applaud Tanzania for the launch of a 10-year National Clean Cooking Strategy for the country and call upon all African
governments to push clean cooking towards the top of their national agendas and implement policy approaches that have proven successful
in the past, including in India, Brazil, Egypt, India, and Indonesia.
At the Summit, participants welcomed the recent commitment by the G7 Climate, Energy, and the Environment Ministers to promote clean
cooking, the announcement by the Brazil G20 Presidency that clean cooking will feature prominently in its G20 agenda, and the recognition


of clean cooking as one of the priority issues for Azerbaijan’s COP29 Presidency. This Summit also carries forward the important
development agenda laid out in the Paris Pact for People and the Planet and can be seen as a milestone under the umbrella of that broader
agenda. We will continue to advance the clean cooking agenda with a coalition of committed actors within the context of these initiatives,
including at the Summit for the Future and the 2025 Financing for Development Conference. At the Summit, participants also emphasised
the importance of building on existing partnerships and initiatives rather than creating new ones that potentially duplicate existing efforts.
The Summit on Clean Cooking in Africa is a pivotal milestone in the collective journey towards universal access to clean cooking.
Stakeholders at the Summit agreed to support further efforts to increase delivery capacity for clean cooking in Africa and many participants
announced concrete actions and commitments, representing important steps toward this end. A separate Summit Outcome Document and
Action Plan catalogues all the pledges, announcements, and commitments made. It also documents the key actions discussed amongst
participants to advance the clean cooking agenda across three key pillars: (i) scaling up Finance for Clean Cooking in Africa, (ii) Making
Clean Cooking a Policy Priority, and (iii) Catalysing Multi-stakeholder Partnerships.
Following the Summit, attention must now turn to implementation of commitments and outcomes – a task that the Summit co-chairs commit
to support. Many actors will take forward pieces of the agenda identified at the Summit, including within the context of the African Clean
Cooking Consortium (ACCC) and the Africa Women Clean Cooking Support Programme (AWCCSP). Key follow-on actions include supporting
policy implementation, mobilising more financial commitments and investments, convening stakeholders on clean cooking at future events
and Summits, a new task force committed to enhancing the generation of and demand for carbon credit from clean cooking. We will ensure
the continuing of IEA’s tracking of clean cooking progress, investment, and energy demand, which will be provided annually as a means of
gauging progress against commitments made at the Summit and future events.
Finally, we applaud the 130 delegations who, at the Summit, joined us in a statement of commitment to advance clean cooking efforts in
Africa, through their endorsement of the high-level Clean Cooking Declaration. This group included 28 governments, as well as many
international organisations, governments, and civil society. The declaration is a clear demonstration of our shared commitment and resolve
to collective action, and progressing this important agenda through various fora until this issue is finally solved.


Download the Summit Outcome Document and Action Plan
Learn more
Read the press release
The Energy Mix
Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly.
Your email
Subscribe
Browse
Topics
Countries & regions
Energy system
Programmes
Explore
Reports
Follow
Learn
About
News and commentaries
Events
Glossary
Connect
Contact
Press
View sample
Explore our other newsletters
Jobs
Delegates


Data & statistics
Terms
Privacy