A Proclamation on National Immigrant Heritage Month, 2021

America is, always has been, and always will be a Nation of immigrants.  It was the premise of our founding; it is reflected in our Constitution; it is etched upon the Statue of Liberty — that “from her beacon-hand glows world-wide welcome.”  During National Immigrant Heritage Month, we reaffirm and draw strength from that enduring identity and celebrate the history and achievements of immigrant communities across our Nation.

Across each generation throughout our history, wave after wave of immigrants have enriched our Nation and made us better, stronger, more innovative, and more prosperous.  The American story includes the story of courageous families who ventured here — be it centuries ago, or just this year — from every part of the world to seek new possibilities and help to forge our Nation.  In every era, immigrant innovators, workers, entrepreneurs, and community leaders have fortified and defended us, fed us and cared for us, advanced the limits of our thinking, and broken new ground.

After an especially difficult period marked by both the COVID-19 pandemic and the all-too-frequent demonization of immigrants, it is vital that our Nation reflect on the leadership, resilience, and courage shown by generations of immigrant communities, and recommit ourselves to our values as a welcoming Nation.  We recognize all of the workers, many of whom are immigrants, who have contributed to the food security, health, and safety of all Americans during this challenging year — and every year.  And we honor the sacrifices made by immigrants who serve on the front lines of the pandemic as health care providers, first responders, teachers, grocers, farm workers, and other essential workers.  It was these same immigrant families and communities of color who were disproportionately struck by the virus.  In honor of those we’ve lost, let us dedicate ourselves as a Nation to protecting one another and doing our part to put an end to this pandemic for good.

The promise of our Nation is that every American has a fair shot and an equal chance to get ahead, yet systemic racism and persistent barriers have denied this promise to far too many immigrants throughout our history and today.  I have placed equity at the center of my Administration’s agenda.  From day one, I promised that my Administration would reflect the full diversity of our Nation — and today, nearly one-third of my Administration’s 1,500 political appointees are naturalized U.S. citizens or children of immigrants. 

I have directed Federal agencies to rebuild trust in our immigration system that has been lost, to reach out to underserved communities unable to access the opportunities our Nation offers them, to offer again a welcoming humanitarian hand to the persecuted and oppressed, and to reduce barriers to achieving citizenship and equality. 

I am honored to serve alongside Vice President Harris, the first daughter of immigrants to hold the Office of the Vice President, and to work with so many dedicated public servants who are immigrants — and who carry with them every day the legacies of their families’ sacrifice and resilience.
     Despite the progress our Nation has made since our founding, there is more work to be done to extend the full promise of America to all our people.  Nearly 11 million people in this country are undocumented — and it is time that the Congress acts by passing the U.S. Citizenship Act of 2021, the immigration reform plan that I introduced on day one of my Presidency. My plan would provide a pathway to lawful permanent residency and citizenship for these undocumented immigrants, including Dreamers, individuals with Temporary Protected Status, farm workers, and other essential workers who contribute to our Nation every day.

Vice President Harris and I affirm that immigrants historically have made and continue to make our Nation stronger.  I urge my fellow Americans to join us this month in celebrating immigrant heritage, stories, and cultures.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH R. BIDEN JR., President of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, do hereby proclaim June 2021 as National Immigrant Heritage Month.  I call upon the people of the United States to learn more about the history of immigrant communities throughout the generations following our Nation’s founding, and to observe this month with appropriate programming and activities.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this first day of June, in the year of our Lord two thousand twenty-one, and of the Independence of the United States of America the two hundred and forty-fifth.



FACT SHEET: Biden-⁠Harris Administration Continues to Uplift Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander Communities

Today, the Biden-Harris Administration is releasing its first-ever National Strategy to Advance Equity, Justice, and Opportunity for Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander (AA and NHPI) Communities. The new strategy, which comprises action plans prepared by 32 federal agencies—including all 15 executive departments in the President’s Cabinet—builds on the Administration’s broader equity agenda and details much needed investments in AA and NHPI communities and priorities, including data disaggregation, language access, and combatting anti-Asian hate.

Read the full strategy here.

President Joe Biden signed Executive Order 14031 in May 2021, delivering on his commitment to establish and reinvigorate the White House Initiative on Asian Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders (WHIAANHPI). In the Executive Order, the President directed the development of an ambitious, government-wide interagency plan to advance equity, justice, and opportunity for AA and NHPI communities.

Since Day One, the Administration has prioritized the needs of AA and NHPI communities by advancing policies that promote equity, reducing barriers to accessing federal services and programs, and centering the experiences and resiliency of AA and NHPIs. The following is a snapshot of the progress and the important role of the federal government in supporting families, neighborhoods, and communities across the country.

Promoting Belonging and Inclusion and Addressing Anti-Asian Hate/Discrimination
Across the federal government, agencies have stepped up their efforts to respond to the increasing number of bias incidents and discrimination against AA and NHPIs, promote belonging, equity, and inclusion, and improve access to federal resources.

The Department of Justice developed an array of resources to provide local officials, community leaders and residents, law enforcement, and victims with the tools to help prevent and address hate crimes and incidents, including a webpage specifically to address hate crimes and incidents against AAs and NHPIs with instructions on how to report a hate crime to the Federal Bureau of Investigation in 24 languages.  

The Department of Justice and the Department of Education jointly issued a letter to educators on May 26, 2021, and a fact sheet addressing the increased harassment and violence directed at Asian American and Pacific Islander (AAPI) students and reminded schools about their role in addressing discrimination, including harassment, against AAPI students.

The Department of Labor and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission continued to protect AA and NHPI workers, including by entering into a conciliation agreement with Conduent Inc., to resolve alleged systemic hiring discrimination against Black, AA and NHPI applicants for customer care assistant positions at its Yukon facility, and by recovering $4.8 million to satisfy a judgment against Maui Pineapple alleging labor trafficking and discrimination against 54 Thai workers. 

In February 2022, the Department of State’s Cultural Heritage Center helped with the repatriation of 58 iwi kūpuna (ancestral Hawaiian remains) from German and Austrian institutions to the Office of Hawaiian Affairs. 

In March 2022, the Department of the Interior designated the Amache National Historic Site in Colorado as the newest component of the National Park System, honoring and preserving AA and NHPI history of the Japanese American incarceration during World War II.

Over the past year, the U.S. Agency for International Development hosted more than 20 “Urgent Hate Crimes Response/Support” meetings to provide a proactive response to the surge in anti-Asian hate crimes across the nation. These meetings created pathways to ensure that AA and NHPI community members felt safe physically returning to work, addressed the interpersonal challenges within the workplace, and sustained a respectful, equitable, and just workplace environment.

Since January 2021, the National Endowment for the Humanities funded nearly 100 awards related to AA and NHPI history and culture.

Addressing the Systemic Lack of Data Disaggregation on AA and NHPI Communities
The Biden-Harris Administration is committed to advancing racial equity through improved data collection, research, access, and disaggregation efforts. Better data leads to better and more informed policies that reflect the needs and priorities of the AA and NHPI communities.

The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, which also co-chairs the Equitable Data Working Group, will support revision to the Office of Management and Budget Directive 15: Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, and Presenting Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity. This will spur the collection of higher quality disaggregated data on AA and NHPI communities and lead to better statistical analyses and overall understanding of the diverse AA and NHPI population.

The Census Bureau is scheduled to release the 2020 Census Detailed Demographic and Housing Characteristics File A in summer of 2023 that will include critical statistics on detailed disaggregated Asian and Pacific Islander groups, unavailable in any other data collection.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission released a new data visualization tool enabling agency users to analyze AA and NHPI demographic information and identify national origin groups experiencing high rates of limited English proficiency.

In May 2021, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau expanded the demographic section in its consumer complaint form to include household size and household income questions, changes that will improve data collection of AA and NHPI complaints. 

The Federal Housing Finance Agency used disaggregated AA and NHPI data to uncover trends and disparities related to mortgage approval rates, which will help ensure equal treatment of all future homeowners.

The Department of Transportation launched an agency-wide Transportation Equity Data Analysis Community of Practice and Working Group that brings together researchers and staff to collaborate on ways to strengthen transportation equity.

Expanding Language Access Across Federal Programs
Federal agencies are taking critical action to expand access for limited English proficient communities and deliver greater equity for the diverse AA and NHPI community.

The Internal Revenue Service developed landing pages on IRS.gov in 20 foreign languages including Chinese (Simplified and Traditional), Vietnamese, Korean, Tagalog, Khmer, Japanese, Urdu, Arabic, Gujarati, Bengali, and Punjabi.

The Food and Drug Administration developed culturally and linguistically tailored COVID-19 health messages in Mandarin, Cantonese, Hmong, Korean, Tagalog, and Vietnamese. And, as part of the Department of Health and Human Services’ Health Resources and Services Administration, the Pacific Basin Telehealth Resource Center’s “Translation Toolkit” included resources in Japanese, Chuukese, Ilocano, Korean, Marshallese, Samoan, Tagalog, Chinese (Simplified and Traditional), and Vietnamese.

The Department of Homeland Security translated, among other things, its National Terrorism Advisory System Bulletin into Chinese (Simplified and Traditional), Korean, Tagalog, Thai, and Vietnamese and its statements on safety and immigration issued during Hurricane Ida, Hurricane Henri and Tropical Storm Fred into Chinese (Simplified and Traditional) and Vietnamese.

The Federal Communications Commission created consumer-friendly fact sheets and other materials online about its Affordable Connectivity Program and translated them into Chinese (Simplified and Traditional), Korean, Vietnamese, and Tagalog.

Following a listening session with journalists about COVID recovery-related scams, the Federal Trade Commission placed a series of multilingual advertorials and live-announcer scripts in 68 print publications and 26 radio stations in Asian American, Black, Latino, and Tribal communities. 

The Social Security Administration expanded its Multi-Language Gateway internet site to include Tagalog and Simplified Chinese translated publications. SSA also made linguistic updates to its visitor intake kiosks to better facilitate the check-in process at local field offices. 

Building Capacity in AA and NHPI Communities
By increasing access to federal contracts, grants, and opportunities, the federal government is helping to break down persistent barriers to federal resources, center equity in grant-making, and build the capacity of AA and NHPI communities and organizations across the country.

The Department of the Treasury and the Department of Agriculture increased their grants, loans, and investments in infrastructure to Hawaii, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of Marshall Islands, and the Republic of Palau by over $85 million and $87.4 million, respectively.  

The Department of Commerce’s Minority Business Development Agency (MBDA) awarded $3.9 million in federal funding to 13 grant recipients to establish American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian projects that addressed innovation and entrepreneurship, strategic planning, and/or transformative projects.

Several federal agencies continued investing in Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander-Serving Institutions (AANAPISIs) through grants, cooperative agreements, and direct financial relief to students, including the Department of Defense ($4.8 million), Department of Energy ($57.2 million), and Department of Education ($5 billion).

The Department of Housing and Urban Development made available $5 million in Native Hawaiian Housing Block Grant funding via the President’s American Rescue Plan, providing critical rental and utility assistance to 564 low-income Native Hawaiian families and supporting homeownership by issuing 107 mortgage loan guarantees in FY 2021 and FY 2022. 

The Small Business Administration distributed to AA and NHPI business owners and entrepreneurs: 1,084 loans through its 504 Program totaling $1.5 billion; 5,603 loans through its 7(a) Program totaling $5.3 billion; and 165 micro-loans totaling $3.7 billion (in FY 2022) and 22,725 grants via the temporary Cares Act Restaurant Revitalization Fund totaling $5.9 billion  (in FY 2021).

The Department of the Interior’s Office of Insular Affairs (OIA) provided $55 million through CARES Act grant assistance for facilities, medicine, food, and supplies to Pacific Islander populations in the U.S. territories, the Republic of Palau, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and to support OIA’s Insular Area Pacific Islander populations in the contiguous United States.

Creating a Diverse Federal Workforce
The Biden-Harris Administration strives to make the federal government a model for diversity, equity, and inclusion and reflects the lived experiences and rich cultural backgrounds of all Americans, including the diverse members of the AA and NHPI community.

The Office of Personnel Management co-leads the whole-of-government effort to implement Executive Order 14035, Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility in the Federal Workforce.

The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office is working to improve recruitment and retention efforts for members of underserved communities, including those in the AA and NHPI community who now comprise 28% of the overall workforce.

In Spring 2021, Congress established five new discretionary advisory committees in the U.S. territories, and the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights subsequently appointed a total of 30 new members, 14 of whom self-identify as Asian/Asian American, Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, or Mixed Ethnicity/Other. 

Currently, 17% of appointees at the National Endowment for the Arts identify as AA or NHPI, and President Biden nominated two AA and NHPI council members to its governing body, the National Council on the Arts.

The General Services Administration’s AA and NHPI affinity group launched a mentoring program to encourage career growth and development.

Increasing Outreach and Engagement Efforts and Cultivating Community Partnerships
To ensure that government policies are informed by and reflect the needs of the AA and NHPI community, agencies are engaging in meaningful outreach efforts to hear from community stakeholders, deepen partnerships, and expand access to government programs.   

The Department of Veterans Affairs is working to understand the unmet needs of minority and women Veterans in the Pacific Islands and freely associated states.

In August 2021, the Department of Homeland Security’s Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) issued ICE Directive 11005.3, Using a Victim-Centered Approach with Noncitizen Crime Victims, which could offer protection from the threat of deportation for AA and NHPI victims of domestic violence, hate crimes, and human trafficking.

U.S. Trade Representative Ambassador Katherine Tai connected with AA and NHPI communities across the country, including with the Hmong community in La Crosse, Wisconsin, and AA and NHPI leaders in Chicago, Illinois; Charlotte, North Carolina; and students in Massachusetts.

The National Science Foundation established a Native Hawaiian working group during the construction of the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope in Maui. Researchers will acknowledge in any resulting scientific publications that the site is located on land of spiritual and cultural significance to Native Hawaiian people.

The Environmental Protection Agency provided technical assistance and support for local Vietnamese leaders and communities following Hurricane Ida in September 2021 and continued to offer emergency preparedness in response to natural disasters.





FACT SHEET: President Biden Announces New Actions to Secure the Border

New actions will bar migrants who cross our Southern border unlawfully from receiving asylum

Biden taking action as Congressional Republicans put partisan politics ahead of national security, twice voting against toughest reforms in decades


Since his first day in office, President Biden has called on Congress to secure our border and address our broken immigration system. Over the past three years, while Congress has failed to act, the President has acted to secure our border. His Administration has deployed the most agents and officers ever to address the situation at the Southern border, seized record levels of illicit fentanyl at our ports of entry, and brought together world leaders on a framework to deal with changing migration patterns that are impacting the entire Western Hemisphere. 

Earlier this year, the President and his team reached a historic bipartisan agreement with Senate Democrats and Republicans to deliver the most consequential reforms of America’s immigration laws in decades. This agreement would have added critical border and immigration personnel, invested in technology to catch illegal fentanyl, delivered sweeping reforms to the asylum system, and provided emergency authority for the President to shut down the border when the system is overwhelmed. But Republicans in Congress chose to put partisan politics ahead of our national security, twice voting against the toughest and fairest set of reforms in decades.

President Biden believes we must secure our border. That is why today, he announced executive actions to bar migrants who cross our Southern border unlawfully from receiving asylum. These actions will be in effect when high levels of encounters at the Southern Border exceed our ability to deliver timely consequences, as is the case today. They will make it easier for immigration officers to remove those without a lawful basis to remain and reduce the burden on our Border Patrol agents.

But we must be clear: this cannot achieve the same results as Congressional action, and it does not provide the critical personnel and funding needed to further secure our Southern border. Congress still must act.

The Biden-Harris Administration’s executive actions will:  

Bar Migrants Who Cross the Southern Border Unlawfully From Receiving Asylum

President Biden issued a proclamation under Immigration and Nationality Act sections 212(f) and 215(a) suspending entry of noncitizens who cross the Southern border into the United States unlawfully. This proclamation is accompanied by an interim final rule from the Departments of Justice and Homeland Security that restricts asylum for those noncitizens.

These actions will be in effect when the Southern border is overwhelmed, and they will make it easier for immigration officers to quickly remove individuals who do not have a legal basis to remain in the United States.

These actions are not permanent. They will be discontinued when the number of migrants who cross the border between ports of entry is low enough for America’s system to safely and effectively manage border operations. These actions also include similar humanitarian exceptions to those included in the bipartisan border agreement announced in the Senate, including those for unaccompanied children and victims of trafficking.

Recent Actions to secure our border and address our broken immigration system:

Strengthening the Asylum Screening Process

The Department of Homeland Security published a proposed rule to ensure that migrants who pose a public safety or national security risk are removed as quickly in the process as possible rather than remaining in prolonged, costly detention prior to removal. This proposed rule will enhance security and deliver more timely consequences for those who do not have a legal basis to remain in the United States.

Announced new actions to more quickly resolve immigration cases

The Department of Justice and Department of Homeland Security launched a Recent Arrivals docket to more quickly resolve a portion of immigration cases for migrants who attempt to cross between ports of entry at the Southern border in violation of our immigration laws.

Through this process, the Department of Justice will be able to hear these cases more quickly and the Department of Homeland Security will be able to more quickly remove individuals who do not have a legal basis to remain in the United States and grant protection to those with valid claims.

The bipartisan border agreement would have created and supported an even more efficient framework for issuing final decisions to all asylum seekers. This new process to reform our overwhelmed immigration system can only be created and funded by Congress.

Revoked visas of CEOs and government officials who profit from migrants coming to the U.S. unlawfully

The Department of State imposed visa restrictions on executives of several Colombian transportation companies who profit from smuggling migrants by sea. This action cracks down on companies that help facilitate unlawful entry into the United States, and sends a clear message that no one should profit from the exploitation of vulnerable migrants.

The State Department also imposed visa restrictions on over 250 members of the Nicaraguan government, non-governmental actors, and their immediate family members for their roles in supporting the Ortega-Murillo regime, which is selling transit visas to migrants from within and beyond the Western Hemisphere who ultimately make their way to the Southern border.

Previously, the State Department revoked visas of executives of charter airlines for similar actions.

Expanded Efforts to Dismantle Human Smuggling and Support Immigration Prosecutions

The Departments of State and Justice launched an “Anti-Smuggling Rewards” initiative designed to dismantle the leadership of human smuggling organizations that bring migrants through Central America and across the Southern U.S. border. The initiative will offer financial rewards for information leading to the identification, location, arrest, or conviction of those most responsible for significant human smuggling activities in the region.

The Department of Justice will seek new and increased penalties against human smugglers to properly account for the severity of their criminal conduct and the human misery that it causes.

The Department of Justice is also partnering with the Department of Homeland Security to direct additional prosecutors and support staff to increase immigration-related prosecutions in crucial border U.S. Attorney’s Offices. Efforts include deploying additional DHS Special Assistant United States Attorneys to different U.S. Attorneys’ offices, assigning support staff to critical U.S. Attorneys’ offices, including DOJ Attorneys to serve details in U.S. Attorneys’ Offices in several border districts, and partnering with federal agencies to identify additional resources to target these crimes.

Enhancing Immigration Enforcement

The Department of Homeland Security has surged agents to the Southern border and is referring a record number of people into expedited removal.

The Department of Homeland Security is operating more repatriation flights per week than ever before. Over the past year, DHS has removed or returned more than 750,000 people, more than in every fiscal year since 2010.

Working closely with partners throughout the region, the Biden-Harris Administration is identifying and collaborating on enforcement efforts designed to stop irregular migration before migrants reach our Southern border, expand investment and integration opportunities in the region to support those who may otherwise seek to migrate, and increase lawful pathways for migrants as an alternative to irregular migration.

Seizing Fentanyl at our Border

Border officials have seized more fentanyl at ports of entry in the last two years than the past five years combined, and the President has added 40 drug detection machines across points of entry to disrupt the fentanyl smuggling into the Homeland. The bipartisan border agreement would fund the installation of 100 additional cutting-edge inspection machines to help detect fentanyl at our Southern border ports of entry.

In close partnership with the Government of Mexico, the Department of Justice has extradited Nestor Isidro Perez Salaz, known as “El Nini,” from Mexico to the United States to face prosecution for his role in illicit fentanyl trafficking and human rights abuses. This is one of many examples of joint efforts with Mexico to tackle the fentanyl and synthetic drug epidemic that is killing so many people in our countries and globally, and to hold the drug trafficking organizations to account.

























FACT SHEET: The President’s Budget Secures Our Border, Combats Fentanyl Trafficking, and Calls on Congress to Enact Critical Immigration Reform

From his first day in office, President Biden has called on Congress to act to address our broken immigration system. Over the past three years, while waiting for Congress to act, the Administration has taken important steps to secure our border. The President has secured more resources for border security than any President before him, and in October he requested even more funding to secure the border, build capacity to enforce immigration law, and counter illicit fentanyl. The Administration has deployed the most agents and officers ever to address the situation at the southwest border, seized record levels of illicit fentanyl at our ports of entry, and brought together world leaders on a framework to deal with changing migration patterns that are impacting the entire Western Hemisphere.

Just recently, the President led the way on achieving a bipartisan agreement for the toughest, fairest border reform legislation in decades. The President and his team reached a historic bipartisan agreement with Senate Democrats and Republicans on border policy reforms and funding in February that would provide a fairer and more efficient process for asylum claims. The agreement also provides for emergency authority for the President to shut down the border when the system is overwhelmed, additional immigrant visas for families and workers, expedited work permits for those already here, and significant funding for more immigration judges, asylum officers, and Border Patrol agents and officers to secure the border and combat illicit fentanyl. Congressional Republicans should stop stonewalling this historic deal and work to send the legislation to the President’s desk.

The President’s Budget builds on these measures by ensuring adequate base resources for border enforcement, while continuing to reiterate the need for Congress to pass legislation and provide meaningful reforms and supplemental funding to secure the border. The Budget includes a $1.9 billion (7 percent) base budget increase for U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), as well as funds to expand and improve the immigration courts, address the root causes of migration, and combat illicit fentanyl trafficking. The President’s FY25 Budget:

Reiterates the Administration’s Request for Immediate Funding to Secure the Border, Build Capacity to Enforce Immigration Law, and Counter Illicit Fentanyl. In October 2023, the Administration transmitted an emergency supplemental request to Congress for the southwest border and migration issues totaling $13.6 billion. The Budget includes, and therefore reiterates the need for, the unmet needs from the October supplemental request. In addition to urgent requirements, the request includes investments to build longer-term capacity in the areas of border security, immigration enforcement, and countering illicit fentanyl, totaling $4.3 billion for the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the Department of Justice (DOJ). This amount includes $405 million to hire 1,300 additional Border Patrol Agents to secure the border, $239 million to hire 1,000 additional CBP Officers to stop illicit fentanyl and other contraband from entering the U.S., $755 million to hire an additional 1,600 Asylum Officers and support staff to facilitate timely immigration dispositions, $100 million for Homeland Security Investigations to investigate and disrupt transnational criminal organizations and drug traffickers, $1.3 billion for the Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR) to fund the hiring of 375 new immigration judge teams to help reduce the immigration case backlog, and $849 million for cutting-edge detection technology at ports of entry. Taken together, these long-term capacity building investments equip the Nation’s border security and immigration system to more effectively respond to challenges present along the border. In addition, the Administration appreciates the Senate’s bipartisan border legislation that would make additional investments in DHS and provide authorities to bolster the Department’s efforts to secure and manage the border.

Continues to Invest in Critical Capabilities Needed for Border and Immigration Enforcement.  Strengthening border security and providing safe, lawful pathways for migration remain top priorities for the Administration. The Budget builds on the Administration’s October supplemental request to include an additional $25.9 billion for CBP and ICE, an increase of $1.9 billion over the 2023 enacted level when controlling for border management amounts. The Budget includes funds for CBP to hire an additional 350 Border Patrol Agents and 310 processing coordinators, $127 million for border security technology between ports of entry, and $86 million in air and maritime operational support that is central to efforts to secure the border. The Budget also includes funds to support 34,000 ICE immigration detention beds; $225 million to address increased transportation and removal costs; and $34 million to combat child exploitation, forced labor, and human trafficking.

Enables Access to Resources to Scale Border Enforcement Capacity for Conditions on the Southwest Border. Given the uncertainty surrounding border conditions in any given year, the Budget proposes a $4.7 billion contingency fund to aid the Department and its components when responding to migration surges along the Southwest border. Modeled on a contingency fund provided for unaccompanied children, each fiscal year, the fund would receive appropriations incrementally and above the base appropriation as Southwest border encounters reach pre-identified levels. DHS could use these funds for surge-related functions only, and would transfer funds to CBP, ICE, and FEMA accounts when appropriate conditions are met.

Supports America’s Promise to Resettle Refugees and Care for Unaccompanied Children. The Budget builds on the Administration’s October supplemental request and provides an additional $9.3 billion for the Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR) to help rebuild the Nation’s refugee resettlement infrastructure and support the resettling of up to 125,000 refugees in 2025. The Budget also helps ensure that unaccompanied immigrant children receive appropriate support and services while they are in ORR’s care and are unified with relatives and sponsors as safely and quickly as possible. This funding would allow ORR to continue the programmatic improvements the Administration has made, including expanding access to counsel to help children navigate complex immigration court proceedings and enhancing case management and post-release services. In addition, the Budget includes an emergency contingency fund that would provide additional resources, beyond the $9.3 billion, when there are unanticipated increases in the number of unaccompanied children.

Improves Immigration Courts. The Budget builds on the Administration’s October supplemental request and invests $981 million, an increase of $121 million above the 2023 enacted level, in EOIR to enhance America’s immigration courts and help address the backlog of over 2.4 million currently pending cases. This funding supports 25 new immigration judge teams, which includes the support personnel necessary to ensure efficient case processing. The Budget also invests $30 million for EOIR to partner to with the U.S. Digital Service to develop and implement digital court operations strategies that will maximize each judge’s adjudicatory capacity and help reduce the case backlog.

Addresses the Root Causes of Migration. The Budget provides approximately $1 billion for Central American programming to meet the President’s commitment to invest $4 billion in Central America over four years to address the root causes of migration. The Budget also supports hemispheric programs to advance economic prosperity and regional security through key initiatives such as the America’s Partnership for Economic Prosperity, including $75 million for a capital increase to the Inter-American Development Bank’s (IDB Invest) to advance clean energy projects, modernize agriculture, strengthen transportation systems, and expand access to financing. The Budget further reserves $35 million in additional targeted funding for regional migration management, including $25 million for the IDB’s Migration Grant Facility to support integration efforts for migrants and host communities and address the root causes of irregular migration.

Combats Narcotics Trafficking Networks and Secures the Border and Our Communities. The Budget allocates $6.6 billion for DHS to invest in its counternarcotics efforts, including $4.5 billion for drug-related resources associated with border security, immigration enforcement, and countering illicit fentanyl. Additionally, the Administration remains committed to providing law enforcement with the resources and necessary personnel to defend our borders from illicit drug trade by reiterating the October 2023 emergency supplemental request for an additional $849 million for cutting edge drug detection technology at the border, $239 million for 1,000 additional CBP officers, $100 million to expand Homeland Security Investigations’ capacity for counter-fentanyl investigations and enforcement, and $14 million for additional research and development of narcotics detection and forensics, for a total supplemental request for DHS of $1.2 billion. These resources are critical to the fight against illicit opioids.

The Budget also provides $2.3 billion to the Department of Justice to combat opioid trafficking and reduce the supply and demand of deadly illicit fentanyl in American communities, including $1.2 billion for the Drug Enforcement Administration, $367 million for the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Forces, and $61 million for the Federal Bureau of Investigation. This also includes an additional $18 million in Counter-Fentanyl Threat Targeting Teams at the DEA to enhance America’s fight against the transnational criminal networks pushing deadly illicit fentanyl. These interdisciplinary teams of special agents, intelligence analysts, and data experts will map criminal organizations and build cases that lead to the dismantlement of entire drug trafficking networks and the deprivation of hundreds of millions of dollars to the Sinaloa and Jalisco cartels. This also includes $494 million in grants supporting efforts to address opioid use and trafficking, including $190 million for the Comprehensive Opioid, Stimulant, and Substance Use Program, $95 million to support Drug Courts, and $51 million for anti-drug task forces.The Budget further invests $290 million in the High-Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas Program to provide state and local law enforcement with resources to combat the most dangerous illicit drug threats in their communities. The Budget further includes $1.1 billion for the Department of Defense to support security cooperation efforts with partner nations; counterdrug operations, detection and monitoring efforts in support of drug interdiction operations; and treatment, recovery, and education efforts.

Disrupts the International Synthetic Drug Trade. The Budget includes $169 million across State and USAID to counter illicit fentanyl and other synthetic drug production and trafficking, 58 percent above 2023 estimated levels. These resources would counter the worldwide flow of fentanyl and other synthetics that endanger public safety and health, and contribute to tens of thousands of drug-overdose deaths in the United States annually.

Combats Corruption and Increases Corporate Transparency. Treasury plays a leading role in monitoring and disrupting corruption, money laundering, terrorist financing, the use of the financial system by malicious actors domestically and abroad, and combatting the trafficking of illicit substances such as fentanyl in American communities. The Budget provides $216 million for the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, $26 million above the 2023 level, to support Beneficial Ownership Information reporting which will be required for existing covered companies beginning in 2025. This reporting will provide investigative tools making it harder for bad actors—including major narcotics traffickers—to hide or benefit from their ill-gotten gains through shell companies or other opaque ownership structures.





Remarks by President Biden on Border Security and Enforcement

Roosevelt Room

11:54 A.M. EST

THE PRESIDENT: Hi, everybody. Sorry to keep you waiting. There’s a lot going on.

Today, I’d like to — the Vice President and I would like to talk you about how my administration is dealing with our situation in the southwest border.

Now, these actions alone that I’m going to announce today aren’t going to fix our entire immigration system, but they can help us a good deal in better managing what is a difficult challenge.

On my first day in office, some of you may recall, who cover this area — and they cover it well — I sent Congress a comprehensive piece of legislation that would completely overhaul what has been a broken immigration system for a long time: cracking down on illegal immigration; strengthening legal immigration; and protecting DREAMers, those with temporary protected status, and farmworkers, who all are part of the fabric of our nation.

But congressional Republicans have refused to consider my comprehensive plan. And they rejected my recent request for an additional $3.5 billion to secure the border and funds for 2,000 new asylum personnel, another — asylum officers and personnel — and 100 new immigration judges so people don’t have to wait years to get their claims adjudicated, which they have a right to make a claim legally.

And the failure to pass and fund this comprehensive plan has increased the challenges that we’re seeing at our southwest border. No one knows this better than the Vice President.

And to truly understand what’s happening there, it’s important to step back and see our — see the bigger picture here.

You know, I — I know it’s hard to see, but because our politics has been so divisive — you know it’s getting much better, as you’ve all observed, but it’s been so darn divisive that it — it clouds the picture. I mean, it clouds the picture.

But let me explain what I’m going to do in — as clearly and plainly as I can. I know it’s a complicated issue. I don’t want to pretend there’s anything easy about it.

People come to America for a whole lot of different reasons. To seek new opportunity in what is the strongest economy in the world. Can’t blame them wanting to do it. They flee oppression, you know, to the — to the freest nation in the world. They chase their own American Dream in the greatest nation in the world.

And the story of America is the story of so many of your families — including mine, going back to the mid-1800s from Ireland.

Now, there are a number of ways to immigrate to America legally under our existing laws. For example, an American citizen — an American citizen can sponsor an immediate family member from another country. An American company can sponsor an employee from another country. There are visas for students to study in our colleges and other special categories.

And regardless of the legal pathway they pro- — they process — they process them to require everyone be involved in following the law. That’s the notion. There are laws to get here legally. That includes another legal way for someone to come to America by seeking asylum because they’re fleeing persecution, like a lot of our ancestors did as well.

And for many people, that’s what’s happening at our southwest border now.

Over the past several years, thousands of people have been fleeing from Central and South America and the Caribbean countries ruled by oppressive dictators — including Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela — and escaping gang violence, which has the same impact, in Haiti.

Currently, these four countries account for most of the people traveling into Mexico to start a new life by getting at the — to the American border and trying to cross.

But instead of safe and orderly process at the border, we have a patchwork system that simply doesn’t work as it should. We don’t have enough asylum officers or personnel to determine whether people qualify for asylum. There’s a standard by what you have to meet. You don’t — we don’t have enough immigrant judges — immigration judges to adjudicate the claims of immigrants.

In fact, the previous administration used a rule called Title 42 to deal with — to deal with the pandemic, a rapidly — to rapidly expel people who crossed the border. It was a — designed to deal with the pandemic, but it’s used as a means to expel people at the border.

People turned away under Title 42, and they are not — and — and they’re not barred from trying to come back. They’ve been turned away. They go back. They try again. They try again. Well, you know, they can and they do try to re-enter the United States again and again, which makes the problem that borders — at the border even worse.

And under the United States Supreme Court decision, a case on Title 42 later this year, my administration will — and they will make a decision, finally, what to do about Title 42. In the meantime, my administration will continue to use that authority as the Supreme Court has required.

And until Congress passes the funds — a comprehensive immigration plan to fix the system completely — my administration is going to work to make things better at the border using the tools that we have available to us now.

Today, my administration is taking several steps to stiffen enforcement for those who try to come without a legal right to stay, and to put in place a faster process — I emphasize a “faster process” — to decide a claim of asylum, someone who says, “I’m coming because I’m escaping oppression.” Well, there’s got to be a way to determine that much quicker for people who are credibly seeking protection from persecution.

Secretary of Homeland Security Mayorkas will detail these actions very shortly, after I finish, at Homeland Security.

But here’s one significant step we’re taking: Over the summer, we saw a huge spike in the number of Venezuelans traveling through — through Mexico and attempting to enter the United States without going through our legal processes.

They res- — we responded by using and ensuring that there are two safe and lawful ways for someone leaving the country to come to America. And that was one of the reasons you — you were proposing.

First, if they’re seeking asylum, they can use an app on their cell phone called CBP One — O-N-E — CBP One — O-N-E. That’s to spell it out, not the number “1.” To schedule an appointment at a port of entry and make their asylum claim there without crossing the border unlawfully and have a decision determined by an asylum officer, do they qualify.

Second, in October, we worked with the Mexican government to launch a new parole program. There’s another program called the — you all know it, but the public may not — called the “parole program” that immediately showed results by reducing the number of people crossing the border unlawfully. The way this parole program works: One must have a lawful sponsor here in the United States who agrees to sponsor you to get here.

Then, that person has to go — undergo rigorous background checks and apply from outside the United States and not cross the border illegally in the meantime.

If they apply and their application is approved, they can use the same app, the CBP One app, to present at a port of entry and be able to work in the United States legally for two years. That’s the process.

But if their application is denied or if they attempt to cross into the United States unlawfully, they will be returned back to Mexico and will not be eligible for this program after that.

So, they — if they — if they — we’re making the program available. If they apply and they do it properly, fine. If they — if they don’t apply and they try to come through, they’re not going to have an opportunity to deal with the program.

This new process is orderly, it’s safe, and it’s humane. And it works.

Since we created the new program, the number of Venezuelans trying to enter America without going through a legal process has dropped dramatically, from about 1,100 per day to less than 250 per day on average. That’s several hundred people on average every single day who are not crossing into America illegally.

Today I’m announcing that my administration is going to expand the parole program for people not only from Venezuela but from Cuba, Nicaragua, and Haiti.

Again, these four countries — Venezuela, Cuba and — Cuba and Nicaragua and Haiti — these four countries account for most of the people now traveling into Mexico to try to start a new life by crossing the border into the United States of America on the southwest border.

We anticipate this action is going to substantially reduce the number of people attempting — attempting to cross our southwest border without going through a legal process.

In fact, today I’m announcing that Mexico has agreed to allow up to re- — to return up to 30,000 persons per month who try, get caught, and get sent back from those four countries
who are apprehended while attempting to unlawfully cross the border — the southwest border.

My message is this: If you’re trying to leave Cuba, Nicaragua, or Haiti, you have — and we — or have agreed to begin a journey to America, do not — do not just show up at the border. Stay where you are and apply legally from there.

Starting today, if you don’t apply through the legal process, you will not be eligible for this new parole program.

Let me reiterate: You need a lawful sponsor in the United States of America, number one. And you need to undergo a rigorous background check, number two.

If your application is approved and you show up at — at a U.S. airport or when and where directed — (coughs) — excuse me — you have access.

But if your application is denied or you attempt to cross into the United States unlawfully, you will not be allowed to enter.

Look, we should all recognize that as long as America is the land of freedom and opportunity, people are going to try to come here. And that’s what many of our ancestors did, and it’s no surprise that it’s happening again today.

We can’t stop people from making the journey, but we can require them to come here, and they — that they come here in an orderly way under U.S. law.

And let me say it again: The actions we’re announcing today will make things better — will make things better but will not fix the border problem completely. There’s more that has to be done, and I laid that out in the first week I was here.

That work will not be done unless and until the Congress enacts and funds a more comprehensive immigration plan that I proposed on day one.

Until Congress has acted, I — I can act where I have legal capacity to do so.

Last year, I brought together 20 leaders — many of you were there — from the Western Hemisphere — heads of state — to stabilize the flow of immigration, to expand pathways to immigration, and to manage border — and to manage the border humanely.

The leaders of the hemisphere have built on those efforts that I led when I was Vice President to expand economic assistance to nations in north Central America so people here can — there — there can improve their economic prospects at home, instead of having to leave for the United States.

Most people would much rather stay in the country they are if they can feed their families, be safe, send their kids to school, and have opportunity.

It’s not like people — you’ve heard me say it before: It’s not like people are sitting around a table in — somewhere in Central America and saying, “I got a great idea. Let’s sell everything we have. Let’s give it to a coyote, a smuggler. They’ll take us on a harrowing journey for thousands of miles to get to the United States, then we’re going to illegally cross the border. They’re going to drop us in a desert. And we’re — in a place where we don’t speak the language. Won’t that be fun?” I’m not being facetious.

Well, [Vice] President Harris led this effort — led this effort to make things better in the countries from which they are leaving. And thanks to her leadership, she’s been able to generate more than $3.2 billion from the private sector to create jobs and opportunities in El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala to help people stay in their own countries — home countries where it’ll be safer and they have some opportunities.

We’ve also set up a joint patrols and law enforcement with Mexico and Guatemala that share real-time information on locations that smugglers are using to convince migrant groups to cross illegally.

That’s what they’re doing. This is — they’re — they’re out recruiting — recruiting — they’re taking all the savings or anything they have to take them on an incredibly dangerous journey.

We embedded our Border Patrol officers with Mexican patrols to detect and — and raid human smuggling operations. This has been — we — thus far, there have — more than 7,000 arrests of human smugglers in the last six months. Seven thousand.

That’s not just human smuggling at the border. We’re focused on cracking down on drug smuggling, which is a serious and deadly promise — or, excuse me, a pro- — problem. And I made a promise we would try this.

My administration has allocated record funding that added hundreds of additional Border Patrol agents and installed new cutting-edge technologies to be able to use incr- — effectively — you know, it’s like a X-ray machine, detailed to be able to look through these large containers to determine what’s in the container and — at the border.

For example, since August of last year, Customs and Border Patrol have seized more than 20,000 pounds of deadly fentanyl. That’s enough to kill — kill as many as 1,000 people in this country. Twenty thousand pounds of fentanyl. It’s a killer. It’s a flat killer.

And next week, I’m going to travel to Mexico where I’m going to meet with President López Obrador. We have a big agenda that ranges from the climate crisis to economic development and other issues. But one important part of that agenda is strengthening our border between our nations.

And I will visit the border myself this Sunday, in El Paso, to assess border enforcement operations, meet with the local officials and community leaders and the folks at the border sending me what they need that they don’t have, and make it public what they conclude they need they don’t have to try to convince my Republican colleagues they should do something.

And I know that migration is putting a real strain on the borders and on border communities. They can’t do but — anything but that.

We’re going to get these communities more support. And I want to thank all the nonprofits, the faith groups, the community leaders, and other volunteers who will make sure that vulnerable immigrants have what they need to survive, whether it’s food, warm clothing, shelter, medical care right after their arrival.

These religious and civic groups represent our — our nation’s generosity — the best of our country. They really do. They really do. And they’re a powerful rebuke to the hostility and even the hate which many people face when they arrive here legally.

So let me close with this. Our problems at the border didn’t arise overnight and they’re not going to be solved overnight. It’s a difficult problem.

It’s clear that immigration is a political issue that extreme Republicans are always going to run on. But now they have a choice: They can keep using immigration to try to score political points or they can help solve the problem. They can help solve the problem and come together to fix the broken system.

Before Congress adjourned for the holidays, some Democrats and Republicans, a few of them, got together — both sides, up in the Senate — and decided they were going to put together a comprehensive plan on immigration.

But the Republican leadership and other Republi- — I don’t know who — exactly who did it — rebuked it and rejected it out of hand — it broke up — just like they rejected my plan two years ago, just like they rejected my recent request for an additional $3.5 billion to secure and manage the border with more holding facilities, better transportation, additional funding for 2,000 new asylum officers and personnel, 100 new immigration judges to more rapidly adjudicate for people when they come here, and how much — and so much more.

Think about it. I mean, if this were something if we were — if we had to have 100 more immigration officers to see to it that we’re able to import something we needed very badly, it wouldn’t take very much time to get it, would it? It’d be real done. Or, conversely, if there were criminal gangs coming into the — into the nation or the — I mean —

But when it comes to immigration, it seems like it’s a better issue — a better issue for them than trying to solve it.

Look, we need me- — we need more resources to secure the border. Yet again, extreme Republicans have said no. Many Republicans agree we should do something. But it’s time to stop listening to their inflammatory talk, and it’s time to look at their record.

As I’ve always done when I sit down — I’ll sit down with anyone who, in good faith, wants to fix our broken immigration system. And it’s hard. It’s hard on the best of circumstances. But if the most extreme Republicans continue to demagogue this issue and reject solutions, I’m left with only one choice: to act on my own, do as much as I can on my own to try to change the atmosphere.

Immigration reform used to be a bipartisan issue. We can make it that way again. It’s not only the right thing to do, it’s economically a smart thing to do.

That’s why immigration reform is supported by everyone. Think of this now. I re- — want to remind the public: Immigration reform is supported by the American labor movement — unions. It’s supported by religious leaders. It’s supported by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.

We can secure our border, fix the immigration system to be orderly, fair, safe, and humane. We can do all this while keeping lit the torch of liberty that has led generations of immigration to America — many of our forebearers, many of yours.

We can do this by remembering who we are. You’ve heard me say this a million times. We’re the United States of America. The idea this is beyond our capacity, I just don’t buy. We can do anything if we do it together.

And you’ve heard me say it also, many times: God bless you all. And may God protect our troops.

I’m going to stop here. And in a few minutes — literally, a few minutes; Secretary Mayorkas and I have been coordinating — he’s going to be speaking in much greater detail and will take questions at the Department of Homeland Security headquarters.

So, I want to thank you for your time. And this is going to be — this is a hard one to — to deal with, but we have to deal with it. I mean, we — it’s who we are.

Q Mr. President, do you believe that immigr- — that migration is a human right? Activists say that it is. What’s your take?

THE PRESIDENT: Well, I think it is a human right if — to have your — if your family is being persecuted, if you’re being dealt with in a way — I mean, like it was — I thought it was a human right for, you know, Jews in Germany to be able to go — to get to escape and get help where they could.

But the other side of this is there’s also — the people in this country have basic rights — that are here — basic fundamental rights to assure the people who are coming have been checked out. They’re not criminals. They’re not problem. They’re — you know, that their background checks are real. They —

I mean, look, if you think about it, there’s not a whole lot of countries people would rather live in than here. No, I mean it sincerely. I think about this, and I think this is — sometimes, the team looks at me like maybe I’m out of my mind here.

But all kidding aside, if you just said, tomorrow, “All right, for the next year, you can move to any country you want without any questions.” How many people do you think are going to leave the United States? And I can name any of the 140-some countries I’ve been to — there’s more than that. I think you’d get — a lot would be willing to leave and come here. So, there — there’s a rationale. There has to be an orderly process and a rationale to it.

But it is — and there’s other ways we can deal with this, as I said. You may remember — no, you — I don’t think you’re old enough to have been doing it when I was doing it as a senator, when I came up with a proposal to have billions of dollars of funding for the — Central America to keep people where they are. Remember, we were putting —

And it was very, very precise. For example, if the country was in economic difficulty — and most of them are because of climate and other things — and we’d say, “Okay. Well, we have a pro- — they have a problem. Well, guess what? They don’t have lighting in their — in their town squares. They can’t — they can’t, you know, assure the safety of people walking the streets.”

Well, if their leader asked for money, we made them sign a proposal that they’re going to do lighting in the town squares — what they’re going do, exactly what they’re going to do. We checked it out, we put it in, and it began to work.

Or hospitals — where you have hospitals that don’t function because they don’t have the following. Well, one of the reasons people will stay is if you’ve improved the hospital. We were doing that.

And the thing that I’m so — presumptive of me to say “proud of” — but proud of the Vice President, she went beyond the United States and contributors to try to get the rest of the world to say, “Look, this makes sense.”

And you know, she got commitments of 3.5, I think?

THE VICE PRESIDENT: Two. Three point two.

THE PRESIDENT: $3.2 billion.

And so, there’s a — there’s a lot to be done. And think about it. Even back in days when — it’s so easy to demagogue this issue. It’s so easy to demagogue it. And you hear, you know, a number of our friends, the MAGA Republicans, talking about, you know, “They don’t even want me to speak in English anymore. They want me speak in dah, dah, dah. They’re going to — they’re going to take over my community, my nei…” “They.” “They.” Whoever “they” are at the time.

Well, you know, that’s what a lot of folks went through when they got here, going all the way back to the 1800s. It’s not new. It’s — part of it is human nature and fear.

But there’s got to be an orderly way. And I know we can make it much, much better.

Q Mr. President, why did you decide that now is finally the right time to visit the southern border? Republicans have been calling on you to do this since the beginning of your presidency.

THE PRESIDENT: Because the Republicans haven’t been serious about this at all. Come on. They haven’t been serious about this at all.

I wanted to make sure that I knew what the outcome — at least the near outcome was on Title 42 before I went down. We don’t have that yet, so I had to operate — I don’t like Title 42. But it’s the law now, and I have to operate within it.

It’s — my prediction is — it’s not — there’s nothing particularly insightful about this: Title 42 is going to go away before the end of the year, in terms of the Supreme Court, in my prediction. And then we’re going to have to use Title 9 — Title 8.

Eight, right? Am I right? Yeah. Title 8. Eight, nine — (laughs).

And — which is — which we can implement what we’re doing here plus some other things.

But so, I wanted to make sure there was a rational way in which we could begin to announce it, but I couldn’t wait once the Supreme Court ruled that they’re not going to make the final decision on Title 42 for some time — you know, for another — who knows? Probably not until June — in that range, although I don’t know that for a fact — to be able to lay this out.

But, look, Mayorkas is waiting to impress you all, all kidding aside.

Q Are you concerned about the effect that requiring an airline ticket could prejudice or sort of make — lean it toward wealthier migrants and —

THE PRESIDENT: Yes.

Q — kind of make it harder for poorer migrants?

THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. But there’s also ways to get to ports of entry along the border as well.

Q So — I’m sorry.

Q Go ahead.

Q So the ceasefire proposed by — by President Putin in Ukraine for the Orthodox Christmas on January 6th, 7th — have you heard about that? Do you have a reaction to whether it’s —

THE PRESIDENT: I’m reluctant to respond to anything Putin says. I found it interesting. He was ready to bomb hospitals and nurseries and churches and with the — with — on the 25th and New Year’s. And, I mean, you know, I — I think he’s trying to find some oxygen.

Thank you so very much.

Q Are you still monitoring the Speaker’s race? Are you still watching the Speaker’s race?

THE PRESIDENT: I’m monitoring — I’m — I’m following it with great — how can I say it?

THE VICE PRESIDENT: Attention.

THE PRESIDENT: Attention. (Laughter.)

12:19 P.M. EST