THE STATUTES OF THE REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
CUSTOMS ACT 1960
2020 REVISED EDITION
This revised edition incorporates all amendments up to and
including 1 December 2021 and comes into operation on 31 December 2021.
Prepared and Published by
THE LAW REVISION COMMISSION
UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF
THE REVISED EDITION OF THE LAWS ACT 1983
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Customs Act 1960
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
PRELIMINARY
Section
1.
Short title
2.
Scope of Act
3.
Interpretation
PART 2
APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS
4.
Appointment of Director‑General and other officers
5.
Powers of Director‑General to delegate
6.
Officers of customs to be public servants
6A.
Officers of customs to be armed
7.
Powers of police officers
8.
Authority card to be produced
9.
Persons employed on customs duty to be deemed proper officers
of customs
PART 3
LEVYING OF DUTY AND TAX
10.
Levying of duties
11.
Power of Director‑General to waive duty, etc.
12.
Measuring and testing by proper officers of customs
13.
Power of Minister to exempt
14.
Reimposition of customs duty or excise duty
15.
Remission of customs duty or excise duty on goods lost,
damaged or destroyed before removal from customs control
16.
Rebate for motor cars
17.
Tax on motor vehicles using heavy fuel oil, etc.
17A.
Exemption from, and other changes in liability to, special tax
17B.
Presumptions relating to special tax
18.
Recovery of special tax in arrears
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024
1
2020 Ed.


Section
19.
Claims for duties, taxes, fees and other charges overpaid or
erroneously paid
20.
Payment of duty, etc., short levied or erroneously refunded
21.
Calculation of duty
22.
Value of imported or locally-manufactured goods, other than
motor spirit, for excise duty
22A.
Value of imported goods for customs duty
22B.
Objection and appeal on valuation
23.
Value of imported and locally-manufactured motor spirit
24.
Value of motor spirit where variation in price
25.
Value of motor spirit which is uncustomed, not retailed in
Singapore under a trade name or where retailers’ pump price is
not available
26.
Question as to price of motor spirit to be decided by
Director‑General
27.
Removal of dutiable goods from customs control
28.
Time of importation when duty is imposed
29.
Customs rulings
30.
Import of trade samples
PART 4
IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION
31.
Place of import, export or transhipment
32.
Registration of importers and agencies in respect of goods made
dutiable
33.
Import and export to be in accordance with regulations
34.
Permit to remove goods
35.
[Repealed]
36.
Goods removed in accordance with declaration not to be
relanded
37.
Declaration
38.
Power to prohibit imports and exports
39.
Particulars of goods inwards to be furnished
40.
Correction to be made on completion of discharge
41.
Particulars of goods exported to be furnished
42.
Liability in respect of duty for goods unaccounted for, etc.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
2
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


PART 5
GENERAL PROVISIONS AFFECTING AIRCRAFT
AND VESSELS IN TERRITORIAL WATERS
Section
43.
Master of vessel to obey signals from preventive vessels and
instructions by officer of customs
44.
Goods not specified in manifest to be deemed uncustomed
45.
Missing goods deemed to have been illegally landed
46.
Accommodation in vessel to be provided for proper officer of
customs
47.
Power to lock up goods dutiable on import
48.
Prohibition of carriage of dutiable goods in local craft
PART 6
WAREHOUSING
49.
Government warehouses
50.
[Repealed]
51.
Licensed warehouses
52.
Dutiable goods to be deposited in free trade zone
53.
Warehouse deposit receipts
54.
Power to open and examine goods or packages
55.
Detention of goods where doubt exists
56.
Protection of Government from liability
57.
Protection of officers of customs from liability
58.
Payment of warehouse rent
59.
Removal of dutiable goods from customs control
60.
Landing of dutiable goods for transhipment
61.
Storage of dutiable goods
62.
Weighing and handling
PART 7
MANUFACTURE AND BOTTLING
63.
Licence to manufacture dutiable goods
64.
No person except licensee to keep a still, etc.
65.
[Repealed]
66.
Bottling warehouse
67.
Prohibition on keeping of utensil, apparatus, etc., for bottling,
blending, etc.
68.
Exemption
Customs Act 1960
3
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Section
69.
Power to enter licensed premises
PART 8
70. to 77.
[Repealed]
PART 9
DRAWBACK
78.
Drawback on imported tobacco manufactured in Singapore
79.
Drawback on imported goods on which duty has been paid
80.
Declaration by claimant
81.
Drawback on goods used in manufacture
PART 10
DUTY FREE SHOPS FOR TOURISTS
82.
Duty free shops for tourists
PART 11
COMPOSITE LICENCE
83.
Grant of composite licence
84.
[Repealed]
PART 12
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
85.
Documents to be produced on demand
86.
Computer service
87.
Preservation of records
88.
Power of Director‑General to obtain information and furnishing
of information
89.
Information not to be published or disclosed
90.
Retention of trade documents
91.
Persons bound to give information or produce documents
92.
Service of notices
93.
Baggage of passengers
94.
Proper officer of customs may take samples
95.
Addition or deduction of new or altered duties in the case of
contract
96.
Declarations to give a full and true account
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
4
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Section
97.
Agents and employees
98.
Director‑General may charge rates, etc.
98A.
Late payment charges and interest
98B.
Power to appoint agent, etc., for recovery of duty
98C.
Indemnification of agent
99.
Securities for payment of duty and compliance with this Act
100.
Appeal from decision of Director‑General
PART 13
SEARCH, SEIZURE AND ARREST
101.
Issue of search warrant
102.
Power of Magistrate, etc., to enter and search
103.
When search may be made without warrant
103A.
Power to have access to, inspect and check operation of
computer and other apparatus
104.
Power to search vessels and aircraft
105.
Senior officer of customs to exercise powers of search
106.
Officers of customs may stop and search conveyances
107.
Road barrier
108.
Power to open packages and examine goods
109.
Search of persons arriving in Singapore
110.
Seizure of goods the subject of an offence
111.
Release of vehicle, vessel or aircraft under bond
112.
Powers of arrest
PART 14
PROVISIONS AS TO TRIALS AND PROCEEDINGS
113.
Who may prosecute
114.
Jurisdiction of court
115.
Burden of proof
115A.
Presumptions of possession of dutiable, prohibited or
uncustomed goods
116.
Proportional examination or testing of goods seized to be
accepted by courts
117.
Proof as to registration or licensing of vehicles, vessels and
aircraft
118.
Analyst’s certificate
119.
Imprisonment for non-payment of fine
Customs Act 1960
5
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Section
120.
Manner of seizure not to be inquired into on trial before court or
on appeal to Supreme Court
121.
Protection of informers from discovery
122.
Goods liable to seizure liable to forfeiture
123.
Court to order disposal of goods seized
124.
Goods seized in respect of which there is no prosecution,
deemed to be forfeited if not claimed within one month
125.
Conviction under other law
125A.
Customs ticket notice
126.
Composition of offences
127.
No costs or damages arising from seizure to be recoverable
unless seizure without reasonable or probable cause
PART 15
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
128.
Offences in relation to making and signing untrue or incorrect or
incomplete declarations, certificates and documents
128A.
Offences in relation to falsifying documents
128B.
Offences in relation to failure to make declarations
128C.
Offences in relation to failure to produce trade documents
128D.
Offences in relation to fraudulent evasion
128E.
Offences in relation to goods found in person’s baggage or upon
his or her person, etc.
128F.
Offences in relation to importation of uncustomed or prohibited
goods
128G.
Offences in relation to exportation of uncustomed or prohibited
goods
128H.
Offences in relation to shipping, unshipping, loading, unloading,
etc., of uncustomed or prohibited goods
128I.
Offences in relation to possession, storage, conveying and
harbouring of goods
128J.
Offences in relation to duty-free allowances
128K.
Offences in relation to illegal removal of goods from customs
control, etc., and carrying on of certain activities without licence
128L.
Penalty for various offences
129.
Penalty on refusing to answer questions or on giving false
information or false document
130.
[Repealed]
131.
Evading duty by unauthorised modification of computer
program or data
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
6
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Section
132.
Knowingly advancing or furnishing money for business
comprising sale, purchase, etc., of uncustomed goods
133.
Penalty for adding deleterious substances to intoxicating liquor,
or storing, keeping, etc., such liquor
134.
Offence in connection with claims for drawback
135.
Penalty for possession of a still, etc.
136.
Motor vehicle leaving Singapore without prescribed amount of
motor fuel
137.
Penalty for assaulting or obstructing officers of customs,
rescuing goods, resisting arrest and escaping from custody
138.
Penalty for offering or receiving bribes
139.
Penalty for offences not otherwise provided for
140.
Attempts and abetments
141.
Offences by bodies of persons and by agents and employees
142.
Action of officers no offence
PART 16
REGULATIONS
143.
Power to make regulations
144.
References in written laws and documents
The Schedule — Customs Rulings
An Act relating to customs and excise.
[33/2000]
[26 September 1960]
PART 1
PRELIMINARY
Short title
1. This Act is the Customs Act 1960.
Customs Act 1960
7
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Scope of Act
2. This Act does not apply to —
(a) such off-shore islands as the Minister may by notification
in the Gazette specify, in respect of the importation,
exportation, manufacture or use of motor fuel; and
(b) subject to the provisions of this Act or any other written
law, any act or thing lawfully done or permitted to be done
within a free trade zone.
[29/2018]
Interpretation
3.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —
“agent”, in relation to a vessel, includes a chinchew and a
comprador;
“aircraft” includes any kind of craft which may be used for the
conveyance of passengers or goods by air;
“alcohol” means ethanol;
“authentication code” means any identification or identifying
code, password or any other authentication method or
procedure which has been assigned to a registered user of
the computer service mentioned in section 86 for the
purposes of identifying and authenticating the access to
and use of the computer service by the registered user;
“bottle” includes any container for intoxicating liquors capable
of being corked or sealed;
“bottling”, in the case of intoxicating liquors, includes blending,
compounding and varying any intoxicating liquor with intent
that the blend, compound or varied intoxicating liquor so
formed be sold for human consumption, but does not include
any such blend, compound or varied intoxicating liquor
prepared at the order of a purchaser, and for immediate
consumption;
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
8
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


“bottling warehouse” means a warehouse licensed by the
Director‑General for the bottling, blending, compounding
or varying of intoxicating liquor under section 66(1) or 83(4);
“captain of an aircraft” means every person having or taking
command or charge of an aircraft;
“complete month” means the period from the first day of a
month to the last day of the month, both days inclusive;
“customs airport” means any place which has been designated as
a customs airport;
“customs duty” means duty on goods imported into Singapore,
excluding any excise duty;
“customs territory” means Singapore and the territorial waters
thereof but excluding any free trade zone;
“database report” means any automatic log, journal or other
report which is automatically generated by the computer
service mentioned in section 86 for the purposes of recording
the details of a transaction relating to an electronic notice
including the authentication code, date and time of receipt,
storage location and any alteration or deletion relating to the
notice;
“deleterious substance” means any matter —
(a) which is unfit for human consumption; or
(b) the consumption of which is harmful to human
beings,
as certified by an analyst employed by such laboratory as the
Director‑General may specify;
“denatured” means rendered unfit for human consumption to the
satisfaction of the Director‑General;
“Director‑General” means the Director‑General of Customs
appointed under section 4(1);
“dutiable goods” means any goods subject to the payment of
customs duty or excise duty on entry into customs territory or
manufactured in Singapore (including any free trade zone)
Customs Act 1960
9
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


and on which customs duty or excise duty has not been paid
and includes goods manufactured in a free trade zone from
materials of a class dutiable on entry into customs territory
for consumption within the customs territory;
“electronic notice” has the meaning given by section 86(1);
“excise duty” means duty on goods whether manufactured in
Singapore or elsewhere;
“export” means to take or cause to be taken out of the customs
territory by any means or to place goods in any form of
conveyance for the purpose of taking the goods out of the
customs territory by any means to any place including a free
trade zone; except that goods bona fide in transit, including
goods which have been transhipped, are not deemed to be
exported unless they are or become uncustomed goods;
“free trade zone” means any area in Singapore which has been
declared to be a free trade zone under the Free Trade Zones
Act 1966;
“goods” includes animals, birds, fish, plants and all kinds of
movable property;
“Government warehouse” means a warehouse established by the
Director‑General under section 49 for the deposit of dutiable
goods;
“Green Channel” means any passage or area in a customs airport
or customs station clearly indicated with a sign in the shape of
a regular octagon and marked in green with the words
“Customs” and “Nothing To Declare”;
“heavy oil or diesel oil” includes any liquid, other than
petroleum, which is or may be used as a fuel in the engine
of a traction engine or motor vehicle;
“import” means to bring or cause to be brought into the customs
territory by any means from any place including a free trade
zone; except that goods bona fide in transit, including goods
which have been taken into any free trade zone from outside
the customs territory or transhipped, are not, for the purpose
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
10
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


of the levy of customs duties or excise duties, deemed to be
imported unless they are or become uncustomed goods;
“importer” includes and applies to any owner or other person for
the time being possessed of or beneficially interested in any
goods at and from the time of importation thereof until the
goods are duly removed from customs control;
“intoxicating liquor” means —
(a) a mixture of alcohol and some other substances
containing more than 0.5 per cent alcohol by mass; or
(b) a mixture of alcohol and water containing more than
0.5 per cent alcohol by volume, which is fit, or
intended, or can by any means be converted, for use
as a beverage, but does not include denatured spirit;
“in transit” means taken out or sent from any country and
brought into Singapore by land, sea or air (whether or not
landed or transhipped in Singapore) for the sole purpose of
being carried to another country either by the same or another
conveyance;
“licensed FTZ operator” has the meaning given by section 2 of
the Free Trade Zones Act 1966;
[Act 33 of 2023 wef 01/03/2024]
“licensed warehouse” means a warehouse or other place
licensed or deemed to be licensed under section 51(1),
63(1), or 83(4) (if the licence granted under section 83(3)
covers an activity for which a licence under section 51(1),
63(1) or 66(1) is required);
“local craft” means any junk, tongkang, prahu, or other similar
type of vessel, and any steam or motor vessel under 75 net
registered tons and includes any type of motor vessel whether
fitted with inboard engine or outboard motor;
“manufacture” —
(a) in the case of intoxicating liquors, includes the
process
of
distillation,
fermentation
and
any
process
of
converting
raw
materials
into
an
Customs Act 1960
11
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


intoxicating liquor, but does not include blending,
compounding and varying of any intoxicating liquor;
(b) in the case of tobacco, includes the process of
converting any raw or leaf tobacco into tobacco fit
for smoking, snuffing or chewing and the making of
cigarettes by power‑operated machinery; and
(c) in the case of any other goods or substitutes thereof,
includes
any
process
of
production,
assembly,
purification, blending or conversion of materials,
substances
or
components
of
such
goods
or
substitutes into a finished product;
“master” means any person (except a pilot or harbour master)
having for the time being control or charge of a vessel;
“motor fuel” means any fuel used in the propulsion of any
conveyance;
“motor spirit” includes gasoline, petrol or any inflammable
hydrocarbon liquid fuel for spark ignited engines;
“motor vehicle” means a mechanically-propelled vehicle
primarily intended or adapted for use in the conveyance of
goods or in the carriage of passengers (including any person
driving the vehicle) on roads maintained at the public
expense, and includes any vehicle constructed to tow any
other vehicle along such roads, but does not include such
vehicles as excavators, crawlers, bulldozers, tractors and any
similar vehicles which are not primarily intended for use on
such roads;
“officer of customs” means —
(a) the Director‑General;
(b) any
Deputy
Director‑General
of
Customs
or
Assistant Director‑General of Customs appointed
under section 4(2);
(c) any senior officer of customs appointed under
section 4(4);
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
12
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(d) any officer of customs appointed under section 5(2);
and
(e) any police officer;
“owner” includes a hirer under a hire-purchase agreement;
“per cent alcohol by mass” means the measure of alcoholic
strength of a mixture of alcohol and some other substances
shown by the ratio, expressed as a percentage, of the mass of
alcohol present in the mixture to the total mass of the mixture;
“per cent alcohol by volume” means the measure of alcoholic
strength of a mixture of alcohol and water shown by the ratio,
expressed as a percentage, of the volume of alcohol present in
the mixture at a temperature of 20 degrees Celsius to the total
volume of the mixture;
“petroleum” includes the liquids commonly known by the
names of rock oil, Rangoon oil, Burma oil, kerosene and
kerosene substitutes, paraffin oil, petrol, gasoline, benzol,
benzoline,
benzine,
naphtha
and
any
other
similar
inflammable liquid, whether a natural product or one that
is made from petroleum, coal, schist, shale or any other
bituminous substance, or from any products thereof;
“preventive vessel” means any vessel employed for the
prevention of smuggling or for any other purpose relating
to this Act;
“prohibited goods” means goods the import or export of which is
prohibited, either conditionally or absolutely, by notification
made under section 38;
“proper officer of customs” means any officer of customs acting
in the fulfilment of his or her duties under this Act, whether
such duties are assigned to him or her specially or generally
or expressly or by implication;
“Red Channel” means any passage or area in a customs airport
or customs station clearly indicated with a sign in the shape of
a square marked in red with the words “Customs” and
“Goods To Declare”;
Customs Act 1960
13
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


“registered user” means a person who has been registered with
and authorised by the Director‑General to gain access to and
use the computer service mentioned in section 86;
“Registrar” means the Registrar of Vehicles or a Deputy
Registrar of Vehicles or an Assistant Registrar of Vehicles
appointed under the Road Traffic Act 1961;
“senior officer of customs” means —
(a) the Director‑General;
(b) any
Deputy
Director‑General
of
Customs
or
Assistant Director‑General of Customs appointed
under section 4(2);
(c) any senior officer of customs appointed under
section 4(4);
(d) any officer of customs conferred with the powers of a
senior officer of customs under section 5(3); and
(e) any police officer having the powers of a senior
officer of customs by virtue of section 7(a);
“tobacco” includes all tobacco other than growing tobacco,
whether manufactured or not;
“toddy” means the fermented juice of coconut or other palm;
“tourist” means any person whose entry into Singapore is
dependent upon the presentation of a passport or other travel
document and whose stay in Singapore does not exceed
6 months, and includes persons in transit and such other class
of persons as the Director‑General may, by notification in the
Gazette, specify;
“uncustomed goods” means goods in respect of which a breach
of the provisions of this Act has been committed.
[3/2008; 25/2011; 29/2018; S 270/71]
(2) For the purposes of this Act, goods are deemed to be under
customs control while they are deposited or held in any free trade
zone, Government warehouse, licensed warehouse, or bottling
warehouse or post office or in any vessel, train, vehicle or aircraft
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
14
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


or any place from which they may not be removed except with the
permission of the proper officer of customs.
[3/2008]
(3) In this Act, a reference to a document or record includes, in
addition to a document or record on paper, a reference to any, or part
of any —
(a) document or record kept on any magnetic, optical,
chemical or other medium;
(b) photograph;
(c) map, plan, graph, picture or drawing;
(d) film (including a microfilm and a microfiche), negative,
disc, tape, soundtrack or any other device in which one or
more visual images, sounds or other data are embodied so
as to be capable (with or without the aid of some other
equipment) of being reproduced therefrom.
(4) In this Act, a reference to a document or record in writing or the
making of a document or record in writing, unless the context
otherwise requires, includes any electronic notice, or the making,
serving or submitting of such a notice under the provisions of this
Act.
PART 2
APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS
Appointment of Director‑General and other officers
4.—(1) The Minister may appoint an officer to be styled the
Director‑General of Customs who has the superintendence of all
matters relating to this Act, subject to the direction and control of the
Minister.
(2) The
Minister
may
appoint
such
number
of
Deputy
Directors‑General of Customs and Assistant Directors‑General of
Customs as the Minister thinks fit.
(3) Subject to the general direction and supervision of the
Director‑General of Customs, the Deputy Directors‑General of
Customs Act 1960
15
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Customs and Assistant Directors‑General of Customs have and may
exercise all the powers conferred on the Director‑General by this Act.
(4) The Minister may appoint such number of other senior officers
of customs as the Minister thinks fit for the purpose of carrying out
the provisions of this Act.
Powers of Director‑General to delegate
5.—(1) The Director‑General may confer on any senior officer of
customs appointed under section 4(4) all or any of the powers
conferred on the Director‑General by this Act, subject to such
conditions or restrictions as the Director‑General thinks fit.
[29/2018]
(2) The Director‑General may appoint such number of other
officers of customs as the Director‑General thinks fit for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(3) The Director‑General may confer on any officer of customs
appointed under subsection (2) all or any of the powers of a senior
officer of customs.
Officers of customs to be public servants
6. All officers of customs are deemed to be public servants within
the meaning of the Penal Code 1871.
Officers of customs to be armed
6A. Every officer of customs must be provided with such batons,
arms, ammunition and other accoutrements as may be necessary for
the effective discharge of his or her duties.
[Act 31 of 2022 wef 01/11/2022]
Powers of police officers
7. For the purposes of this Act —
(a) all police officers not below the rank of sergeant have and
may exercise all the powers conferred by this Act on senior
officers of customs; and
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
16
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(b) all police officers below the rank of sergeant have and may
exercise all the powers conferred by this Act on officers of
customs.
Authority card to be produced
8.—(1) Every officer of customs when acting against any person
under this Act must, if not in uniform, on demand declare his or her
office and produce to the person against whom the officer is acting
such authority card as the Director‑General or, in the case of a police
officer, the Commissioner of Police, may direct to be carried by such
officers.
(2) It is not an offence for any person to refuse to comply with any
request, demand or order made by any officer of customs acting or
purporting to act under this Act if the officer is not in uniform and
refuses to declare his or her office and produce his or her authority
card, on demand being made by the person.
Persons employed on customs duty to be deemed proper
officers of customs
9.—(1) Every person employed on any duty or service relating to
customs
by
the
orders
or
with
the
concurrence
of
the
Director‑General (whether previously or subsequently expressed) is
deemed to be the proper officer of customs for that duty or service.
(2) Every act required by law at any time to be done by or with any
particular officer nominated for such purpose, if done by or with any
person appointed by the Director‑General to act for such particular
officer is deemed to be done by or with that particular officer.
PART 3
LEVYING OF DUTY AND TAX
Levying of duties
10.—(1) There
shall
be
charged,
levied
and
paid
to
the
Director‑General such customs duties and excise duties on any
goods imported into the customs territory or manufactured in
Customs Act 1960
17
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Singapore as may be prescribed by the Minister by order in the
Gazette.
(2) Any excise duty imposed by or under this Act on any goods
must be imposed on a non-discriminatory basis regardless of the
place of origin or manufacture of the goods.
(3) Without affecting any other remedy, any customs duty or excise
duty or any tax, fee or other charge payable under this Act may be
recovered by the Director‑General as a civil debt due to the
Government.
(4) All amounts collected as duties, taxes, fees and other charges
under this Act must be paid into the Consolidated Fund.
Power of Director‑General to waive duty, etc.
11. The Director‑General or an officer of customs authorised by the
Director‑General for the purpose of this section may waive the
payment, or recovery of payment, of the whole or any part of any
customs duties, excise duties, taxes, fees or other charges, except that
the amount which may be waived must not exceed $20 or any other
amount that the Minister may by order prescribe.
[29/2018]
Measuring and testing by proper officers of customs
12.—(1) The proper officer of customs may value, weigh, measure,
test or otherwise examine, or may cause to be weighed, measured,
tested or otherwise examined, any dutiable or uncustomed goods for
the purpose of ascertaining the customs duty or excise duty leviable
thereon.
(2) When a valuation of any goods has been made by the proper
officer of customs, the valuation is presumed to be correct until the
contrary is proved.
Power of Minister to exempt
13.—(1) The Minister may, by order in the Gazette, exempt any
class of goods or persons from —
(a) any provision of this Act; or
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
18
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(b) the payment of the whole or any part of any customs duties,
excise duties, taxes, fees or other charges which may be
payable.
[3/2008]
(2) The Minister may, in any particular case —
(a) exempt any person from —
(i) any provision of this Act; or
(ii) the payment of the whole or any part of any customs
duties, excise duties, taxes, fees or other charges
which may be payable by that person; or
(b) direct the remission or refund of the whole or any part of
any customs duties, excise duties, taxes, fees or other
charges which may be payable or which may have been
paid by any person.
[3/2008]
(2A) An exemption under subsection (2)(a) need not be published
in the Gazette.
[29/2018]
(3) In granting an exemption or directing a remission or refund, the
Minister may impose any conditions (including, for an exemption,
conditions subsequent) that the Minister considers fit.
[29/2018]
(4) Any goods in respect of which an exemption from the payment
of customs duties, excise duties, taxes, fees or other charges has been
granted under subsection (1) or (2) are —
(a) deemed to be dutiable goods until the conditions (if any)
subject to which the exemption from customs duties,
excise duties, taxes, fees or other charges was granted are
fulfilled; and
(b) liable to all other charges, not being customs duties, excise
duties, taxes, fees or other charges, to which they would be
subject if no such exemption had been granted.
Customs Act 1960
19
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Reimposition of customs duty or excise duty
14.—(1) If —
(a) customs duty or excise duty is not paid on any goods by
reason of an exemption granted under section 13; and
(b) any condition to which the exemption is subject is
contravened,
then the goods, upon the contravention, become liable to customs
duty or excise duty in accordance with the rate and valuation (if any)
specified in the exemption.
[29/2018]
(1A) For the purpose of subsection (1), the rate and valuation (if
any) specified in the exemption must be those —
(a) that would have applied if not for the exemption; or
(b) in force on the date on which the condition of the
exemption is contravened.
[29/2018]
(2) The person to whom the exemption was granted and any person
found in possession of those goods shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay the customs duty or excise duty.
(3) If any goods, which are liable to customs duty or excise duty
under subsection (1) and on which customs duty or excise duty has
not been paid, are found in the possession or on the premises of any
person other than the person authorised to possess them under the
terms of the exemption, those goods are, until the contrary is proved,
deemed to be uncustomed goods.
Remission of customs duty or excise duty on goods lost,
damaged or destroyed before removal from customs control
15.—(1) If any dutiable goods are by unavoidable accident lost,
damaged or destroyed or are lost through theft or through evaporation
at
any
time
before
removal
from
customs
control,
the
Director‑General may remit the whole or any part of the customs
duty or excise duty payable thereon.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
20
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(2) After removal of any goods from customs control, no abatement
of customs duties or excise duties is allowed on any such goods on
account of loss or damage, or on account of any claim —
(a) to pay customs duty or excise duty at a preferential rate; or
(b) that the weight, measure, volume or value as determined by
the proper officer of customs for the purpose of
ascertaining the customs duty or excise duty on such
goods, or any other factor affecting the goods, is incorrect,
unless written notice of the claim has been given at or before the time
of the removal.
Rebate for motor cars
16. The Minister may, by order —
(a) grant, subject to any conditions that the Minister considers
fit to impose, a rebate on any excise duty paid in respect of
a motor car; and
(b) direct that the rebate must not be refunded but may only be
used to set off any specified tax, levy or fee payable in
respect of that motor car under the Road Traffic Act 1961.
Tax on motor vehicles using heavy fuel oil, etc.
17.—(1) Despite and in addition to any tax, duty, fee or other
charge leviable on any mechanically-propelled vehicle under any
other Act or scale of fees made thereunder, a special tax is imposed on
motor vehicles which are equipped with engines using heavy oil,
diesel oil, liquefied petroleum gas or any other gas as fuel or fitted
with producer gas or other gas attachments.
(2) The special tax chargeable under subsection (1) in respect of a
motor vehicle is —
(a) of an amount that the Minister may prescribe and the
Minister may prescribe different rates for motor vehicles of
different classes, categories or descriptions or motor
vehicles used for different purposes;
Customs Act 1960
21
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(b) chargeable by reference to such tax period as the Minister
may prescribe; and
(c) payable in advance at such time and in such manner as the
Minister may prescribe.
[29/2018]
(2A) [Omitted as spent]
(3) [Deleted by Act 29 of 2018]
(4) For the purposes of the special tax, a motor vehicle is deemed —
(a) to be chargeable with the like special tax as on the occasion
of the issue of the vehicle licence or last vehicle licence
issued for the motor vehicle under the Road Traffic
Act 1961, and to be so chargeable by reference to the
prescribed rate as applicable to the motor vehicle on that
occasion; or
(b) if no vehicle licence has been issued for the motor vehicle
under that Act, to be chargeable by reference to the
prescribed rate applicable to the motor vehicle.
(5) Subject to subsection (5A), a person who for any period keeps a
motor vehicle in respect of which the special tax has at any time
become chargeable is, whether or not the motor vehicle is still a
mechanically‑propelled vehicle during the period, liable to pay the
special tax on the motor vehicle for that period.
[29/2018]
(5A) The period mentioned in subsection (5) for which the person is
liable to pay the special tax, does not include any period notified by
the person to the Registrar under the Road Traffic Act 1961 as a
period when the motor vehicle will not be used or kept on a public
road (called in this section the notified period).
[29/2018]
(5B) However, the person is not exempt from liability to pay the
special tax by virtue of subsection (5A) if, at any time during the
notified period, the motor vehicle is used or kept on a public road —
(a) by the person; or
(b) with the person’s consent,
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
22
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


and there is no vehicle licence in force for the motor vehicle at that
time.
[29/2018]
(6) A motor vehicle to which this section applies must not be
used —
(a) after the latest date appointed for payment of the special
tax until the tax has been paid; and
(b) at any time during the notified period.
[29/2018]
(7) If any motor vehicle to which this section applies is knowingly
used in contravention of subsection (6), the person driving the vehicle
or the owner thereof shall be guilty of an offence.
(8) The Registrar has for the purposes of this section all the powers
of the Director‑General under this Act.
(9) In this section, “tax period” means the annual or half‑yearly
period by reference to which the special tax is chargeable under this
section.
[29/2018]
Exemption from, and other changes in liability to, special tax
17A.—(1) The Minister may —
(a) prescribe an exemption from section 17 (including from
the special tax chargeable under section 17 or any part of
the special tax), for any motor vehicle according to class,
category, description or use; or
(b) exempt, in any particular case, any motor vehicle from
section 17 (including from the special tax or part of the
special tax).
[29/2018]
(2) The
Minister
may
prescribe
any
conditions
(including
conditions subsequent) that the Minister thinks fit on an exemption
under subsection (1), and the special tax becomes payable if any such
condition is contravened.
[29/2018]
Customs Act 1960
23
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(3) An exemption under subsection (1)(b) need not be published in
the Gazette.
[29/2018]
(4) Where the Minister prescribes under section 17(2) a new rate of
special tax (called in this section the new rate) in place of an existing
rate (called in this section the old rate), the Minister may further
prescribe under section 17(2) that the new rate —
(a) only applies to tax periods that commence after the time
the regulations prescribing the new rate come into
operation (called in this section the commencement
time); or
(b) applies not only for the tax periods mentioned in
paragraph (a), but also to any current tax period.
[29/2018]
(5) Where, in accordance with subsection (4)(b), the new rate
applies to a current tax period in respect of a motor vehicle, then —
(a) if the old rate is higher than the new rate, the special tax for
that current tax period is reduced by the amount in
subsection (6); and
(b) if the old rate is lower than the new rate, the special tax for
that current tax period is increased by the amount in
subsection (6).
[29/2018]
(6) For the purpose of subsection (5), the amount is (A – B) × C,
where —
(a) A is the higher of the following amounts:
(i) the special tax that would have been payable for the
whole of the current tax period at the old rate;
(ii) the special tax that would have been payable for the
whole of the current tax period at the new rate;
(b) B is the lower of the following amounts:
(i) the special tax that would have been payable for the
whole of the current tax period at the old rate;
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
24
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(ii) the special tax that would have been payable for the
whole of the current tax period at the new rate; and
(c) C is the proportion which the part of the current tax period
that starts from the commencement time up to the end of
the period, bears to the whole of the period.
[29/2018]
(7) For the purpose of this section and section 17, the Minister may
prescribe the following:
(a) where there is an overpayment of the special tax on a motor
vehicle due to an exemption from, or a reduction in the rate
of, the special tax, or for any other reason —
(i) the time when the refund may be given; and
(ii) the manner in which the refund may be given,
including by any or a combination of any of the
following:
(A) as a rebate or reduction of any amount of the
special tax that is payable or remains unpaid
for any tax period in respect of the motor
vehicle;
(B) by setting off any amount of the refund against
any tax, levy or fee payable under the Road
Traffic Act 1961 in respect of the motor
vehicle;
(b) where the special tax becomes payable because of a breach
of a condition subsequent of an exemption or pursuant to
section 17(5B), or additional special tax is payable due to
an increase in the rate of special tax —
(i) the time when the special tax must be paid by the
person liable for the same; and
(ii) the manner of the payment, including by way of
setting off any amount of the payment against any
sum due and owing to the person under this Act or
the Road Traffic Act 1961;
Customs Act 1960
25
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(c) any matter necessary for or incidental to the administration
of this section and section 17.
[29/2018]
(8) The Minister may, for the purposes of subsections (1), (2), (4)
and (7), prescribe different provisions in relation to motor vehicles of
different classes, categories or descriptions or motor vehicles used for
different purposes.
[29/2018]
(9) Despite anything in the Road Traffic Act 1961, any tax, levy, fee
or sum under that Act against which a set-off is effected pursuant to
regulations made under subsection (7)(a)(ii) or (b)(ii), is treated as
having been paid to the extent of the set‑off.
[29/2018]
(10) Regulations made for the purposes of subsection (7)(b) do not
affect the operation of section 18.
[29/2018]
(11) Section 19 does not apply to a reduction in liability for special
tax under this section or section 17, or to any refund arising out of the
reduction.
[29/2018]
(12) To avoid doubt, section 13 does not apply to any special tax
chargeable under section 17.
[29/2018]
(13) In this section —
“current
tax
period”
means
a
tax
period
in
which
a
commencement time falls;
“tax period” has the meaning given by section 17(9).
[29/2018]
Presumptions relating to special tax
17B.—(1) For the purpose of section 17(5), it is presumed, until the
contrary is proved, that a person keeps a motor vehicle if it is
proved —
(a) for a motor vehicle registered under the Road Traffic
Act 1961, that the person is, at the material time, recorded
as the owner of that motor vehicle in a register of vehicles
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
26
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


maintained by the Registrar for the purposes of section 10
of that Act;
(b) for a motor vehicle the registration of which under the
Road Traffic Act 1961 is cancelled or has lapsed under that
Act, that the person is last recorded as the owner of that
motor vehicle in such register of vehicles; or
(c) for a motor vehicle that is not registered under the Road
Traffic Act 1961 and is not a motor vehicle mentioned in
paragraph (b), that the person has a legal right to
possession of the motor vehicle (including any person
who has the use of the motor vehicle under a lease or
hire‑purchase agreement, but not the lessor while the motor
vehicle is being leased under any such agreement).
[29/2018]
(2) For the purpose of section 17(5B), the consent mentioned in that
provision is presumed to have been given unless the contrary is
shown.
[29/2018]
Recovery of special tax in arrears
18.—(1) Any sum payable in respect of the special tax levied under
section 17 or 17A is considered to be in arrears for the purposes of
this section and may be recovered in the manner provided in this Act,
if —
(a) the sum remains due and unpaid on the day when it should
have been paid in advance under section 17(2); or
(b) the sum remains due and unpaid on the day when it should
have been paid under regulations made for the purpose of
section 17A(7)(b)(i).
[29/2018]
(2) For the recovery of arrears of the special tax, the Registrar —
(a) may seize and sell or otherwise dispose of any vehicle in
respect of which the special tax is in arrears;
(b) must apply the proceeds of the sale in satisfaction of the
arrears and all licence fees and other taxes due and owing
in respect of the vehicle under any other written law; and
Customs Act 1960
27
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(c) must refund the balance thereof (if any) to the owner of the
seized vehicle.
(3) A vehicle seized under this section must be returned to the
owner thereof if the special tax and all licence fees and other taxes
due and owing in respect of the vehicle have been paid at any time
prior to the sale or disposal of the vehicle.
(4) When any vehicle is seized under this section, the Registrar
must immediately give written notice of the seizure and the ground
thereof to the owner of the vehicle, either by delivering the notice to
the owner personally or by post at the owner’s place of abode.
(5) The purchaser of a vehicle sold by the Registrar under this
section is deemed to have acquired a good title to the vehicle free
from all encumbrances created over it.
(6) No proceedings may be brought by any person for the return of
the seized vehicle or for any damages or for any other relief arising
out of the seizure and use of the vehicle.
(7) For the purposes of exercising the power of seizure under this
section, the Registrar may authorise any officer of customs or police
officer to seize any vehicle on the Registrar’s behalf.
(8) The power of seizure and sale or disposal conferred by this
section is in addition to any other remedy conferred by this Act.
Claims for duties, taxes, fees and other charges overpaid or
erroneously paid
19.—(1) Except as provided in this section, no person is entitled to
any refund or return of any money that —
(a) was overpaid or erroneously paid as customs duties, excise
duties, taxes, fees or other charges under this Act; or
(b) was erroneously collected for the composition of offences
under this Act.
[29/2018]
(2) A person who overpaid or erroneously paid, or who was the
subject of any erroneous collection, mentioned in subsection (1) may
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
28
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


make a written claim to the Director‑General for the refund or return
of any money overpaid, erroneously paid or erroneously collected.
[29/2018]
(3) A refund or return of the money to a person under subsection (2)
may be made only if —
(a) the person makes the claim within 5 years after the
overpayment, erroneous payment or erroneous collection;
and
(b) the Director‑General is satisfied of the overpayment,
erroneous payment or erroneous collection.
[29/2018]
Payment of duty, etc., short levied or erroneously refunded
20.—(1) Where any customs duty, excise duty, tax, fee or other
charge under this Act has been short levied or erroneously refunded
for any reason or owing to any cause, the person who should have
paid the amount short levied or to whom the refund has erroneously
been made must pay the deficiency or repay the amount erroneously
refunded, to the Director‑General on a valid demand being made.
[29/2018]
(1A) A demand is valid under subsection (1) if it satisfies the
following:
(a) it is in writing;
(b) it is made within 5 years after the date of payment of the
duty, tax, fee or other charge stated in the demand as
having been short levied or erroneously refunded;
(c) it specifies —
(i) the amount of the short levy or erroneous refund that
the Director‑General requires to be paid or repaid; or
(ii) the circumstances or the goods in relation to which
the Director‑General has reason to believe the short
levy or erroneous refund arose.
[29/2018]
(1B) Subsection (1A)(b) does not apply if the short levy or
erroneous refund was the result of fraud or evasion on the part of
Customs Act 1960
29
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


the person liable to pay the short levy, or who claimed for or to be
entitled to the refund erroneously made, as the case may be.
[29/2018]
(2) Without affecting any other remedy for the recovery of the
amount due, any dutiable goods belonging to that person which may
be in customs control may be detained until the deficiency is paid or
the refund is repaid, as the case may be.
(3) Where the short levy or erroneous refund does not exceed $20 or
such other amount as the Minister may by order prescribe in any
one case, the Director‑General may waive the recovery of the short
levy or erroneous refund.
Calculation of duty
21. The rate of customs duty or excise duty and the valuation (if
any) applicable to any goods is —
(a) in the case of goods lawfully imported or manufactured in
Singapore —
(i) if the goods are in a Government warehouse or
licensed warehouse, the rate and valuation in force at
the time when those goods are removed from the
Government warehouse or licensed warehouse, as
the case may be;
(ii) if the goods are imported by post, the rate and
valuation in force at the time when customs duty or
excise duty is assessed by the proper officer of
customs; and
(iii) in any other case, the rate and valuation in force at
the time when the goods are released by the proper
officer of customs; and
(b) in the case of uncustomed goods, the rate and valuation in
force at the time when the goods became uncustomed
goods, if known, or the rate and valuation in force at the
time of seizure, whichever is the higher.
[3/2008]
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
30
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Value of imported or locally-manufactured goods, other than
motor spirit, for excise duty
22.—(1) For the purposes of levying excise duty under this Act, the
value of any imported or locally-manufactured goods, other than
motor spirit, must be determined according to the regulations made
by the Minister for the purposes of this section.
(2) Regulations made under subsection (1) may require any
importer, local manufacturer or other person concerned with the
importation or local manufacture of goods —
(a) to furnish to a proper officer of customs, in such form as he
or she may require, such information as is in his or her
opinion necessary for a proper valuation of the goods; and
(b) to produce any book of accounts or other document of
whatever nature relating to the purchase, importation or
sale of the goods by that person.
Value of imported goods for customs duty
22A.—(1) For the purposes of levying customs duty under this Act,
the value of any imported goods must be determined according to the
regulations made by the Minister for the purposes of this section.
(2) Regulations made under subsection (1) may provide for
requiring any importer or other person concerned with the
importation of goods —
(a) to furnish to a proper officer of customs, in such form as he
or she may require, such information as is in his or her
opinion necessary for a proper valuation of the goods; and
(b) to produce any book of accounts or other document of
whatever nature relating to the purchase, importation or
sale of the goods by that person.
[11/97]
Objection and appeal on valuation
22B.—(1) If any person disagrees with any determination by the
proper officer of customs of the value of any goods under section 22
or 22A, the person may object to that value by making an application
Customs Act 1960
31
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


to the Director‑General, stating the grounds of the person’s objection
and the amount that the person considers should be the value of the
goods.
(2) An objection under this section must be given in writing to the
Director‑General within 14 days after any determination made under
section 22 or 22A or within such longer time as the Director‑General
may allow.
(3) The Director‑General must consider the objection and inform
the importer in writing of his or her decision.
(4) Where a proper officer of customs amends his or her
determination of the value of any goods pursuant to this Act
otherwise than as a result of an objection received from the importer
of the goods, he or she must give notice to the importer of the
amended determination.
(5) If any person is dissatisfied with the decision of the
Director‑General
in
respect
of
the
person’s
objection
under
subsection (1), the person may appeal to the General Division of
the High Court against that decision.
[40/2019]
(6) Every appeal under subsection (5) must be made by giving
notice of appeal within 28 days after the date on which the importer is
notified in writing under subsection (3) of the decision or within such
further period as the General Division of the High Court may allow.
[40/2019]
(7) On any appeal under subsection (5), the General Division of the
High Court may confirm, vary or set aside the decision of the
Director‑General and make such further or other order on such
appeal, whether as to costs or otherwise, as the General Division of
the High Court thinks fit.
[40/2019]
(8) Despite anything to the contrary in this section, where, in the
course of determining any appeal, it becomes necessary to delay the
final determination of the appeal, the importer must be given delivery
of the importer’s goods from customs control subject to the
Director‑General receiving any security that the Director‑General
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
32
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


thinks sufficient to cover the full amount of customs duty or excise
duty on the goods.
Value of imported and locally-manufactured motor spirit
23. For the purposes of this Act, the value of any grade of imported
or locally-manufactured motor spirit with a trade name or trade mark
is taken to be the price inclusive of excise duty but excluding goods
and services tax charged thereon for that grade with that trade name
or trade mark prevailing in Singapore at retailers’ motor spirit pumps
at the time when excise duty becomes payable.
Value of motor spirit where variation in price
24. For the purpose of section 23, if there is any difference in the
price of a grade of motor spirit with the same trade name or trade
mark, the highest price inclusive of excise duty but excluding goods
and services tax charged thereon for that grade with that trade name
or trade mark is taken to be the value of that grade of motor spirit.
Value of motor spirit which is uncustomed, not retailed in
Singapore under a trade name or where retailers’ pump price
is not available
25. Despite sections 23 and 24, the value of any grade of motor
spirit which is uncustomed or which is not being retailed in Singapore
under a trade name or trade mark or which is being retailed in
Singapore under a trade name or trade mark but the retailers’ motor
spirit pump price is not available, is the highest price inclusive of
excise duty but excluding goods and services tax charged thereon for
that grade regardless of trade names or trade marks prevailing in
Singapore at the retailers’ motor spirit pumps.
Question as to price of motor spirit to be decided by
Director‑General
26. If any question arises as to the price of motor spirit at the
retailers’ motor spirit pumps, the question is to be decided by the
Director‑General.
Customs Act 1960
33
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Removal of dutiable goods from customs control
27.—(1) Dutiable goods must not be removed from customs
control except —
(a) after payment of the customs duty or excise duty payable
thereon;
(b) under such conditions as the Director‑General may impose
for deposit in a Government warehouse or licensed
warehouse; or
(c) under such conditions as the Director‑General may impose
in any particular case.
[3/2008]
(2) Goods must not be removed from a Government warehouse
until all warehouse rent and other charges due in respect thereof have
been paid.
(3) The Director‑General may allow dutiable goods in a licensed
warehouse to be removed therefrom before payment of the customs
duty or excise duty but before doing so the Director‑General may, in
the Director‑General’s discretion, require that security be lodged to
the Director‑General’s satisfaction to guarantee the payment of the
customs duty or excise duty within such time as the Director‑General
may allow.
Time of importation when duty is imposed
28. When, by virtue of an order made under section 10(1), a
customs duty or excise duty is fixed on any goods which previously
were not dutiable goods or any customs duty or excise duty on goods
is abolished or when the importation or exportation of any goods is
prohibited or any such prohibition abolished by a notification made
under section 38 and it becomes necessary for the purpose of this Act
to determine the time at which an importation or exportation of any
goods made and completed is deemed to have had effect, the
importation or exportation is, despite anything in this Act, deemed to
be —
(a) in the case of importation by sea, the time at which the
vessel importing the goods had actually come within the
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
34
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


limits of the port of Singapore to which the goods are
consigned;
(b) in the case of importation by road or rail, the time at which
the goods come within Singapore;
(c) in the case of importation by air, the time at which the
aircraft lands at a customs airport;
(d) in the case of importation from a free trade zone, the time at
which the goods enter the customs territory;
(e) in the case of exportation by sea, the time at which
shipment of the goods on board the vessel by which they
were exported commenced;
(f) in the case of exportation by road or rail, the time at which
the goods leave Singapore;
(g) in the case of exportation by air, the time at which the
aircraft leaves a customs airport; and
(h) in the case of goods removed from the customs territory
into a free trade zone for export, the time at which the
goods are brought into the free trade zone.
Customs rulings
29.—(1) The Director‑General may, on an application made in
accordance with the Schedule, make a ruling on any of the matters
specified in the Schedule in accordance with the Schedule.
[3/2008]
(2) The Schedule applies to and in connection with an application
under subsection (1) and any ruling made by the Director‑General
under that subsection.
[3/2008]
(3) The Minister may, by order in the Gazette, amend, add to or
revoke the whole or any part of the Schedule.
[3/2008]
Import of trade samples
30.—(1) Where dutiable goods are declared at the time of their
importation to be bona fide trade samples, the Director‑General may
Customs Act 1960
35
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


allow such goods to be imported without payment of customs duty or
excise duty subject to any conditions that the Director‑General
considers fit to impose.
(2) In this section, “trade samples” means articles which are
imported solely —
(a) for the purpose of being shown or demonstrated in
Singapore to enable manufacturers in Singapore to
produce those articles to fulfil orders from abroad or for
the soliciting of orders for goods to be supplied from
abroad; or
(b) by a manufacturer for the purposes of copying, testing or
experimenting before the manufacturer produces those
articles in Singapore,
and which are used solely for the purposes set out in paragraph (a) or
(b) and are not sold or consumed or put to normal use or used in any
way for hire or reward while in Singapore.
PART 4
IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION
Place of import, export or transhipment
31.—(1) Despite any other written law, a person must not import or
export dutiable goods or tranship goods of a class dutiable on import
except —
(a) by sea —
(i) at such authorised piers and places in Singapore as
may be prescribed generally for all goods or in
relation to such goods as may be specified; or
(ii) at such piers and places in Singapore that the
Director‑General, under prescribed circumstances,
determines to be authorised piers and places in
relation to such goods as the Director‑General may
determine;
(b) by air, at a customs airport;
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
36
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(c) by rail, at the customs station along the railway; or
(d) by road.
[25/2011]
(1A) In prescribing an authorised pier or place in Singapore or the
circumstances in which the Director‑General may determine an
authorised pier or place for the purposes of subsection (1)(a), the
Minister may prescribe that the operator of the authorised pier or
place comply with such requirements and restrictions as the
Director‑General may impose in connection with any operations
carried out at the authorised pier or place.
[25/2011]
(2) Dutiable goods, other than accompanied personal effects and
baggage, must not be imported by road except during such times and
under such conditions as may be approved by the Director‑General.
Registration of importers and agencies in respect of goods
made dutiable
32. Where any goods previously not dutiable have become dutiable
by virtue of an order published under section 10(1), a senior officer of
customs may require any importer importing the goods or local
agency acting on behalf of a foreign exporter of the goods to register
the importer’s or local agency’s business particulars at a customs
office.
Import and export to be in accordance with regulations
33. A person must not import or export dutiable goods or tranship
goods of a class dutiable on import except under and in accordance
with such regulations or restrictions as are prescribed.
Permit to remove goods
34.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), dutiable goods
imported and goods of a class dutiable on import intended for
transhipment or in transit must not on arrival be removed —
(a) from the vessel on which the goods arrived;
(b) from the customs airport at which the goods arrived;
Customs Act 1960
37
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(c) from the customs station along the railway at which the
goods arrived;
(d) beyond any customs station at Woodlands or Tuas if the
goods were brought into Singapore by road; or
(e) from the free trade zone in which the goods were deposited
or landed,
except under and in accordance with the conditions contained in a
permit issued by the proper officer of customs in such form as may be
determined by the Director‑General.
(2) No permit is required for the removal —
(a) by an authority or a licensed FTZ operator administering a
free trade zone of any dutiable goods from a vessel directly
into the free trade zone, if a full and correct inward
manifest as required under section 39 has been furnished to
the proper officer of customs;
[Act 33 of 2023 wef 01/03/2024]
(b) of dutiable goods (other than intoxicating liquors or
tobacco) the duty on which does not exceed such amount
as the Minister may by order prescribe and which is in the
possession or in the baggage of any person arriving in
Singapore;
(c) of intoxicating liquors or tobacco of such type and quantity
as —
(i) the Minister may by order prescribe; or
(ii) the Director‑General or an officer of customs
authorised by the Director‑General for the purpose
of this subsection may, subject to any general or
special directions of the Minister, determine,
(c) and which is in the possession or in the baggage of any
person arriving in Singapore;
(d) of motor fuel for use in the propulsion of any motor
vehicle, aircraft or vessel which —
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
38
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(i) in relation to a motor vehicle —
(A) is carried in a fuel supply tank of the motor
vehicle; or
(B) is of such amount as the Minister may by order
prescribe and which is carried in a spare
container of the motor vehicle;
(ii) in relation to an aircraft, is carried in the fuel supply
tank of the aircraft; and
(iii) in relation to a vessel, is carried in the fuel supply
tank of the vessel;
(e) of dutiable goods imported by post unless so required by
the proper officer of customs; and
(f) of such dutiable goods as the Director‑General may,
subject to any general or special directions of the
Minister, determine.
[3/2008; 25/2011; 29/2018]
(3) The Director‑General may, subject to any conditions that the
Director‑General may impose, authorise any person to remove,
without a permit, goods of a class dutiable on import intended for
transhipment or in transit —
(a) from an aircraft into the free trade zone in a customs airport
and to be transhipped from that free trade zone directly into
another aircraft at the same airport; or
(b) from the free trade zone to be transhipped directly to a
vessel berthed at the same free trade zone.
35. [Repealed by Act 4 of 2003]
Goods removed in accordance with declaration not to be
relanded
36. A person must not —
(a) reland or permit the relanding of any goods placed on any
ship or aircraft or loaded into any railway wagon in
accordance with any declaration made under section 59; or
Customs Act 1960
39
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(b) knowingly neglect or omit to cause the goods to be
exported or transhipped (as the case may be) in accordance
with the declaration without the prior consent of the proper
officer of customs.
Declaration
37. Every importer or exporter of dutiable goods and every person
transhipping goods of a class dutiable on import must, before
removing any such goods or any part thereof from customs control or
from any of the following places (whether or not the goods are under
customs control):
(a) the vessel on which the goods arrived;
(b) the customs airport at which the goods arrived;
(c) the customs station along the railway at which the goods
arrived;
(d) any customs station at Woodlands or Tuas if the goods
were brought into Singapore by road; or
(e) the free trade zone in which the goods were deposited or
landed,
make personally or by an agent to the proper officer of customs a
declaration, in accordance with section 96, of the particulars of the
goods imported or exported or to be transhipped.
Power to prohibit imports and exports
38.—(1) The Minister may, by notification in the Gazette, prohibit,
absolutely or conditionally, the importation into, or exportation from,
Singapore of such dutiable goods as are specified in the notification.
(1A) To avoid doubt, the dutiable goods that may be specified in the
notification include goods whose import or export is prohibited,
absolutely or conditionally, under any other written law.
[29/2018]
(2) If any question arises as to whether any particular goods are or
are not included in a class of goods appearing in a notification made
under subsection (1), that question is to be decided by the
Director‑General.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
40
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Particulars of goods inwards to be furnished
39.—(1) The master, owner or agent of every vessel and the pilot,
owner or agent of every aircraft arriving in Singapore, and the
station‑master at the customs station along the railway on the arrival
of every train, must, within 24 hours after the arrival of the vessel,
aircraft or train, or within such longer period as the Director‑General
may in his or her discretion allow, furnish to the proper officer of
customs at the customs office designated by the Director‑General —
(a) a full and correct inward manifest, certified by the master,
pilot, owner, agent or station‑master, containing full
particulars as to the quantities, marks and description of
goods brought into Singapore;
(b) a full and correct statement of goods in transit discharged
in Singapore; and
(c) if so required by the Director‑General —
(i) a full and correct manifest of all goods in transit not
landed in Singapore; and
(ii) a correct list of sea, air or railway stores on board the
vessel, aircraft or train.
(2) The Director‑General may, if he or she thinks fit and subject to
such conditions as he or she may impose, permit the owner or agent of
the vessel or aircraft or the station‑master mentioned in subsection (1)
to authorise any other person to furnish on behalf of the owner, agent
or station‑master the whole or any part of any manifest or statement
mentioned in subsection (1).
Correction to be made on completion of discharge
40.—(1) Within one month of the arrival of a vessel, aircraft or
train, the master, owner or agent of the vessel or the pilot, owner or
agent of the aircraft or the station‑master or the person authorised
under section 39(2) must present to the proper officer of customs a
certified amendment to the manifest required by section 39 due to
short‑shipment, short‑landing, overlanding or such other cause as the
Minister may by order specify.
Customs Act 1960
41
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(2) The Director‑General may refuse to accept any amendment
made after the Director‑General has been notified that investigations
into any offence under any written law have commenced in
connection with goods to which the manifest relates.
(3) If any dutiable goods are not accounted for to the satisfaction of
a senior officer of customs —
(a) within 2 months of the presentation of the amendment or
within such longer period as the officer may allow; or
(b) in any case where the amendment has not been presented
within 3 months of the completion of the discharge of
cargo from a vessel or an aircraft or a train,
the master, owner or agent of the vessel or the pilot, owner or agent of
the aircraft or the station‑master or the person authorised under
section 39(2), is liable to pay on demand to the senior officer of
customs twice the amount of duty leviable thereon or, when the
correct duty cannot be assessed, an amount not exceeding $1,000.
(4) If the person liable to the penalties laid down in subsection (3)
refuses or fails to pay the penalties demanded of the person, any
senior officer of customs may sue for and recover the penalties in a
court.
Particulars of goods exported to be furnished
41.—(1) Within 48 hours of the departure of every vessel, aircraft
or train or within such longer period as the Director‑General may in
his or her discretion allow, the owner or agent of the vessel or aircraft
or the station-master at the customs station along the railway must
furnish to the proper officer of customs at the customs office
designated by the Director‑General —
(a) a full and correct outward manifest of all goods exported
thereon, or which have been taken aboard the vessel or
aircraft as sea or air stores;
(b) a full and correct statement of all goods transhipped; and
(c) a full and correct loadlist in the form approved by the
Director‑General and certified by such owner, agent or
station‑master to contain full particulars of all the dutiable
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
42
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


goods which have been received for loading onto the
vessel, aircraft or train.
(2) The Director‑General may, if he or she thinks fit and subject to
such conditions as he or she may impose, permit the owner, agent or
station‑master mentioned in subsection (1) to authorise any other
person to furnish on behalf of the owner, agent or station‑master the
whole or any part of any manifest, statement or loadlist mentioned in
that subsection.
Liability in respect of duty for goods unaccounted for, etc.
42.—(1) All dutiable goods unshipped or landed in a free trade
zone or approved landing place, or deposited in a transit warehouse,
are, until —
(a) lawfully removed therefrom for export or entry into
customs territory; or
(b) received for storage by the authority or licensed FTZ
operator administering the free trade zone or the occupier
or operator of the premises in which the goods are stored
within the zone,
[Act 33 of 2023 wef 01/03/2024]
at the risk of the master, owner or agent of the vessel or the pilot,
owner or agent of the aircraft or any person authorised under
section 39(2) (as the case may be) as if those goods had not been
unshipped.
[29/2018]
(2) The master, owner or agent of the vessel or the pilot, owner or
agent of the aircraft or any person authorised under section 39(2) is
each liable to pay the duty on such of the goods as are not accounted
for to the satisfaction of a senior officer of customs as if those goods
had been imported.
(3) Despite the provisions of any written law to the contrary, where
any dutiable goods have been received for storage by —
(a) the authority or licensed FTZ operator administering a free
trade zone; or
[Act 33 of 2023 wef 01/03/2024]
Customs Act 1960
43
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(b) the occupier or operator of the premises in which the goods
are stored within a free trade zone,
then, the authority, licensed FTZ operator, occupier or operator is
liable to pay the customs duty or excise duty on such of the goods as
are not accounted for to the satisfaction of a senior officer of customs,
as if those goods had been imported.
[29/2018]
[Act 33 of 2023 wef 01/03/2024]
(3A) Despite the provisions of any written law to the contrary,
where any dutiable goods landed in a free trade zone are used or
consumed in the free trade zone, the following persons are liable to
pay the customs duty or excise duty on the goods so used or
consumed, as if the goods had been imported:
(a) subject to paragraph (b), every relevant person mentioned
in subsection (3B) at whose risk the goods remained under
subsection (1);
(b) if, at the time of their use or consumption, the dutiable
goods were stored by —
(i) the authority or licensed FTZ operator administering
the free trade zone; or
[Act 33 of 2023 wef 01/03/2024]
(ii) the occupier or operator of any premises within the
free trade zone,
(b) the authority, licensed FTZ operator, occupier or operator,
as the case may be.
[29/2018]
[Act 33 of 2023 wef 01/03/2024]
(3B) In subsection (3A), a relevant person is —
(a) in the case of a vessel — the master, owner or agent or
person authorised under section 39(2); and
(b) in the case of an aircraft — the pilot, owner or agent or
person authorised under section 39(2).
[29/2018]
(3C) For the purpose of calculating the customs duty or excise duty
under subsections (3) and (3A), the rate of duty and the valuation (if
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
44
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


any) applicable to the goods are those in force on the date the goods
were brought into the free trade zone.
[29/2018]
(4) For the purpose of subsection (1) and section 45 —
(a) the value of any grade of motor spirit which is not being
retailed in Singapore under a trade name or trade mark is
the highest price inclusive of excise duty but excluding
goods and services tax charged thereon for that grade
regardless of trade names or trade marks prevailing in
Singapore at retailers’ motor spirit pumps; and
(b) the value of any grade of motor spirit which is being
retailed in Singapore under a trade name or trade mark is
determined in accordance with section 23.
PART 5
GENERAL PROVISIONS AFFECTING AIRCRAFT
AND VESSELS IN TERRITORIAL WATERS
Master of vessel to obey signals from preventive vessels and
instructions by officer of customs
43. The master of any vessel in the territorial waters of Singapore
must obey any signal made to the master from a preventive vessel or
any instructions given by an officer of customs in uniform from any
other vessel or any place requiring the master to stop or to heave to or
to perform any other act.
Goods not specified in manifest to be deemed uncustomed
44. If dutiable goods, or goods in transit of a class dutiable on
import, other than bona fide sea, air or railway stores, are found by a
proper officer of customs in any vessel, aircraft or train in Singapore
and those goods are not specified in the manifest of the vessel, aircraft
or train, then those goods are —
(a) deemed to be uncustomed goods; and
(b) liable to seizure and the vessel, aircraft or train may be
detained by the proper officer of customs.
Customs Act 1960
45
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Missing goods deemed to have been illegally landed
45. If in any vessel, aircraft or train in Singapore the quantity of
dutiable goods, or goods of a class dutiable on import intended for
transhipment or in transit, entered in the manifest or other document
of the vessel, aircraft or train, is found missing and the deficiency is
not accounted for to the satisfaction of the proper officer of customs,
then the master, owner or agent of the vessel, or the pilot, owner or
agent of the aircraft, or the station-master at the customs station along
the railway or any person authorised under section 39(2) or 41(2),
is —
(a) unless the contrary is proved, deemed to have illegally
removed those goods and landed them in Singapore; and
(b) without affecting any proceedings under this Act, liable to
pay immediately to the proper officer of customs the duty
leviable on the goods found deficient or missing and the
vessel, aircraft or train may be detained by the proper
officer of customs until the customs duty or excise duty has
been paid.
Accommodation in vessel to be provided for proper officer of
customs
46. When, in exercise of the powers conferred by this Act, a proper
officer of customs boards any vessel, the master of the vessel must
provide the officer with suitable shelter and accommodation on the
vessel while the vessel remains in the territorial waters of Singapore.
Power to lock up goods dutiable on import
47.—(1) When, in exercise of the powers conferred by this Act, a
proper officer of customs boards any vessel, aircraft or train, the
officer —
(a) has free access to every part of the vessel, aircraft or train;
(b) has the power to mark any dutiable goods before landing;
and
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
46
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(c) has the power to lock up, seal, mark or otherwise secure
any dutiable goods, including sea, air or railway stores on
board the vessel, aircraft or train.
(2) Any lock, seal or mark must not be opened, broken or altered
without the consent of the proper officer of customs while the vessel,
aircraft or train is within the limits of the port or airport or before any
such goods are delivered to be landed.
(3) The Director‑General may, in his or her discretion, permit or
refuse to permit the taking of any dutiable goods without payment of
duty into a ship or aircraft as sea or air stores.
(4) In granting permission for the embarkation of any dutiable
goods under subsection (3), the Director‑General may impose any
conditions that the Director‑General considers fit.
(5) The Director‑General may, in his or her discretion, permit or
refuse to permit the use, within the territorial waters of Singapore, of
any sea or air stores on which duty has not been paid.
(6) All goods dutiable on import which are part of any air, sea or
railway store on board —
(a) a vessel or train must be secured in a locked store
specifically provided for the purpose; and
(b) an aircraft must be secured in a locked cabin box or other
receptacle specifically provided for the purpose.
(7) If any air, sea or railway stores are found in any place other than
those stated in subsection (6), those air, sea or railway stores are
deemed to be uncustomed goods.
Prohibition of carriage of dutiable goods in local craft
48.—(1) Goods of a class dutiable on import must not be carried in
any
local
craft
except
with
the
written
permission
of
the
Director‑General
and
subject
to
such
conditions
as
the
Director‑General may impose.
(2) This section does not apply to any local craft lawfully engaged
in transporting cargo from or to a vessel within the limits of the Port
of Singapore.
Customs Act 1960
47
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


PART 6
WAREHOUSING
Government warehouses
49.—(1) The
Director‑General
may
establish
and
maintain
Government warehouses in which dutiable goods may be deposited
and kept without payment of duty.
(2) The Director‑General may, in his or her discretion, limit the
quantity of dutiable goods which, and the period during which any
such dutiable goods, may be deposited and kept in any Government
warehouse, at any customs office or customs station.
(3) The Director‑General may, in his or her discretion, permit the
storage of non-dutiable or duty-paid goods in a Government
warehouse subject to any conditions that the Director‑General may
impose.
50. [Repealed by Act 3 of 2008]
Licensed warehouses
51.—(1) The Director‑General may, in his or her discretion, on
payment of such fees as may be prescribed, grant a licence to any
person (called in this section the licensee) and when granted suspend
or withdraw any licence for warehousing goods liable to duty in a
place or places specified in that licence.
(2) Any such licence is for such period and subject to such
conditions as the Director‑General may in each case specify in the
licence.
(3) A senior officer of customs, or any officer of customs deputed
by a senior officer of customs for the purpose, has at all times access
to any licensed warehouse.
(4) If it appears at any time that in any licensed warehouse there is a
deficiency in the quantity of dutiable goods which ought to be found
therein, the licensee of the warehouse is —
(a) in the absence of proof to the contrary, presumed to have
illegally removed the goods; and
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
48
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(b) without affecting any proceedings under this Act, liable to
pay immediately to the proper officer of customs the duty
leviable on the goods found deficient.
(5) If, it is shown to the Director‑General’s satisfaction that the
deficiency has been caused by theft or by unavoidable leakage,
breakage or other accident, or by evaporation, the Director‑General
may remit the whole or any part of the duty leviable on the goods
found deficient.
Dutiable goods to be deposited in free trade zone
52.—(1) All dutiable goods imported into Singapore —
(a) by sea, must on first arrival be landed and deposited by the
importer or the importer’s agent in a free trade zone; and
(b) by any other means, must on first arrival or landing be
deposited by the importer or the importer’s agent in a
Government warehouse or licensed warehouse or, if so
required, a customs office or customs station or in any
other place approved by the Director‑General in writing.
[3/2008]
(2) If the Director‑General is satisfied that for any reason it is not
practicable to land or deposit any dutiable goods in a free trade zone
or in a Government warehouse or licensed warehouse, or a customs
office or a customs station or in any other place approved by the
Director‑General in writing, the Director‑General may exempt those
goods from being so landed or deposited, subject to any conditions
that the Director‑General may impose.
[3/2008]
(3) Despite subsection (1), such goods as may be prescribed by the
Minister under section 5(4) of the Free Trade Zones Act 1966 —
(a) must be deposited in a Government warehouse or licensed
warehouse; and
(b) are liable to warehouse rent at the prescribed rates
applicable to those goods.
[3/2008]
Customs Act 1960
49
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(4) Any dutiable goods imported by rail may be consigned to, and
are deemed to have first arrived on reaching, the customs station
along the railway.
(5) This section does not apply to goods lawfully imported —
(a) by post; and
(b) by rail as stores for use in railway restaurant cars.
Warehouse deposit receipts
53.—(1) A warehouse deposit receipt must be issued by the proper
officer of customs for all goods deposited in a Government
warehouse or a customs office or customs station or in any other
place approved by the Director‑General in writing.
(2) Where the warehouse deposit receipt is lost, a copy of the
receipt, duly certified by the proper officer of customs, must be
supplied to the owner of the goods or the owner’s agent on delivery to
a senior officer of customs at the customs office of an indemnity bond
approved by the senior officer of customs, securing the Government
against any claim for loss owing to wrong delivery of the goods
deposited.
(3) The holder or endorsee in due course of a warehouse deposit
receipt or a certified copy thereof issued under subsection (2) is
deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to be the owner of the goods
deposited.
(4) Delivery to the holder or endorsee or the agent of the holder or
endorsee of the warehouse deposit receipt or certified copy thereof or
delivery against the production of a delivery order authenticated by
the holder or endorsee or the agent of the holder or endorsee of the
warehouse deposit receipt or certified copy thereof is a good and
lawful delivery.
(5) When delivery is made against such delivery order, the quantity
of goods covered by the deposit receipt or certified copy thereof is
deemed to have been endorsed accordingly and when all the goods
have been so delivered the warehouse deposit receipt or certified
copy thereof is deemed to be cancelled.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
50
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Power to open and examine goods or packages
54. A senior officer of customs may, at any time, direct that any
goods or package lodged in any Government warehouse or licensed
warehouse or customs office or customs station or in any other place
approved by the Director‑General in writing be opened, weighed or
otherwise examined, and, after the goods or package has been so
opened or examined, may cause the same to be sealed or marked in
any manner that the senior officer of customs thinks fit.
[3/2008]
Detention of goods where doubt exists
55.—(1) The proper officer of customs may detain in a Government
warehouse or customs office or customs station or in any other place
approved by the Director‑General in writing any goods if the proper
officer of customs is in doubt whether the goods are dutiable or not.
(2) In every such case, the proper officer of customs must
immediately make a report to a senior officer of customs, who
must, without undue delay, decide whether the goods are dutiable or
not.
(3) If any such goods are found not to be dutiable, no warehouse
rent is payable in respect thereof.
Protection of Government from liability
56. The Government shall not be liable to make good any loss
sustained in respect of any goods by fire, theft, damage or other cause,
while the goods are in any Government warehouse or customs office
or customs station or in any other place approved by the
Director‑General in writing or in the lawful custody or control of
any officer of customs, unless the loss has been caused by the wilful
neglect or default of an officer of customs or of a person employed by
the Government in connection with the customs.
Protection of officers of customs from liability
57. No officer of customs or other person employed by the
Government in connection with the customs shall be liable to make
good any loss sustained in respect of any goods by fire, theft, damage
or other cause while the goods are in any Government warehouse or
Customs Act 1960
51
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


customs office or customs station or in any other place approved by
the Director‑General in writing or in the lawful custody or control of
such officer or any other officer of customs or person employed in
connection with the customs unless the loss has been caused by his or
her wilful neglect or default.
Payment of warehouse rent
58.—(1) The owner of any goods deposited in a Government
warehouse, or the owner’s agent, must pay to the proper officer of
customs at the prescribed rates the warehouse rent which may be due
in respect of the goods.
(2) Such rent is payable on demand, and in any event before the
goods are removed from the Government warehouse.
(3) If any bill for warehouse rent presented in accordance with
subsection (1) is not discharged within 14 days from the date of its
presentation, the Director‑General may immediately order the goods
in respect of which the warehouse rent is payable to be forfeited to the
Government, with effect from the day next following that (if any) in
respect of which storage charges have been paid.
Removal of dutiable goods from customs control
59.—(1) Every owner of goods warehoused under section 51, 52,
60 or 83 must, before removal of the goods or any part thereof from
customs control, make personally or by the owner’s agent to the
proper officer of customs a declaration, in accordance with
section 96, of the goods to be removed.
[3/2008]
(2) Goods deposited in a licensed warehouse may be removed
therefrom without such prior declaration subject to any conditions
that the Director‑General may impose.
[3/2008]
Landing of dutiable goods for transhipment
60.—(1) Dutiable goods arriving in Singapore for transhipment and
landed to await the arrival of the vessel in which they are intended to
be transhipped must be landed and deposited in a free trade zone.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
52
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(2) The Director‑General may exempt any particular goods from
the operation of this section.
Storage of dutiable goods
61. A person must not store, keep or have in the person’s possession
any dutiable goods except under customs control.
Weighing and handling
62.—(1) All necessary operations relating to the loading, shipping,
unloading, unshipping, landing, carrying, weighing, measuring,
testing,
opening,
unpacking,
repacking,
bulking,
sorting
and
marking
of
goods,
including
passengers’
baggage,
whether
warehoused or not, must be performed by or at the expense of the
owner, importer, exporter, consignor, consignee or agent, as the case
may be.
(2) Where the presence of officers of customs is required or
necessary for the proper performance of such operations as are
described in subsection (1), the owner, importer, exporter, consignor,
consignee or agent (as the case may be) must at his, her or its own
expense provide such officers of customs with the necessary transport
between the customs office and the place where those operations are
to be performed.
PART 7
MANUFACTURE AND BOTTLING
Licence to manufacture dutiable goods
63.—(1) A person must not manufacture any dutiable goods except
under and in accordance with the provisions of a licence granted by
the Director‑General and at the place or places of manufacture
specified in the licence.
[3/2008]
(2) Such licence is, on payment of such fee as may be prescribed,
granted at the discretion of the Director‑General for such period as
may be prescribed and subject to —
(a) such conditions as may be prescribed; and
Customs Act 1960
53
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(b) such further conditions as the Director‑General may direct
to be endorsed on the licence in any particular case.
[3/2008]
(3) Such licence may be suspended or withdrawn at any time by the
Director‑General.
[3/2008]
(4) A licence to manufacture any dutiable goods is deemed to
include the following:
(a) a licence for warehousing such dutiable goods as provided
for in section 51(1); and
(b) where the dutiable goods consist of intoxicating liquors, a
licence for the bottling of such intoxicating liquors as
provided for in section 66(1).
[3/2008]
(5) Any regulations made under section 143(1) to regulate the
control of licensed warehouses or bottling warehouses apply to
warehouses deemed to be so licensed under subsection (4) to such an
extent as the Director‑General may direct.
No person except licensee to keep a still, etc.
64.—(1) A person who is not the holder of a licence under
section 63(1), or under section 83(3) for manufacturing dutiable
goods, must not knowingly keep or have in the person’s possession
any still, utensil or other apparatus for distilling, fermenting or
otherwise manufacturing intoxicating liquors or any power-operated
machinery for the manufacture of tobacco or any other apparatus for
the manufacture of dutiable goods.
[3/2008]
(2) The owner and the occupier of any land or premises upon which
any still, utensil or other apparatus for distilling, fermenting or
otherwise manufacturing intoxicating liquors or any power‑operated
machinery for the manufacture of tobacco or any apparatus for the
manufacture of dutiable goods is found are each deemed, until the
contrary is proved, knowingly to have kept or had in the owner’s or
occupier’s possession such still, utensil or other apparatus or
power‑operated machinery for the manufacture of tobacco or
apparatus for the manufacture of dutiable goods, as the case may be.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
54
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(3) Nothing in subsection (1) applies to stocks held by a bona fide
trader in scientific apparatus or in machinery or, with the approval of
the Director‑General, to stills, utensils or other apparatus for
distilling, fermenting or otherwise manufacturing intoxicating
liquors or machinery for the manufacture of tobacco or any other
apparatus or machinery for the manufacture of dutiable goods in the
possession of a person constructing a distillery, brewery or other
factory with the approval of the Director‑General or of a person in
occupation of premises temporarily closed down, in respect of which
a licence had previously been held.
65. [Not in use]
Bottling warehouse
66.—(1) A person must not bottle any intoxicating liquors imported
or manufactured in Singapore, or blend, compound or vary any
intoxicating liquors except under and in accordance with the
provisions of a licence granted by the Director‑General and at the
bottling warehouse or warehouses specified in the licence.
[3/2008]
(2) Such licence is granted at the discretion of the Director‑General
upon payment of the prescribed fee, and is for such period and subject
to such conditions as may be prescribed by regulations made under
this Act, and may be suspended or withdrawn at any time by the
Director‑General.
(2A) A licence to bottle any intoxicating liquors imported or
manufactured in Singapore, or to blend, compound or vary any such
intoxicating liquors at a bottling warehouse specified therein is
deemed to be a licence for warehousing such dutiable goods at the
bottling warehouse as provided for in section 51(1).
[3/2008]
Prohibition on keeping of utensil, apparatus, etc., for bottling,
blending, etc.
67.—(1) A person who is not the holder of a licence under
section 66(1), or under section 83(3) for bottling intoxicating liquors
imported or manufactured in Singapore, or blending, compounding or
varying any intoxicating liquors, must not knowingly keep or have in
Customs Act 1960
55
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


the person’s possession any utensil, apparatus, material or ingredient
for bottling, blending, compounding or varying intoxicating liquors.
[3/2008]
(2) The owner and the occupier of any land or premises upon which
any utensil, apparatus, material or ingredient for bottling, blending,
compounding or varying intoxicating liquors is found are each
deemed, until the contrary is proved, knowingly to have kept or had in
the owner’s or occupier’s possession such utensil, apparatus, material
or ingredient for the bottling, blending, compounding or varying of
intoxicating liquors, as the case may be.
(3) Nothing in subsection (1) applies to stocks held by a bona fide
trader in scientific apparatus or in machinery or, with the approval of
the Director‑General, to any utensil, apparatus, material or ingredient
for bottling, blending, compounding or varying intoxicating liquors
in the possession of a person constructing a bottling warehouse,
distillery, brewery or other factory with the approval of the
Director‑General or of a person in occupation of premises
temporarily closed down, in respect of which a licence had
previously been held.
Exemption
68. Nothing in this Act applies to —
(a) any bottling, blending, compounding or varying of
intoxicating
liquors
by
a
legally
qualified
medical
practitioner or by any chemist in the service of the
Government or by any person registered as a pharmacist
under the Pharmacists Registration Act 2007 and has in
force a valid practising certificate issued under that Act or,
with the approval of the Director‑General, by a qualified
chemist which is proved to be for genuine medicinal or
scientific purposes; and
(b) any distillation by a legally qualified medical practitioner
or by any chemist in the service of the Government or by
any
person
registered
as
a
pharmacist
under
the
Pharmacists Registration Act 2007 and has in force a
valid practising certificate issued under that Act or, with
the approval of the Director‑General, by a qualified
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
56
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


chemist which is proved to be for genuine medicinal or
scientific
purposes
or,
with
the
approval
of
the
Director‑General, to any distillation of essential oils.
[48/2007]
Power to enter licensed premises
69. A senior officer of customs, or any officer of customs deputed
by him or her for the purpose, has at all times access to any premises
licensed under this Part.
PART 8
70. to 77. [Repealed by Act 5 of 2015]
PART 9
DRAWBACK
Drawback on imported tobacco manufactured in Singapore
78. Where any tobacco on
which duty has been paid is
manufactured in Singapore and is re-exported as part or ingredient
of the manufactured tobacco, the Director‑General may, on such
re‑export, allow to the manufacturer a drawback of the whole or such
proportion of the duty paid as the Minister may prescribe if —
(a) the tobacco has been manufactured in a factory licensed
under
section
63(1)
or
under
section
83(3)
for
manufacturing dutiable goods;
(b) provision to the satisfaction of the Director‑General has
been made for the control and supervision in the factory of
the deposit and issue for use of the tobacco on which duty
has been paid;
(c) the tobacco has been imported by the manufacturer or
purchased by the manufacturer before removal from
customs control;
(d) the tobacco is re‑exported within 6 months from the date
upon which excise duty was paid; and
Customs Act 1960
57
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(e) the prescribed monthly supplementary licence fee has been
paid before the removal into the factory of the tobacco as it
is intended to re‑export after manufacture.
[3/2008]
Drawback on imported goods on which duty has been paid
79.—(1) This section and sections 80, 81 and 134 apply to all goods
which have become dutiable by virtue of an order published under
section 10(1).
(2) This section does not apply to goods affected —
(a) by section 13, unless the Minister otherwise directs; or
(b) by section 15 or 28.
(3) When any goods, mentioned in subsection (1), upon which
customs duty or excise duty has been paid and not drawn back are
re‑exported, the whole or such proportion of the duty paid as the
Minister may prescribe calculated in accordance with subsection (4)
may, in the discretion of the Director‑General, be repaid as drawback,
if —
(a) the goods are identified to the satisfaction of a senior
officer of customs at the Port of Singapore or any customs
airport at which goods are shipped or loaded for re‑export,
or at the place of re-export;
(b) the drawback claimed in respect of any one consignment of
re‑exported goods is at least $100;
(c) the goods are re‑exported within 6 months of the date upon
which the customs duty or excise duty was paid;
(d) payment of drawback upon goods of a class to which the
goods to be re‑exported belong has not been prohibited by
any subsidiary legislation made under this Act;
(e) written notice has been given to a senior officer of customs
at or before the time of re‑export that a claim for drawback
will be made and established to the satisfaction of a senior
officer of customs within 3 months of the date of re‑export;
(f) the goods have not been used after importation; and
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
58
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(g) a declaration has been made by the person entitled to
drawback that the conditions on which drawback is
payable have been fulfilled.
[33/2000]
(4) The amount of drawback allowed is calculated at the rate of
customs duty or excise duty levied at the time of import or at the rate
of customs duty leviable on goods of a like description at the time of
re‑export of the goods, whichever is the lower.
[33/2000]
Declaration by claimant
80. Every person claiming drawback on any goods re‑exported
must, personally or by the person’s agent, make to a senior officer of
customs a declaration, in accordance with section 96, that the goods
have actually been re‑exported and have not been relanded and are
not intended to be relanded at any place in Singapore.
Drawback on goods used in manufacture
81. Where any goods are prescribed to be goods in respect of which
drawback may be allowed on exportation as part or ingredient of any
goods manufactured in Singapore and the prescribed goods are so
exported by the manufacturer as part or ingredient of any goods
manufactured in Singapore, then if customs duty or excise duty has
been paid on the prescribed goods and not drawn back the
Director‑General
may,
on
such
exportation,
allow
to
the
manufacturer a drawback of the duty so paid at such rates as may
be prescribed, if —
(a) the prescribed goods exported have been manufactured on
premises approved by the Director‑General;
(b) provision to the satisfaction of the Director‑General has
been made for the control and supervision on the premises
of the deposit and issue for use of the prescribed goods;
(c) such books of account are kept as the Director‑General
may require for the purpose of ascertaining the quantity of
the prescribed goods used in the manufacture;
Customs Act 1960
59
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(d) the prescribed goods are exported within 12 months from
the date upon which customs duty or excise duty was paid
or within such longer period as may be approved by the
Director‑General; and
(e) a declaration has been made by the person entitled to
drawback that the conditions on which drawback is
payable have been fulfilled.
PART 10
DUTY FREE SHOPS FOR TOURISTS
Duty free shops for tourists
82.—(1) The Director‑General may, on payment of any fees
prescribed, grant a licence to any person (called in this Act the
licensee) to sell goods to tourists and returning or departing residents
of Singapore free of duty in the premises designated in the licence.
(2) Any licence is for such period and subject to such conditions as
may be specified in the licence.
(3) Such premises are deemed to be a licensed warehouse for the
purposes of section 51 except that a licensee of those premises is not
required to take out a separate licence for warehousing goods in those
premises.
(4) A senior officer of customs, or any officer of customs deputed
by him or her for the purpose, has at all times access to any such
licensed premises for the purpose of checking accounts and records
and for such other purposes as may be considered necessary.
(5) The licensee must, for the proper conduct of the licensee’s
business, furnish such security as may be required by the
Director‑General.
(6) Any licence granted under subsection (1) may, in the discretion
of the Director‑General, be suspended or withdrawn at any time.
(7) [Deleted by Act 25 of 2011]
(8) A person, other than a licensee, must not issue, display or
distribute or cause to be issued, displayed, or distributed any
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
60
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


advertisement, writing, pamphlet, price list or other document which
may imply or give reasonable cause for the public to believe that the
person has for sale on the person’s premises goods which are duty
free or tax free.
(9) Any person who contravenes subsection (8) shall be guilty of an
offence.
PART 11
COMPOSITE LICENCE
Grant of composite licence
83.—(1) Any person who intends to carry out 2 or more specified
activities for which 2 or more licences under this Act or the Goods
and Services Tax Act 1993 are required may, on payment of such fees
as may be prescribed, apply for a single composite licence
authorising the person to carry out those specified activities.
[3/2008]
(2) An application for a composite licence for specified activities
must be made to —
(a) the Director‑General; or
(b) if any of the specified activities is an activity referred to in
paragraph (b) of the definition of “specified activity” in
subsection (9), the Director‑General and the Comptroller.
[3/2008]
(3) On receipt of an application under subsection (2), the
Director‑General, or the Director‑General and the Comptroller (as
the case may be) may grant a composite licence to the applicant.
[3/2008]
(4) Every composite licence granted under subsection (3) must
specify the person to whom, the premises in respect of which, and the
activities for which, the licence is granted.
[3/2008]
(5) Every composite licence granted under subsection (3) is for
such period and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the
licence.
[3/2008]
Customs Act 1960
61
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(6) The Director‑General may suspend or withdraw the whole of
any composite licence granted under subsection (3), or such part of
any such composite licence relating to any of the activities referred to
in paragraph (a) of the definition of “specified activity” in
subsection (9).
[3/2008]
(7) The Comptroller may suspend or withdraw the part of any
composite licence granted under subsection (3) relating only to the
activity referred to in paragraph (b) of the definition of “specified
activity” in subsection (9).
[3/2008]
(8) Where
a
composite
licence
has
been
granted
under
subsection (3) in respect of 2 or more specified activities specified
in the licence —
(a) the licensee is not required by this Act or the Goods and
Services Tax Act 1993 to take out a separate licence for
each of those activities; and
(b) the premises in respect of which the composite licence is
granted are deemed to be licensed under the relevant
provisions of this Act or the Goods and Services Tax
Act 1993, as the case may be.
[3/2008]
(9) In this section —
“Comptroller” means the Comptroller of Goods and Services
Tax and includes any person authorised by the Comptroller to
grant a composite licence;
“specified activity” means —
(a) in relation to any goods liable to duty —
(i) warehousing dutiable goods for which a licence
is required under section 51;
(ii) manufacturing dutiable goods for which a
licence is required under section 63;
(iii) bottling
intoxicating
liquors
imported
or
manufactured
in
Singapore,
or
blending,
compounding
or
varying
any
such
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
62
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


intoxicating liquors, for which a licence is
required under section 66; or
(iv) selling goods to tourists and to returning or
departing residents of Singapore free of duty
for
which
a
licence
is
required
under
section 82; or
(b) in relation to any goods liable to goods and services
tax on the import of goods into Singapore under the
Goods and Services Tax Act 1993, storing goods
without payment of such tax for which a licence is
required
under
regulations
made
pursuant
to
section 37(5)(b) of that Act.
[3/2008; 25/2011]
84. [Repealed by Act 4 of 2003]
PART 12
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Documents to be produced on demand
85.—(1) On demand by the proper officer of customs, the importer
or exporter of any dutiable goods or the importer’s or exporter’s agent
must produce to that officer all invoices, bills of lading, certificates of
origin or of analysis and any other documents, which that officer may
require to test the accuracy of any declaration made by the importer or
exporter to any officer of customs.
(2) On demand by a senior officer of customs, the importer or
exporter of any dutiable goods or the importer’s or exporter’s agent
must produce to that officer all books of accounts, invoices, bills of
lading, certificates of origin, or of insurance or of analysis and any
other documents including documents on terms of trade relating to
the purchase, importation or sale of the goods by the importer or
exporter or the importer’s or exporter’s agent.
Computer service
86.—(1) The Director‑General may establish and operate a
computer service and make provision for any manifest, return, list,
Customs Act 1960
63
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


statement, declaration, direction, notice, permit, receipt or other
document required or authorised by this Act to be made, served or
submitted by electronic transmission (called in this Act an electronic
notice).
(2) A registered user may, in accordance with the regulations made
under subsection (13), make and serve an electronic notice to the
computer account of the Director‑General.
(3) The Director‑General
or any person
authorised by
the
Director‑General may, in accordance with the regulations made
under subsection (13), make and serve an electronic notice to the
computer account of a registered user.
(4) Where an electronic notice is transmitted to the computer
account of the Director‑General using the authentication code
assigned to a registered user —
(a) with or without the authority of the registered user; and
(b) before the notification to the Director‑General by the
registered user in the prescribed manner, of cancellation of
the authentication code,
that notice is, for the purposes of this Act, presumed to be made by the
registered user unless the registered user adduces evidence to the
contrary.
(5) Where the registered user alleges that the registered user has
transmitted no such electronic notice mentioned in subsection (4), the
burden is also on the registered user to adduce evidence of that fact.
(6) For the purposes of this Act, an electronic notice or a copy
thereof is not inadmissible in evidence merely on the basis that it was
transmitted without the making or delivery of any equivalent
document or counterpart in paper form.
(7) Despite any other written law, in any proceedings under this
Act, an electronic notice or a copy thereof (including a print-out of
that notice or copy) or any database report (including a print-out of
that report) relating to that notice —
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
64
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(a) certified by the Director‑General to contain all or any
information transmitted in accordance with this section;
and
(b) duly
authenticated
in
the
manner
specified
in
subsection (8) or is otherwise duly authenticated by
showing that there is no material discrepancy between
the electronic notice or copy thereof certified by the
Director‑General and the copy of the same electronic
notice kept by an independent record keeper appointed
under any regulations made under subsection (13),
is admissible as evidence of the facts stated or contained therein.
(8) For the purposes of this section, a certificate —
(a) giving the authentication code and other particulars of any
user and device (if known) involved in the production and
transmission of, and identifying the nature of, the
electronic notice or copy thereof; and
(b) purporting to be signed by the Director‑General or by a
person occupying a responsible position in relation to the
operation of the computer service at the relevant time,
is sufficient evidence that the electronic notice or copy thereof has
been duly authenticated, unless the court, in its discretion, calls for
further evidence on this issue.
(9) Where an electronic notice or a copy thereof is admissible under
subsection (7), it is presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the
contents of the electronic notice or copy thereof have been accurately
transmitted.
(10) The Director‑General may, for the purpose of facilitating any
electronic transmission under this section, approve the use in any
such electronic transmission of symbols, codes, abbreviations or
other notations to represent any particulars or information required
under this Act.
(11) Any officer of customs or any other person employed in the
administration of this Act is not treated as having contravened any
provision of any written law relating to confidentiality or secrecy
Customs Act 1960
65
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


merely because he or she communicates to the independent record
keeper or the independent record keeper’s employee or permits the
independent record keeper or the independent record keeper’s
employee
to
have
access
to
any
electronic
notice
or
any
information contained therein.
(12) The independent record keeper, the independent record
keeper’s employee and any person transmitting an electronic notice
on behalf of another person must not divulge or disclose the contents
of any electronic notice or a copy thereof without the prior written
consent of the Director‑General.
(13) The Minister may make regulations —
(a) prescribing the conditions for subscription to the computer
service, including the manner in which the authentication
codes are to be assigned;
(b) prescribing
the
manifests,
returns,
lists,
statements,
declarations, directions, notices, permits, receipts or any
other document which may be transmitted through the
computer service including the form and manner in which
they are to be transmitted;
(c) for the correction of errors in or amendments to electronic
notices;
(d) prescribing the procedure for use of the computer service
including the procedure in circumstances where there is a
breakdown or interruption in the service;
(e) for the appointment of an independent record keeper to be
charged with the duty to maintain for a prescribed period a
record of all the electronic notices and transactions made
through
the
data
service
provider
between
the
Director‑General and the registered users, such a duty to
include keeping the database reports;
(f) for the independent record keeper to produce a copy of the
relevant record pertaining to any electronic notice or a
copy thereof to either the Director‑General or the
registered user, whose electronic notice is in issue, when
requested by either party to do so;
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
66
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(g) for the standards of security, confidentiality, data integrity
and conduct of the computer service and for the review of
the operations and activities of the data service provider by
such authority or expert as may be prescribed; and
(h) generally for the better provision of the computer service.
Preservation of records
87.—(1) Any duty under this Act to keep or preserve any books of
account, register, stock book or other records may, after the goods to
which such records relate have been removed from customs control,
be discharged by the preservation of the information contained
therein by such means as the Director‑General may approve.
[25/2011]
(2) Where the information mentioned in subsection (1) is so
preserved, a copy of any document forming part of the records is,
subject to subsections (3) and (4), admissible in evidence in any
proceedings, whether civil or criminal, to the same extent as the
records themselves.
(3) The Director‑General may, as a condition of approving under
subsection (1) any means of preserving information contained in any
books of account, register, stock book or other records, impose such
reasonable requirements as appear to the Director‑General necessary
for securing that the information will be as readily available to the
Director‑General as if the books of account, register, stock book or
records themselves had been preserved.
(4) A statement contained in a document produced by a computer is
not by virtue of subsection (2) admissible in evidence whether in civil
or criminal proceedings except in accordance with the Evidence
Act 1893.
Power of Director‑General to obtain information and
furnishing of information
88.—(1) The Director‑General or any officer of customs authorised
by the Director‑General has at all times full and free access to all
buildings, places, books, documents and other records for any of the
Customs Act 1960
67
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


purposes of this Act, and may inspect, copy or make extracts from
any such books, documents or records.
(2) The Director‑General or any officer of customs authorised by
the Director‑General may take possession of any such books,
documents or records where in his or her opinion —
(a) the inspection, copying thereof or extraction therefrom
cannot
reasonably
be
performed
without
taking
possession;
(b) the books, documents or records may be interfered with or
destroyed unless possession is taken; or
(c) the books, documents or records may be required as
evidence in proceedings for an offence under this Act or in
proceedings for the recovery of customs duty, excise duty,
tax or penalty, or in proceedings by way of an appeal
against an assessment of customs duty, excise duty or tax.
(3) The Director‑General may require any person to give orally or
in writing, as may be required, all such information concerning the
person’s or any other person’s transactions made in the course of a
business as may be demanded of the firstmentioned person by the
Director‑General for the purposes of this Act.
(4) No person is, by virtue of this section, obliged to disclose any
particulars as to which the person is under any statutory obligation to
observe secrecy.
Information not to be published or disclosed
89.—(1) Any particulars, information or document furnished for
the purposes of this Act must not, unless with the prior written
consent
of
the
person
having
the
control,
management
or
superintendence of the goods in relation to which the same was
given or furnished —
(a) be published; or
(b) be communicated or disclosed to any person,
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
68
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


except where it is necessary for the purposes of —
(c) a prosecution under this Act or the Goods and Services Tax
Act 1993;
(d) enabling an officer of customs to enforce a provision of
this Act;
(e) enabling the Comptroller of Goods and Services Tax or an
officer of customs to enforce a provision of the Goods and
Services Tax Act 1993;
(f) enabling an officer of customs to investigate a suspected
offence under this Act;
(g) enabling the Comptroller of Goods and Services Tax or an
officer of customs to investigate a suspected offence under
the Goods and Services Tax Act 1993;
(h) a prosecution of such offence under such written law (other
than this Act and the Goods and Services Tax Act 1993) as
may be prescribed;
(i) enabling a public agency to enforce such provision of such
written law (other than this Act and the Goods and Services
Tax Act 1993) as may be prescribed;
(j) enabling a public agency to investigate such suspected
offence under such written law (other than this Act and the
Goods and Services Tax Act 1993) as may be prescribed;
(k) enabling a public agency to take steps to protect
individuals and communities from risks or threats to
public health or safety, or to protect against risks or threats
to the security of Singapore (including her financial and
economic security), provided the approval of the Minister
has been given for the publication, communication or
disclosure for such purpose; or
(l) satisfying a request for information under section 353 of
the Copyright Act 2021, section 59B or 67D of the
Geographical Indications Act 2014, section 68I of the
Customs Act 1960
69
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Registered Designs Act 2000*, or section 85B or 93E of the
Trade Marks Act 1998.
[25/2011; 3/2014; 34/2018; 22/2021]
[*Updated to be consistent with the 2020 Revised Edition]
[Act 34 of 2018 wef 21/11/2022]
(1A) The approval of the Minister mentioned in subsection (1)(k)
may be given in respect of —
(a) a specific public agency or a class of public agencies; and
(b) a
specific
request
for
particulars,
information
or
documents, or requests for particulars, information or
documents falling within such class as the Minister may in
his or her approval specify.
[25/2011]
(1B) Nothing in subsection (1) prevents the Minister, and any
public officer assisting the Minister and duly authorised by the
Minister for the purposes of this subsection, from having access to
such
particulars,
information
or
document
mentioned
in
subsection (1) as may be necessary for the performance of his or
her official duties in connection with this Act or the Goods and
Services Tax Act 1993.
[25/2011]
(2) Any officer of customs or any person employed or engaged in
the administration of this Act who makes use of, publishes or permits
any other person to see or communicates or discloses to any other
person the contents of any such particulars, information or document
to any other person otherwise than with such consent or for such
purpose as is referred to in subsection (1), shall be guilty of an offence
and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $6,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or to both.
(3) Any person, having possession of any information which to the
person’s knowledge has been communicated, disclosed or published
in contravention of this section, who publishes or communicates that
information to any other person shall be guilty of an offence and shall
be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $6,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or to both.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
70
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(4) In this section —
“Comptroller”, in relation to goods and services tax, has the
meaning given by the Goods and Services Tax Act 1993;
“public agency” means a public officer, an organ of state or a
ministry or department of the Government, or a public
authority established by or under any public Act for a public
purpose or a member, an officer or an employee, or any
department, thereof.
[25/2011; 3/2014]
Retention of trade documents
90.—(1) Every importer or exporter of dutiable goods or the
importer’s or exporter’s agent must keep the following documents
and records relating to the goods:
(a) invoices;
(b) books of accounts;
(c) bills of lading;
(d) packing lists;
(e) certificates of origin;
(f) certificates of analysis;
(g) certificates of insurance;
(h) any document or record on the terms of trade relating to the
purchase, importation, sale or exportation of the goods by
the importer or exporter or the importer’s or exporter’s
agent; and
(i) such other documents or records as may be prescribed.
[25/2011]
(2) The documents and records mentioned in subsection (1) must be
retained —
(a) in relation to goods in a Government warehouse or licensed
warehouse, for a period of at least 5 years from the date
those goods are removed from the Government warehouse
or licensed warehouse, as the case may be; or
Customs Act 1960
71
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(b) in any other case, for a period of at least 5 years from the
date on which the goods are released by the proper officer
of customs.
[2/2007; 3/2008]
(2A) The duty under this section to retain documents and records
may be discharged by the keeping, or preservation of the information
contained therein, in accordance with section 87.
[25/2011]
(2B) Subsection (2A) does not affect any obligation relating to the
retention of any document or record under such treaty, memorandum
of understanding or other agreement between Singapore and the
government of a country or territory outside Singapore, as may be
prescribed.
[25/2011]
(3) Any person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to comply
with this section shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on
conviction to a fine not exceeding $10,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 years or to both.
Persons bound to give information or produce documents
91.—(1) Every person required by the proper officer of customs to
give information or to produce any travel document or any document
on any subject into which it is the officer’s duty to inquire under this
Act and which it is in that person’s power to give or produce, is bound
to give the information or to produce the document for inspection.
(2) The proper officer of customs may specify the customs office or
station or other place at which that person is required to give
information or to produce any document.
(3) In subsection (1), “travel document” means a passport furnished
with a photograph of the holder or some other similar document
establishing to the satisfaction of the proper officer of customs the
identity of the holder and his or her nationality, domicile or place of
permanent residence.
Service of notices
92.—(1) Every notice or document required by this Act to be
served on any person may be served —
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
72
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(a) by delivering the notice or document to the person;
(b) by sending the notice or document by registered post
addressed to the person at the person’s usual or last known
place of residence or business;
(c) where the person is a body of persons or a company —
(i) by delivering the notice or document to the secretary
or other similar officer of the body of persons or
company at its registered office or principal place of
business; or
(ii) by sending the notice or document addressed to the
body of persons or company at its registered office or
principal place of business; or
(d) by an electronic notice transmitted in accordance with
section 86.
(2) Any notice or document sent by registered post to any person in
accordance with subsection (1) is deemed to be duly served on the
person to whom the letter is addressed at the time when the letter
would in the ordinary course of post be delivered and in proving
service of the notice or document it is sufficient to prove that the
envelope containing the notice or document was properly addressed,
stamped and posted by registered post.
Baggage of passengers
93.—(1) Despite anything in this Act but subject to subsection (2),
every passenger or other person arriving in Singapore must —
(a) declare to the proper officer of customs at the customs
station all dutiable goods in his or her possession, whether
on his or her person or in any baggage or in any vehicle —
(i) which exceed his or her duty free allowance; or
(ii) for which no duty free allowance is granted; and
(b) pay the customs duty or excise duty leviable thereon before
he or she proceeds.
Customs Act 1960
73
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(2) Despite anything in this Act, every passenger or other person
arriving in Singapore at a point of entry which has a Red Channel and
a Green Channel must —
(a) proceed to the Red Channel to declare to the proper officer
of customs all dutiable goods in his or her possession,
whether on his or her person or in any baggage or in any
vehicle —
(i) which exceed his or her duty free allowance; or
(ii) for which no duty free allowance is granted; and
(b) pay the customs duty or excise duty leviable thereon before
he or she proceeds.
(3) Where a passenger or person fails to pay any customs duty or
excise duty on any dutiable goods in accordance with subsection (1)
or (2), those dutiable goods are deemed to be uncustomed goods.
(4) Any passenger or other person arriving in Singapore who
proceeds to the Green Channel with dutiable goods which exceed his
or her duty free allowance, or any goods for which no duty free
allowance is granted in his or her possession, either on his or her
person or in any baggage or in any vehicle is presumed, until the
contrary is proved, to be in possession of uncustomed goods.
(5) The baggage of passengers may be examined and delivered in
any manner as a senior officer of customs may direct, and it is the
duty of the person in charge of the baggage to produce, open, unpack
and repack the baggage.
Proper officer of customs may take samples
94.—(1) The proper officer of customs may at any time, if the
officer’s duties so require, take samples of any goods —
(a) to ascertain whether they are goods of a description liable
to any customs duty or excise duty;
(b) to ascertain the customs duty or excise duty payable on the
goods; or
(c) for such other purposes as the proper officer of customs
may consider necessary.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
74
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(2) The samples may be disposed of in any manner that the
Director‑General directs.
(3) No payment is to be made for the cost of any sample taken but
the proper officer of customs must give a receipt for any sample so
taken.
Addition or deduction of new or altered duties in the case of
contract
95.—(1) Where any new customs duty or excise duty is imposed or
where any customs duty or excise duty is increased, and any goods in
respect of which the customs duty or excise duty is payable are
delivered on or after the day on which the new or increased customs
duty or excise duty takes effect in pursuance of a contract made
before that day, the seller of the goods may, in the absence of
agreement to the contrary, recover from the purchaser as an addition
to the contract price, a sum equal to any amount paid by the seller in
respect of the goods on account of the new customs duty or excise
duty, or the increase of the customs duty or excise duty, as the case
may be.
(2) Where any customs duty or excise duty is decreased or
abolished, and any goods affected by the customs duty or excise
duty are delivered on or after the day on which the decrease or
abolition takes effect in pursuance of a contract made before that day,
the purchaser of the goods, in the absence of any agreement to the
contrary, may, if the seller has had in respect of those goods the
benefit of the decrease or abolition of the customs duty or excise duty,
deduct from the contract price a sum equal to the amount of the
decrease of customs duty or excise duty, or the customs duty or excise
duty, as the case may be.
Declarations to give a full and true account
96.—(1) The declarations mentioned in sections 37, 59 and 80
must, unless the Director‑General allows under subsection (2), be
made and submitted by an electronic notice in accordance with
section 86 and such declaration must give a full and true account of
such particulars as are required by the Director‑General.
Customs Act 1960
75
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(2) The Director‑General may, in the Director‑General’s discretion
and subject to any conditions that the Director‑General may impose,
allow any declaration mentioned in sections 37, 59 and 80 to be made
on a form determined by the Director‑General.
(3) Such declaration must —
(a) give a full and true account of the particulars for which
provision is made in the form; and
(b) be in duplicate or in such other number of copies as the
person to whom the declaration is required to be made may
direct.
Agents and employees
97.—(1) The agent or employee of any person or firm may transact
business generally at any customs office on behalf of the person or
firm subject to the following provisions:
(a) a senior officer of customs may refuse to transact business
with the agent or employee unless the person or a member
of the firm identifies the agent or employee to the officer as
empowered to transact the business and deposits with that
officer a signed authority authorising the agent or
employee to transact the business on behalf of that
person or firm; or
(b) a senior officer of customs may in addition require that
person or firm to give any security that the officer may
consider adequate for the faithful and incorrupt conduct of
the agent or employee acting on behalf of that person or
firm.
(2) The Director‑General may forfeit the whole or any part of the
amount secured under subsection (1)(b) as the Director‑General may
think fit if the Director‑General is satisfied that the agent or employee
has committed or attempted to commit or abetted the commission of
an improper or corrupt act.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
76
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Director‑General may charge rates, etc.
98.—(1) Where, upon the application of a person having the
possession and management of any place (called in this section the
applicant), that place or any part thereof —
(a) is
determined
by
the
Director‑General
under
section 31(1)(a)(ii) to be an authorised pier or place in
Singapore reserved for the separate and exclusive import,
export and transhipment by sea of goods by a particular
person or class of persons associated with the applicant;
(b) is prescribed by regulations under section 143 to be a
customs airport reserved for the separate and exclusive
import, export and transhipment by air of goods by a
particular person or class of persons associated with the
applicant; or
(c) is prescribed by regulations under section 143 to be a
customs office or a customs station reserved for the
separate and exclusive import, export and transhipment of
goods by a particular person or class of persons associated
with the applicant,
the Director‑General may, with the approval of the Minister, require
the applicant to pay to the Director‑General a rate at such intervals
and at such amount or rate as may be prescribed, for or in connection
with acts required by or under this Act to be done by officers of
customs at that place or part thereof.
[18/2012]
(2) The number of officers of customs to be deployed at any
authorised pier or place or at any customs airport, customs office or
customs station mentioned in subsection (1) is to be determined at the
discretion of the Director‑General.
[18/2012]
(3) In this section and section 143, any reference to the separate and
exclusive import, export and transhipment of goods includes a
reference to the separate and exclusive import, export and
transhipment of goods carried out only during a particular period
or periods in a day by a particular person or class of persons.
[18/2012]
Customs Act 1960
77
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(4) Any sum purportedly determined and collected by the
Director‑General before 19 December 2012 at any customs airport
reserved for the separate and exclusive import, export and
transhipment by air of goods by a particular person or class of
persons associated with the applicant is deemed to have been, by
force of this section, validly imposed as a rate under this section as if
this section was in force at the material time; and no legal proceedings
shall be instituted on or after 9 July 2012 in any court on account of or
in respect of any collection of these sums by the Director‑General.
[18/2012]
Late payment charges and interest
98A.—(1) The Director‑General may impose —
(a) charges for the late payment of any customs duty, excise
duty, tax, fee or other charge payable under this Act; and
(b) interest payable on any outstanding amount of any customs
duty, excise duty, tax, fee or charge or for any payment
thereof by instalment.
[25/2011]
(2) Every amount collected before 1 January 2012 as, or
purportedly as —
(a) charges for the late payment of any customs duty, excise
duty, tax, fee or other charge under this Act; or
(b) interest on any outstanding amount of any customs duty,
excise duty, tax, fee or charge or for any payment thereof
by instalment,
is deemed to be and always to have been validly collected, and no
legal proceedings shall lie or be instituted or maintained in any court
of law on account of or in respect of any such collection.
[25/2011]
Power to appoint agent, etc., for recovery of duty
98B.—(1) The Director‑General may by written notice if the
Director‑General thinks it necessary, declare any person to be the
agent of any other person.
[25/2011]
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
78
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(2) The person (X) declared the agent under subsection (1) is the
agent of that other person for the purposes of this Act and may be
required to pay any duty due or which may become due from any
moneys,
including
pensions,
salaries,
wages
or
any
other
remuneration, which, at the date of receipt of the notice or at any
time not later than 90 days thereafter may be held by X for or due by
X to the person whose agent X has been declared to be, and in default
of such payment, the duty is recoverable from X in the manner
provided by section 10(3).
[25/2011]
(3) For the purposes of this section, the Director‑General may
require any person to give the Director‑General information as to any
moneys, funds or other assets which may be held by the person for, or
of any moneys due by the person to, any other person.
[25/2011]
(4) For the purposes of payment of any duty due from any moneys
mentioned in subsection (2) in a joint account at any bank or from the
proceeds of sale of any immovable property owned by 2 or more
persons as joint owners, the following provisions apply:
(a) the person declared by the Director‑General under
subsection (1) to be the agent of any person who is an
owner of such moneys must —
(i) within 14 days after the receipt of the notice under
subsection (1), send a notice by registered post
addressed to every owner of such moneys at the
address last known to the agent informing the owner
of such declaration; and
(ii) retain such amount of the moneys as is presumed
under paragraph (b) to be owned by the person from
whom duty is due and, subject to paragraph (c),
within 42 days after the receipt of the notice under
subsection (1), or within such longer period as the
Director‑General in his or her discretion may allow,
pay over the duty due from such amount to the
Director‑General;
Customs Act 1960
79
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(b) it is presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the holders
of a joint account at any bank have equal share of the
moneys in the account as at the date of receipt of the notice
under subsection (1) and that the joint owners of any
immovable property share the proceeds of sale of the
property equally;
(c) any owner of such moneys who objects to the share
presumed under paragraph (b) must give written notice of
the owner’s objection to the person declared to be the agent
under subsection (1) within 28 days after the receipt of the
notice of the agent under paragraph (a)(i), or within such
longer period as the Director‑General in his or her
discretion may allow, and furnish proof as to the owner’s
share of the moneys;
(d) where an objection under paragraph (c) has been received,
the person declared to be the agent must —
(i) retain the amount of such moneys mentioned in
paragraph
(a)(ii)
until
such
time
as
the
Director‑General by notice under paragraph (e)
informs
the
person
of
the
Director‑General’s
decision on the objection; and
(ii) inform the Director‑General of the objection within
7 days after the receipt of the objection;
(e) the Director‑General must consider the objection and must
by written notice inform the person declared to be the agent
of the Director‑General’s decision and the agent must,
despite any appeal under paragraph (f), pay over any duty
due
from
the
share
of
moneys
decided
by
the
Director‑General as the amount, not exceeding the
amount presumed under paragraph (b) to be the share of
the person by whom the duty is payable, held by the agent
for or due by the agent to the person;
(f) any owner of such moneys aggrieved by the decision of the
Director‑General
under
paragraph
(e)
may,
despite
section 100, appeal against the decision to the General
Division of the High Court; and
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
80
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(g) for the purpose of this subsection, “joint account” means
any account in the names of 2 or more persons but excludes
any partnership account, trust account and any account
where a minor is one of the joint account holders.
[25/2011; 40/2019]
(5) Where an agent makes any payment of moneys to the
Director‑General under this section —
(a) the agent is deemed to have been acting under the authority
of the person by whom the duty is payable (called in this
section the person in default);
(b) the amount of the duty due from the person in default is
reduced by the amount paid by the agent to the
Director‑General; and
(c) the amount of the reduction is, to the extent of that amount,
deemed to have been paid to the person in default in
accordance with any law, contract or scheme governing the
payment of moneys held by the agent for or due from the
agent to the person in default.
[25/2011]
(6) Where —
(a) an amount of duty is due from any person under this Act
otherwise than as an agent under this section;
(b) except for this subsection, an amount is or would, at any
time during the period of 90 days after the date of the
receipt of the notice in paragraph (c), be payable by the
Government to the person in default by or under any
written law, contract or scheme; and
(c) before payment of the amount mentioned in paragraph (b)
is made to the person in default, the Director‑General
serves notice on any public officer by whom the payment is
to be made that the duty is due from the person in default,
then the public officer is, despite any other written law, contract or
scheme, entitled to reduce the amount mentioned in paragraph (b) by
the amount of the whole or any part of the duty mentioned in
paragraph (a), and if the public officer makes such a reduction —
Customs Act 1960
81
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(d) the amount of the duty mentioned in paragraph (a) is
reduced by the amount of the reduction; and
(e) the amount of the reduction is, to the extent of such
amount, deemed to have been paid to the person in default
in accordance with any law, contract or scheme governing
the payment of moneys mentioned in paragraph (b) to the
person in default.
[25/2011]
(7) In this section, “duty” includes any penalty or any other money
which a person is liable to pay to the Director‑General under this Act.
[25/2011]
Indemnification of agent
98C. Every person liable under section 98B for the payment of duty
on behalf of another person may retain out of any money coming to
the firstmentioned person’s hands on behalf of the other person so
much thereof as is sufficient to pay the duty; and is to be indemnified
against any person for all payments made by the firstmentioned
person in pursuance and by virtue of this Act
[25/2011]
Securities for payment of duty and compliance with this Act
99.—(1) The Director‑General has the right to require and take
securities for payment of duty and generally for compliance with this
Act and for the protection of the revenue.
(2) Pending the giving of the required security, a proper officer of
customs may refuse to do any act in the execution of his or her office
in relation to any matter in respect of which the security is required.
(3) The security must be given in the manner and form approved by
the Director‑General and may, subject to that approval, be by bond,
guarantee, cash deposit or any other method or by the combination of
2 or more such methods.
(4) Any such security may be given in relation to any particular
transaction or generally with respect to any class of transactions or to
all
transactions
and
for
such
period
and
amount
as
the
Director‑General thinks fit and under such conditions as to
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
82
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


forfeiture, penalty or otherwise as the Director‑General may
determine.
(5) If at any time the Director‑General is not satisfied with the
sufficiency of any security, the Director‑General may require a new
security in substitution for or in addition to the security which has
been given.
Appeal from decision of Director‑General
100. Where it is provided in this Act that the decision on any matter
rests with the Director‑General then unless it is specifically provided
that the decision is at the discretion of the Director‑General, any
person aggrieved by the Director‑General’s decision may appeal to
the Minister whose decision is final.
PART 13
SEARCH, SEIZURE AND ARREST
Issue of search warrant
101.—(1) Where it appears to any Magistrate, or any senior officer
of customs not below the rank of Assistant Director‑General of
Customs, upon information and after any inquiry which he or she may
think necessary, that there is reasonable cause to believe that in any
dwelling house, shop or other building or place, there are concealed
or deposited any —
(a) dutiable or uncustomed goods;
(b) goods liable to forfeiture under this Act;
(c) goods as to which any offence under this Act has been
committed; or
(d) books, records, documents or other articles, directly or
indirectly, relating to any transaction or dealing in any of
the goods mentioned in this subsection,
the Magistrate or the senior officer of customs may issue a warrant
authorising any officer of customs, named therein, by day or by night
and with or without assistance —
Customs Act 1960
83
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(e) to enter the dwelling house, shop or other building or place
and there to search for and seize any goods reasonably
suspected of being dutiable or uncustomed goods, or goods
liable to forfeiture under this Act, or goods as to which any
offence under this Act is suspected to have been
committed, or any books, records, documents or other
articles which may reasonably be believed to be, directly or
indirectly, relating to any transaction or dealing in any of
the goods mentioned in this subsection;
(f) to arrest any person or persons being in such dwelling
house, shop, building or place, in whose possession the
goods, books, records, documents or other articles may be
found, or whom the officer may reasonably suspect to have
concealed
or
deposited
the
goods,
books,
records,
documents or other articles; and
(g) to make copies of and take any reasonable steps to preserve
any books, records, documents or other articles mentioned
in sub‑paragraph (e).
(2) Such officer may if it is necessary to do so —
(a) break open any outer or inner door of the dwelling house,
shop or other building or place and enter therein;
(b) forcibly enter that place and every part thereof;
(c) remove by force any obstruction to such entry, search,
seizure and removal as that officer is empowered to effect;
and
(d) detain every person found in that place until that place has
been searched.
Power of Magistrate, etc., to enter and search
102. A Magistrate or senior officer of customs not below the rank of
Assistant Director‑General of Customs may himself or herself do
what he or she may under section 101 empower an officer of customs
to do whenever the Magistrate or senior officer of customs is
competent to issue a warrant under that section.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
84
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


When search may be made without warrant
103. Where it appears to any senior officer of customs that there is
reasonable cause to believe that in any dwelling house, shop or other
building or place there are concealed or deposited any —
(a) dutiable or uncustomed goods;
(b) goods liable to forfeiture under this Act;
(c) goods as to which any offence under this Act has been
committed; or
(d) books, records, documents or other articles, directly or
indirectly, relating to any transaction or dealing in any of
the goods mentioned in this subsection,
and if the officer has reasonable grounds for believing that by reason
of the delay in obtaining a search warrant the goods, books, records,
documents or other articles are likely to be removed, the officer may
exercise in, upon and in respect of that dwelling house, shop or other
building or place all the powers mentioned in section 101 as if the
officer were authorised to do so by a warrant issued under that
section.
Power to have access to, inspect and check operation of
computer and other apparatus
103A. In connection with the exercise of the powers in section 102
or 103, any Magistrate or any senior officer of customs, as the case
may be —
(a) is entitled at any time to have access to, and inspect and
check the operation of, any computer and any associated
device, apparatus or material which is or has been in use in
connection with any data or document to which section 102
or 103 applies; and
(b) may require —
(i) the person by whom or on whose behalf the
computer is or has been so used; or
Customs Act 1960
85
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(ii) any person having charge of, or otherwise concerned
with
the
operation
of,
the
computer,
device,
apparatus or material,
(b) to provide the Magistrate or the senior officer of customs
with such reasonable assistance as he or she may require
for the purposes of paragraph (a).
Power to search vessels and aircraft
104.—(1) A proper officer of customs may —
(a) go on board any vessel or aircraft in the Port of Singapore
or in any customs airport or place or within the territorial
waters of Singapore and remain on board as long as the
vessel or aircraft remains in Singapore;
(b) require the master of the vessel or the captain of the aircraft
to give such information relating to the vessel or aircraft,
cargo, stores, crew, passengers or voyage as the officer
may consider necessary;
(c) rummage and search all parts of the vessel or aircraft for
uncustomed goods;
(d) examine all goods on board and all goods then being
loaded or unloaded;
(e) demand all documents which ought to be on board the
vessel or aircraft;
(f) require all or any such documents to be brought to the
officer for inspection; and
(g) if necessary, retain any such documents brought to the
officer for inspection.
(2) The master of any vessel and the captain of any aircraft refusing
to allow the proper officer of customs to board or search the vessel or
aircraft, or refusing to give such information or to produce such
documents on demand shall be guilty of an offence.
(3) If any place, box or chest on board the vessel or aircraft is
locked and the key withheld, the proper officer of customs may open
any such place, box or chest.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
86
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(4) If any goods of a class dutiable on import are found concealed
on board any vessel or aircraft, they are deemed to be uncustomed
goods.
Senior officer of customs to exercise powers of search
105.—(1) Every senior officer of customs is entitled to exercise in
and upon and in respect of any vessel, aircraft, islet, landing place,
wharf, free trade zone or railway all the powers mentioned in
section 101 in as full and ample a manner as if the officer were
authorised to do so by a warrant issued under that section.
(2) Despite anything in any other written law, every senior officer
of customs, or any officer of customs deputed by him or her for the
purpose, in exercise of his or her powers under subsection (1) has free
access to the vessel, aircraft or any of the places specified in that
subsection.
(3) In this section, “railway” has the meaning given by the
Railways Act 1905.
Officers of customs may stop and search conveyances
106.—(1) Any officer of customs may stop and examine any
vehicle for the purpose of ascertaining whether any dutiable or
uncustomed goods are contained therein.
(2) The person in control or in charge of the vehicle must, if
required to do so by the officer of customs —
(a) stop the vehicle and allow the officer to examine it or move
his or her vehicle to another place for examination; and
(b) not proceed until permission to do so has been given by the
officer.
(3) The person in control or in charge of any vehicle stopped for
examination under subsection (1) must, on request by the proper
officer of customs —
(a) open all parts of the vehicle for examination by the officer;
and
Customs Act 1960
87
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(b) take all measures necessary to enable any examination that
the officer considers necessary to be made.
Road barrier
107.—(1) Despite any other written law, any senior officer of
customs may, if the officer considers it necessary to do so for the
prevention of smuggling of dutiable goods or detection of revenue
evasion —
(a) erect or place barriers in or across any public road or street
or in any public place in such manner as the officer may
think fit; and
(b) take all reasonable steps to prevent any vehicle from being
driven or ridden past any such barrier mentioned in
paragraph (a).
(2) Any driver or rider of any vehicle who fails to comply with the
signal of an officer of customs requiring the person to stop his or her
vehicle before reaching any barrier mentioned in subsection (1) shall
be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
6 months or to both.
(3) Any officer of customs may, without warrant, arrest any driver
or rider mentioned in subsection (2) unless the driver or rider gives
his or her name, identity card number and a place of address within
Singapore and if the officer of customs has reason to believe that the
name and address so given by the driver or rider is false, the officer
may exercise such power of arrest and detention or seizure of the
vehicle.
(4) No officer of customs shall be liable for any loss or damage
resulting to any vehicle or for any injury to the driver or rider or any
other occupant of the vehicle or pillion rider as a result of any barrier
erected by any officer under subsection (1).
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
88
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Power to open packages and examine goods
108. Any proper officer of customs may —
(a) examine any goods in the course of being imported or
exported or intended to be imported or exported;
(b) for the purposes of such examination direct the goods to be
brought to a customs office or a customs station; and
(c) open any package or receptacle.
Search of persons arriving in Singapore
109.—(1) Subject to this section, any person landing, or being
about to land, or having recently landed, from any vessel or aircraft,
or leaving any vessel or aircraft in the territorial waters of Singapore,
whether for the purpose of landing or otherwise, or entering or having
recently entered Singapore by road or rail must, on demand by any
proper officer of customs —
(a) permit his or her person, goods and baggage to be searched
by the officer; or
(b) together with the goods and baggage accompany the
officer to a customs office or customs station or police
station and there permit his or her person, goods and
baggage to be searched by an officer of customs.
(2) Any person who requests that his or her person be searched in
the presence of a senior officer of customs must not be searched
except in the presence of and under the supervision of that officer, but
the person may be detained until the arrival of that officer, or taken to
any customs office or customs station or police station where that
officer may be found.
(3) The goods and baggage of any person who requests to be
present when they are searched and so presents himself or herself
within a reasonable time must not be searched except in his or her
presence.
(4) A woman must not be searched except by a woman.
Customs Act 1960
89
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Seizure of goods the subject of an offence
110.—(1) All goods in respect of which there has been, or there is
reasonable cause to suspect that there has been, committed any
offence under this Act or any breach of the provisions of this Act or of
any restriction or condition subject to or upon which any licence or
permit has been granted, together with any receptacle, package,
vehicle, vessel not exceeding 200 tons net registered tonnage, or
aircraft, in which the same may have been found or which has been
used in connection with the offence or breach, and any books or
documents which may reasonably be believed to have a bearing on
the case may be seized by any officer of customs in any place either
on land or in the territorial waters of Singapore.
(2) All such goods and such receptacles, packages, vehicles, vessels
or aircraft must, as soon as practicable, be delivered into the care of a
proper officer of customs whose duty it is to receive the same.
(3) Whenever any goods, vehicles, vessels or aircraft are seized
under this Act, the seizing officer must immediately give written
notice of the seizure and the grounds thereof to the owner of the
goods, vehicles, vessels or aircraft, if known, either by delivering the
notice to the owner personally or by post at the owner’s place of
abode, if known.
(4) The notice mentioned in subsection (3) is not required to be
given where the seizure is made on the person, or in the presence of
the offender or the owner or the owner’s agent, or in the case of a
vessel or an aircraft, in the presence of the master or pilot, as the case
may be.
(5) The provisions of this section relating to —
(a) the seizure of goods apply to all the contents of any
package or receptacle in which the same are found and to
any article used to conceal the same;
(b) the seizure of any vessel or aircraft apply also to the tackle,
equipment and furnishings of the vessel or aircraft; and
(c) the seizure of conveyances apply to all equipment thereof
and to any animal by which the same is drawn.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
90
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(6) Any goods of a perishable nature or any animal or bird seized
under this section may be sold immediately and the proceeds of sale
held to abide the result of any prosecution or claim.
(7) Any goods which are of a dangerous character or which cannot
be removed without undue expense may be destroyed on the
instructions of a senior officer of customs.
(8) A senior officer of customs may release any goods seized under
this section to the importer or owner thereof subject to such
conditions and on such security as that officer may determine.
(9) The security required under subsection (8) may be by cash
deposit or bank guarantee or both.
Release of vehicle, vessel or aircraft under bond
111. When any vehicle, vessel or aircraft has been seized under this
Act, a senior officer of customs may temporarily return the vehicle,
vessel or aircraft to the owner of the same on security being furnished
to the satisfaction of the officer that the vehicle, vessel or aircraft will
be surrendered to the officer on demand.
Powers of arrest
112.—(1) Any officer of customs may arrest without warrant —
(a) any person found committing or attempting to commit, or
employing or aiding any person to commit, or abetting the
commission of, an offence under this Act;
(b) any person whom the officer may reasonably suspect to
have
in
the
person’s
possession
any
dutiable
or
uncustomed goods or any goods liable to seizure under
this Act; or
(c) any person against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that
the person has been guilty of an offence under this Act,
and may search or cause to be searched, any person so arrested.
(2) A woman must not be searched except by a woman.
(3) An officer of customs making an arrest without warrant must,
without unnecessary delay and subject to this section as to bail or
Customs Act 1960
91
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


previous release, take or send the person arrested before a
Magistrate’s Court.
(4) An officer of customs must not detain in custody a person
arrested without a warrant for a longer period than under the
circumstances of the case is reasonable.
(5) The period must not exceed 48 hours exclusive of the time
necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate’s
Court.
(6) A person who has been arrested by an officer of customs must
not be released except on his or her own bond or on bail or under the
special written order of a Magistrate or a senior officer of customs.
(7) If any person liable to arrest under this Act is not arrested at the
time of committing the offence for which the person is so liable, or
after arrest makes his or her escape, the person may, at any time
afterwards, be arrested and be dealt with as if the person had been
arrested at the time of committing the offence.
PART 14
PROVISIONS AS TO TRIALS AND PROCEEDINGS
Who may prosecute
113. Prosecutions, in respect of offences committed under this Act,
may, with the authorisation of the Public Prosecutor, be conducted by
a senior officer of customs or any officer of customs specially
authorised in writing in that behalf by the Director‑General.
[15/2010]
Jurisdiction of court
114. Despite any written law to the contrary, a District Court or a
Magistrate’s Court has jurisdiction to try any offence under this Act
and has the power to impose the full penalty or punishment in respect
of the offence.
Burden of proof
115. If, in any prosecution in respect of any goods seized for
non‑payment of customs duties or excise duties or for any other cause
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
92
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


of forfeiture or for the recovery of any penalty or penalties under this
Act, any dispute arises —
(a) whether the customs duties or excise duties have been paid
in respect of those goods;
(b) whether they have been lawfully imported or lawfully
landed, or lawfully manufactured;
(c) whether any goods are exempt from customs duty or excise
duty under section 13;
(d) concerning the place from where those goods were
brought; or
(e) whether drawback has been lawfully claimed,
in every such case the burden of proof thereof shall lie on the
defendant in such prosecution.
Presumptions of possession of dutiable, prohibited or
uncustomed goods
115A.—(1) Any person who is proved to have had in the person’s
possession or custody or under the person’s control —
(a) any
thing
containing
any
dutiable,
prohibited
or
uncustomed goods;
(b) the keys of any thing containing any dutiable, prohibited or
uncustomed goods;
(c) the keys of any place or premises or any part thereof in
which any dutiable, prohibited or uncustomed goods are
found; or
(d) a document of title relating to any dutiable, prohibited or
uncustomed goods or any other document intended for the
delivery of any dutiable, prohibited or uncustomed goods,
is, until the contrary is proved, presumed to have had those dutiable,
prohibited or uncustomed goods in the person’s possession.
(2) If any dutiable, prohibited or uncustomed goods are found in
any ship or aircraft, it is, until the contrary is proved, presumed that
those dutiable, prohibited or uncustomed goods have been imported
Customs Act 1960
93
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


in that ship or aircraft with the knowledge of the master or the
commander or captain thereof.
(3) If any dutiable, prohibited or uncustomed goods are found in
any vehicle, it is, until the contrary is proved, presumed to be in the
possession of the owner of the vehicle and of the person in charge of
the vehicle for the time being.
Proportional examination or testing of goods seized to be
accepted by courts
116.—(1) When any goods suspected of being uncustomed or
otherwise liable to seizure have been seized, it is sufficient to open,
examine, and if necessary test the contents of such proportion of the
goods seized as the proper officer of customs may determine.
(2) The court is to presume that the goods contained in the
unopened packages or receptacles are of the same nature, quantity
and quality as those found in the similar packages or receptacles
which have been opened.
Proof as to registration or licensing of vehicles, vessels and
aircraft
117.—(1) Where, in any prosecution under this Act, it is relevant to
ascertain particulars as to the registration or licensing of any vehicle,
vessel or aircraft registered or licensed in Singapore or in Malaysia, a
certificate purporting to be signed by the officer responsible under
any written law for the time being in force in Singapore or in
Malaysia or any part thereof for such registration or licensing is prima
facie evidence as to all particulars concerning such registration or
licensing contained therein.
(2) The burden of proving the incorrectness of any particulars
stated in the certificate is on the person denying the same.
Analyst’s certificate
118.—(1) A certificate purporting to be signed by an analyst
employed by such laboratory as the Director‑General may specify
(called in this section an analyst) and purporting to be a report by the
analyst upon any matter or thing duly submitted to the analyst for
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
94
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


examination or analysis may be used as evidence in any proceedings
for an offence under this Act on its production by the prosecution
without proof of signature and is prima facie evidence of all matters
contained therein.
[3/2008]
(2) Where the accused person desires to examine an analyst on the
analyst’s report, the accused person may require the court to summon
that analyst to give evidence and the court is to then summon that
analyst as a witness for the prosecution.
(3) An analyst is bound to state the truth in a report made under the
analyst’s hand.
Imprisonment for non-payment of fine
119. Despite the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code 2010,
the period of imprisonment imposed by any court in respect of the
non-payment of any fine under this Act, or in respect of the default of
a sufficient distress to satisfy any such fine, is such period as in the
opinion of the court will satisfy the justice of the case, but must not
exceed in any case the maximum fixed by the following scale:
Where the fine
The period may extend to
does not exceed $50
2 months
exceeds $50 but does not exceed $100
4 months
exceeds $100 but does not exceed
$200
6 months
with one additional month for every $100 after the first $200 of the
fine until a maximum period of 6 years is reached.
Manner of seizure not to be inquired into on trial before court
or on appeal to Supreme Court
120. On any trial before any court and in any proceedings on appeal
in the Supreme Court, relating to the seizure of goods subject to
forfeiture under this Act, the court is to proceed to the trial or hear the
appeal on the merits of the case only, without inquiring into the
Customs Act 1960
95
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


manner or form of making any seizure, except insofar as the manner
and form of seizure may be evidence on such merits.
Protection of informers from discovery
121.—(1) Subject to this section, no witness in any civil or criminal
proceedings is obliged or permitted to disclose the name or address of
an informer or the substance of the information received from the
informer or to state any matter which might lead to the informer’s
discovery.
(2) If any books, documents or papers which are in evidence or
liable to inspection in any civil or criminal proceedings contain any
entry in which any informer is named or described or which might
lead to the informer’s discovery, the court is to cause all such
passages to be concealed from view or to be obliterated so far only as
may be necessary to protect the informer from discovery.
(3) If, on the trial for any offence under this Act, the court, after full
inquiry into the case, believes that the informer wilfully made in the
informer’s complaint a material statement which the informer knew
or believed to be false or did not believe to be true, or if in any other
proceedings the court is of the opinion that justice cannot be fully
done between the parties to the proceedings without the discovery of
the informer, it is lawful for the court to require the production of the
original complaint, if in writing, and permit inquiry, and require full
disclosure, concerning the informer.
Goods liable to seizure liable to forfeiture
122.—(1) All goods liable to seizure under the provisions of this
Act are liable to forfeiture.
(2) In this section and sections 123, 124 and 127, “goods” includes
receptacles, packages, vehicles, vessels not exceeding 200 tons net
registered tonnage and aircraft, other than aircraft engaged on
international carriage.
Court to order disposal of goods seized
123.—(1) An order for the forfeiture or for the release of anything
liable to forfeiture under the provisions of this Act shall be made by
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
96
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


the court before which the prosecution with regard thereto has been
held.
(2) An order for the forfeiture of goods shall be made if it is proved
to the satisfaction of the court that an offence under this Act has been
committed and that the goods were the subject matter of, or were used
in the commission of, the offence, even though no person may have
been convicted of the offence.
(3) All goods forfeited must be delivered to a proper officer of
customs and must be disposed of in accordance with the directions of
the Director‑General.
Goods seized in respect of which there is no prosecution,
deemed to be forfeited if not claimed within one month
124.—(1) If there is no prosecution with regard to any goods seized
under this Act, the goods are to be taken and deemed to be forfeited at
the expiry of one month from the date of seizure unless a claim
thereto is made before that date in the manner provided in this section.
(2) Any person asserting that the person is the owner of the goods
may personally or by the person’s agent authorised in writing give
written notice to a senior officer of customs that the person claims the
goods.
(3) On receipt of the notice, the senior officer of customs must refer
the claim to the Director‑General who may direct that the goods be
released or may direct the senior officer of customs, by information in
the prescribed form, to refer the matter to a District Judge or a
Magistrate for his or her decision.
(4) The District Judge or the Magistrate shall issue a summons
requiring the person asserting that the person is the owner of the
goods and the person from whom they were seized, if the person is
known, to appear before the District Judge or the Magistrate.
(5) Upon the person’s appearance or default to appear, due service
of the summons being proved, the District Judge or the Magistrate
shall proceed to the examination of the matter and on proof that an
offence under this Act has been committed and that the goods were
the subject matter, or were used in the commission, of the offence,
Customs Act 1960
97
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


shall order the goods to be forfeited or may in the absence of such
proof order their release.
(6) In any proceedings under subsection (5), section 115 applies to
the person asserting that the person is the owner of the goods and to
the person from whom they were seized as if the owner or person had
been the defendant in a prosecution under this Act.
Conviction under other law
125. Nothing in this Act is deemed to prevent the prosecution,
conviction and punishment of any person according to the provisions
of any other written law for the time being in force in Singapore,
except that a person must not be punished more than once for the
same offence.
Customs ticket notice
125A.—(1) Where an officer of customs has reasonable grounds
for believing that a person has committed an offence under this Act
which is prescribed as an offence to which this section applies, the
officer may, in lieu of applying to a court for a summons, immediately
serve upon that person a prescribed notice requiring that person to
attend at the court described, at the hour and on the date specified in
the notice.
[25/2011]
(2) A duplicate of the notice must be prepared by the officer of
customs and, if so required by a court, produced to the court.
[25/2011]
(3) The notice may be served on the person alleged to have
committed the offence in the manner provided by section 92(1).
[25/2011]
(4) On an accused person appearing before a court pursuant to such
a notice, the court is to take cognizance of the offence alleged and
proceed as though the person were produced before it in pursuance of
section 153 of the Criminal Procedure Code 2010.
[25/2011]
(5) If a person, upon whom such a notice has been served, fails to
appear before a court in person or by counsel in accordance therewith,
the court may, if satisfied that the notice was duly served, issue a
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
98
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


warrant for the arrest of the person unless, in the case of an offence
which may be compounded, that person has before that date been
permitted to compound the offence.
[25/2011]
(6) Upon a person arrested pursuant to a warrant issued under
subsection (5) being produced before a court, the court is to proceed
as though the person were produced before it in pursuance of
section 153 of the Criminal Procedure Code 2010.
[Act 31 of 2022 wef 01/11/2022]
(7) [Deleted by Act 31 of 2022 wef 01/11/2022]
(8) A senior officer of customs or an officer empowered with the
power of senior officer of customs may, at any time before the date
specified in the notice, cancel the notice.
[25/2011]
Composition of offences
126.—(1) Any senior officer of customs may compound any
offence under this Act that is prescribed to be a compoundable
offence by collecting from the person reasonably suspected of having
committed the offence a sum not exceeding $5,000.
(2) On payment of the sum of money, the person reasonably
suspected of having committed an offence, if in custody, must be
discharged, any properties seized must be released and no further
proceedings are to be taken against that person or property unless the
property consists of goods the import of which is absolutely
prohibited under section 38 or of goods manufactured in Singapore
without a licence in contravention of this Act, in which case the goods
are to be forfeited.
No costs or damages arising from seizure to be recoverable
unless seizure without reasonable or probable cause
127. No person is, in any proceedings before any court in respect of
the seizure of any goods seized in exercise or the purported exercise
of any power conferred under this Act, entitled to the costs of the
proceedings or to any damages or other relief other than an order for
the return of the goods or the payment of their value unless the seizure
was made without reasonable or probable cause.
Customs Act 1960
99
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


PART 15
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
Offences in relation to making and signing untrue or incorrect
or incomplete declarations, certificates and documents
128.—(1) Any person who —
(a) makes or causes to be made, orally or in writing, or signs or
causes to be signed any declaration, certificate or other
document required by this Act, which is untrue or incorrect
in any particular or which is incomplete by omitting any
material particular therefrom;
(b) makes or causes to be made, orally or in writing, or signs or
causes to be signed any declaration or document, made for
consideration of any officer of customs on any application
presented to the officer, which is untrue or incorrect in any
particular or which is incomplete by omitting any material
particular therefrom; or
(c) makes or causes to be made a declaration required by this
Act of the value of dutiable goods imported into or
manufactured in Singapore for the purpose of assessment
of customs duty or excise duty, which declaration is untrue
or incorrect in any particular or is incomplete by any
material particular having been omitted therefrom,
shall be guilty of an offence.
[3/2008; 25/2011]
(2) When any such declaration, whether oral or written, or any such
certificate or other document has been proved to be untrue or
incorrect or incomplete in whole or in part, it is no defence to
allege —
(a) that the declaration, certificate or other document was
made or used inadvertently or without criminal or
fraudulent intent, or that the person signing the same
was not aware of, or did not understand the contents of, the
document; or
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
100
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(b) where the declaration was made or recorded in English by
interpretation from any other language, that the declaration
was misinterpreted or not fully interpreted by any
interpreter provided by the declarant.
[3/2008]
Offences in relation to falsifying documents
128A.—(1) Any person who —
(a) counterfeits or falsifies, or uses, when counterfeited or
falsified —
(i) any document which is or may be required under this
Act; or
(ii) any document used in the transaction of any business
or matter relating to customs; or
(b) fraudulently alters any document, or counterfeits the seal,
signature, initials or other mark of, or used by, any officer
of customs for the verification of any such document or for
the security of any goods or any other purpose in the
conduct of business relating to customs,
shall be guilty of an offence.
[3/2008]
(2) When any such document has been proved to be counterfeited
or falsified in whole or in part, it is no defence to allege that the
document was made or used inadvertently or without criminal or
fraudulent intent.
[3/2008]
Offences in relation to failure to make declarations
128B.—(1) Any person who, being required by this Act to do so —
(a) fails to make a declaration of dutiable goods which are
imported into, exported from or transhipped in Singapore;
or
(b) fails to make a declaration of the value of dutiable goods
imported into or manufactured in Singapore for the
purpose of the assessment of customs duty or excise duty,
Customs Act 1960
101
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


shall be guilty of an offence.
[3/2008]
(2) When a failure to make a declaration has been proved, it is no
defence to allege that the failure was inadvertent or without criminal
or fraudulent intent, or that it was not known that such a declaration is
required to be made.
[3/2008]
Offences in relation to failure to produce trade documents
128C. Any person who fails or refuses to produce to a proper
officer of customs any document required to be produced under
section 85 shall be guilty of an offence.
[3/2008]
Offences in relation to fraudulent evasion
128D. Any person who is in any way concerned in any fraudulent
evasion of, or attempt to fraudulently evade, any customs duty or
excise duty shall be guilty of an offence.
[3/2008]
Offences in relation to goods found in person’s baggage or
upon his or her person, etc.
128E. Any person who after he or she denies having, is found to
have, any dutiable or prohibited goods in the person’s baggage or
upon his or her person or otherwise in the person’s possession shall be
guilty of an offence.
[3/2008]
Offences in relation to importation of uncustomed or
prohibited goods
128F. Any person who is in any way concerned in importing any
uncustomed or prohibited goods shall be guilty of an offence.
[3/2008]
Offences in relation to exportation of uncustomed or
prohibited goods
128G. Any person who is in any way concerned in exporting any
uncustomed or prohibited goods shall be guilty of an offence.
[3/2008]
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
102
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Offences in relation to shipping, unshipping, loading,
unloading, etc., of uncustomed or prohibited goods
128H. Any person who ships, unships, loads, unloads, lands or
delivers, or who assists or is concerned in the shipping, unshipping,
loading, unloading, landing or delivery of, any uncustomed or
prohibited goods, whether or not the goods are shipped, unshipped,
loaded, unloaded, landed or delivered, shall be guilty of an offence.
[3/2008]
Offences in relation to possession, storage, conveying and
harbouring of goods
128I.—(1) Any person who —
(a) stores, keeps or has in the person’s possession any —
(i) dutiable or prohibited goods, except under customs
control; or
(ii) uncustomed goods;
(b) is in any way concerned in conveying, removing,
depositing or dealing with any dutiable, uncustomed or
prohibited goods with intent to defraud the Government of
any customs duty or excise duty thereon, or to evade any of
the provisions of this Act; or
(c) knowingly harbours or conceals, or permits, suffers,
causes, or procures to be harboured or concealed, any
dutiable, uncustomed or prohibited goods,
shall be guilty of an offence.
[3/2008; 25/2011]
(2) Nothing in paragraph (a) of subsection (1) prevents any person
from storing, keeping or having in the person’s possession goods
mentioned in that paragraph if the Director‑General has allowed the
person to store, keep or have the goods in the person’s possession
under section 27(3).
[25/2011]
Customs Act 1960
103
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Offences in relation to duty-free allowances
128J. Any person who sells, exchanges or gives away, or offers to
sell, exchange or give away, to any person in Singapore goods which
are the person’s duty‑free allowances in Singapore shall be guilty of
an offence.
[3/2008]
Offences in relation to illegal removal of goods from customs
control, etc., and carrying on of certain activities without
licence
128K. Any person who —
(a) illegally removes or withdraws, or in any way assists or is
concerned in the illegal removal or withdrawal of, any
goods from any customs control;
(b) is in any way concerned in the manufacture of any dutiable
or prohibited goods —
(i) in contravention of section 63; or
(ii) without a licence granted under section 83 for
manufacturing dutiable goods; or
(c) is
in
any
way
concerned
in
bottling,
blending,
compounding or varying any intoxicating liquors —
(i) in contravention of section 66; or
(ii) without a licence granted under section 83 for
bottling
intoxicating
liquors
imported
or
manufactured
in
Singapore,
or
blending,
compounding or varying any intoxicating liquors,
shall be guilty of an offence.
[3/2008]
Penalty for various offences
128L.—(1) Any person who is guilty of an offence under
section 128(1), 128A(1), 128B(1) or 128C shall be liable on
conviction to a fine not exceeding $10,000, or the equivalent of the
amount of the customs duty, excise duty or tax payable, whichever is
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
104
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


the greater amount, or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
12 months, or to both.
[3/2008]
(2) Subject to subsection (3), any person who is guilty of a specified
offence shall be liable on conviction to a fine of —
(a) not less than 10 times the amount of the customs duty,
excise duty or tax the payment of which would have been
evaded by the commission of the offence or $5,000,
whichever is the lesser amount, subject to a minimum of
$1,000 where the specified offence involves goods
consisting wholly or partly of relevant tobacco products;
and
(b) not more than 20 times the amount of the customs duty,
excise duty or tax the payment of which would have been
so evaded or $5,000, whichever is the greater amount,
except that where the amount of customs duty or excise duty cannot
be ascertained, the penalty may amount to a fine not exceeding
$5,000, subject to a minimum of $1,000 where the specified offence
involves goods consisting wholly or partly of relevant tobacco
products.
[3/2008; 25/2011]
(3) Any person who is convicted of any specified offence and who
has been convicted on a previous occasion of —
(a) that or any other specified offence; or
(b) any offence under the repealed section 130(1) in force
immediately before 4 April 2008,
shall be liable on conviction to a fine mentioned in subsection (2), or
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years, or to both.
[3/2008]
(4) Any person who is guilty of any specified offence involving
goods consisting wholly or partly of relevant tobacco products shall,
if such tobacco products exceed 2 kilogrammes in weight, be liable
on conviction —
Customs Act 1960
105
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(a) to a fine of —
(i) not less than 15 times the amount of the customs
duty, excise duty or tax the payment of which would
have been evaded by the commission of the offence,
subject to a minimum of $1,000; and
(ii) not more than 20 times the amount of the customs
duty, excise duty or tax the payment of which would
have been so evaded or $10,000, whichever is the
greater amount; or
(b) to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 years,
or to both.
[3/2008; 25/2011]
(5) Where any person is convicted of a specified offence committed
by the person on or after 1 January 2012 involving goods consisting
wholly or partly of relevant tobacco products and the person has been
convicted on a previous occasion of —
(a) that or any other specified offence involving such goods; or
(b) any offence under the repealed section 130(1) in force
immediately before 4 April 2008 involving such goods,
then the person shall be liable to —
(c) a fine of —
(i) not less than 30 times the amount of the customs
duty, excise duty or tax the payment of which would
have been evaded by the commission of the
firstmentioned
specified
offence,
subject
to
a
minimum of $2,000; and
(ii) not more than 40 times the amount of the customs
duty, excise duty or tax the payment of which would
have been so evaded or $20,000, whichever is the
greater amount; or
(d) imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years,
or to both.
[25/2011]
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
106
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(5A) Despite subsection (5), where any person is convicted of a
specified offence committed by the person on or after 1 January 2012
involving goods consisting wholly or partly of relevant tobacco
products exceeding 2 kilogrammes in weight and the person has been
convicted on a previous occasion of —
(a) that or any other specified offence involving goods
consisting wholly or partly of relevant tobacco products
exceeding 2 kilogrammes in weight; or
(b) any offence under the repealed section 130(1) in force
immediately
before
4
April
2008
involving
goods
consisting wholly or partly of relevant tobacco products
exceeding 2 kilogrammes in weight,
then the person shall be punished with —
(c) a fine of —
(i) not less than 30 times the amount of the customs
duty, excise duty or tax the payment of which would
have been evaded by the commission of the
firstmentioned
specified
offence,
subject
to
a
minimum of $2,000; and
(ii) not more than 40 times the amount of the customs
duty, excise duty or tax the payment of which would
have been so evaded or $20,000, whichever is the
greater amount; and
(d) imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.
[25/2011]
(6) In any prosecution against a person for committing, attempting
or abetting an offence under sections 128D to 128K, any dutiable,
uncustomed or prohibited goods are deemed to be dutiable,
uncustomed or prohibited goods to the person’s knowledge, unless
the contrary is proved by the person.
[3/2008]
(7) In this section —
“relevant tobacco products” means any cigarette, cigar, cheroot
or cigarillo or any other form of tobacco including —
Customs Act 1960
107
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(a) any mixture containing tobacco; and
(b) any tobacco substitute which is capable of being
smoked;
“specified offence” means an offence under section 128D, 128E,
128F, 128G, 128H, 128I, 128J or 128K.
[3/2008]
Penalty on refusing to answer questions or on giving false
information or false document
129.—(1) Any person who, being required by this Act to answer
any question put to the person by any proper officer of customs, or to
give any information or produce any document which may
reasonably be required of the person by the officer and which it is
in the person’s power to give —
(a) refuses to answer the question or does not truly answer the
question;
(b) refuses to give such information or produce such
document; or
(c) furnishes as true information or document which the
person knows or has reason to believe to be false,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
12 months or to both.
(2) When any such answer or any such information or any such
document is proved to be untrue or incorrect in whole or in part, it is
no defence to allege that such answer or such information or such
document or any part thereof was made or furnished or produced
inadvertently or without criminal or fraudulent intent, or was
misinterpreted or not fully interpreted by an interpreter provided by
the informant.
(3) Nothing in this section obliges a person to answer any question
which would have a tendency to expose the person to a criminal
charge or to a penalty or forfeiture.
130. [Repealed by Act 3 of 2008]
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
108
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Evading duty by unauthorised modification of computer
program or data
131.—(1) Any
person
who,
without
the
authority
of
the
Director‑General —
(a) destroys, damages, erases or otherwise manipulates data
stored in, or used in connection with, a computer;
(b) introduces into, or records or stores in, a computer by any
means data for the purpose of —
(i) destroying, damaging, erasing or altering other data
stored in that computer; or
(ii) interfering with, interrupting or obstructing the
lawful use of, that computer or the data stored in
that computer; or
(c) otherwise uses a computer,
the purpose or effect of which is to reduce, avoid or evade any
liability to customs duty, excise duty or tax imposed or which would
otherwise have been imposed by this Act, or to defeat any provision
of this Act, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable —
(d) on the first conviction to a fine of not less than 10 times the
amount of the customs duty, excise duty or tax or $5,000
whichever is the lesser amount, and of not more than
20 times the amount of the customs duty, excise duty or tax
or $5,000 whichever is the greater and where the amount of
customs duty or excise duty cannot be ascertained, the
penalty shall be a fine not exceeding $5,000; and
(e) on the second or subsequent conviction to the fine
mentioned in sub‑paragraph (d) or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 2 years or to both.
(2) In subsection (1), “data” includes any computer program or part
of a computer program being a program, whether or not approved by
the Director‑General, for use in relation to the computer service
established under section 86.
Customs Act 1960
109
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Knowingly advancing or furnishing money for business
comprising sale, purchase, etc., of uncustomed goods
132. Any person who knowingly advances or furnishes money for
the purpose of establishing or conducting any business comprising
the sale, purchase, hire, receiving, concealment, disposal or dealing
of uncustomed goods shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable
on conviction to a fine of not less than $100,000 and not more than
$1 million and shall also be liable to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 years.
Penalty for adding deleterious substances to intoxicating
liquor, or storing, keeping, etc., such liquor
133.—(1) Any person who —
(a) is in any way concerned in adding deleterious substances to
any intoxicating liquor for consumption or for sale; or
(b) stores, keeps or has in the person’s possession any
intoxicating liquor to which has been added deleterious
substances,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
2 years or to both.
(2) The owner or occupier of any premises upon which any
intoxicating liquor to which has been added deleterious substances is
found or which has been used for the sale of such intoxicating liquor
is deemed, until the contrary is proved, to have knowingly kept, used
or permitted the use of the premises for such purposes.
(3) In any prosecution against a person for committing, attempting
to commit or abetting an offence under this section, any intoxicating
liquor to which has been added deleterious substances is deemed to
have been so added with the person’s knowledge unless the contrary
is proved by the person.
Offence in connection with claims for drawback
134. If any person obtains, attempts to obtain or abets in obtaining,
or does anything whereby there might be obtained by any person, any
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
110
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


amount by way of drawback of any duty in respect of any goods
which is not lawfully payable or allowable in respect thereof or which
is greater than the amount so payable or allowable, the person shall be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine of
3 times the value of the goods or $5,000, whichever is the greater.
Penalty for possession of a still, etc.
135. Every person other than a person licensed under —
(a) section 63(1), or section 83(3) for manufacturing dutiable
goods, who knowingly keeps or has in the person’s
possession any still, utensil, apparatus, equipment or
machinery for the manufacture of any dutiable goods; or
(b) section 66(1), or section 83(3) for bottling intoxicating
liquors imported or manufactured in Singapore, or
blending, compounding or varying any intoxicating
liquors, who knowingly keeps or has in the person’s
possession any utensil, apparatus, material or ingredient
for
bottling,
blending,
compounding
or
varying
intoxicating liquor,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
18 months or to both.
[3/2008]
Motor vehicle leaving Singapore without prescribed amount of
motor fuel
136.—(1) Except
with
the
written
permission
of
the
Director‑General or an officer of customs authorised by the
Director‑General for the purpose of this section, any person, being
in charge of a motor vehicle registered under the Road Traffic
Act 1961, who leaves or attempts to leave Singapore in that motor
vehicle or with that motor vehicle in a vessel without such minimum
amount of motor fuel in such of its fuel supply tanks as the Minister
may by order prescribe shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable
on conviction to a fine not exceeding $500.
[25/2011; 29/2018]
Customs Act 1960
111
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) —
(a) where a motor vehicle is driven past the Customs gantry
before the departure bay of the Immigration Checkpoint at
any prescribed place, the person in charge of that motor
vehicle is presumed, until the contrary is proved, to have
attempted to leave Singapore in that motor vehicle or with
that motor vehicle in a vessel, as the case may be;
(b) where a motor vehicle is fitted with an instrument or gauge
which indicates or measures the amount of motor fuel in
any fuel supply tank of the motor vehicle, the indication or
measurement on that instrument or gauge is, until the
contrary is proved, evidence of the amount of motor fuel in
that fuel supply tank;
(c) the proper officer of customs may measure or otherwise
ascertain the quantity of motor fuel carried in a fuel supply
tank of any motor vehicle registered under the Road Traffic
Act 1961.
[25/2011]
(3) To avoid doubt, written permission under subsection (1) may be
given to enable a person to leave Singapore without contravening that
subsection, after the person has attempted to leave Singapore in
contravention of that subsection, and without affecting any liability of
the person for such attempt.
[29/2018]
Penalty for assaulting or obstructing officers of customs,
rescuing goods, resisting arrest and escaping from custody
137. Any person who —
(a) assaults, abuses or obstructs any officer of customs or other
public servant or any person acting in the officer’s or
public servant’s aid or assistance, or duly employed for the
prevention of offences under this Act in the execution of
his or her duty or in the due seizing of any goods liable to
seizure under this Act;
(b) rescues or endeavours to rescue, or causes to be rescued,
anything which has been duly seized;
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
112
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(c) before or after any seizure, staves, breaks or otherwise
destroys any package or goods to prevent the seizure
thereof or the securing of the same; or
(d) intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to
the lawful apprehension of himself or herself or of any
other person, or escapes or attempts to escape from any
custody in which he or she is lawfully detained, or rescues
or attempts to rescue any other person from any custody in
which that person is lawfully detained,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable —
(e) on conviction to a fine not exceeding $10,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 18 months or to
both; and
(f) in the case of a second or subsequent conviction to a fine
not exceeding $20,000 and to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 3 years.
Penalty for offering or receiving bribes
138.—(1) If any officer of customs or other person duly employed
by the Singapore Customs —
(a) makes any collusive seizure or delivers up or makes any
agreement to deliver up or not to seize any vessel or aircraft
or other means of conveyance, or any goods liable to
seizure;
(b) accepts, agrees to accept, or attempts to obtain, any bribe,
gratuity, recompense or reward for the neglect or
non‑performance of his or her duty; or
(c) conspires or connives with any person to import or export
or is in any way concerned in the importation or
exportation of any dutiable goods for the purpose of
seizing any vessel, aircraft or conveyance or any goods and
obtaining any reward for such seizure or otherwise,
the officer or person shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on
conviction to a fine not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a
Customs Act 1960
113
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


term not exceeding 3 years or to both, and is to be interdicted from
holding office in the public service of the Government.
(2) Any person who gives or offers or promises to give or procures
to be given any bribe, gratuity, recompense or reward to, or makes
any collusive agreement with, any officer of customs or other person
duly employed by the Singapore Customs to induce him or her in any
way to neglect his or her duty or to do, conceal or connive at any act
whereby any of the provisions of any other law relating to imports or
to exports may be evaded, shall be guilty as an abettor and so
punishable under this Act.
(3) Any officer of customs or other person duly employed by the
Singapore Customs who is found when on duty to have in his or her
possession any moneys in contravention of any written departmental
regulations issued is presumed, until the contrary is proved, to have
received the moneys in contravention of subsection (1)(b).
(4) If any officer of customs has reasonable suspicion that another
officer of customs junior in rank to the firstmentioned officer of
customs or any other person duly employed by the Singapore
Customs has possession of any money received in contravention of
subsection (1)(b), the firstmentioned officer of customs may search
that officer or person.
Penalty for offences not otherwise provided for
139. Every omission or neglect to comply with, and every act done
or attempted to be done contrary to, the provisions of this Act, or any
breach of the conditions and restrictions subject to, or upon which,
any licence or permit is granted under this Act, shall be an offence
and in respect of any such offence for which no penalty is expressly
provided the offender shall be liable to a fine not exceeding $5,000.
Attempts and abetments
140. Any person who attempts to commit any offence punishable
under this Act, or abets the commission of the offence, shall be
punished with the punishment provided for the offence.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
114
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Offences by bodies of persons and by agents and employees
141.—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by
a company, firm, society or other body of persons, any person who at
the time of the commission of the offence was a director, manager,
secretary or other similar officer or a partner of the company, firm,
society or other body of persons or was purporting to act in that
capacity shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence unless he or she
proves that —
(a) the offence was committed without his or her consent or
connivance; and
(b) he or she exercised all such diligence to prevent the
commission of the offence as he or she ought to have
exercised, having regard to the nature of his or her
functions in that capacity and to all the circumstances.
(2) Where any person would be liable under this Act to any
punishment, penalty or forfeiture for any act, omission, neglect or
default, the person shall be liable to the same punishment, penalty or
forfeiture for every such act, omission, neglect or default of any agent
or employee, or of the agent’s employee, if the act, omission, neglect
or default was committed —
(a) by the employee in the course of his or her employment; or
(b) by the agent when acting on behalf of the person or by the
agent’s employee when acting in the course of his or her
employment in such circumstances that had the act,
omission, neglect or default been committed by the
agent, the agent’s principal would have been liable under
this section.
Action of officers no offence
142. Nothing done by an officer of the Government in the course of
his or her duties is deemed to be an offence under this Act.
Customs Act 1960
115
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


PART 16
REGULATIONS
Power to make regulations
143.—(1) The Minister may make regulations for carrying out the
purposes and provisions of this Act and, in particular, may make
regulation —
(a) to regulate the powers and duties to be exercised and
performed by officers of customs;
(b) to provide for the ranks, uniforms, insignias or badges of
rank, accoutrements and equipment of officers of customs;
(c) to regulate the conduct of all matters relating to the
collection of duties and taxes under this Act;
(d) to prescribe customs offices and customs stations, either
generally or for the separate and exclusive import, export
and transhipment of goods by a particular person or class
of persons;
(e) to prescribe customs airports for the import, export and
transhipment of dutiable goods by air, either generally or
for the separate and exclusive import, export and
transhipment by a particular person or class of persons;
(f) to specify the goods dutiable on import in respect of which
drawback may be allowed on re-export as part or
ingredient of any goods manufactured in Singapore and
to fix the rate of drawback thereon and to prohibit the
payment of drawback upon the re-export of any specified
goods or description of goods;
(g) to prescribe the method of importing, exporting or
removing any dutiable goods;
(h) to prescribe the manner in which goods of a class dutiable
on import may be transhipped;
(ha) for the registration of any person making a declaration
under this Act;
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
116
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(hb) to provide for matters relating to the World Customs
Organization SAFE Framework of Standards to Facilitate
and Secure Global Trade or any other similar framework
by any international body;
(i) to prescribe the procedure relating to documentation,
storage, movement, examination, sealing and security of
containers and containerised cargoes;
(j) to prescribe the manner and method of payment of any
duty payable or chargeable under this Act;
(k) to prescribe the days and times during which any customs
office, customs station, Government warehouse, licensed
warehouse or bottling warehouse may be open for
business;
(l) to regulate the deposit, custody and withdrawal of goods in
and from Government warehouses, licensed warehouses
and bottling warehouses and the management and control
of the same;
(m) to prescribe the amount to be paid as warehouse rent on
goods deposited in a Government warehouse;
(n) to prescribe the manner in which intoxicating liquor must
be denatured in a Government warehouse or licensed
warehouse;
(o) to
regulate
the
erection,
inspection,
supervision,
management and control of distilleries, breweries or
tobacco or other factories and the fittings, implements,
machinery and apparatus maintained therein;
(p) to regulate the hours during which manufacture may or
may not take place and during which goods may be
removed from a distillery, brewery or tobacco or other
factory;
(q) to regulate the blending, compounding, varying and
bottling of intoxicating liquors in bottling warehouses
and to fix the fees to be paid for bottling dutiable
intoxicating liquor;
Customs Act 1960
117
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


(r) to prescribe the books to be kept by licensees;
(s) to regulate the grant and transfer of licences;
(sa) to provide that no compensation may be given in the event
of a suspension, withdrawal or surrender of a licence;
(sb) to prescribe the fees to be paid for any declaration, or any
application
for
or
grant
of
any
licence,
permit,
authorisation, approval or registration, or for any other
matter or thing done under this Act by officers of customs,
and for any service rendered by officers of customs which
is not required to be done under this Act, and to provide for
the circumstances in which such fees or any part thereof
may be refunded;
(t) to prescribe the rates of overtime fees to be paid when
officers of customs are required to work beyond the
ordinary hours prescribed and the conditions under which
the overtime is permitted;
(u) [Deleted by Act 5 of 2015]
(v) [Deleted by Act 5 of 2015]
(w) [Deleted by Act 18 of 2012]
(x) to prescribe the offences which may be compounded and
the manner in which, and the officers of customs by whom,
they may be compounded;
(y) to prescribe penalties for any contravention or failure to
comply with any of the provisions of the regulations made
under this section except that no such penalty shall exceed
the penalty prescribed under section 139; and
(z) to prescribe anything which is to be or may be prescribed
under the provisions of this Act.
[3/2008; 25/2011; 18/2012; 5/2015]
(2) All regulations and orders made under this Act must be
presented to Parliament as soon as possible after publication in the
Gazette.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
118
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


References in written laws and documents
144. Insofar as is necessary for preserving the effect of any written
law or document on or after 1 April 2003 —
(a) a reference therein to the Director‑General of Customs and
Excise is to be read as a reference to the Director‑General
of Customs; and
(b) a reference therein to the Customs and Excise Department
is to be read as a reference to the Singapore Customs.
THE SCHEDULE
Section 29
CUSTOMS RULINGS
Application for customs ruling
1.—(1) Subject to sub‑paragraph (3), any person concerned in the importation of
any goods may apply to the Director‑General for a ruling on one or more of the
following matters:
(a) the classification of the goods;
(b) the country of origin of the goods;
(c) the application of a provision of the Customs (Valuation) Regulations
to the goods.
(2) Subject to sub‑paragraph (3), any person concerned in the local manufacture
of any goods may apply to the Director‑General for a ruling on one or more of the
following matters:
(a) the classification of the goods;
(b) the application of a provision of the Customs (Valuation) Regulations
to the goods.
(3) Where any goods are the subject of any Free Trade Agreement to which
Singapore is a party, and that Free Trade Agreement identifies the person who may
apply for a ruling in relation to those goods, only that person may apply under
sub‑paragraph (1) or (2) for a ruling in relation to those goods.
(4) An application for a ruling must —
(a) be made in such form as the Director‑General may determine;
(b) comply with the disclosure requirements of paragraph 4; and
(c) be made at such time as the Director‑General may determine.
Customs Act 1960
119
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


THE SCHEDULE — continued
Director‑General may decline to make ruling
2.—(1) The Director‑General may decline to make a ruling if —
(a) the application for the ruling would require the Director‑General to
determine any question of fact;
(b) the Director‑General considers that the correctness of the ruling would
depend on the making of assumptions, whether in respect of a future
event or any other matter;
(c) the application is frivolous or vexatious;
(d) the matter on which the ruling is sought involves the interpretation of
any foreign law; or
(e) after the Director‑General has requested further information —
(i) the applicant fails to provide the information within the time
specified by the Director‑General for the provision of the
information; or
(ii) in the Director‑General’s opinion, the applicant has not
provided sufficient information in relation to the application.
(2) The Director‑General must, where the Director‑General has declined to
make a ruling, notify the applicant in writing of his or her decision and the reasons
therefor.
Duration of ruling
3. A ruling applies in relation to a matter only for such period as may be stated in
the ruling.
Information to be provided to Director‑General
4.—(1) An application for a ruling must —
(a) identify the applicant; and
(b) disclose all relevant facts and documents relating to the matter in
respect of which the ruling is sought.
(2) The Director‑General may, at any time, request further relevant information
from an applicant for the purpose of making a ruling.
(3) An applicant for a ruling must provide the Director‑General with the
information
mentioned
in
sub‑paragraph
(2)
within
such
time
as
the
Director‑General may determine.
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
120
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


THE SCHEDULE — continued
Director‑General may make assumptions
5. If the Director‑General considers that the correctness of a ruling would
depend on assumptions being made about any future event or other matter, the
Director‑General may make the assumptions that he or she considers to be most
appropriate.
Making of ruling
6.—(1) A ruling made by the Director‑General must state —
(a) that it is a ruling made under section 29;
(b) the identity of the person or class of persons to whom, and the
particulars of the matter to which, the ruling applies;
(c) any material assumptions about future events or other matters made by
the Director‑General; and
(d) the conditions (if any) applicable to the ruling.
(2) The Director‑General must notify the person to whom the ruling applies of
the making of the ruling by sending the person a copy of the ruling.
(3) Where there is any Free Trade Agreement applicable to the matter to which a
ruling applies, and the Free Trade Agreement specifies the period within which the
ruling is to be made, the Director‑General must make the ruling within that period.
(4) The Director‑General may make a ruling even though no application has
been made under paragraph 1.
Modification or withdrawal of ruling
7.—(1) The Director‑General may, at any time, modify or withdraw a ruling by
notifying the person to whom the ruling applies in such manner as the
Director‑General may determine of the modification or withdrawal and the
reasons therefor.
(2) Subject to sub‑paragraphs (3) and (4), a ruling is modified or withdrawn
from the date specified in the notice of modification or withdrawal, as the case
may be.
(3) The Director‑General may, on the application of a person to whom a ruling
applies, postpone the date the ruling is modified or withdrawn to such later date as
the Director‑General may determine, if that person shows that —
(a) the person had relied in good faith on the ruling; and
(b) the modification or withdrawal (as the case may be) of the ruling
would be detrimental to the person.
Customs Act 1960
121
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


THE SCHEDULE — continued
(4) The Director‑General may postpone the date the ruling is modified or
withdrawn to such later date as the Director‑General may determine even though
no application has been made under sub‑paragraph (3).
(5) If the Director‑General withdraws a ruling, the ruling does not apply in
relation to any goods, the subject matter of the ruling, which are imported or
manufactured locally, on or after the date of the withdrawal.
(6) If —
(a) the Director‑General withdraws a ruling made pursuant to an
application by a person under paragraph 1; and
(b) the person to whom the ruling applies has not acted in accordance with
any condition applicable to the ruling,
the ruling ceases to apply to that person in relation to any goods, the subject matter
of the ruling, which are imported or manufactured locally, before the date of the
withdrawal.
(7) If the Director‑General modifies a ruling, the modified ruling applies in
relation to any goods, the subject matter of the modified ruling, which are
imported or manufactured locally, on or after the date of the modification.
(8) If —
(a) the Director‑General modifies a ruling made pursuant to an application
by a person under paragraph 1; and
(b) the person to whom the original ruling applies has not acted in
accordance with any condition applicable to the original ruling,
the modified ruling applies to that person in relation to any goods, the subject
matter of the modified ruling, which are imported or manufactured locally, before
the date of the modification.
(9) The Director‑General may modify or withdraw a ruling if —
(a) the ruling is based on an error of fact;
(b) there is a change in the circumstances after the ruling was made;
(c) any information provided by the applicant in support of the application
for the ruling is false, inaccurate or misleading;
(d) there is a change in the basis of the classification of the goods after the
ruling was made;
(e) there is a change in the circumstances relating to the sale and import or
local manufacture of goods after the ruling was made;
Customs Act 1960
2020 Ed.
122
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


THE SCHEDULE — continued
(f) an offence is suspected to have been committed in relation to the
goods; or
(g) it is one of the grounds of modification or withdrawal provided under
any Free Trade Agreement applicable to the matter to which the ruling
applies.
Typographical or minor error in ruling
8. The Director‑General does not have to withdraw and reissue a ruling to
correct any typographical or minor error, if the correction does not change the
meaning of the ruling.
Amendment of Act
9. A ruling does not apply from the date a provision of this Act is repealed or
amended to the extent that the repeal or amendment changes the way the provision
applies in the ruling.
[3/2008; S 783/2010]
Customs Act 1960
123
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


LEGISLATIVE HISTORY
CUSTOMS ACT 1960
This Legislative History is a service provided by the Law Revision Commission
on a best-efforts basis. It is not part of the Act.
1. Ordinance 44 of 1960 — Customs Ordinance 1960
Date of First Reading
:
21 September 1960
(Bill No. 91/60)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
21 September 1960
Date of commencement
:
26 September 1960
2. Ordinance 24 of 1962 — Customs (Amendment) Ordinance 1962
Date of First Reading
:
26 March 1962
(Bill No. 176/62 published on 3 April
1962)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
9 July 1962
Date of commencement
:
20 July 1962
3. Act 2 of 1966 — Customs (Amendment) Act 1966
Date of First Reading
:
23 February 1966
(Bill No. 16/66)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
23 February 1966
Date of commencement
:
9 August 1965 (sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
15, 17, 18, 25, 30 and 43(a) and (d))
1 March 1966 (remaining provisions
of the Act)
4. Act 31 of 1966 — Customs (Amendment No. 2) Act 1966
Date of First Reading
:
17 August 1966
(Bill No. 30/66 published on
17 August 1966)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
26 August 1966
Date of commencement
:
1 September 1969
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


5. Act 40 of 1968 — Customs (Amendment) Ordinance 1968
Date of First Reading
:
3 December 1968
(Bill No. 38/68 published on
23 February 1966)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
23 December 1968
Date of commencement
:
2 January 1969
6. 1970 Revised Edition — Customs Act (Cap. 133)
Date of operation
:
30 April 1971
7. Act 50 of 1970 — Customs (Amendment) Act 1970
Date of First Reading
:
4 November 1970
(Bill No. 50/70 published on
9 November 1970)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
30 December 1970
Date of commencement
:
1 February 1971
8. Act 18 of 1971 — Customs (Amendment) Act 1971
Date of First Reading
:
2 December 1971
(Bill No. 28/71 published on
2 December 1971)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
2 December 1971
Date of commencement
:
3 December 1971
9. Act 21 of 1973 — Statutes of the Republic of Singapore (Miscellaneous
Amendments) Act 1973
Date of First Reading
:
7 March 1973
(Bill No. 16/73 published on 9 March
1973)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
20 March 1973
Date of commencement
:
6 April 1973
10. Act 17 of 1974 — Customs (Amendment) Act 1974
Date of First Reading
:
28 August 1974
(Bill No. 21/74 published on
2 September 1974)
ii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
23 October 1974
Date of commencement
:
15 November 1974
11. Act 23 of 1978 — Customs (Amendment) Act 1978
Date of First Reading
:
7 April 1978
(Bill No. 17/78 published on 12 April
1978)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
14 June 1978
Date of commencement
:
1 August 1978
12. Act 24 of 1981 — Customs (Amendment) Act 1981
Date of First Reading
:
23 October 1981
(Bill No. 24/81 published on
30 October 1981)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
22 December 1981
Date of commencement
:
1 October 1982
13. 1985 Revised Edition — Customs Act
Date of operation
:
30 March 1987
14. Act 19 of 1989 — Customs (Amendment) Act 1989
Date of First Reading
:
13 March 1989
(Bill No. 20/89 published on 14 March
1989)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
7 April 1989
Date of commencement
:
17 April 1989
15. Act 12 of 1991 — Customs (Amendment) Act 1991
Date of First Reading
:
3 January 1991
(Bill No. 5/91 published on 5 January
1991)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
15 January 1991
Date of commencement
:
4 February 1991
iii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


16. Act 15 of 1991 — Customs (Amendment No. 2) Act 1991
Date of First Reading
:
26 February 1991
(Bill No. 6/91 published on
28 February 1991)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
22 March 1991
Date of commencement
:
1 April 1991
17. Act 10 of 1992 — Customs (Amendment) Act 1992
Date of First Reading
:
27 February 1992
(Bill No. 10/92 published on
28 February 1992)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
19 March 1992
Date of commencement
:
1 May 1992
18. Act 23 of 1993 — Customs (Amendment) Act 1993
Date of First Reading
:
28 May 1993
(Bill No. 20/93 published on 29 May
1993)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
30 July 1993
Date of commencement
:
10 August 1993
19. Act 31 of 1993 — Goods and Services Tax Act 1993
(Consequential amendments made by)
Date of First Reading
:
26 February 1993
(Bill No. 14/93 published on
27 February 1993)
Date of Second Reading
:
19 March 1993
Referred to Select Committee
:
Parl 4 of 1993 presented to Parliament
on 7 September 1993
Date of Third Reading
:
12 October 1993
Date of commencement
:
26 November 1993 (except para (3) of
Fifth Schedule)
1 April 1994 (para (3) of Fifth
Schedule)
iv
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


20. 1995 Revised Edition — Customs Act
Date of operation
:
15 March 1995
21. Act 24 of 1996 — Customs (Amendment) Act 1996
Date of First Reading
:
21 May 1996
(Bill No. 14/96 published on 22 May
1996)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
12 July 1996
Date of commencement
:
16 August 1996
22. Act 11 of 1997 — Customs (Amendment) Act 1997
Date of First Reading
:
25 August 1997
(Bill No. 10/97 published on
26 August 1997)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
7 October 1997
Date of commencement
:
17 October 1997
23. 1997 Revised Edition — Customs Act
Date of operation
:
20 December 1997
24. Act 29 of 1998 — Customs (Amendment) Act 1998
Date of First Reading
:
1 June 1998
(Bill No. 21/98 published on 2 June
1998)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
29 June 1998
Date of commencement
:
1 August 1998
25. Act 33 of 2000 — Customs (Amendment) Act 2000
Date of First Reading
:
13 November 2000
(Bill No. 33/2000 published on
13 November 2000)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
22 November 2000
Date of commencement
:
1 January 2001
v
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


26. Act 4 of 2001 — Health Sciences Authority Act 2001
(Consequential amendments made by)
Date of First Reading
:
12 January 2001
(Bill No. 3/2001 published on
13 January 2001)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
22 February 2001
Date of commencement
:
1 April 2001
27. 2001 Revised Edition — Customs Act
Date of operation
:
31 July 2001
28. Act 4 of 2003 — Customs (Amendment) Act 2003
Date of First Reading
:
10 March 2003
(Bill No. 6/2003 published on
11 March 2003)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
21 March 2003
Date of commencement
:
1 April 2003
29. 2004 Revised Edition — Customs Act
Date of operation
:
31 July 2004
30. Act 2 of 2007 — Statutes (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2007
Date of First Reading
:
8 November 2006
(Bill No. 14/2006 published on
9 November 2006)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
22 January 2007
Dates of commencement
:
1st March 2007
(item (5) in the Schedule)
31. Act 3 of 2008 — Customs (Amendment) Act 2008
Date of First Reading
:
12 November 2007
(Bill No. 48/2007 published on
13 November 2007)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
22 January 2008
Date of commencement
:
4 April 2008
vi
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


32. Act 48 of 2007 — Pharmacists Registration Act 2007
(Consequential amendments made to Act by)
Date of First Reading
:
27 August 2007
(Bill No. 36/2007 published on
28 August 2007)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
20 September 2007
Date of commencement
:
1 September 2008
(item (1) in the Second Schedule)
33. G. N. No. S 783/2010 — Customs Act (Amendment of Schedule)
Order 2010
Date of commencement
:
1 January 2011
34. Act 15 of 2010 — Criminal Procedure Code 2010
Date of First Reading
:
26 April 2010
(Bill No. 11/2010 published on
26 April 2010)
Dates of Second and Third
Reading
:
19th May 2010
Date of commencement
:
2 January 2011
(item (31) of the Sixth Schedule)
35. Act 25 of 2011 — Customs (Amendment) Act 2011
Date of First Reading
:
18 October 2011 (Bill No. 19/2011
published on 18 October 2011)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
22 November 2011
Date of commencement
:
1 January 2012
(except section 14)
1 January 2013
(section 14)
36. Act 18 of 2012 — Immigration (Amendment) Act 2012
Date of First Reading
:
9 July 2012 (Bill No. 16/2012
published on 9 July 2012)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
13 August 2012
vii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Date of commencement
:
19 December 2012
(section 31 — Related amendments to
Customs Act)
37. Act 3 of 2014 — Regulation of Imports and Exports (Amendment) Act
2014
(Consequential amendments made to Act by)
Date of First Reading
:
11 November 2013 (Bill No. 24/2013
published on 11 November 2013)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
21 January 2014
Date of commencement
:
1 April 2014
(section 5 — consequential
amendments to Customs Act)
38. Act 5 of 2015 — Liquor Control (Supply and Consumption) Act 2015
Date of First Reading
:
19 January 2015 (Bill No. 1/2015
published on 19 January 2015)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
30 January 2015
Date of commencement
:
1 April 2015
39. Act 29 of 2018 — Customs (Amendment) Act 2018
Date of First Reading
:
17 May 2018]
(Bill No. 26/2018)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
9 July 2018
Date of commencement
:
18 February 2019
1 April 2019
3 September 2021
40. Act 40 of 2019 — Supreme Court of Judicature (Amendment) Act 2019
Date of First Reading
:
7 October 2019 (Bill No. 32/2019
published on 7 October 2019)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
5 November 2019
Date of commencement
:
2 January 2021
viii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


41. Act 22 of 2021 — Copyright Act 2021
(Amendments made by the above Act)
Date of First Reading
:
6 July 2021 (Bill No. 17/2021
published on 6 July 2021)
Second and Third Readings
:
13 September 2021
Date of Commencement
:
21 November 2021
42. 2020 Revised Edition — Customs Act 1960
Date of operation
:
31 December 2021
43. Act 31 of 2022 — Statutes (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2022
Date of First Reading
:
12 September 2022
(Bill No. 24/2022)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
3 October 2022
Date of commencement
:
1 November 2022 (sections 8(1) and
20(5))
44. Act 34 of 2018 — Intellectual Property (Border Enforcement) Act 2018
Date of First Reading
:
17 May 2018 (Bill No. 24/2018
published on 17 May 2018)
Date of Second and Third
Readings
:
9 July 2018
Date of commencement
:
10 October 2018
21 November 2019
21 November 2022
45. Act 33 of 2023 — Free Trade Zones (Amendment) Act 2023
(Amendments made by the above Act)
Bill
:
29/2023
First Reading
:
18 September 2023
Second and Third Readings
:
4 October 2023
Commencement
:
1 March 2024
ix
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


Abbreviations
.
(updated on 29 August 2022)
G.N.
Gazette Notification
G.N. Sp.
Gazette Notification (Special Supplement)
L.A.
Legislative Assembly
L.N.
Legal Notification (Federal/Malaysian)
M.
Malaya/Malaysia
(including
Federated
Malay
States,
Malayan Union, Federation of Malaya and Federation of
Malaysia)
Parl.
Parliament
S
Subsidiary Legislation
S.I.
Statutory Instrument (United Kingdom)
S (N.S.)
Subsidiary Legislation (New Series)
S.S.G.G.
Straits Settlements Government Gazette
S.S.G.G. (E)
Straits Settlements Government Gazette (Extraordinary)
x
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


COMPARATIVE TABLE
CUSTOMS ACT 1960
This Act has undergone renumbering in the 2020 Revised Edition. This
Comparative Table is provided to help readers locate the corresponding provisions
in the last Revised Edition.
2020 Ed.
2004 Ed.
[Omitted as spent]
17—(2A)
—
51—(6) [Deleted by Act 25 of 2011]
—
(7) [Deleted by Act 25 of 2011]
—
63—(6) [Deleted by Act 25 of 2011]
—
66—(3) [Deleted by Act 25 of 2011]
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/3/2024


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LAWS OF MALAYSIA 
 
 
Act 235 
 
 
CUSTOMS ACT 1967 
 
 


 
LAWS OF MALAYSIA 
 
 
Act 235 
 
 
CUSTOMS ACT 1967 
 
 
 
 
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
Section 
 
 
1.  
Short title 
 
2.  
Interpretation 
 
 
PART II 
APPOINTMENT AND POWERS OF OFFICERS 
 
 
3.  
Appointment of Director General, Deputy Director General and other officers 
4.  
Appointment of Customs Officers 
5.  
Investment of powers of senior officer of customs by Director General 
6.  
Officers of customs to be public servants 
7.  
Officers of customs exempted from serving as jurors or assessors 
8.  
Powers of police officers 
8A. 
Minister may prescribe uniforms, etc. 
9.  
Badges and authority cards to be produced 
9A. 
Unlawful use, possession, etc., of uniform, etc. 
10.  
Persons employed on customs duty to be deemed proper officers of customs 
for such service 
 
 
PART IIA 
CUSTOMS RULING AND PUBLIC RULING 
 
 
10A. 
Application for customs ruling 
10B. 
Making of customs ruling 
10C. 
Amendment, modification or recovation of customs ruling 
10D. 
Director General to declare rulings to be null, etc. 
10E. 
Receiving of two customs rulings 
10F. 
Public Ruling 
 
 
 


PART III 
LEVYING OF CUSTOMS DUTIES 
 
Section  
 
11.  
Power of Minister to fix customs duties by orders to be approved by the 
Dewan Rakyat 
11A. 
No customs duty levied on goods bona fide in transit and transhipment 
12.  
Power to fix value 
13.  
Classification and valuation by proper officer of customs 
13A. 
Payment of customs duty under protest 
13B. 
Director General to determine questions on classification and valuation 
14.  
Powers of Minister to exempt 
14A. 
Minister may remit customs duty, etc. 
15.  
Reimposition of duty 
16.  
Refund of duty or other charges overpaid or erroneously paid 
17.  
Payment of duty, etc., short paid or erroneously refunded 
17A. 
Recovery of customs duty, etc. from persons leaving Malaysia 
17B. 
Payment by instalments 
18.  
Remission of import duty on goods damaged, destroyed or lost before 
removal from customs control 
19.  
Calculation of customs duty 
20.  
Calculation of export duty 
21.  
Time of importation and exportation when duty is imposed or repealed 
22.  
Questions in respect of goods deemed to be dutiable 
22A. 
Certificate of Director General admissible in evidence 
22B. 
Recovery of customs duty, etc., as a civil debt 
22C. 
Joint and several liability of director, etc. 
 
 
PART IV 
IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION 
 
 
23.  
Time and place of landing goods inwardly 
24.  
Places of landing of goods imported by air 
25.  
Time and place of import by rail or road 
26.  
Time and place of loading goods for export by sea 
27.  
Transportation by sea of goods liable to export duty to another customs port 
28.  
Time and place of export by rail or road 
29.  
Exportation by air 
29A. 
Importation or exportation by pipeline 
29B. 
Importation or exportation by other means 
30.  
Exemption from provisions of sections 23, 24, 25, 26, 28 and 29 
31.  
Power of Minister to prohibit imports or exports 
32.  
Transportation by sea of goods of a class the export of which is prohibited 
33.  
Saving in respect of certain navigable rivers 
34.  
Power of Director General to require security 
35.  
Presumption as to export 
 
 
 
 


 
 
PART IVA 
TRANSIT AND TRANSHIPMENT 
 
 
Section  
 
 
35A. 
Transits allowed 
35B. 
Commencement and completion of transit procedure 
35C. 
Safeguard against any unauthorized interference with goods in transit 
35D. 
Determination of customs ports and airports for transit 
35E. 
Determination on routes for transit 
35F. 
Persons entitled to submit declaration for transit 
35G. 
Movement of goods in transit 
35H. 
Licensed carrier 
35I. 
Transhipment goods to be deposited in warehouse 
35J. 
Commencement and completion of transhipment procedures 
35K. 
Safeguard against any unauthorized interference with goods under 
transhipment 
35L. 
Non-compliance with completion periods 
35M. 
Delivery of goods for transhipment for loading on board outgoing vessel or 
aircraft 
35N. 
Responsibilities of licensee, owner or person handling goods for 
transhipment 
 
 
PART V 
PORT CLEARANCES 
 
 
36.  
Arriving vessels, unless exempted, to be reported, and produce papers 
37.  
No vessel unless exempted, to sail without port clearance 
38.  
Port clearance before departure 
39.  
Vessels exempted from requiring port clearance 
40.  
Master of vessel not sailing within 48 hours of port clearance to report to 
proper officer of customs 
41.  
When clearance may be refused 
42.  
Application to aircraft 
 
 
PART VI 
GENERAL PROVISIONS AFFECTING VESSELS IN TERRITORIAL WATERS 
 
 
43.  
Master of vessel to obey signals from preventive vessels and instructions by 
an officer of customs 
44.  
Hovering 
45.  
Goods unaccounted for to be deemed uncustomed 
46.  
Missing goods deemed to have been illegally landed 
47.  
Proper officer of customs may board vessel in a customs port 
48.  
Power to seal up and secure hatchways goods, etc., and use of ship's stores 
49.  
Prohibition of carriage of dutiable goods in local craft 
50.  
Bulk not to be broken, etc. 
51.  
Application to aircraft 


PART VII 
 
MANIFESTS 
 
 
Section  
 
 
52.  
Master or agent of arriving vessel to present complete manifest 
53.  
(Deleted) 
54.  
Person in charge of local craft to make declaration on arrival 
55.  
Correction to be made on completion of discharge 
56.  
Pilot or agent of arriving aircraft to present complete manifest 
57.  
Outward manifest of vessel to be presented 
58.  
Person in charge of local craft to make declaration before departure 
59.  
Pilot of departing aircraft to present outward manifest 
60.  
Station master to produce railway invoices and waybills 
61.  
Local craft arriving at or leaving certain navigable rivers 
62.  
Saving in respect of exempted vessels and certain aircraft 
 
 
PART VIII 
WAREHOUSING 
 
 
63.  
Minister may establish customs warehouses 
64.  
Goods imported or exported from a collection station 
65.  
Licensed warehouse 
65A. 
Manufacture and other operations in relation to goods in licensed 
warehouse 
65AA. 
Remission on waste or refuse from goods undergoing process 
65AB. 
Deficiency in quantity of dutiable goods at licensed manufacturing 
warehouse 
65AC. 
Licensee to provide customs office and facilities 
65B. 
Liquidator of company to give notice of winding-up, and set aside duty 
65C. 
Appointment of receiver to be notified to the Director General 
65D. 
Licensing of duty free shop 
65E.  
Licensing of inland clearance depot 
65F. 
Deposit of goods in a warehouse or other place approved by the Director 
General 
66.  
Depositing goods into warehouse 
67.  
Warehouse deposit receipts 
68.  
Power to open and examine packages 
69.  
Detention of goods where doubt exists 
70.  
Protection of Government from liability 
71.  
Protection of officers of customs from liability 
72.  
Payment of warehouse rent 
73.  
Dangerous goods 
74.  
Government lien over goods deposited in a customs warehouse 
75.  
Removal of dutiable goods from a warehouse 
76.  
(Deleted) 
77.  
Weighing and handling fees 
 
 


 
 
 
 
PART VIIIA 
PETROLEUM SUPPLY BASE 
 
 
Section  
 
 
77A. 
Interpretation 
77B. 
Licensing of petroleum supply base 
77C. 
Release of goods from petroleum supply base 
77D. 
Exemption from a payment of customs duty 
77E. 
Remission of customs duty 
77F. 
Deficiency in quantity of dutiable goods at petroleum supply base 
 
 
PART IX 
DECLARATION OF GOODS 
 
A—Dutiable goods 
 
 
78.  
Declaration of dutiable goods on import 
78A. 
Payment of duties of imported goods 
78B. 
Declaration of dutiable goods before arrival 
78C. 
Abandoned goods 
79.  
Declarations to give a full and true account 
80.  
Declaration of dutiable goods to be exported 
 
 
B—Non-dutiable goods 
 
 
81.  
Declaration of non-dutiable goods imported by sea or air 
82.  
Declaration of non-dutiable goods imported by rail 
83.  
Declaration of non-dutiable goods imported by road 
84.  
Declaration on non-dutiable goods exported by sea or air 
85.  
Declaration of non-dutiable goods exported by rail 
86.  
Declaration of non-dutiable goods exported by road 
87.  
Declarations to give a full and true account 
87A. 
Provisional declaration of exported goods 
 
 
 
C—General Provisions 
 
 
88.  
Goods which have been declared at a collection station exempted 
88A. 
Deferred payment 
88B. 
Simplified procedures for accredited person 
89.  
Saving provision 
90.  
Customs agent 
91.  
Person in charge of goods imported, etc., by road to be deemed agents 
91A. 
(Deleted) 
92.  
Declaration to be made in copies 
 
 
 
 


PART X 
REFUND AND DRAWBACK OF DUTY 
 
 
Section 
 
 
92A. 
Definition of "re-export" in sections 93, 94 and 99 
93.  
Conditions under which drawback may be paid 
94.  
Declaration by claimant 
95.  
(Deleted) 
96.  
Refund to visitors and owners of samples 
97.  
Relief from duty on goods temporarily imported 
98.  
Export and reimport of trade sample free of duty 
99.  
Drawback on imported goods used in manufacture or in packing 
99A.  
Offsetting of drawback or refund against amount owing 
 
 
PART XI 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
 
100. 
 Documents to be produced on demand  
100A. 
Records relating to customs matters 
100B. 
Requirement to provide translation 
101. 
 Persons legally bound to give information 
102. 
 Service of notices 
102A. 
Submission of list of passengers and crews 
103. 
 Baggage of passengers 
104. 
 The proper officer of customs may take samples 
105. 
 Packing of dutiable goods 
106. 
 Addition or deduction of new or altered duties in the case of contract 
 
 
PART XII 
INSPECTION, INVESTIGATION, SEARCH, SEIZURE AND ARREST 
 
 
106A. 
Access to places or premises 
106B. 
Power of enforcement, investigation and inspection 
107. 
 Magistrate may issue search warrant 
108. 
 When search may be made without warrant 
109. 
 Power to search vessels and aircraft 
110. 
 Proper officer of customs to exercise powers of search 
111. 
 Officers of customs may stop and search conveyances 
111A. 
Power to set up roadblocks 
111B. 
Access to recorded information or computerized data 
111C. 
Power to intercept communications 
112. 
 Power to open packages and examine goods 
113. 
 Search of persons etc., arriving in Malaysia 
114. 
 Seizure of goods the subject of an offence 
114A. 
No costs or damages arising from entry, search or seizure to be recoverable 
115. 
 Return or disposal of goods 
 
 


Section  
 
 
115A. 
Production of a certificate of an analyst, or a senior officer of customs, or a 
person authorized by the Minister 
116. 
 Powers of arrest 
116A. 
Power to examine persons 
116B. 
Admissibility of statements in evidence 
116C. 
Procedure where investigation cannot be completed within twenty-four 
hours 
116D. 
Diary of proceedings in investigation 
 
 
PART XIII 
PROVISIONS AS TO TRIALS AND PROCEEDINGS 
 
 
117. 
 (Deleted) 
118. 
 Magistrate of the First Class to have full jurisdiction 
119. 
 Burden of proof 
119A. 
Court order  
120. 
 Proportional examination of goods seized to be accepted by courts 
121. 
 Evidence of analysis may be given in writing 
121A. 
Admissibility of statements and documents of persons who are dead or 
cannot be traced, etc. 
121B. 
Evidential provisions 
122. 
 Proof as to registration or licensing of conveyances in Malaysia or Singapore 
122A. 
Proof as to tonnage or build of a craft 
122B. 
Proof as to accuracy of a compass, radar, etc. 
122C. 
Proof as to countervailing, anti-dumping and safeguard duties payable 
122D. 
Proof as to accuracy of a master or other device for measuring petroleum 
123. 
 Imprisonment for non-payment of fine 
124. 
 Manner of seizure not to be enquired into on trial before court or on appeal 
to High Court 
124A. 
Obligation of secrecy 
125. 
 Protection of informers from discovery 
125A. 
Confidentiality of information 
126. 
 Goods liable to seizure liable to forfeiture 
127. 
 Court to order disposal of goods seized 
128. 
 Goods seized in respect of which there is no prosecution, or the proceeds of 
sale thereof, are forfeited if not claimed within one month 
129. 
 Goods or amount forfeited may be delivered or refunded to the owner or 
other person 
130. 
 Conviction under other law 
131. 
 Compounding of offences 
131A. 
Cost of holding goods, document or thing seized 
132. 
 No costs of damages arising from seizure to be recoverable unless seizure 
without reasonable or probable cause 
132A. 
Order to pay cost of damage to Government property 
 
 
 
 
 
 


PART XIV 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
 
 
Section  
 
 
133. 
 Penalty on making incorrect declarations and on falsifying documents 
134. 
 Penalty on refusing to answer questions or on giving false information 
135. 
 Penalty relating to smuggling offences, evasion of duty, fraud, etc. 
135A. 
Penalty for offences relating to data stored in a computer 
135B. 
Penalty for offence relating to claims for drawback 
135C. 
Penalty for offence relating to claims for refund 
136. 
 Penalty for assaulting or obstructing officers of customs and rescuing goods 
137. 
 Penalty for offering or receiving bribes 
138. 
 Penalty for offences not otherwise provided for 
139. 
 Attempts and abetments 
140. 
 Offences by bodies of persons and by servants and agents 
141. 
 Rewards 
 
 
PART XIVA 
CUSTOMS APPEAL TRIBUNAL 
 
 
141A. 
Interpretation 
141B. 
Establishment of Tribunal 
141C. 
Membership of Tribunal 
141D. 
Temporary exercise of functions of Chairman 
141E. 
Revocation of appointment 
141F. 
Resignation 
141FA. Vacation of office 
141G. 
Remuneration 
141H. 
Secretary to Tribunal and other officers 
141I. 
Public servant 
141J. 
Hearing of appeals 
141K. 
Hearing by single member 
141L. 
Disclosure of interest 
141M. 
Jurisdiction of Tribunal 
141N. 
Exclusion of jurisdiction of court 
141O. 
Notice of appeal and hearing 
141P. 
Negotiation for settlement 
141Q. 
Representation at hearing 
141R. 
Proceedings to be closed 
141S. 
Evidence 
141T. 
Decision of the Tribunal 
141TA. Provisions relating to costs and expenses 
141U. 
Decision and settlement to be recorded in writing 
141V. 
Decision of Tribunal to be final 
141W. 
Appeal to the High Court 
141X. 
Tribunal to adopt procedure 
 
 
 
 


Section  
 
141Y. 
Want of form 
141Z. 
Disposal of documents, etc. 
141AA. Act or omission done in good faith 
141AB. Regulations in respect of the Tribunal 
 
 
PART XV 
REGULATIONS 
 
 
142. 
 Power to make regulations 
 
 
PART XVI 
GENERAL 
 
 
143. 
 Review of and appeal against decision of the Director General 
143A. 
(Deleted) 
144. 
 Powers of Director General to charge fees 
145. 
 Forms to be used 
145A. 
Customs duty, etc., to be payable notwithstanding any proceedings, etc. 
145B. 
Protection against suit and legal proceedings 
 
 
PART XVII 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS DEALING WITH PENANG 
 
Sections 146 to 153 (Deleted) 
 
PART XVIII 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS DEALING WITH LABUAN 
 
 
154. 
 Interpretation 
155. 
 Customs duties on goods imported into or exported from Labuan or 
transported to or from Labuan from or to the principal customs area 
156. 
 Transportation of goods to or from Labuan from or to the principal customs 
area 
157. 
 Declaration of goods transported from Labuan to the principal customs area 
158. 
 Dutiable goods to be deemed to be non-dutiable while in Labuan 
159. 
 Collection of duties in Labuan 
160. 
 Application of Part X to goods transported to Labuan 
 
 
PART XIX 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS DEALING WITH SABAH AND SARAWAK 
 
 
161. 
 Agreements between Sabah and Sarawak relating to movement of goods 
162. 
 Saving in respect of vessels entering territorial waters due to circumstances 
beyond the Master's control or in respect of local craft from any other place 
without clearance or manifest 
163. 
 Time and manner of payment of duty in Sarawak 
 
 


PART XIXA 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS DEALING WITH LANGKAWI 
 
 
Section  
 
 
163A. 
Interpretation 
163B. 
Customs duties relating to Langkawi 
163C. 
Transportation of goods to or from Langkawi from or to the principal 
customs area 
163D. 
Declaration  of  goods  transported  from  Langkawi  into  the  principal 
customs area 
163E. 
Dutiable goods to be deemed to be non-dutiable while in Langkawi 
163F. 
Collection of duties in Langkawi 
163G. 
Application of Part X to goods transported to Langkawi 
 
 
PART XIXB 
SPECIAL PROVISION DEALING WITH THE JOINT DEVELOPMENT AREA 
 
 
163H. 
Movement of goods into or from Joint Development Area 
163I. 
Customs  duty  payable  on  importation  into  or  exportation  from  Joint 
Development Area 
 
 
PART XIXC 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS DEALING WITH TIOMAN 
 
 
163J. 
Interpretation 
163K. 
Customs duties relating to Tioman 
163L. 
Transportation of goods from or to Tioman to or from the principal customs 
area 
163M. 
Declaration of goods transported from Tioman to the principal custom area 
163N. 
Dutiable goods to be deemed to be non-dutiable while in Tioman 
163O. 
Collection of duties in Tioman 
163P. 
Application of Part X to goods transported to Tioman 
 
 
PART XIXD 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS DEALING WITH PANGKOR 
 
 
163Q. 
Interpretation 
163R. 
Customs duties relating to Pangkor 
163S. 
Transportation of goods to or from Pangkor from or to the principal customs 
area 
163T. 
Declaration of goods transported from Pangkor into the principal customs 
area 
163U. 
Dutiable goods to be deemed to be non-dutiable while in Pangkor 
163V. 
Collection of duties in Pangkor 
163W. 
Application of Part X to goods transported to Pangkor 
 
 
 
 
 
 


PART XX 
SINGAPORE PREVENTIVE VESSELS 
 
Sections 164 to 168 (Deleted) 
 
PART XXI 
REPEAL 
 
 
Section  
 
 
164. 
 Repeal and saving 
165. 
 SCHEDULE 
 
 
 


LAWS OF MALAYSIA 
 
 
Act 235 
 
 
CUSTOMS ACT 1967 
 
 
 
 
PART I 
 
PRELIMINARY 
 
Short title 
 
1. 
(1)    This Act may be cited as the Customs Act 1967. 
 
(2) (Omitted). 
 
 
Interpretation 
 
2. 
(1)    In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— 
 
“agent”, in relation to a vessel includes chinchew and comprador; 
 
“accredited person” means any person who has been approved by the Director 
General under section 88B;’ 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“aircraft” includes any kind of craft which may be used for the conveyance of 
passengers or goods by air; 
 
“collection station” means a customs warehouse established in Singapore under 
subsection 63(2); 
 
“computer” has the meaning assigned thereto in section 3 of the Evidence Act 
1950 [Act 56]; 
 
“conveyance” includes any vessel, aircraft, vehicle, train, barge, pipeline, electrical 
grid and all other means of transportation; 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
"customs agent" means any person approved under section 90 to undertake any 
customs transactions on behalf of another person; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act A1571 w.e.f. 1/9/2018] 
 


“customs airport” means any place which has been prescribed as a customs 
airport; 
 
“customs clearance” means the completion of the relevant customs procedure to 
allow goods to be— 
 
(a) 
released for home consumption; 
 
(b) 
exported; or 
 
(c) 
placed under another customs procedure; 
 
“customs control” means measures applied by officers of customs before the 
release of goods to ensure compliance with this Act;’ 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
"customs duty" means any import duty, export duty, surtax, surcharge or cess 
imposed by or under this Act, any countervailing duty or anti-dumping duty imposed 
by or under the Countervailing and Anti-Dumping Duties Act 1993 [Act 504], any 
safeguard duty imposed by or under the Safeguards Act 2006 [Act 657] and includes 
any royalty payable in lieu of an export duty under any written law, or a contract, lease 
or agreement to which the Federal Government or the Government of any State is a 
party or to which such Government has consented; 
 
“customs office” means the customs administrative unit responsible for the 
performance of the functions and duties relating to customs, and the premises used, or 
other places approved, licensed or prescribed, for that purpose under this Act; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“customs port” means any port prescribed to be a customs port; 
 
“customs ruling” means the customs ruling made by the Director General under 
section 10B; 
 
“customs warehouse” means a warehouse or other place established by the 
Minister under subsection 63(1) for the deposit of dutiable goods; 
 
“declaration of origin” means an appropriate statement as to the origin of the 
goods in connection with their importation or exportation by the importer, producer or 
exporter on the commercial invoice or any documents relating to the goods; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“denatured” means effectually rendered unfit for human consumption to the 
satisfaction of the Director General; 
 


“Director General” means the Director General of Customs and Excise appointed 
under subsection 3(1); 
 
“document” has the meaning assigned thereto in section 3 of the Evidence Act 
1950; 
 
“dutiable goods” means all goods subject to the payment of customs duty and on 
which such duty has not yet been paid; 
 
“duty free shop” means any place licensed for the warehousing and sale of 
dutiable goods free of duty under section 65D; 
 
“electronic data interchange” means the transfer, from computer to computer, of 
commercial and administrative transactions using an agreed message standard to 
structure the data pertaining to a transaction; 
 
“export” means to take or cause to be taken out of Malaysia, by land, sea, air, or by 
any other means or to place any goods in a conveyance for the purpose of such goods 
being taken out of Malaysia by land, sea, air, or by any other means; 
 
[Subst. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“export by air” includes exportation in any manner or by any means by air; 
 
“export by road” includes exportation in any manner or by any means by land, 
and includes, in particular, exportation through the land by means of a pipeline; 
 
“export by sea” includes exportation in any manner or by any means by sea, and 
includes, in particular, exportation through the sea by means of a pipeline; 
 
“exporter” includes any person by whom any goods (including goods transferred 
from an importing aircraft or ship) are exported from Malaysia or supplied for use as 
aircraft’s or ship’s stores, and also the owner, or any person acting on his behalf, and 
any person who for customs purposes signs any document relating to goods exported 
or intended for exportation or supplied or intended for supply as aircraft’s or ship’s 
stores as aforesaid; 
 
“Financial Authority” in relation to Sabah and Sarawak means any person 
appointed by the Minister, by notification in the appropriate Gazette, to exercise under 
the directions of the Minister any function which the Minister is empowered or 
required by this Act to exercise in Sabah or Sarawak; 
 
“goods” includes animals, birds, fish, plants, currency and bearer negotiable 
instruments and any other kinds of movable property; 
 
[Subst. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“hover” in the case of a vessel in territorial waters means to linger without 
apparent lawful purpose, whether such vessel be moving or not moving; 


“import” means to bring or cause to be brought into Malaysia, by land, sea or air 
or by any other means; 
 
[Subst. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“import by air” includes importation in any manner or by any means by air; 
 
“import by road” includes importation in any manner or by any means by land, 
and includes, in particular, importation through the land by means of a pipeline; 
 
“import by sea” includes importation in any manner or by any means by sea, and 
includes, in particular, importation through the sea by means of a pipeline; 
 
“importer” includes— 
 
(a) 
any owner or other person for the time being possessed of or beneficially 
interested in any goods at and from the time of importation thereof until 
such goods are duly removed from customs control; and 
 
(b) 
in relation to goods imported by means of a pipeline, the owner of the 
pipeline; 
 
[Subst. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“inland clearance depot” means a common-user inland facility equipped with 
fixed installations and offering services for handling and temporary storage of any kind 
of goods carried by land and placed under customs control; 
 
"intoxicating liquor" includes any alcohol, or any liquid containing more than 1.14 
per centum volume over volume of alcohol, which is fit or intended to be or which can 
by any means be converted for use as a beverage; 
 
“issuing authority” means a body or government agency appointed under section 
99c; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“in transit” (deleted).  
 
[Del. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“Joint Development Area” has the meaning assigned thereto in section 2 of the 
Malaysia-Thailand Joint Authority Act 1990; 
 
“legal landing place” means any place which has been prescribed as a legal place 
for the landing and shipping of goods; 
 


"licensed carrier" means a person approved by the Director General to operate 
vehicles by road for the carriage of any goods in transit or any dutiable goods under 
this Act or under the Excise Act 1976 [Act 176]; 
 
“licensed warehouse” means a warehouse or other place licensed for the 
warehousing of dutiable goods under section 65; 
 
“local craft” means any junk, tongkang, perahu, kumpit or other similar type of 
vessel, and any steam or motor vessel under seventy-five net registered tons; 
 
“manufacture” means— 
 
(a) 
in the case of intoxicating liquors, distilling, brewing, fermenting, bottling of 
intoxicating liquor, and includes the addition of any substance (other than 
water) to any intoxicating liquor and the blending, compounding and 
varying of intoxicating liquors with intent that the compound so formed 
shall be sold for human consumption, but excluding any such compound 
prepared at the order of the purchaser, and for his immediate consumption; 
 
(b) 
in the case of tobacco, any process converting any raw or leaf tobacco into 
tobacco fit for smoking, snuffing or chewing, and includes the making of 
cigarettes from manufactured tobacco; 
 
(c) 
in relation to petroleum, the process of refining that include separation, 
conversion, purification, and blending of refinery streams or petrochemical 
streams; and 
 
[Subst. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(d) 
in other cases, the conversion by manual or mechanical means of organic or 
inorganic materials into a new product by changing the size, shape, 
composition, nature or quality of such materials and includes the assembly 
of parts into a piece of machinery or other products, but does not include 
the installation of machinery or equipment for the purpose of construction; 
 
“master” means any person (except a pilot or harbour master) having for the time 
being control or charge of a vessel; 
 
“Minister” means the Minister charged with the responsibility for finance; 
 
“non-preferential certificate of origin” means a specific document identifying the 
goods, in which the issuing authority empowered to issue such document certifies 
expressly that the goods to which the certificate relates originate in Malaysia; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“officer of customs” means— 
 
(a) 
the Director General; 


(b) 
any Deputy Director General of Customs and Excise appointed under 
subsection 3(1); 
 
(c) 
any Assistant Director General, Director, Deputy Director, Senior Assistant 
Director and Assistant Director of Customs and Excise appointed under 
subsection 3(1); 
 
(d) 
any Senior Superintendent, Superintendent, Chief Assistant Superintendent, 
Senior Assistant Superintendent or Assistant Superintendent of Customs and 
Excise appointed under subsection 3(4); and 
 
(e) 
any Chief Customs Officer, Senior Customs Officer or Customs Officer 
appointed under section 4; 
 
[Subst. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“origin of goods”— 
 
(a) 
in relation to preferential tariff treatment, means the country in which the 
goods were wholly obtained, produced or regarded as having been 
produced according to the applicable rules of origin adopted within the 
framework of international or regional agreements in force; and 
 
(b) 
in relation to non-preferential tariff treatment, means Malaysia in which the 
goods were wholly obtained, produced or regarded as having been 
produced according to the rules adopted in Malaysia; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“owner”— 
 
(a) 
in respect of goods, includes any person (other than an officer of customs 
acting in his official capacity) being or holding himself out to be the owner, 
importer, exporter, consignee, agent or person in possession of, or 
beneficially interested in, or having any control of, or power of disposition 
over, the goods; and 
 
(b) 
in respect of any aircraft, vessel or vehicle, includes the charterer, the hirer 
and any person acting as an agent for the owner or who receives freight or 
other charges payable in respect of the aircraft, vessel or vehicle; 
 
[Subst. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“owner” in respect of a ship includes every person acting as agent for the owner 
or who receives freight or other charges payable in respect of the ship; 
 
“Peninsular Malaysia” has the meaning assigned thereto in section 3 of the 
Interpretation Acts 1948 and 1967 [Act 388], and includes the Federal Territory. 


“petroleum” means any mineral oil or relative hydrocarbon in its solid, liquid or 
gaseous form existing in its natural condition and includes casing head petroleum 
spirit, bituminous shales, other stratified deposits from which oil can be extracted 
commercially and petroleum products obtained from the process of manufacture; 
 
 
“pilot of an aircraft” means every person having or taking command or charge of 
an aircraft; 
 
“postal article” means a letter, postcard, newspaper, book, document, pamphlet, 
pattern or sample packet, parcel, package or any other article or thing that can be 
transmitted, collected or delivered by post; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“preferential certificate of origin” means a specific document identifying the 
goods, in which the issuing authority empowered to issue such document certifies 
expressly that the goods to which the certificate relates originate in a specific country 
in accordance with the rules of origin adopted within the framework of international or 
regional agreements in force; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“preferential tariff treatment” means the rates of import duty published in the 
order made under section 11 applicable to originating goods of the exporting country 
in accordance with the relevant trade agreements;’; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“preventive vessel” means any vessel employed for the prevention of smuggling 
or for any other purpose relating to the customs; 
 
[Amd. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“producer” means a person who engages in the production of goods which 
includes the growing, cultivating, raising, mining, harvesting, fishing, trapping, hunting, 
capturing, collecting, breeding, extracting, aquaculture, gathering, manufacturing, 
processing or assembling of the goods; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“prohibited goods” means goods the import or export of which his prohibited, 
either absolutely or conditionally by an order under section 31 and any subsidiary 
legislation made under this Act or by any other written law; 
 
[Amd. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 


“proper officer of customs” means any officer of customs acting in the fulfilment 
of his duties under this Act, whether such duties are assigned to him specially or 
generally, or expressly or by implication; 
 
“public ruling” means the public ruling made by the Director General under 
section 10F; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“release” in relation to goods, means the action by the proper officer of customs to 
allow goods which has completed customs clearance to be placed at the disposal of the 
owner of such goods; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“road” includes any prescribed land route; 
 
“sea” includes inland waters; 
 
“senior officer of customs” means— 
 
(a) 
the Director General; 
 
(b) 
any Deputy Director General of Customs and Excise appointed under 
subsection 3(1); 
 
(c) 
any Assistant Director General, Director, Deputy Director, Senior Assistant 
Director and Assistant Director of Customs and Excise appointed under 
subsection 3(1); 
 
(d) 
any Senior Superintendent, Superintendent, Chief Assistant Superintendent, 
Senior Assistant Superintendent or Assistant Superintendent of Customs 
and Excise appointed under subsection 3(4); 
 
(e) 
any officer of customs invested with the powers of a senior officer of 
customs under subsection 3(5) or section 5; and  
 
(f) 
any police officer having the powers of a senior officer of customs by virtue 
of section 8; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“sufferance wharf” means any place other than an approved place of loading or 
unloading at which the senior officer of customs may, in his discretion, and under such 
conditions and in such manalau ner as he may direct, either generally or in any 
particular case, allow any goods to be loaded or unloaded; 
 
 
 


“surcharge” means any charge that is due and payable under subsection 17B(2); 
 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“territorial waters” means the territorial waters of Malaysia; 
 
“transit” means the movement of goods— 
 
(a) 
between two or more customs offices in Malaysia; or 
 
(b) 
from a customs office in any country to a customs office in Malaysia 
(including goods on transhipment) for the sole purpose of being carried out 
to another country; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
“transhipment” means— 
 
(a) 
transferring of goods from one vessel or aircraft to another vessel or aircraft; 
or 
 
(b) 
unloading of goods from a vessel or aircraft and depositing such goods in a 
customs or licensed warehouse or in a warehouse or other place approved 
by the Director General, 
 
for the purpose of shipment out of Malaysia on that other vessel or aircraft within 
the jurisdictional area of the same customs office relating to the importation and 
exportation; 
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
“uncustomed goods” means goods in respect of which a breach of the provisions of 
this Act or of any subsidiary legislation made thereunder has been committed; 
 
“value”— 
 
(a) 
in relation to imported goods, means customs value as determined under the 
regulations made under subsection 142(35B); and 
 
(b) 
in relation to goods to be exported, means the price which an exporter would 
receive for the goods calculated to the stage where such goods are released 
by Customs at the place of export; 
 
[Subst. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
(1A)  For the purposes of this Act, a free zone shall be deemed to be a place outside 
a principal customs area, and the provisions of section 31 and Parts IVA, V, VI and VII of 
this Act shall apply to a free zone.”; 
[Subst. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 


In this subsection, the expression "free zone" has the meaning assigned to it under 
section 26 of the Free Zones Act 1990 [Act 438]. 
 
(1B)  For the purposes of subsection (1A)— 
 
(a) 
“free zone” means any area in Malaysia which has been declared by the 
Minister to be a free commercial zone or a free industrial zone under the 
Free Zones Act 1990 [Act 438]; and 
 
 
 
(b) 
“principal customs area” means any part of Malaysia excluding a free zone, 
Labuan, Langkawi, Tioman and Pangkor.  
 
[Ins. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(2)  For the purpose of this Act, goods shall be deemed to be under customs 
control whilst they are deposited or held in any customs or licensed warehouse, 
warehouse or other place approved by the Director General, petroleum supply base, 
post office, or in any conveyance from which they may not be removed except with the 
permission of the proper officer of customs. 
 
[Amd. S2 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
PART II 
 
APPOINTMENT AND POWERS OF OFFICERS 
 
Appointment of Director General, Deputy Director General and other officers 
 
3. 
(1)  There shall be appointed an officer to be styled the Director General of 
Customs and Excise and such number of Deputy Directors General, Assistant Directors 
General, Directors, Deputy Directors, Senior Assistant Directors and Assistant Directors 
of Customs and Excise as may be considered necessary for the purpose of this Act and 
any written law relating to excise. 
 
[Subst. S3 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) The Director General shall be the Chief Officer of Customs and shall have the 
superintendence of all matters relating to the customs, subject to the direction and 
control of the Minister. 
 
(3) The Deputy Directors General, Assistant Directors General, Directors, Deputy 
Directors, Senior Assistant Directors and Assistant Directors shall be subject to the 
general direction and supervision of the Director General, and, subject thereto, shall 
have and exercise all powers conferred on the Director General by or under this Act, 
other than those conferred by sections 10F, 13B, 22 and 145 thereof. 
[Ins. S3 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 


(4) There shall be appointed so many Senior Superintendents, Superintendents, 
Chief Assistant Superintendents, Senior Assistant Superintendents and Assistant 
Superintendents of Customs and Excise as may be considered necessary for the 
purposes of this Act and any written law relating to excise. 
 
[Subst. S3 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(5) The Minister may, by notification in the Gazette, invest any officer of customs 
not being a senior officer of customs with all or any of the powers of a senior officer of 
customs. 
 
 
Appointment of Customs Officers 
 
4. 
There shall be appointed so many Chief Customs Officers, Senior Customs Officers, 
and Customs Officers as may be considered necessary for the purposes of this Act. 
 
 
Investment of powers of senior officer of customs by Director General 
 
5. 
The Director General may by authorization in writing invest any officer of customs 
not being a senior officer of customs with all or any of the powers of a senior officer of 
custom for a period not exceeding ninety days in respect of any one authorization. 
 
 
Officers of customs to be public servants 
 
6. 
All officers of customs shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning 
of the Penal Code [Act 574]. 
 
 
Officers of customs exempted from serving as jurors or assessors 
 
7. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any written law no officer of customs 
shall be liable to serve as juror or assessor. 
 
 
Powers of police officers 
 
8. 
For the purposes of this Act, all police officers not below the rank of Inspector 
shall have and may exercise all the powers conferred by Part XII on senior officers of 
customs, and all police officers below the rank of Inspector shall have and may exercise 
all the powers conferred by Part XII on officers of customs.”. 
 
[Subst. S4 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Minister may prescribe uniforms, etc. 
 
8A. The Minister may, by order published in the Gazette, prescribe— 
 


(a) 
uniforms and rank markings for any rank of officers of customs; and 
 
(b) 
the authority card and badge to be carried by any rank of officers of 
customs. 
 
 
Badges and authority cards to be produced 
 
9. 
(1)  Every officer of customs when acting against any person under this Act 
shall, if not in uniform, on demand declare his office and produce to the person against 
whom he is acting such badge or authority card as the Director General or, in the case 
of a police officer, the Inspector General of Police, may direct to be carried by such 
officers. 
 
(2) It shall not be an offence for any person to refuse to comply with any 
request, demand or order made by any officer of customs acting or purporting to act 
under this Act if such officer is not in uniform and refuses to declare his office and 
produce his badge or authority card, on demand being made by such person. 
 
(3) A badge or an authority card issued to an officer of customs shall be the 
property of the Government and shall be surrendered by such officer to the person 
appointed by the Director General for that purpose when such officer ceases to be an 
officer of customs or when instructed to do so. 
 
 
Unlawful use, possession, etc., of uniform, etc. 
 
9A.  Any person, not being an officer of customs, who unlawfully wears, uses, 
possesses or displays otherwise than in the course of a stage play or other theatrical 
performance, any prescribed uniform or badge or authority card, or any dress having 
the appearance of or bearing the distinctive marks of such uniform shall be guilty of an 
offence under this Act. 
 
 
Persons employed on customs duty to be deemed proper officers of customs for 
such service 
 
10. Every person employed on any duty or service relating to the customs by the 
orders or with the concurrence of the Director General (whether previously or 
subsequently expressed) shall be deemed to be the proper officer of customs for that 
duty or service; and every act required by law at any time to be done by, or with any 
particular officer nominated for such purpose, if done by or with any person appointed 
by the Director General to act for such particular officer, shall be deemed to be done by 
or with such particular officer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


PART IIA 
 
CUSTOMS RULING AND PUBLIC RULING 
 
[Ins. S5 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Application for customs ruling 
 
10A.  (1)  Any person may apply, in the prescribed form together with the prescribed 
fee, to the Director General for a customs ruling in respect of any one or more of the 
following matters: 
(a) the classification of goods; 
 
(aa) the origin of goods; 
 
[Ins. S6 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(b) 
the principles to be adopted for the purposes of determination of value of 
goods; or 
 
(c) 
on any other matters to be prescribed by the Director General. 
 
 
(2)  An application under subsection (1) may be made— 
 
(a) 
in respect of imported goods— 
 
(i) 
at any time before the goods, that are the subject matter of the 
application, are to be imported or intended to be imported into 
Malaysia; or 
 
(ii) at any later time, if the Director General may in his discretion permit; 
or 
 
(b) 
in respect of manufactured goods— 
 
(i) 
at any time before the goods that are the subject matter of the 
application, are to be manufactured; or 
 
(ii) at any later time, if the Director General may in his discretion permit. 
 
(3)  An applicant may withdraw his application at any time before a customs 
ruling is made and any payment made relating to the application for the customs ruling 
shall be forfeited by the Director General. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Making of customs ruling 
 
10B.  (1)  Subject to subsection (3), the Director General shall make a customs ruling 
in respect of any matter specified in the application made under section 10A and such 
ruling shall bind the applicant. 
 
(2)  Any such customs ruling may be subject to such conditions as the Director 
General may deem fit to impose. 
 
(3) The Director General may decline to make a customs ruling if, in his 
opinion— 
 
(a) 
the information given by the applicant is insufficient to do so; 
 
(b) 
the application is for a hypothetical situation; or 
 
(c) 
a review or an appeal under this Act is pending involving the subject matter 
referred to in the application. 
 
 
Amendment, modification or revocation of customs ruling 
 
10C.  (1)  A customs ruling may be amended, modified or revoked by the Director 
General if— 
 
(a) 
it contains an error which needs to be corrected; 
 
(b) 
the customs ruling was based on an error of fact or law; 
 
(c) 
there is a change in law relating to customs; or 
 
(d) 
there is a change in the material fact or circumstances on which the ruling 
was based. 
 
(2) The Director General shall, immediately after making the amendment, 
modification or revocation, give a notice in writing to the applicant of the amendment, 
modification or revocation and, subject to subsection (3), such amended, modified or 
revoked customs ruling shall take effect from the date stated in the notice. 
 
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2), where a customs ruling has the effect of 
causing or increasing any duty liability in respect of any goods, and— 
 
(a) 
the goods are imported within 3 months of the date the notice of the 
amendment, modification or revocation is given, pursuant to a binding 
contract entered into before that date; 
 
(b) 
the goods have left the place of manufacture or warehouse in the country 
from which they are being exported for direct shipment to Malaysia on the 


date the notice of the amendment, modification or revocation of the ruling is 
given; or 
 
(c) 
the goods are imported on or before the date the notice of the amendment, 
modification or revocation is given but have not been released for home 
consumption, 
 
then the customs ruling which was made prior to the amendment, modification or 
revocation under this section shall be applied to such goods. 
 
(4) Notwithstanding subsection (2), and subject to section 16, if the amendment, 
modification or revocation to a customs ruling has the effect of decreasing any duty 
liability in respect of any goods, any higher duty that has been paid shall been treated 
as if it has been paid in error. 
 
 
Director General to declare rulings to be null, etc. 
 
10D. The Director General shall by a notice declare a customs ruling made under 
section 10B to be null, void and of no effect if the ruling has been obtained by the 
applicant by way of fraud, misrepresentation or falsification of facts. 
 
 
Receiving of two customs rulings 
 
10E. Where an applicant receives two or more different customs ruling on the same 
subject matter, such rulings shall be treated as being null and void and such applicant 
shall immediately notify the Director General who shall, within thirty days from the 
date of the notification, issue a new customs ruling. 
 
 
Public ruling 
 
10F.  (1)  The Director General may, at any time, make a public ruling on the 
application of any provision of this Act. 
 
(2)  The Director General may withdraw, either wholly or partly, any public 
ruling made under this section.”. 
 
[Ins. S7 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


PART III 
 
LEVYING OF CUSTOMS DUTIES 
 
Power of Minister to fix customs duties by orders to be approved by the Dewan 
Rakyat 
 
11. (1)  The Minister may, from time to time, by order published in the Gazette, fix 
the customs duties to be levied on any goods imported into or exported from Malaysia 
and to be paid by the importer or exporter, as the case may be. 
 
(2) Any order made under subsection (1) shall, at the next meeting of the Dewan 
Rakyat be laid on the table of the Dewan Rakyat and shall, at the expiration of one 
hundred and twenty days from being so laid or of such extended period as the Dewan 
Rakyat may, by resolution, direct, cease to have effect if and in so far as it is not 
confirmed by a resolution passed by the Dewan Rakyat within the said one hundred 
and twenty days or, if such period has been extended, within such extended period. 
 
(3) Where an order ceases to have effect in whole or in part as provided by 
subsection (2), then any customs duty levied in pursuance of such order or, as the case 
may be, of such part thereof as ceases to have effect shall, subject to subsection (4), be 
repayable to the person from whom such duty was levied. 
 
(4) Unless the Minister shall otherwise direct, no customs duty repayable under 
subsection (3) shall be repaid, unless the person entitled to such repayment makes a 
claim therefor to the Director General within one year from the day on which the order 
ceases to have effect in whole or in part as provided by subsection (2). 
 
(5) Such claim shall be made in writing and shall contain such particulars as the 
Director General may, by general or special order, require. 
 
(6) (Deleted). 
 
 
No customs duty levied on goods bona fide in transit and transhipment 
 
11A. For the purpose of levying of customs duties, goods bona fide in transit, including 
goods for transhipment, shall not be deemed to be imported unless they are or become 
uncustomed goods.” 
 
[Ins. S8 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Power to fix value 
 
12. The Minister may, from time to time, by notification in the Gazette, fix, for the 
purpose of the levy and payment of customs duties, the value of any dutiable goods. 
 
 
 


Classification and valuation by proper officer of customs 
 
13. (1)  The proper officer of customs may, in respect of any dutiable or uncustomed 
goods— 
 
(a) 
determine the class of goods to which such dutiable or uncustomed goods 
belong; and 
 
(b) 
value, weigh, measure or otherwise examine, or cause to be valued, 
weighed, measured or otherwise examined such dutiable or uncustomed 
goods, 
 
for the purpose of ascertaining the customs duty leviable thereon. 
 
(2) When a valuation of any goods has been made by the proper officer of 
customs, such valuation shall be presumed to be correct until the contrary is proved. 
 
 
Payment of customs duty under protest 
 
13A.  Any person who is dissatisfied with a decision of a proper officer of customs 
under subsection 13(1) as to whether any particular goods are or are not included in a 
class of goods appearing in an order made under subsection 11(1) or with the 
valuation, weighing, measuring or examining of any goods may pay the customs duty 
levied under protest. 
Director General to determine questions on classification and valuation 
 
13B.   Where customs duty has been paid under protest, the proper officer of customs 
shall, within thirty days of such payment being made, refer any question as to 
classification or valuation of goods to the Director General for his decision. 
 
 
Powers of Minister to exempt 
 
14. (1)  The Minister may, by order, exempt, subject to such conditions as he may 
deem fit to impose, any class of goods or persons from the payment of the whole or any 
part of any customs duty or any other prescribed fee or charge which may be payable. 
 
(2) The Minister may in any particular case— 
 
(a) 
exempt any person from the payment of the whole or any part of the 
customs duties or any other prescribed fees or charges which may be 
payable by such person on any goods; or 
 
(b) 
direct the refund to any person of the whole or any part of the customs 
duties or any other prescribed fees or charges which have been paid by such 
person on any goods, 
 
and in granting such exemption or directing such refund, impose such conditions as he 
may deem fit. 


(3) Any goods in respect of which an exemption from the payment of customs 
duties has been granted under subsection (1) or (2) shall be deemed to be dutiable 
goods until the conditions, if any, subject to which the exemption from duty was 
granted are fulfilled and shall be liable to all other charges, not being customs duties, to 
which they would be subject if no such exemption had been granted. 
 
 
Minister may remit customs duty, etc. 
 
14A.  (1) 
The Minister may, if he thinks it just and equitable to do so, and subject to 
such conditions as he may deem fit to impose, remit the whole or any part of the 
customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money  payable under this Act. 
 
[Amd. S9 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
 
(2)  Where a person who has been granted remission under subsection (1) has 
paid any of the customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money to which the 
remission relates, he shall be entitled to a refund of the amount of customs duty, 
surcharge, penalty, fee or other money which had been remitted.” 
 
[Ins. S9 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Reimposition of duty 
 
15. (1)  If any goods, on which customs duty has not been paid by reason of an 
exemption granted under section 14, cease to comply with the conditions subject to 
which such exemption was granted or cease to be kept or used by the person or for the 
purposes qualifying them for such exemption, such goods shall, upon such cesser, 
become liable to the customs duty and the person to whom such exemption was 
granted and any person found in possession of such goods shall be jointly and severally 
liable to pay such customs duty. 
 
(2) If any goods, which are liable to customs duty under subsection (1) and on 
which such duty has not been paid, are found in the possession or on the premises of 
any person other than the person authorized to possess them under the terms of such 
exemption, such goods shall, until the contrary is proved, be deemed to be uncustomed 
goods. 
 
 
Refund of duty or other charges overpaid or erroneously paid 
 
16. (1) 
It shall be lawful for the Director General, if it is proved to his satisfaction 
that any money has been overpaid or erroneously paid as customs duty, surcharge, 
penalty, fee or other money or as any other fee or charge under this Act, to order the 
refund of the money so overpaid or erroneously paid: 
 
[Subst. S10 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 


Provided that— 
 
(a) 
no such refund shall be allowed unless a claim in respect of it is made in the 
prescribed form within one year after the overpayment or erroneous payment 
was made; or 
 
(b) 
in the case where any customs duty has been paid under section 13A or 
paragraph 99H(2)(b) or pending the result of a review under section 143 or 
appeal under section 141T, no claim of refund shall be allowed unless such claim 
is made in the prescribed form within one year from the date of the decision on 
classification, valuation, verification of origin, review or appeal is made known to 
the claimant. 
 
[Subst. S10 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(2)  A claim under subsection (1) shall be supported by such documents as 
required by the Director General. 
 
[Ins. S10 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Payment of duty, etc., short paid or erroneously refunded 
 
17. (1)  Whenever— 
 
(a) 
through inadvertence, error, or for any other reason, misconstruction on the 
part of any officer of customs, or through unintentional misstatement as to 
value, quantity or description by any person, or for any other reason, the 
whole or any part of any customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other 
money payable under this Act have not been paid; or 
 
(b) 
the whole or any part of any customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other 
money, after having been paid, have been, owing to any cause, erroneously 
refunded, 
 
the person liable to pay such customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money  or 
the person to whom such refund has erroneously been made, as the case may be, shall 
pay the deficiency or repay the amount paid to him in excess, on demand being made 
within six years from the date on which customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other 
money was payable or deficient customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money 
was paid or the refund was made, as the case may be, and without prejudice to any 
other remedy for the recovery of the amount due, any goods belonging to such person 
which may be in customs control may be detained until such customs duty, surcharge, 
penalty, fee or other money or deficiency be paid or the refund be repaid, as the case 
may be. 
 
[Subs. S11 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 


(2) (Deleted). 
 
[Del. S11 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(3)  Nothing in subsection (1) shall prejudice the exercise of the rights and 
powers under this section by the Director General to seize or, subject to subsection (4), 
sell any goods under customs control belonging to the person liable to pay such customs 
duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money for the recovery of the amount payable 
under subsection (1) or (7), or any outstanding balance thereof.  
 
(4) If the customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money or the deficient 
customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money, or the refund to be repaid remain 
unpaid, as the case may be, the Director General may sell such goods seized under 
subsection (3)— 
 
(a) 
after giving not less than thirty days’ notice in writing from the date of 
seizure to the person or his agent if the name and address of such owner or 
agent is known to the Director General; or 
 
(b) 
after giving not less than thirty days’ notice in the Gazette if the name and 
address of such owner or his agent is not known to the Director General. 
 
(5)  The proceeds of sale of any goods under subsection (4) shall be applied to 
the payment of— 
 
(a) 
the customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money; or 
 
(b) 
the recovery of any amount or charges which may be due in respect of selling 
off such goods, and the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the person liable to 
pay the amount due under subsection (1) and if such person cannot be found 
within one month of the sale, such surplus shall be paid into the 
Consolidated Fund. 
 
(6)  If at the sale of any goods under subsection (4) no sufficient bid is 
forthcoming to defray the customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money or the 
deficient customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money payable or the refund 
erroneously paid, as the case may be, the goods shall be forfeited to the Government and 
shall be disposed of in such manner as the Director General may direct. 
 
(7)  Nothing in subsection (1) shall prevent the Director General from making a 
demand at any time after six years whenever any payment of customs duty, surcharge, 
penalty, fee or other money is not paid or short paid due to any form of fraud or default 
committed by or on behalf of any person. 
[Ins. S11 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Recovery of customs duty, etc. from persons leaving Malaysia 
 
17A. (1)  Where the Director General has reason to believe that any person is about 
or is likely to leave Malaysia without paying any customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee 


or other money, payable under this Act, he may issue to the Director General of 
Immigration a certificate containing particulars of the person reasonably suspected of 
having committed an offence with a request that such person be prevented from 
leaving Malaysia unless and until he pays all the duties, surcharges, penalties, fees or 
other moneys so payable or furnishes security to the satisfaction of the Director 
General for its payment. 
 
[Subst. S12 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) Subject to any order issued or made under any written law relating to 
banishment or immigration, the Director General of Immigration who receives a 
request under subsection (1) in respect of a person shall exercise all measures which 
may include the removal or retention of any certificate of identity, passport, exit permit 
or other travel documents in relation to that person as may be necessary to give effect 
to the request. 
 
[Subst. S12 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(3) The Director General shall cause a notice of the issue of a certificate under 
subsection (1) to be served personally or by registered post at the last known address 
of the person to whom the certificate relates. 
 
[Subst. S12 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Provided that the non-receipt of the notice by that person shall not invalidate 
anything done under this section. 
 
(4) Where the person in respect of whom a certificate has been issued under 
subsection (1) produces on or after the date of the certificate a written statement 
signed by the Director General stating that all the duties, surcharges, penalties, fees or 
other moneys  have been paid or that security has been furnished for its payment, that 
statement shall be sufficient authority for allowing that person to leave Malaysia. 
 
[Subst. S12 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(5) No legal proceedings shall be instituted or maintained against the 
Government, a State Government, or any other public officer in respect of anything 
lawfully done under this section. 
 
(6) (Deleted).  
[Del. S12 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Payment by instalments 
 
17B. (1) Where any amount is payable in accordance with subsection 17(1), the 
Director General may allow the amount to be paid by instalments, subject to such 
conditions, in such amounts and on such dates as he may determine. 
 


(2)  If there is default in payment of any instalment under subsection (1) on its 
due date, the whole outstanding balance shall become due and payable on that date and 
shall, without any further notice being served on the person liable to pay the amount 
due, be subject to a surcharge equal to ten per cent of that outstanding balance and the 
surcharge shall be recoverable as if it were due and payable under this Act. 
 
(3)  Nothing in subsections (1) and (2) shall prejudice the exercise of the rights 
and powers under this section by the Director General to seize or sell any goods under 
customs control belonging to the person liable to pay such customs duty, surcharge, 
penalty, fee or other money for the recovery of the amount payable under subsections 
(1) and (2), or any outstanding balance thereof. 
 
[Ins. S13 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Remission of import duty on goods damaged, destroyed or lost before removal 
from customs control 
 
18.  (1)  If any dutiable goods which have been imported are damaged, destroyed or 
lost due to unavoidable accident at any time after their arrival within Malaysia and 
before removal from customs control, the Director General may, where he deems fit, 
remit the whole or any part of the customs duty payable thereon if notice in writing of 
such damage, destruction or loss, supported by sufficient documents, has been given at 
or before the time of such removal. 
 
 
(2)  If any dutiable goods are damaged, destroyed or lost due to unavoidable 
accident after the removal of such goods from customs control, no abatement of 
customs duty shall be allowed on such goods. 
[Subst. S14 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Calculation of customs duty 
 
19. (1)  The rate of customs duty applicable to any goods shall be: 
 
(a) 
in the case of goods lawfully imported— 
 
(i) 
if such goods (other than petroleum in a licensed warehouse) are 
warehoused, or if customs duty is paid at a collection station established 
under subsection 63(2), the rate in force on the day on which the 
removal of the goods is authorized by the proper officer of customs or, 
in the case of a collection station, by an officer appointed under the 
provisions of any law for the time being in force in Singapore relating to 
the collection of customs duties payable to the Government of Malaysia; 
 
(ii) if such goods consist of petroleum which is in a licensed warehouse, the 
rate in force on the day on which such petroleum is removed from such 
warehouse; 
 


(iii) if such goods are imported by post, the rate in force on the day on 
which duty is assessed by the proper officer of customs; and 
 
(iv) in any other case, the rate in force on the day on which such goods are 
released by the proper officer of customs; 
 
(b) 
in the case of uncustomed goods, the rate in force on the day on which such 
goods became uncustomed goods, if known, or the rate in force on the day of 
seizure, whichever is the higher. 
 
(2) For the purpose of calculating the customs duty payable, the valuation 
applicable to any goods shall be made in the prescribed manner. 
 
 
Calculation of export duty 
 
20. The rate of export duty and the valuation (if any) applicable to any goods shall 
be— 
 
(a) 
in the case of goods lawfully exported, the rate and valuation in force on the 
day on which a receipt is issued for the payment of duty: 
 
Provided that when payment of duty in arrears has been permitted under 
section 80 the rate and valuation shall be the rate and valuation in force on the 
day on which the goods are released by the proper officer of customs, or, as the 
case may be, by an officer appointed under any law for the time being in force in 
Singapore relating to the collection of export duties on goods exported from 
Malaysia; 
 
(b) 
in the case of uncustomed goods, the rate and valuation in force on the day 
on which such goods became uncustomed goods, if known, or the rate and 
valuation in force on the day of seizure, whichever is the higher. 
 
 
Time of importation and exportation when duty is imposed or repealed 
 
21. When by virtue of an order made under subsection 11(1) a customs duty is fixed 
on any goods which previously were not dutiable goods or any customs duty on goods 
is abolished or when the importation or exportation of any goods is prohibited or any 
such prohibition is abolished by an order made under section 31 and it becomes 
necessary for the purpose of this Act to determine the time at which an importation or 
exportation of any goods made and completed shall be deemed to have had effect, such 
importation or exportation shall, notwithstanding anything in this Act contained, be 
deemed to be the time at which the goods are released by the proper officer of customs. 
 
 
 
 
 


Questions in respect of goods deemed to be dutiable 
 
22. If any question arises as to whether any particular goods are or are not included 
in a class of goods appearing in an order made under subsection 11(1), such question 
shall be decided by the Director General. 
 
 
Certificate of Director General admissible in evidence 
 
22A.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other written law or rule of evidence 
to the contrary, where in any proceedings a document purporting to be a certificate 
under the hand of the Director General in respect of a decision made by him under 
section 10B, 13B or 22 is produced, such document shall be admissible in evidence and 
shall be accepted as sufficient evidence of the facts therein stated and the Director 
General shall not be required to give evidence in respect of such decision unless the 
court otherwise orders. 
 
 
Recovery of customs duty, etc., as a civil debt 
 
22B.  (1) 
Without prejudice to any other remedy and notwithstanding any review or 
appeal against any decision of the Director General under section 143, any customs 
duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money payable under this Act, may be recovered 
as a civil debt due to the Government of Malaysia, or where the customs duty is a duty 
of a category assigned to the State by Article 112c of the Federal Constitution, to the 
Government of that State. 
 
(2)  In any proceedings to recover the customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or 
other money under subsection (1), the production of a certificate signed by the 
Director General— 
 
(a) 
stating that any customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money and 
the amount shown in the certificate as payable, in any assessment or notice 
made under this Act from a person named in the certificate; and 
 
(b) 
giving the address of the person and purporting to be a copy of or an extract 
from any notice of assessment, shall be conclusive evidence of the customs 
duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money and the amount as payable in 
any assessment or notice and shall be sufficient authority for the court to 
give judgement for that amount. 
 
(3)  Any penalty imposed under this Act shall, for the purposes of this Act and 
the Limitation Act 1953 [Act 254], the Limitation Ordinance of Sabah [Sabah Cap. 72] or 
the Limitation Ordinance of Sarawak [Swk. Cap 49], as the case may be, be recoverable 
as if the penalty were customs duty due and payable under this Act and accordingly 
subsection 6(4) of the Limitation Act 1953, section 3 of the Limitation Ordinance of 
Sabah or section 3 of the Limitation Ordinance of Sarawak, as the case may require, 
shall not apply to that penalty. 
 
[Ins. S14 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 


Joint and several liability of dirctor, etc. 
 
22C. Where any customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money is payable by— 
 
(a) 
a company; 
 
(b) 
a firm; or 
 
(c) 
a society, an association or other body of persons, 
 
then notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Act or in any other written law, 
the directors of such company or the partners of such firm or the members of such 
society, association or other body of persons, as the case may be, shall, together with 
such company, firm, society, association or other body of persons, be jointly and 
severally liable for the customs duty, surcharge penalty, fee or other money payable: 
 
Provided that in relation to a company that is being wound up, the directors of such 
company shall only be so liable where the assets of the company are insufficient to meet 
the amount due, after paying any sums having priority over the customs duty, surcharge 
penalty, fee or other money under the Companies Act 1965 in relation to the application 
of the assets of the company in such winding up. 
 
[Ins. S16 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
PART IV 
 
IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION 
 
Time and place of landing goods inwardly 
 
23. (1)  No goods imported by sea or transported by water from any place in 
Malaysia shall be landed— 
 
(a) 
except at a legal landing place: 
 
Provided that in Sabah and Sarawak goods may be landed at a sufferance 
wharf; 
 
(b) 
until permission to do so has been received from the proper officer of 
customs; and 
 
(c) 
except on such days and during such times as may be prescribed, unless 
permission to land goods on other days and during other times has been 
granted by the proper officer of customs. 
 
(2) Except with the permission of the proper officer of customs, no such 
goods— 
 
(a) 
after having been landed or unshipped shall be transhipped; or 


(b) 
after having been put into any boat or craft to be landed shall be removed 
into any other boat or craft previously to their being landed. 
 
(3) The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to fresh fish, 
whether packed with ice or not, which is landed from any vessel licensed for the 
purpose of fishing under any written law. 
 
 
Places of landing of goods imported by air 
 
24. No goods imported by air shall be landed except at a customs airport and such 
goods may be cleared at such customs airport, an inland clearance depot or an inland 
customs station. 
 
[Ins. S17 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Time and place of import by rail or road 
 
25. No goods imported by rail or road shall be imported— 
 
(a) 
except at a prescribed place of import and where a route has been 
prescribed, by such route; and 
 
(b) 
in the case of goods imported by road, except on the days and during the 
times prescribed for such importation unless permission to import goods on 
other days and during other times has been granted by the proper officer of 
customs. 
 
 
Time and place of loading goods for export by sea 
 
26. No goods shall be loaded, or water-borne to be loaded for exportation by sea or 
for transportation by water from any place to another place in Malaysia— 
 
(a) 
except at a legal landing place: 
 
Provided that in Sabah and Sarawak goods may be loaded or water-borne 
to be loaded for exportation by sea at a sufference wharf; 
 
(b) 
until permission to do so has been received from the proper officer of 
customs; and 
 
(c) 
except on such days and during such times as may be prescribed, unless 
permission to load goods on other days and during other times has been 
granted by the proper officer of customs. 
 
 
 
 


Transportation by sea of goods liable to export duty to another customs port 
 
27. (1)  No goods in respect of which customs duty is payable on export shall be 
loaded, or water-borne to be loaded, for transportation by sea from any place to any 
other place in Malaysia unless— 
 
(a) 
the export duty has been paid on any goods intended to be transhipped at 
such other place; or 
 
(b) 
in the case of goods to be landed at a legal landing place in Malaysia security 
in the amount of such export duty has been furnished to the satisfaction of 
the senior officer of customs that any goods intended to be landed at such 
other legal landing place shall be so landed: 
 
Provided that in the case of Sarawak, export duty may be paid at such time 
and in such manner as the Minister may prescribe by regulation under 
section 142. 
 
(2) No goods in respect of which customs duty is payable on export shall be 
forwarded by rail from one place to another place in Malaysia when the journey 
involves passage through territory outside Malaysia unless— 
 
(a) 
the customs export duty has been paid thereon; or 
 
(b) 
security in the amount of such duty has been furnished to the satisfaction of 
the senior officer of customs at the station of despatch that such goods shall 
be produced to the senior officer of customs at the station of destination. 
 
 
Time and place of export by rail or road 
 
28. No goods shall be exported by rail or road— 
 
(a) 
except at a prescribed place of export and, where a route has been 
prescribed, by such route; and 
 
(b) 
in the case of goods exported by road except on such days and during such 
times as may be prescribed unless permission to export goods on other days 
and during other times has been granted by the proper officer of customs. 
 
 
Exportation by air 
 
29. No goods shall be exported by air except at a customs airport and such goods may 
be cleared at such customs airport,  an inland clearance depot or an inland customs 
station. 
 
[Ins. S18 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 


Importation or exportation by pipeline 
 
29A. (1)  No goods shall be imported or exported by pipeline unless such pipeline is 
approved by the Director General who, in granting such approval, may impose such 
conditions as he may deem fit. 
 
(2) Goods imported by means of a pipeline shall be treated as imported at the 
time when they are brought— 
 
(a) 
if by sea, across the boundaries into the territorial waters; or 
 
(b) 
if by land, across the boundaries into Malaysia. 
 
(3) Goods exported by means of a pipeline shall be treated as exported at the 
time when the goods are loaded from a pipeline into another conveyance for 
exportation. 
 
[Ins. S19 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Importation or exportation by other means 
 
29B. No goods shall be imported or exported by other means except as approved by the 
Director General subject to such conditions as he deems fit. 
 
[Ins. S20 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Exemption from provisions of sections 23, 24, 25, 26, 28 and 29 
 
30. The Director General may exempt any person from all or any of the provisions of 
sections 23, 24, 25, 26, 28 and 29 on such conditions as he may deem fit to impose. 
 
 
Power of Minister to prohibit imports or exports 
 
31. (1)  The Minister may, by order— 
 
(a) 
prohibit the importation into, or the exportation from Malaysia or any part 
thereof, either absolutely or conditionally, or from or to any specified 
country, territory or place outside Malaysia, or the removal from one place 
to another place in Malaysia of any goods or class of goods; and 
 
(b) 
prohibit the importation into, or exportation from, Malaysia or any part 
thereof, or removal from one place to another place in Malaysia of any goods 
or class of goods, except at specified ports or places. 
 
(2) If any question arises as to whether any particular goods are or are not 
included in a class of goods appearing in an order made under subsection (1), such 
question shall be decided by the Director General. 


Transportation by sea of goods of a class the export of which is prohibited 
 
32. (1)  No goods of a class the exportation of which is prohibited by an order made 
under section 31 shall be loaded, or water-borne to be loaded, for transportation by sea 
from any place to any other place in Malaysia unless security has been furnished in 
such amount, not exceeding three times the value of such goods, as the senior officer of 
customs of the place from where the goods are to be transported may determine and 
such officer is satisfied that any goods intended to be landed at such other place shall 
be so landed. 
 
(2) No goods of a class the exportation of which is prohibited by an order made 
under section 31 shall be forwarded by rail from one place to another place in Malaysia 
when the journey involves passage through territory outside Malaysia unless security 
has been furnished in such amount, not exceeding three times the value of such goods 
as the senior officer of customs at the station of despatch may determine and such 
officer is satisfied that such goods shall be produced to the senior officer of customs at 
the station of destination. 
 
 
Saving in respect of certain navigable rivers 
 
33. Where in respect of any goods the provisions of this Act and of any subsidiary 
legislation made thereunder have been complied with, then notwithstanding sections 
23 and 26, such goods may, subject to such conditions and the payment of such fee as 
the Director General may impose, be landed or loaded at any place on the banks of a 
navigable river upstream of a customs port or legal landing place. 
 
 
Power of Director General to require security 
 
34.  (1)  The Director General may require any person to give security or further 
security of such amount and in such manner as the Director General may determine for 
the payment of any customs duty which is or may become due and payable from the 
person. 
 
(2)  Where any security has been required to be given under subsection (1), no 
person shall move goods under customs control unless such security has been given. 
 
[Ins. S21 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Presumption as to export 
 
35. In relation to export, goods shall be deemed to be taken or caused to be taken out 
of Malaysia— 
 
(a) 
if they have been cleared by a proper officer of customs at the last customs 
station on their route out of Malaysia; 
 


(b) 
if they have been loaded on to a vessel or aircraft which is about to depart 
from a port or place in Malaysia; or 
 
(c) 
if they have been cleared by a proper officer of customs at an inland 
clearance depot or at an inland customs station on their route out of 
Malaysia through a customs port or airport. 
 
 
PART IVA 
 
TRANSIT AND TRANSHIPMENT 
 
 
Transits allowed 
 
35A. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, the following transits are allowed: 
 
(a) 
goods imported into the country— 
 
(i) 
on board a vessel, aircraft, vehicle or a railway carriage to be 
transported through Malaysia from the place of import in Malaysia 
whether the goods were unloaded or not from the vessel, aircraft, 
vehicle or railway carriage to a place of exit from where the goods are 
to be taken out from Malaysia; or 
 
(ii) on board a vessel, aircraft, vehicle or railway to be transported through 
Malaysia from the place of import in Malaysia to a place under customs 
control; 
 
(b) 
movement of goods from a place under customs control to a place of exit in 
Malaysia for the purpose of export; and 
 
(c) 
movement of goods under customs control from a place to another place in 
Malaysia. 
 
(2)  The payment of customs duties for the imported or exported goods which 
moved in transit under subsection (1) may be temporarily suspended subject to such 
conditions as determined by the Director General. 
 
 
Commencement and completion of transit procedure  
 
35B. (1) Subject to subsection (4), the transit procedure commences when the goods 
are cleared for transit and completes when such goods are cleared and released for 
another customs procedure approved by the proper officer of customs or for home 
consumption.  
 


(2)  Goods moved under the transit procedure shall reach the destination point 
as indicated in the declaration, and be exported within the period as determined by the 
Director General.  
 
(3) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2), the transit procedure, in relation to 
any goods, ends before its completion if it is interrupted by any of the following 
circumstances:  
 
(a) 
the release of the goods for the transit procedure is withdrawn;  
 
(b) 
the goods have been—  
 
(i) 
released for home consumption not according to the approval given by 
the proper officer of customs; 
 
(ii) released for export not according to the approval given by the proper 
officer of customs; or  
 
(iii) moved not under customs control;  
 
(c) 
the goods have been abandoned;  
 
(d) 
the goods have been seized under this Act or any other written law; or  
 
(e) 
the goods are destroyed, lost or unaccounted for.  
 
(4)  Without prejudice to any proceedings under this Act, where any dutiable 
goods moved under transit procedure ends before its completion as a result of the 
circumstances under subsection (3), the owner of the goods or his agent shall be liable 
to pay the duty leviable on such dutiable goods and any security furnished under this 
Act may be forfeited and paid into the Consolidated Fund.  
 
(5)  Any person who contravenes subsection (2) shall be guilty of an offence and 
shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both.  
 
 
Safeguard against any unauthorized interference with goods in transit  
 
35C.  (1)  The Director General may require the owner of the goods to take the 
necessary measures to safeguard against any unauthorized interference with goods in 
transit.  
 
(2)  Any person who fails to comply with the request made by the Director 
General under subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be 
liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding five years or to both.  
 
 
 
 


Determination of customs ports and airports for transit  
 
35D.  (1)  The Director General may determine—  
 
(a) 
the customs ports and airports where goods may be off-loaded from 
vessels or aircraft for transit; or  
 
(b) 
the customs ports and airports where goods may be loaded on board 
vessels or aircrafts for export from Malaysia under the transit 
procedure.  
 
(2)  No person shall load or off-load goods for transit except at the customs port 
or airport as determined under subsection (1).  
 
(3)  Any person who contravenes subsection (2) shall be guilty of an offence and 
shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both. 
 
 
Determination on routes for transits  
 
35E.  (1)  The Director General may determine the routes, by road or railway, over 
which goods may be transported under the transit procedures.  
 
(2)  No person shall transport goods for the purpose of transit operation over a 
road or railway route other than a route determined under subsection (1).  
 
(3)  Any person who contravenes subsection (2) shall be guilty of an offence and 
shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both.  
 
 
Persons entitled to submit declaration for transit  
 
35F.  The following persons are entitled to submit declarations and supporting 
documents to clear goods for the purpose of transit: 
  
(a) 
the owner of the goods;  
 
(b) 
the licensed carrier or any other person as approved by the Director General 
under subsection 35G(2); or  
 
(c) 
a customs agent.  
 
 
Movement of goods in transit  
 
35G.  (1)  Subject to subsection (2), no goods shall be moved in transit (including 
transhipment) by road except by a licensed carrier.  
 


(2)  The Director General may, in special circumstances and subject to such 
conditions as determined by him, approve any person other than a licensed carrier to 
move goods in transit and transhipment. 
 
(3)  Any person who contravenes subsection (1) or the conditions under 
subsection (2) shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not 
exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 
five years or to both.  
 
 
Licensed carrier  
 
35H.  (1)  The Director General may grant a licence to any person to act as a licensed 
carrier subject to such terms and conditions as he may deem fit and he may suspend or 
withdraw such licence.  
 
(2)  In granting a licence under subsection (1), the Director General may require 
such security to be furnished as he may consider adequate to cover the customs duty 
payable on the goods moved and for the faithful and incorrupt conduct of such licensed 
carrier and of the licensed carrier’s agents and employees acting for the licensed carrier 
both as regards to the customs and the licensed carrier’s employers.  
 
(3)  The licensed carrier who carries out the transit or transhipment operation 
shall ensure such operation is carried out and completed in accordance with this Act 
and the necessary measures required by the Director General under subsection 35C(1) 
or 35K(1).  
 
(4) If the licensed carrier who carries out the transit or transhipment operation is 
not the person who submits the declaration or other document for such operation, the 
licensed carrier and the person who submits the declaration shall be jointly and 
severally liable for the customs duty due and payable and the obligation referred to in 
subsection (3).  
 
(5)  If the licensed carrier who carries out the transit or transhipment operation 
is the person who has subcontracted the transport of the goods to another carrier, the 
licensed carrier and the other carrier shall be jointly and severally liable for the customs 
duty due and payable and the obligation referred to in subsection (3). 
 
(6) Any person who contravenes subsection (3) shall be guilty of an offence and 
shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both.  
 
 
Transhipment goods to be deposited in warehouse  
 
35I.  
(1) Goods arriving in Malaysia for transhipment and landed at a customs port or 
airport to await the arrival of the vessel or aircraft to which they are intended to be 
transhipped shall, if they are dutiable or prohibited on import or export, as the case may 
be, or belong to a class of such goods, be deposited in a customs or licensed warehouse, 


or a warehouse or other place approved by the Director General, until such goods are 
loaded on board the vessel or aircraft and transported out of Malaysia.  
 
(2)  The owner or agent of the goods for transhipment is liable to any storage 
charges, handling charges, warehouse rental and other charges at the rates applicable to 
such goods or, if such rates are not prescribed, at the prescribed rates applicable to such 
goods prior to transportation out of Malaysia.  
 
(3)  No goods for transhipment may be moved between two or more places 
under customs control at the customs port or airport where the goods were off-loaded 
without the prior permission of the proper officer of customs.  
 
(4)  The Director General may exempt any particular goods from the operation of 
this section.  
 
(5)  Any person who contravenes subsection (1) or (3) shall be guilty of an 
offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand 
ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both.  
 
 
Commencement and completion of transhipment procedures  
 
35J.  (1)  Subject to the provisions of this Part, the Director General may allow any 
goods imported to be moved under transhipment procedure subject to such conditions 
as determined by the Director General. 
 
(2)  The transhipment procedure commences when the goods are cleared for 
transhipment and completes when such goods are cleared for export.  
 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsection (2), the transhipment procedure, in relation to 
any goods, ends before its completion if it is interrupted by any of the following 
circumstances:  
 
(a) 
the release of the goods for the transhipment procedure is withdrawn; 
  
(b) 
the goods have been—  
 
(i) 
released for home consumption not according to the approval given by 
the proper officer of customs;  
 
(ii) released for export not according to the approval given by the proper 
officer of customs; or 
 
(iii) moved not under customs control;  
 
(c) 
the goods have been abandoned;  
 
(d) 
the goods have been seized under this Act or any other written law; or  
 


(e) 
the goods are destroyed, lost or unaccounted for.  
 
(4) 
Without prejudice to any proceedings under this Act, where any dutiable 
goods moved under transhipment ends before its completion as a result of the 
circumstances under subsection (3), the owner of the goods or his agent shall be liable 
to pay the duty leviable on such dutiable goods and any security furnished under this 
Act may be forfeited and paid into the Consolidated Fund.  
 
 
Safeguard against any unauthorized interference with goods under transhipment  
 
35K.  (1)  The Director General may require the owner of the goods to take the 
necessary measures to safeguard against any unauthorized interference with goods 
under transhipment. 
 
(2)  Any person who contravenes the request made by the Director General 
under subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a 
fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding five years or to both.  
 
 
Non-compliance with completion periods  
 
35L.  (1)  If—  
 
(a) 
transhipment procedure does not commence or is not completed in 
accordance with subsection 35J(2); or  
 
(b) 
transhipment goods loaded on board the vessel or aircraft to be transported 
out of Malaysia are not exported in accordance with subsection 35J(2),  
 
the licensee of the licensed warehouse, or warehouse or other place approved by 
the Director General, or the master of the vessel or the pilot of the aircraft on board 
of which the goods were to be loaded for export, as the case may be, shall—  
 
(A) immediately notify the proper officer of customs of the delay, and the 
reasons for the delay; and  
 
(B) thereafter notify the proper officer of customs regularly, of the situation with 
regard to the commencement and completion of the transhipment 
procedure.  
 
(2)  Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and 
shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both.  
 
 
 
 


Delivery of goods for transhipment for loading on board outgoing vessel or 
aircraft  
 
35M. (1) The master of a vessel or pilot of an aircraft or the agent of the vessel or 
aircraft under Part VII reporting the arrival of transhipment goods shall ensure that the 
goods are to be loaded on board the vessel or aircraft and be transported out of 
Malaysia at the customs port or airport to which the transhipment goods are intended 
to be transhipped under section 35I. 
 
 
(2)  Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and 
shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both.  
 
 
Responsibilities of licensee, owner or person handling goods for transhipment  
 
35N.  (1)  Where goods are deposited under section 35i, the licensee of the licensed 
warehouse, or warehouse or other place approved by the Director General, the owner 
or the person handling such goods for transhipment, shall keep such records of the 
receipt, handling, storage and delivery of the goods as may be determined by the 
Director General.  
 
(2)  The licensee, owner or person handling such goods for transhipment 
referred to in subsection (1) shall—  
 
(a) 
within two hours after the goods have been loaded on board such vessel or 
aircraft, submit to the proper officer of customs a certified statement in 
relation to the removal of the goods from the licensed warehouse, or 
warehouse or other place approved by the Director General; and  
 
(b) 
immediately notify the proper officer of customs if the goods are removed 
from the licensed warehouse, or warehouse or other place approved by the 
Director General, for the purposes other than the loading of the goods on 
board such vessel or aircraft.  
 
(3)  The certified statement submitted under paragraph (2)(a) shall—  
 
(a) 
state that such goods are for transhipment; and  
 
(b) 
contain all the information as may be required by the Director General.  
 
(4)  The certified statement submitted under paragraph (2)(a) shall be submitted 
electronically unless approved otherwise by the Director General. 
 
(5)  Any person who contravenes subsection (1), (2), (3) or (4) shall be guilty of 
an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred 
thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both. 
[Ins. S22 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 


PART V 
 
PORT CLEARANCES 
 
Arriving vessels, unless exempted, to be reported, and produce papers 
 
36. (1)  The master of every vessel arriving at any customs port and not being a 
vessel to which the exemption under section 39 applies shall either personally or 
through the agent of such vessel— 
 
(a) 
forthwith report to the proper officer of customs the arrival of such vessel; 
 
(b) 
give such information relating to the vessel, cargo, crew and voyage, as the 
proper officer of customs may require; and 
 
(c) 
on demand by such officer, produce the port clearance, or other document 
which it is usual to grant, granted at the last port of call and any other 
documents relating to the vessel, cargo, crew and voyage. 
 
(2) The proper officer of customs may retain the port clearance or other 
document granted at the last port of call. 
 
(3) Where there has been a failure to comply with subsection (1) the master or 
agent of the vessel concerned shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be 
liable to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding three years or to both. 
 
[Subst. S23 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
No vessel unless exempted, to sail without port clearance 
 
37. (1)  No vessel, whether laden or in ballast or empty, not being a vessel to which 
the exemption under section 39 applies, shall depart or attempt to depart from any 
customs port until a port clearance in the prescribed form has been granted by the 
proper officer of customs to the master or to the agent of the vessel. 
 
(2) If any such vessel, departs or attempts to depart from any customs port 
without such port clearance, the master of the vessel and also the owner and agent of 
the vessel, if a party or privy there to, shall be guilty of an offence, and the vessel, if still 
within the territorial waters, may be detained. 
 
(3) Any person guilty of an offence under this section shall on conviction be 
liable to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding three years or to both. 
 
[Subst. S24 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 


Port clearance before departure 
[Subst. S25 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
38. (1)  Before any vessel, other than a vessel to which the exemption under section 
39 applies, departs from any customs port, the master or the agent of such vessel shall 
give such information concerning the vessel, the cargo, the crew, the passengers and 
the voyage, as the proper officer of customs may require and shall deliver to such 
officer a list of all goods, in respect of which customs duty is payable on export, and a 
list of all goods of a class the export of which is prohibited, which are to be delivered at 
another port in Malaysia. 
 
[Del. S25 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
List of goods carried to be endorsed upon or attached to port clearance 
 
(2) If the proper officer of customs is satisfied that the information given under 
subsection (1) is accurate, he shall issue to the master or the agent of the vessel, a port 
clearance in the prescribed form, and shall endorse thereon or, at his discretion, attach 
thereto, a copy of the list of the goods delivered to the proper officer of customs in 
accordance with subsection (1). 
 
[Del. S25 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Port clearance to be carried aboard vessel to next port of call 
 
(3) Such port clearance shall be carried on board the vessel at all the times 
when such vessel is in the territorial waters. 
 
 
 
 
Vessels exempted from requiring port clearance 
 
39. (1)  Sections 36, 37 and 38 shall not apply to vessels of the following classes, 
namely— 
 
(a) 
any vessel of war, troop-ship, or other vessel belonging to, or for the time 
being operated by the Government of Malaysia or of any foreign State and 
used exclusively on governmental and non-commercial services; 
 
(b) 
vessels engaged solely in fishing and licensed for the purpose of fishing 
under any written law; 
 
(c) 
vessel whose movements are confined to navigable rivers upstream of a 
customs station situated at or near the mouth of such river; 
 
(d) 
privately owned pleasure vessels not plying for hire and not carrying cargo; 
 


(e) 
vessels of a class in respect of which an order under subsection (2) is in 
force. 
 
(2) The Minister may, by order, exempt either absolutely or conditionally, any 
class of vessels from the operation of sections 36, 37 and 38. 
 
 
Master of vessel not sailing within 48 hours of port clearance to report to proper 
officer of customs 
 
40. If a port clearance is issued in respect of any vessel in accordance with subsection 
38(2), and the vessel does not sail within forty-eight hours thereafter, the master or 
agent of such vessel shall report to the proper officer of customs his reason for not 
sailing, and if the proper officer of customs so directs shall obtain a fresh port 
clearance. 
 
 
When clearance may be refused 
 
41. (1) 
The proper officer of customs shall not grant a port clearance in respect of 
any vessel— 
 
(a) 
until the provisions of this Act and any regulation made thereunder 
regarding the vessel and cargo carried aboard such vessel have been 
complied with; or 
 
(b) 
until all charges and penalties due by such vessel or by the owner or master 
thereof and all duties payable in respect of any goods shipped therein have 
been paid or their payment secured by such deposit or written guarantee as 
the proper officer of customs may require. 
 
(2) If under the provisions of any written law a Port Officer or other proper 
authority has notified the proper officer of customs that any vessel is liable to be 
detained, the proper officer of customs shall not issue a port clearance in respect of 
such vessel without the written concurrence of such Port Officer or other proper 
authority. 
 
 
Application to aircraft 
 
42. The provisions of this Part shall apply, with such modifications and adaptations as 
may be necessary, in respect of aircraft arriving at, or departing from, any customs 
airport. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


PART VI 
 
GENERAL PROVISIONS AFFECTING VESSELS IN TERRITORIAL WATERS 
 
Master of vessel to obey signals from preventive vessels and instructions by an 
officer of customs 
 
43. The master of any vessel in territorial waters shall obey any signal made to him 
from a preventive vessel or any instructions given by an officer of customs in uniform 
from any other vessel or any place requiring him to stop or to heave to or to perform 
any other act. 
 
 
Hovering 
 
44. (1) If any vessel hovers within territorial waters and on examination is found to 
be conveying goods dutiable on import or goods of a class the importation of which is 
prohibited, the master and every member of the crew of such vessel shall be presumed, 
until the contrary is proved, to have imported uncustomed or prohibited goods, as the 
case may be. 
 
(2) If any vessel hovers within territorial waters and on examination is found 
not to be carrying any of the goods referred to in subsection (1), such vessel shall be 
presumed, until the contrary is proved, to be hovering for the purpose of receiving 
dutiable goods upon which export duty has not been paid or prohibited goods exported 
contrary to a prohibition and the master and every member of the crew of such vessel 
shall be guilty of an offence against this Act. 
 
(3) The master of any vessel found without lawful excuse in territorial waters 
without a clearance for a customs port in Malaysia, or carrying cargo or passengers or 
both without a proper manifest of such, or found to have passed the customs port 
named in the papers of such vessel without having made entry and declared at such 
port, shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not 
exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 
five years or to both. 
 
[Subst. S26 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Goods unaccounted for to be deemed uncustomed 
 
45. If goods, other than bona fide ship’s stores, are found by a proper officer of 
customs in any vessel in territorial waters and such goods are not correctly accounted 
for in the manifest or other documents which ought to be aboard such vessel, then such 
goods shall be deemed to be uncustomed goods and shall be liable to seizure. 
 
 
 
 
 


Missing goods deemed to have been illegally landed 
 
46. If in any vessel in territorial waters the quantity of any goods entered in the 
manifest or other documents which ought to be aboard such vessel, is found by a 
proper officer of customs to be short, and the deficiency is not accounted for to the 
satisfaction of such officer, then such goods shall be deemed to have been illegally 
landed in Malaysia. 
 
 
Proper officer of customs may board vessel in a customs port 
 
47. When in exercise of the powers conferred by this Act, a proper officer of customs 
boards any vessel, the master of such vessel shall provide such officer with suitable 
shelter and accommodation on the vessel while such vessel remains in territorial 
waters. 
 
 
Power to seal up and secure hatchways goods, etc., and use of ship’s stores 
 
48. (1)  When in exercise of the powers conferred by this Act, a proper officer of 
customs boards any vessel, he shall have the power to fasten down hatchways or 
entrances to holds, to mark any goods before landing, and to lock-up, seal, mark or 
otherwise secure any goods, including ship’s stores, on board such vessel; and no 
hatchway or entrance, after having been fastened down by such officer, shall be opened 
and no lock, seal or mark shall be opened, broken or altered without the consent of the 
proper officer of customs while the vessel is within the limits of the customs port or 
before any goods are delivered to be landed. 
 
(2) The Director General may, in his absolute discretion, permit or refuse to 
permit the taking of anything without payment of customs duty into a ship as ship’s 
stores and in granting permission for the embarkation of anything under this 
subsection impose such conditions as he may deem fit. 
 
(3) The Director General may, in his absolute discretion, permit or refuse to 
permit the use, within the territorial waters, of any ship’s stores on which customs duty 
has not been paid. 
 
(4) Any person who contravenes subsection 48(1) shall be guilty of an offence 
and shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years 
or to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to both. 
 
[Ins. S27 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Prohibition of carriage of dutiable goods in local craft 
 
49. (1)  No goods of a class dutiable on import or export or prohibited goods shall be 
carried in any local craft except with the permission of the Director General and subject 
to such conditions as the Director General may impose. 


(2) Such permission may be granted either generally, by notification in the 
Gazette, in respect of all local craft or any class or classes of local craft, or specially, in 
writing under the hand of the Director General or an officer authorized by him in that 
behalf, in respect of a particular local craft. 
 
(3) No vessel shall go alongside a legal landing place or alongside an ocean 
going vessel except with the permission of the proper officer of customs. 
 
(4)  Any person who contravenes subsection 49(1) or (3) shall be guilty of an 
offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five 
years or to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to both. 
 
[Ins. S28 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Bulk not to be broken, etc. 
 
50. After the arrival of any vessel within territorial waters— 
 
(a) 
bulk shall not be broken; 
 
(b) 
no alteration shall be made in the stowage of the cargo so as to facilitate 
the unloading of any part of the cargo, before the permission to land 
goods required by paragraph 23(1)(b) has been received by the master of 
such vessel; and 
 
(c) 
no package shall at any time be opened on board such vessel; 
 
without proper cause shown to a senior officer of customs. 
 
 
Application to aircraft 
 
51. The provisions of this part shall apply, with such modifications and adaptations as 
may be necessary, in respect of aircraft arriving at, or departure from, any customs 
airport. 
 
 
PART VII 
 
MANIFESTS 
 
Master or agent of arriving vessel to present complete manifest  
 
52. (1) The master or agent of every vessel, other than a local craft, arriving in any 
customs port shall, not less than twenty-four hours before its arrival, or such period as 
the Director General may determine, whichever is lesser, present to the proper officer of 
customs at the customs office a true and complete manifest of the whole cargo of the 
vessel in the national language or English language, in the prescribed form, and certified 
by such master or agent. 
 


(2)  The manifest under subsection (1) shall contain— 
  
(a) 
a complete list of the whole cargo which remains on board, intended to 
be landed and to be transhipped at the customs port; and 
  
(b) 
a complete list of stores on board such vessel.  
 
(3)  The manifest shall list all particulars as to marks, numbers, contents of each 
package of the cargo, destination, together with the names of shippers and consignees of 
the cargo.  
 
(4)  Any person who contravenes subsection (1), (2) or (3) shall be guilty of an 
offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five 
years or to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to both.  
 
(5)  For the purpose of this section, “agent of every vessel” includes a freight 
forwarder. 
 
[Subst. S29 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Provision for cases where all particulars are not known 
 
53. (Deleted by S30 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020). 
 
  
Person in charge of local craft to make declaration on arrival  
 
54. (1) 
The master or agent of every local craft, whether carrying cargo or not, 
arriving in any customs port shall make, in the prescribed form, a declaration of a 
complete list of the whole cargo on board the vessel to the proper officer of customs.  
 
 
(2) 
No cargo shall be landed or delivered to the importer or consignee, or his 
agent, except with the permission of the proper officer of customs. 
 
[Subst. S31 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Correction to be made on completion of discharge 
 
55. (1) 
 On completion of the discharge of cargo or within one month of such 
discharge or within such further period as the proper officer of customs may allow, the 
master or agent of the vessel shall present to the proper officer of customs a certified 
statement of the outturn of such cargo and shall enumerate therein any alteration in 
the manifest due to short shipment, short landing, over landing or any other cause. 
 
[Amd. S31 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 


 
(1A)  The proper officer of customs may refuse to accept any alteration made in 
the manifest after being notified that investigation into any offence under any written 
law has commenced in connection with the goods to which the manifest relates. 
 
[Ins. S31 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Liability of master or agent in respect of goods not satisfactorily accounted for 
 
(2) If any goods entered in the manifest of any vessel are not accounted for to the 
satisfaction of the proper officer of customs within one month of the presentation of 
such statement or within such further period as such officer may allow, the master or the 
agent of the vessel shall be liable to pay to such officer on demand a sum not exceeding 
five thousand ringgit, and in addition, in the case of dutiable goods, the agent shall be 
liable to pay to such officer on demand the amount of customs duty leviable thereon or, 
when the correct duty cannot be assessed, an amount not exceeding ten thousand 
ringgit. 
 
[Subst. S32 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(3) If the person liable to the penalties laid down in subsection (2) refuses or fails 
to pay the penalties demanded of him any senior officer of customs may sue for and 
recover such penalties in a court of a Magistrate of the First Class. 
 
(4) For the purpose of this section, “agent of the vessel” includes a freight 
forwarder. 
 
[Ins. S32 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
 
Pilot or agent of arriving aircraft to present complete manifest  
 
56. (1) The pilot or agent of every aircraft arriving at a customs airport shall, not less 
than two hours before itsarrival or such period as the Director General may determine, 
whichever is lesser, present to the proper officer of customs at the customs office a true 
and complete manifest of the whole cargo of the aircraft in the national language or 
English language, in the prescribed form, and certified by such pilot or agent.  
 
(2)  The manifest under subsection (1) shall contain—  
 
(a) 
a complete list of the whole cargo which remains on board, intended to 
be landed and to be transhipped at the customs airport;  
 
(b) 
a complete list of stores on board such aircraft.  
 
(3)  The manifest shall list all particulars as to marks, numbers, contents of each 
package of the cargo, destination, together with the names of shippers and consignees of 
the cargo.  
 


(4)  Any person who contravenes subsection (1), (2) or (3) shall be guilty of an 
offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five 
years or to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to both.  
 
(5)  For the purpose of this section, “agent of every aircraft” includes a freight 
forwarder. 
[Ins. S33 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Outward manifest of vessel to be presented 
 
57. The owner or agent of any vessel, other than a local craft, leaving any customs 
port shall, not less than twenty-four hours before the departure of such vessel or such 
period as the Director General may determine, whichever is lesser, present to the 
proper officer of customs  a true outward manifest of the vessel in the National 
Language or in English, in the prescribed form and certified by such owner or agent, 
containing all particulars as to marks, numbers and contents of each package shipped 
at the customs port and the names of the shippers. 
 
[Subst. S34 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Person in charge of local craft to make declaration before departure 
 
58. (1) 
The master of any local craft, whether carrying cargo or not, leaving any 
customs port shall, before the departure of such local craft, make a declaration in the 
prescribed form of all cargo shipped on board his local craft and the port or ports of 
destination of such cargo to the proper officer of customs, and if no cargo is being 
carried he shall make a declaration accordingly: 
 
[Subst. S35 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Provided that in the case of a local craft which in the circumstances mentioned in, and 
under the provisions of, section 61 is deemed to leave such customs port, no 
declaration shall be required if the proper officer of customs is satisfied that a 
declaration has already been made at a customs port further upstream. 
 
 
(2) No cargo shall be loaded into the local craft except with the permission of the 
proper officer of customs. 
 
[Ins. S35 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Pilot of departing aircraft to present outward manifest 
 
59. The pilot or agent of any aircraft leaving any customs airport shall, not less than 
two hours before the departure of such aircraft or such period as the Director General 
may determine, whichever is lesser, present to the proper officer of customs a true 
outward manifest of the aircraft in the National Language or in English, in the 
prescribed form and certified by such pilot or agent, containing all particulars as to 


marks, numbers and contents of each package loaded at such customs airport and the 
names of the consignors and consignees of the same. 
[Ins. S36 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Station master to produce railway invoices and waybills 
 
60. (1) 
The station-master at the place of import or export of goods by rail and at 
the customs station to which goods are consigned, shall produce  to the proper officer 
of customs the railway invoice or waybill or any other document approved by the 
Director General, as the case may be, in respect of such goods. 
 
[Subst., Ins. S37 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(2)  No cargo shall be loaded into or unloaded off the train except with the 
permission of the proper officer of customs. 
 
[Ins. S37 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Local craft arriving at or leaving certain navigable rivers 
 
61. Every local craft proceeding up or down a navigable river, at or near the mouth of 
which there is a customs port, shall stop at such port and shall, for the purposes of this 
Part, be deemed to arrive at or leave, as the case may be, such customs port. 
 
 
Saving in respect of exempted vessels and certain aircraft 
 
62. The provisions of this Part shall not apply to any vessel exempted under section 
39. 
 
 
PART VIII 
 
WAREHOUSING 
 
Minister may establish customs warehouses 
 
63. (1) The Minister may establish and maintain customs warehouses, wherein 
dutiable goods may be deposited and kept without payment of customs duty, at any 
customs port, customs airport, place of import or export or at any inland customs 
station and may prescribe the amount to be paid as warehouse rent on goods deposited 
in such warehouses and remit any amount payable as rent. 
 
 
Minister may establish collection stations 
 
(2) The Minister may establish customs warehouses in Singapore in this Act 
referred to as collection stations if provisions for such establishment exist by virtue of 


any written law in force in Singapore or by virtue of any agreement between the 
Governments of Malaysia and of Singapore. 
 
 
Goods imported or exported from a collection station 
 
64. Where collection stations have been established as provided by subsection 63(2), 
then subject to other provisions of this Act and to such conditions and restrictions as 
the Director General either generally by order or in any particular case may impose— 
 
(a) 
the provisions of this Act relating to the payment of customs duty shall not 
apply to goods imported from a collection station on which duty has been 
paid before import; and 
 
(b) the provisions of this Act requiring payment of duty on goods to be exported 
at the time of export shall not apply to dutiable goods which are forwarded 
to a collection station. 
 
 
Licensed warehouse 
 
65. (1)  The Director General may, on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, 
grant a licence to any person, hereinafter in this section referred to as the licensee, and 
when granted withdraw any licence, for warehousing goods liable to customs duties in 
a place or places specified in such licence. 
[Amd. S38 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(1A)  The Director General may allow goods, other than goods liable to customs 
duty, to be kept in the licensed warehouse subject to such conditions he deems fit. 
 
[Ins. S38 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) Any such licence shall be for such period and subject to such conditions as 
the Director General in each case may specify in the licence. 
 
(3) A senior officer of customs, or any officer of customs deputed by him for the 
purpose, shall at all times have access to any licensed warehouse. 
 
(4) If it appears at any time that in any licensed warehouse or any part thereof 
there is a deficiency in the quantity of dutiable goods which ought to be found therein, 
the licensee of such warehouse shall, in the absence of proof to the contrary, be 
presumed to have illegally removed such goods and shall, without prejudice to any 
proceedings under this Act, be liable to pay to the proper officer of customs the 
customs duty leviable on the goods found deficient: 
 
Provided that if it is shown to the satisfaction of the Director General that such 
deficiency has been caused by unavoidable leakage, breakage or other accident, the 
Director General may remit the whole or any part of the customs duty leviable on the 
goods found deficient. 


(5)  Goods deposited in a licensed warehouse shall be cleared within two years 
from the date of deposit or such further period as the Director General may approve. 
 
[Ins. S38 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Manufacture and other operations in relation to goods in licensed warehouse 
 
65A.  (1)  The Director General may, on payment of such fees as may be fixed by him 
in each case, grant a licence to any person and when granted withdraw, susend or 
cancel any such licence, to carry on any manufacturing process and other operation in 
respect of the goods liable to customs duties and any other goods. 
 
[Subst. S39 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
(1A)  A licence under subsection (1) shall be deemed to include a licence for 
warehousing goods as provided under section 65. 
[Ins. S39 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) Any such licence shall be for such period and subject to such conditions as 
the Director General may specify in the licence. 
 
(3) (a)  No goods which have undergone any manufacturing process in the 
licensed manufacturing warehouse may be released for home 
consumption or export without the prior approval of the Director 
General. 
 
(b) 
Subject to subsection (4), if such goods are released from the licensed 
manufacturing warehouse for home consumption the customs duty 
thereon shall be calculated on the basis as if such good shad been 
imported: 
[Subst. S39 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Provided that the Minister may in any particular case exempt any person from the 
payment of the whole or part of such duty which may be payable by such person on any 
such goods and in granting such exemption the Minister may impose such conditions as 
he may deem fit. 
 
(4) (Deleted by S39 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Remission on waste or refuse from goods undergoing process  
 
65AA. (1) Where in the course of carrying out any activities approved under subsection 
65a(1) there is waste or refuse, the customs duty may be remitted on the quantity of 
goods liable to the customs duty in so much of the waste or refuse as has arisen from 
the activities carried out in relation to the goods which have undergone any process.  
 


(2)  If the customs duty is remitted under subsection (1), the Director General 
shall direct the waste or refuse to be destroyed subject to such conditions as the 
Director General deems fit.  
 
(3)  If no remission is granted under subsection (1), the Director General shall 
require customs duty to be paid on such waste or refuse as if it had been imported in 
that form.  
 
 
Deficiency in quantity of dutiable goods at licensed manufacturing warehouse  
 
65AB. (1)  If it appears at any time that in any licensed manufacturing warehouse there 
is a deficiency in the quantity of dutiable goods which ought to be found therein, the 
licensee of such licensed manufacturing warehouse shall—  
 
(a) 
in the absence of proof to the contrary, be presumed to have illegally 
removed such goods; and  
 
(b) 
without prejudice to any proceedings under this Act, be liable to pay to the 
proper officer of customs the customs duty leviable on the goods found 
deficient. 
 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1), if it is shown to the satisfaction of the 
Director General that such deficiency has been caused by any unavoidable leakage, 
breakage or other accident, the Director General may remit the whole or any part of the 
customs duty leviable on the goods found deficient.  
 
 
Licensee to provide customs office and facilities  
 
65AC. The licensee of a licensed warehouse shall provide appropriate customs office 
and facilities within or at the perimeter of the licensed warehouse at the expense of the 
licensee. 
 
[Subst. S40 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Liquidator of company to give notice of winding-up, and set aside duty 
 
65B. (1) Where an effective resolution is passed or an order is made for the winding-up 
of a company which is licensed under this Part, the liquidator of the company shall give 
notice thereof to the Director General within fourteen days thereafter, and shall before 
disposing of any of the assets of the company set aside such sum out of the assetsas 
appears to the Director General to be sufficient to provide for any customs duty that is or 
will thereafter become payable in respect of the company, and shall thereafter pay such 
customs duty. 
 
[Subst. S41 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 


(2) A liquidator of any such company who fails to give notice to the Director 
General within the time specified in subsection (1) or (2B) or fails to provide for 
payment of the customs duty as required by that subsection shall be personally liable 
for any customs duty that is or become payable as aforesaid. 
 
[Ins. S41 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(2A)  Any liquidator who fails to comply with subsection (1) shall be guilty of an 
offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand ringgit 
or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or to both. 
 
[Subst. S41 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(2B) A liquidator shall furnish all relevant documents, books and records which 
are in his possession to the proper officer of customs for the purpose of calculating all 
duties payable under this Act. 
 
[Ins. S41 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(3) Where two or more persons are appointed liquidators or are required by 
law to carry out the winding-up of any such company, subject to a right of contribution 
between themselves as in cases of contract, the obligations and liabilities attaching to a 
liquidator under this section shall attach to all such persons jointly and severally. 
 
 
Appointment of receiver to be notified to the Director General 
 
65C.  (1)  Where a receiver of the property of a licensee under this Part is appointed, 
he shall give notice thereof to the Director General within fourteen days thereafter, and 
shall before disposing of any of the assets of the licensee set aside such sum out of the 
assets as appears to the Director General to be sufficient to provide for any customs 
duty that will thereafter become payable in respect of the goods that have been sold by 
the licensee before the appointment of the receiver, and shall thereafter pay such 
customs duty. 
[Subst. S42 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) A person appointed as receiver who fails to give notice to the Director 
General within the time specified in subsection (1) or fails to provide for payment of 
the customs duty as required by that subsection shall be personally liable for any 
customs duty that is or becomes payable as aforesaid. 
 
(2A)  Any receiver who fails to comply with subsection (1) or (2B) shall be guilty 
of an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand 
ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or to both. 
 
[Subst. S42 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 


(2B) A receiver shall furnish all relevant documents, books and records which are 
in his possession to the proper officer of customs for the purpose of calculating all 
duties payable under the Act. 
 
[Ins. S42 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(3) Where two or more persons are appointed receivers, subject to a right of 
contribution between themselves as in cases of contract, the obligations and liabilities 
attaching to a receiver under this section shall attach to all such persons jointly and 
severally. 
 
 
Licensing of duty free shop 
 
65D.  (1)  The Director General may on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, 
grant a licence to operate a duty free shop to any person, hereinafter in this section 
referred to as “the licensee”, and when granted, may withdraw, suspend or cancel such 
licence. 
 
[Subst.. S43 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) Any such licence shall be for such period and subject to such conditions as 
the Director General in each case may specify in the licence. 
 
(3) The licensee shall, for the proper conduct of his business, furnish such 
security as may be required by the Director General. 
 
(4) If it appears at any time that any goods have been sold or removed from 
such duty free shop otherwise than in accordance with all the conditions of a licence 
granted under this section, the licensee of such duty free shop shall, in the absence of 
proof to the contrary, be presumed to have illegally removed such goods and shall, 
without prejudice to any proceedings under this Act, be liable to pay to the proper 
officer of customs the customs duty leviable on the goods sold or removed. 
 
 
Licensing of inland clearance depot 
 
65E. (1) 
The Director General may on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, 
grant a licence to operate an inland clearance depot to any person, hereinafter in this 
section referred to as “the licensee”, and when granted, may withdraw, suspend or 
cancel such licence. 
[Subst.. S44 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) Any such licence shall be for such period and subject to such conditions as 
the Director General in each case may specify in the licence. 
 
(3) The licensee shall, for the proper conduct of his business, furnish such 
security as may be required by the Director General. 
 


(4) If it appears at any time that in any inland clearance depot there is a 
deficiency in the quantity of dutiable goods which ought to be found therein, the 
licensee of such inland clearance depot shall, in the absence of proof to the contrary, be 
presumed to have illegally removed such goods and shall, without prejudice to any 
proceedings under this Act, be liable to pay to the proper officer of customs the 
customs duty leviable on the goods found deficient: 
 
Provided that if it is shown to the satisfaction of the Director General that such 
deficiency has been caused by any leakage, breakage or other unavoidable accident, the 
Director General may remit the whole or any part of the customs duty leviable on the 
goods found deficient. 
 
 
Deposit of goods in a warehouse or other place approved by the Director General 
 
65F. (1) The Director General may approve any warehouse, not being a customs or 
licensed warehouse, or other place to be deposited with dutiable goods, and when 
granted may withdraw, suspend or cancel such approval. 
 
(2)  Any such approval shall be for such period and subject to such conditions as 
the Director General in each case may specify in the approval. 
 
[Ins. S45 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Depositing goods into warehouse 
 
66.  (1)  On arrival or landing, any goods imported, other than prohibited goods, shall 
be deposited in a customs or licensed warehouse or in a warehouse or other place 
approved by the Director General unless— 
 
(a) 
the customs duty payable, if any, has been paid in accordance with section 
78A; 
 
(b) 
the goods have been approved for movement in transit and the payment for 
customs duty has been suspended under section 35A;  
 
(c) 
he goods have been approved for transhipment and the goods are for 
immediate off-loading to another vessel;  
 
(d) 
the goods are imported by post;  
 
(e) 
the goods are imported by road or by sea where there is no customs or 
licensed warehouse, or warehouse or other place approved by the Director 
General at the place of import; or  
 
(f) 
the goods are personal effects carried or brought by passengers in any 
baggage.  
 


(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), prohibited goods which are subject to 
certain conditions may be deposited in a customs or licensed warehouse or in a 
warehouse or other place approved by the Director General if the goods are 
accompanied by any licence, permit or approval required under any written law and the 
licence, permit or approval is produced to the proper officer of customs.  
 
(3)  If the Director General deems it necessary for the purposes of public interest 
that any goods imported are to be warehoused, the Director General may require the 
goods to be deposited in a customs or licensed warehouse or in a warehouse or other 
place approved by the Director General.  
 
(4)  The goods deposited under subsection (3) shall—  
 
(a) 
be deposited at the expense of the owner of such goods;  
 
(b) 
be deemed to be under customs control; and  
 
(c) 
not be removed except with the permission of the proper officer of customs.  
 
(5)  Subsection (1) shall not be applicable to goods entering a principal customs 
area by road, sea or air from a free zone. 
 
(6)  Notwithstanding subsection (5), the goods referred to in that subsection 
shall not be released from customs control unless— 
  
(a) 
the customs duty payable, if any, has been paid in accordance with section 
78A; or  
 
(b) 
the goods have been approved for movement in transit and the payment for 
customs duty has been suspended under section 35A. 
 
[Subst. S46 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Warehouse deposit receipts 
 
67. (1)  A warehouse deposit receipt shall be issued by the proper officer of customs 
for all dutiable goods deposited in a customs warehouse: 
 
Provided that in the case of dutiable goods imported by road no such receipt shall be 
issued except at the request of the importer or his agent. 
 
(2) Where the warehouse deposit receipt is lost, a copy of such receipt duly 
certified by the proper officer of customs shall be supplied to the owner of the dutiable 
goods or his agent on delivery of an indemnity bond approved by a senior officer of 
customs and delivered to him at the customs office, securing the Government against 
any claim for loss owing to wrong delivery of the goods deposited. 
 
(3) The holder or endorsee in due course of a warehouse deposit receipt or a 
certified copy thereof granted under subsection (2) shall be deemed, for the purposes 


of this Act, to be the owner of the goods deposited, and delivery to the holder or 
endorsee or the agent of the holder or endorsee of such warehouse deposit receipt or 
certified copy thereof shall be a good and lawful delivery. 
 
 
Power to open and examine packages 
 
68. A senior officer of customs may, at any time, direct that any goods or package 
lodged in any customs or licensed warehouse or in a warehouse or other place 
approved by the Director General shall be opened, weighed or otherwise examined, and 
after such goods or package has been so opened or examined, may cause the same to be 
sealed or marked in such manner as he sees fit. 
 
[Inst. S47 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Detention of goods where doubt exists 
 
69. (1)  The proper officer of customs may detain in a customs warehouse or any 
other place deemed to be under customs control any goods if he is in doubt whether 
such goods are dutiable or not, or any other reason. 
 
(2) In every such case the proper officer of customs shall forthwith make a 
report to a senior officer of customs, who shall, without undue delay, decide whether 
such goods are dutiable or not. 
 
(3) If any such goods are found not to be dutiable, no warehouse rent, handling 
or other charges shall be payable in respect thereof. 
 
 
Protection of Government from liability 
 
70. The Government shall not be liable to make good any loss sustained in respect of 
any goods by fire, theft, damage or other cause while such goods are in any customs 
warehouse or in the lawful custody or control of any officer of customs, unless such loss 
is caused by the wilful neglect, or default of an officer of customs or of a person 
employed by the Government in connection with the customs. 
 
 
Protection of officers of customs from liability 
 
71. No officer of customs or other person employed by the Government in connection 
with the customs shall be liable to make good any loss sustained in respect of any 
goods by fire, theft, damage or other cause while such goods are in any customs 
warehouse or in the lawful custody or control of such officer or any other officer of 
customs or person employed in connection with customs unless such loss is caused by 
his wilful neglect, or default. 
 
 
 
 


Payment of warehouse rent 
 
72. The owner or his agent shall pay to the proper officer of customs the warehouse 
rent at the prescribed rates which may be due in respect of any goods deposited in a 
customs warehouse or a warehouse approved by the Director General. Such rent shall 
be payable at the end of each month whether or not a demand in respect thereof is 
made and if not so paid may be recovered as a civil debt due to the Government. 
 
 
Dangerous goods 
 
73. No goods of an inflammable nature or of such a nature as to be likely to cause 
detriment to other goods shall be deposited in any customs warehouse without the 
sanction of a senior officer of customs, and if any such goods are landed they may be 
deposited, at the expense and risk of the importer thereof, in any place that a senior 
officer of customs may deem fit, and whilst so deposited such goods shall be deemed to 
be in a customs warehouse, and unless within a period of fourteen days they have been 
duly cleared or warehoused in any warehouse approved for that purpose shall, at the 
expiration of that period, be liable to be dealt with in the same manner as goods of a 
similar nature actually deposited in a customs warehouse. Such goods shall be 
chargeable with such expenses for securing, watching and guarding the same until sold, 
cleared or warehoused as aforesaid, as the senior officer of customs may deem fit. 
 
 
Government lien over goods deposited in a customs warehouse 
 
74. (1)  Goods of a perishable nature deposited in a customs warehouse shall be 
cleared forthwith, and if not so cleared a senior officer of customs may sell such goods. 
 
(2) Goods of an inflammable nature deposited in a customs warehouse shall be 
cleared within fourteen days of the date of deposit. 
 
(3) Goods not of a perishable or inflammable nature deposited in a customs 
warehouse shall be cleared within one month of the date of deposit: 
 
Provided that a senior officer of customs may permit any goods to remain 
deposited for such further periods of not less than one month at a time and not 
exceeding six months in the aggregate as he may in his discretion think fit. 
 
(4) If any goods are not cleared within the time specified in subsection (2) or (3) 
or if any warehouse rent in respect of any goods is not duly paid in the manner 
provided by section 72, a senior officer of customs may, after giving not less than 
fourteen days notice in writing to the owner (if the name and address of such owner is 
known to him), or after due notice in the Gazette (if the name and address of such 
owner is not known to him), sell such goods. 
 
(5) The proceeds of the sale of any such goods shall be applied to the payment 
of any customs duties, warehouse rent and other charges and railway freight which 
may be due in respect of such goods or of any other goods deposited by the owner of 


such goods, and the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the owner of such goods and if the 
owner cannot be found within one month of the sale, such surplus shall be paid to the 
Consolidated Fund. 
 
(6) If at the sale of any goods no sufficient bid is forthcoming to defray the 
customs duties, warehouse rent and other charges which are due in respect of such 
goods, the goods shall be forfeited to Government and shall be disposed of in such 
manner as the Director General may direct. 
 
(7) Every auction sale shall be conducted— 
 
(a) 
by or in the presence of senior officer of customs; or 
 
(b) 
electronically in the manner to be determined by the Director General. 
 
[Subst. S48 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Removal of dutiable goods from a warehouse 
 
75. No dutiable goods shall be removed from customs control except— 
 
(a) 
after payment of the customs duty payable thereon; or 
 
(b) 
if such goods are in a customs or licensed warehouse, a warehouse or other 
place approved by the Director General, or a petroleum supply base under 
such conditions as the Director General may impose, for transit to another 
customs or licensed warehouse, warehouse or other place approved by the 
Director General, or a petroleum supply base; or 
 
[Subst. S49 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(c) 
under such conditions as the Director General may impose, for a re-export 
from Malaysia, 
 
and in no case shall any goods be removed from a customs warehouse, or 
warehouse or other place approved by the Director General until all warehouse rent 
and other charges due in respect thereof have been paid: 
 
[Ins. S49 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
Provided that petroleum or any other dutiable goods as approved by the Director 
General may be removed from the customs or licensed warehouse or the warehouse or 
other place approved by the Director General before payment of the customs duty if 
security has been lodged to the satisfaction of the Director General by which payment 
of duty is guaranteed within such time as the Director General may allow. 
 
[Subst. S49 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 


Landing of goods for transhipment 
 
76. (Deleted by S50 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020) 
 
 
Weighing and handling fees 
 
77. (1)  All necessary operations relating to the loading, shipping, unloading, 
unshipping, landing, carrying, weighing, opening, unpacking, repacking, bulking, 
sorting and marking of goods, including passenger’s baggage, whether warehoused or 
not, shall be performed by or at the expense of the owner, importer, exporter, 
consignor, consignee or agent as the case may be: 
 
Provided that the proper officer of customs may, at his discretion, direct that any such 
operations shall be performed by officers of customs or other persons under his 
control, and in any such case such operation shall be performed at the expense of the 
owner, importer, exporter, consignor, consignee or agent, as the case may be. 
 
(2) The Minister may prescribe the charges to be paid for operations performed 
under this section by officers of customs or other persons under the control of the 
proper officer of customs and may remit any charges due. 
 
 
PART VIIIA 
 
PETROLEUM SUPPLY BASE 
 
Interpretation  
 
77A.  For the purpose of this Part, unless the context otherwise requires—  
 
“licensee” means any person licensed under section 77B;  
 
“petroleum supply base” means an area licensed under section 77B.  
 
 
Licensing of petroleum supply base  
 
77B. (1)  The Director General may, on payment of such fees as prescribed, issue a 
licence to any person to manage and administer a petroleum supply base and to carry 
out activities in the petroleum supply base as approved by the Director General. 
 
(2)  The licence issued under subsection (1)—  
 
(a) 
shall be for such period and subject to such conditions as the Director 
General may specify in the licence; and  
 
(b) 
may be withdrawn, suspended or cancelled by the Director General.  
 


(3)  The licensee shall, for the proper conduct of his business, furnish such 
security as may be required by the Director General.  
 
(4)  The licensee shall provide appropriate customs office and facilities within or 
at the perimeter of the petroleum supply base at the expense of the licensee.  
 
 
Release of goods from petroleum supply base  
 
77C. (1)  No goods which have undergone any process in the petroleum supply base 
may be released for home consumption or export without the prior approval of the 
Director General.  
 
(2)  Subject to section 77E, if the goods referred to in subsection (1) are released 
from the petroleum supply base for home consumption, the customs duty on such goods 
shall be calculated on the basis as if such goods had been imported.  
 
 
Exemption from a payment of customs duty  
 
77D. Notwithstanding subsection 77C(2), the Minister may in any particular case 
exempt any person from the payment of the whole or part of such the customs duty 
which may be payable by such person on such goods subject to such conditions as the 
Minister deems fit. 
 
 
Remission of customs duty  
 
77E. (1)  
Where in the course of carrying out any activities approved under subsection 
77B(1) there is waste or refuse, the customs duty may be remitted on the quantity of 
goods liable to the customs duty in so much of the waste or refuse as has arisen from 
the activities carried out in relation to the goods which have undergone any process.  
 
(2)  If the customs duty is remitted under subsection (1), the Director General 
shall direct the waste or refuse to be destroyed subject to such conditions as the 
Director General deems fit.  
 
(3)  If no remission is granted under subsection (1), the Director General shall 
require customs duty to be paid on such waste or refuse as if it had been imported in 
that form.  
 
 
Deficiency in quantity of dutiable goods at petroleum supply base  
 
77F. (1)  
If it appears at any time that in any petroleum supply base there is a 
deficiency in the quantity of dutiable goods which ought to be found therein, the owner 
of the goods or the occupier of the premises shall—  
 


(a) 
in the absence of proof to the contrary, be presumed to have illegally 
removed such goods; and  
 
(b) 
without prejudice to any proceedings under this Act, be liable to pay to the 
proper officer of customs the customs duty leviable on the goods found 
deficient.  
 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1), if it is shown to the satisfaction of the 
Director General that such deficiency has been caused by unavoidable leakage, breakage 
or other accident, the Director General may remit the whole or any part of the customs 
duty leviable on the goods found deficient. 
 
[Ins. S51 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
 
PART IX 
 
DECLARATION OF GOODS 
 
A—Dutiable goods 
 
Declaration of dutiable goods imported 
 
78. (1)  Every importer of dutiable goods shall make a declaration on such goods 
imported, personally or by his agent, in such form as may be prescribed to the proper 
officer of customs—  
 
(a) 
in the case of goods deposited in the customs or licensed warehouse, or 
warehouse or other place approved by the Director General referred to 
under subsection 66(1) or (3), within a period of one month from the date of 
the arrival or landing of such goods before the removal of such goods or any 
part of the goods from customs control;  
 
(b) 
in the case of goods not deposited in the customs or licensed warehouse, or 
warehouse or other place approved by the Director General referred to 
under subsection 66(1) or (3), upon arrival or landing of such goods at a 
place of import; or  
 
(c) 
in the case of goods entering the principal customs area from a free zone, 
upon arrival of such goods at the principal customs area. 
 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1), the proper officer of customs may, by 
notice in writing, require such declaration to be submitted within three days from the 
date of such notice. 
 
(3)  In the case of goods imported by post, the declaration shall be made by the 
addressee or by his agent on demand by the proper officer of customs. 
 
[Subst. S53 Act 1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 


Payment of duties of imported goods 
 
78A. The customs duties and other charges leviable on goods imported shall be paid by 
the importer of the goods— 
 
(a) 
in the case of goods referred to in paragraph 78(1)(a), within fourteen days 
from the date of declaration being approved by the proper officer of 
customs except for goods in transit; 
 
(b) 
in the case of goods referred to in paragraph 78(1)(b), forthwith upon the 
arrival of such goods; 
 
(c) 
in the case of goods referred to in paragraph 78(1)(c), forthwith upon the 
arrival of such goods; and 
 
(d) 
in the case of goods referred to in subsection 78(3), within fourteen days 
from the date of the declaration being approved by the proper officer of 
customs.  
 
 
Declaration of dutiable goods before arrival 
 
78B.  (1)  Notwithstanding section 78, any importer of dutiable goods may make a 
declaration, personally or by his agent, to the proper officer of customs before arrival of 
the goods to be imported subject to such conditions as determined by the Director 
General. 
 
(2)  The importer of the dutiable goods shall pay the customs duties and other 
charges leviable on such goods within fourteen days from the date of the declaration 
being approved by the proper officer of customs. 
 
 
Abandoned goods 
 
78C.  (1)  Any imported goods which are not declared according to section 78 shall be 
deemed to be abandoned and the Director General may destroy or dispose of such 
goods in any manner as he deems fit. 
 
(2)  Any proceeds from the disposal of the goods under subsection (1) shall be 
applied to the payment of customs duties or other moneys, or recovery of any amount 
or charges which may be due in respect of the disposal of such goods. 
 
(3)  Any surplus of the proceeds referred to under subsection (2), 
if any, shall be paid— 
 
(a) 
to the importer, if known; and 
 
(b) 
into the Consolidated Fund, if the importer cannot be found within one 
month of the disposal. 


Declarations to give a full and true account 
 
79. (1)  The declaration referred to in section 78 shall give a full and true account of 
the number and description of packages, of the description, weight, measure or 
quantity, and value of all such dutiable goods, and of the country of origin of such 
goods. 
 
(Proviso Deleted by S55 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020) 
 
(2)  (Deleted by S55 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020) 
 
 
Declaration of dutiable goods to be exported 
 
80. (1)  Every exporter of dutiable goods shall immediately before export— 
 
(a) 
personally or by his agent make, in the prescribed form and to the officer of 
customs specified in subsection (2), a declaration of the goods to be 
exported; 
 
(b) 
produce such goods to such officer at any place as the officer may direct; and 
 
  [Amd. S56 Act A1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(c) 
pay the export duty and any other charge leviable thereon, if any, to such 
officer: 
[Amd. S56 Act A1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
[Proviso Del. S56 Act A1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) The declaration referred to in paragraph (1)(a) shall be made to the proper 
officer of customs at the appropriate place specified hereunder that is to say— 
 
(a) 
at an inland clearance depot or at an inland customs station or at a customs 
port where goods are loaded if export is by sea; 
 
(b) 
at an inland clearance depot or at an inland customs station where goods are 
loaded or at the place of export if export is by rail; 
(c) 
at the place of export if export is by road, but the Director General may allow 
the declaration to be made to a proper officer of customs at an inland 
clearance depot or at an inland customs station if such export by road is on 
their route to a customs port or airport or any other place approved by him; 
 
(d) 
at an inland clearance depot or at an inland customs station or at a customs 
airport where goods are loaded if export is by air. 
 
(3)  The declaration referred to in paragraph (1)(a) shall give a full and true 
account of the number and description of packages and of the description, weight, 


measure or quantity, and value of all such dutiable goods, and the country of destination 
of such goods. 
 
 
(4)  No dutiable goods shall be removed from the place at which such goods were 
produced to the officer of customs in accordance with subsection (1) unless permission 
in that behalf has first been obtained from a senior officer of customs. 
 
 
B—Non-dutiable goods 
 
Declaration of non-dutiable goods imported by sea or air 
 
81. (1)  When any goods which are not dutiable on import are imported by sea or 
air, the importer thereof shall, before taking delivery of such goods and in any case not 
later than ten days after the arrival of the vessel or aircraft in which such goods are 
imported or arrival otherwise of goods, make personally or by his agent to the proper 
officer of customs at the customs port at which such goods are landed or at other 
prescribed place, or at the customs airport at which such goods are imported, a 
declaration substantially in the prescribed form, giving particulars of the goods 
imported. 
 
(2) No owner, master or agent of any vessel, and no pilot or agent of any 
aircraft arriving at any customs port or airport shall deliver any inward cargo 
consisting of goods which are not dutiable until he has been authorized to do so by the 
proper officer of customs to whom the declaration referred to in subsection (1) has 
been made. 
 
 
Declaration of non-dutiable goods imported by rail 
 
82. When any goods which are not dutiable on import are imported by rail the 
importer thereof shall make personally or by his agent to the proper officer of customs 
at the prescribed place of import a declaration, substantially in the prescribed form 
giving particulars of the goods imported, and until such a declaration has been made 
delivery or onward transport of the goods shall not be permitted. 
 
 
Declaration of non-dutiable goods imported by road 
 
83. When any goods which are not dutiable on import are imported by road, the 
importer thereof shall make personally or by his agent to the proper officer of customs 
at the place of import or at other prescribed place a declaration substantially in the 
prescribed form, giving particulars of the goods imported, and shall not proceed till 
this has been done. 
 
 
 
 
 


Declaration of non-dutiable goods exported by sea or air 
 
84. (1)  When any goods which are not dutiable on export are exported by sea or air 
the exporter thereof shall, before such goods are shipped or water-borne to be shipped 
or transported otherwise to be shipped or loaded into an aircraft, make personally or 
by his agent to the proper officer of customs at the customs port at which such goods 
are to be shipped or at the customs airport at which such goods are to be loaded or at 
other prescribed place, a declaration substantially in the prescribed form, giving 
particulars of the goods to be exported. 
 
(2) No owner, master or agent of any vessel, and no pilot or agent of any 
aircraft shall allow any goods which are not dutiable on export to be shipped or loaded 
until he has been authorized by the proper officer of customs to do so. 
 
 
Declaration of non-dutiable goods exported by rail 
 
85. When any goods which are not dutiable on export are exported by rail the 
exporter thereof shall make personally or by his agent to the proper officer of customs 
at the prescribed place of export a declaration, substantially in the prescribed form 
giving particulars of the goods to be exported, and until such a declaration has been 
made such goods shall not be released for export. 
 
 
Declaration of non-dutiable goods exported by road 
 
86. When any goods which are not dutiable on export are exported by road, the 
exporter thereof shall make personally or by his agent to the proper officer of 
customs at the place of export a declaration, substantially in the prescribed form, 
giving particulars of the goods to be exported, and shall not proceed till this has 
been done. 
 
 
Declarations to give a full and true account 
 
87. The declarations referred to in sections 81, 82, 83, 84, 85 and 86 shall give a 
full and true account of the number and description of packages, of the description, 
weight, measure or quantity, and value of all goods, and of the country of origin of 
such goods. 
 
[Amd. S57 Act A1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 
 
C – General provisions 
 
Provisional declaration  
 
87A.  (1)  Notwithstanding sections 78, 78B, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85 and 86, the proper 
officer of customs may, upon a written application by the importer or exporter, allow a 
provisional declaration if— 
 


(a) 
in relation to goods imported— 
 
(i) 
the necessary documents or information on such goods cannot be 
produced or furnished at the time of import; 
 
(ii) such goods are subject to examination, testing or analysis; or 
 
(iii) such goods are urgently required for home consumption; and 
 
(b) 
in relation to goods to be exported— 
 
(i) 
the necessary documents or information on such goods cannot be 
produced or furnished at the time of declaration; or 
 
(ii) such goods are not subject to any drawback claim under sections 93 
and 99. 
 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1), a provisional declaration shall not be 
allowed if the goods are subject to any prohibition. 
 
(3) Any goods declared under subsection (1) may be released from customs 
control subject to— 
 
(a) 
the payment of such customs duty, if any, as provisionally assessed; 
 
(b) 
the payment of sufficient security as required by the proper officer of 
customs not exceeding the amount of duty provisionally assessed; and 
 
(c) 
the giving of an undertaking to submit a full and correct declaration within— 
 
(i) 
two months or such further period as the proper officer of customs 
may allow for imported goods; or 
 
(ii) five days from the date the goods have been released for export or such 
further period as may be approved by the Director General. 
 
(4) On the submission of a full and correct declaration within the time specified 
under paragraph (3)(c)— 
 
(a) 
the proper amount of customs duty and other charges leviable shall be 
assessed by the proper officer of customs; and 
 
(b) 
any money paid and secured in excess of such amount of customs duty 
assessed shall be returned to the importer or exporter or his agent. 
 
(5)  If the submission of a full and correct declaration is not made within the time 
specified under paragraph (3)(c), the security referred to in paragraph (3)(b) shall be 
forfeited and paid into the Consolidated Fund. 
[Subs. S58 Act A1593 w.e.f 1/1/2020] 


Goods which have been declared at a collection station exempted 
 
88. The provisions of this Part shall not apply— 
 
(a) 
subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Director General may, 
either generally by order or in any particular case, impose, to goods 
imported from a collection station or to goods which are forwarded to a 
collection station; 
 
Passengers’ baggage, etc., and postal goods exempted 
 
(b) 
to accompanied passengers’ baggage or personal effects; 
 
(c) 
to fresh fish locally taken; and 
 
(d) 
except as provided by subsection 78(3), to any goods sent by post. 
 
 
Deferred payment 
 
88A. (1) 
 The Director General may, subject to such terms and conditions as he deems 
fit, approve any person to defer the payment of customs duty due and payable under 
sections 78A and 80, and for such purpose determine the due date for the customs duty 
to be paid. 
 
(2)  The Director General may suspend or withdraw such approval or vary any of 
the terms or conditions under which the approval was given and vary the due date on 
which the customs duty is to be paid. 
 
(3)  Any person who fails to pay to the Director General the amount of customs 
duty due and payable on the due date under subsection (1) or (2) shall be guilty of an 
offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand ringgit or 
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or to both. 
 
[Ins. S59 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Simplified procedures for accredited person 
 
88B. (1) The Director General may approve any person to be an accredited person to 
benefit from simplified procedures for customs clearance as determined by the Director 
General subject to such terms and conditions as he deems fit to impose. 
 
(2)  The Director General may suspend or withdraw the approval granted under 
subsection (1) or vary or revoke the terms and conditions. 
 
[Ins. S59 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 


Saving provision 
 
89. Nothing in this Part contained shall release any person from any obligation 
imposed by or under any written law regulating the movement of any special goods or 
currency. 
 
 
Customs agents 
 
90.   (1) 
Any person who intends to act as a customs agent— 
 
(a) 
shall attend a course on matters relating to customs and pass such 
examination as may be specified by the Director General; 
 
 
(aa)  shall be a registered person under the Service Tax Act 2018 [Act 807]; 
 
(b) 
shall produce a written authority from the person on whose behalf he is to 
act; 
 
(c) 
shall give such security as may be considered adequate by a senior officer of 
customs for the faithful and incorrupt conduct of such agent and of his 
employees acting for him both as regards the customs and his employers; 
and 
 
(d) 
shall not have been proved against him or convicted on a charge in respect 
of— 
 
(i) 
an offence involving fraud or dishonesty; 
 
(ii) an offence under any written law relating to corruption; 
 
(iii) an offence under any written law relating to taxation; or 
 
(iv) any offence punishable with imprisonment for more than two years. 
 
 
(2)  Subject to subsection (1), any application for approval to act as a customs 
agent shall be made in the form as determined by the Director General. 
 
 
(3)  The Director General may waive the requirement of paragraph (1)(a) if he is 
satisfied that the person has sufficient knowledge and experience on matters relating to 
customs. 
 
 
(3A)  The Director General may grant such approval for the application made 
under subsection (2) subject to such terms and conditions as he deems fit. 
 
 
(4)  The Director General may suspend or cancel any approval granted under 
subsection (3A) if the customs agent commits any breach of this Act or of any regulation 
made thereunder or if he fails to comply with the terms and conditions imposed 


pursuant to subsection (3A) or any direction given by an officer of customs with regard 
to the business transacted by the customs agent. 
 
 
(5)  [Deleted by S3 Act A1571 w.e.f. 28/8/2018] 
 
 
(6)  Any person who acts as customs agent when approval has not been granted 
to him under this section or while such approval is cancelled or suspended, or who 
makes or causes to be made a declaration of any goods without being duly authorized 
for that purpose by the proprietor or consignee of such goods shall be guilty of an 
offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five 
years or to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to both. 
 
 
(6A)  The importer, exporter or manufacturer may appoint a customs agent to act 
on his behalf on matters relating to declaration and clearance of goods or entry or 
clearance of any vessel or aircraft under this Act. 
 
 
(6B) For the purpose of subsection (6A), a person is presumed to act as a customs 
agent without being duly authorized if there is reasonable cause to believe that the 
proprietor or consignee is not in existence or the existence of the proprietor or 
consignee is unlawful. 
 
 
(7)  The employee of any person or firm may transact business at any customs 
office on behalf of such person or firm. 
 
[Proviso Del. S3 Act A1571 w.e.f. 1/9/2018] 
 
 
 
(8)  Notwithstanding subsection (7), a senior officer of customs may refuse to 
transact business with such employee unless such person or firm has furnished a signed 
authority authorizing such employee to transact business on behalf of such person or 
firm. 
 
[Ins. S3 Act A1571 w.e.f. 1/9/2018] 
 
 
Person in charge of goods imported, etc., by road to be deemed agents 
 
91. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 90 the person in charge of any 
goods imported or exported by road shall be deemed to be the agent of the importer or 
exporter, as the case may be and shall not be subject to the provision of paragraph 
90(1)(a). 
 
 
Licensed carrier 
 
91A. [Del. S60 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
 
 


Declaration to be made in copies 
 
92. Every declaration required to be made under this Part shall be in such number of 
copies as the proper officer of customs, to whom such declaration is required to be 
made, may direct. 
 
[Ins. S61 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
PART X 
 
REFUND AND DRAWBACK OF DUTY 
 
 
Definition of “re-export” in sections 93, 94 and 99 
 
92A.  In sections 93, 94 and 99 of this Part, the expression "re-export" includes the 
movement of goods to a warehouse licensed under section 65A and to a duty free shop 
licensed under section 65D of the Act. 
 
 
Conditions under which drawback may be paid 
 
93. (1)  When any goods, other than goods affected by section 96, upon which 
customs duty has been paid are re-exported, nine-tenths of the duties calculated in 
accordance with subsection (2) may be repaid as drawback, if— 
 
[Amd. S63 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(a) 
the goods are identified to the satisfaction of a senior officer of customs at 
the customs port or customs airport at which such goods are shipped or 
loaded for re-export, or at the place of re-export; 
 
(b) 
the drawback claimed in respect of any one consignment of re-exported 
goods is not less than two hundred ringgit; 
 
[Amd. S63 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(c) 
the goods are re-exported within three months of the date upon which the 
customs duty was paid; 
 
[Amd. S63 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(d) 
payment of drawback upon goods of a class to which the goods to be re-
exported belong has not been prohibited by regulations made under this Act; 
 
(e) 
written notice has been given to a senior officer of customs at or before the 
time of re-export that a claim for drawback will be made, and such claim is 


made in the prescribed form and established to the satisfaction of a senior 
officer of customs within three months of the date of re-export; and 
 
(f) 
the goods have not been used after importation. 
 
(2) The amount of drawback allowed shall be calculated at the rate of the 
customs duty levied at the time of import. 
 
[Amd. S63 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Declaration by claimant 
 
94. Every person claiming drawback on any goods re-exported shall, personally or by 
his agent, make to a senior officer of customs a declaration in the prescribed form, that 
such goods have actually been re-exported and have not been relanded or detrained 
and are not intended to be relanded or detrained at any customs port, customs airport 
or place in Malaysia or within any port of Malaysia. 
 
[Amd. S64 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Drawback on destroyed goods 
 
95. 
[Del. S65 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Refund to visitors and owners of samples 
 
96. When any personal effects or other goods which have been imported by visitors 
to Malaysia for their personal use, or samples imported by commercial travellers, or 
trade samples or such other goods as may be prescribed, on which customs duty has 
been paid are re-exported within three months from the date of importation or within 
such further period as the Director General may, either generally or in any special case 
allow, the Director General may allow a drawback of such customs duty. 
 
 
Relief from duty on goods temporarily imported 
 
97. Where the Director General is satisfied that goods are imported only temporarily 
with a view to subsequent re-exportation, he may permit the goods to be delivered on 
importation without payment of duty subject to the payment of a deposit equivalent to 
not less than the amount of duty which would be payable if the goods were imported 
for home consumption or security being given to the satisfaction of the Director 
General for the payment of such duty, and such deposit shall be refunded or such 
security discharged if the goods are re-exported within three months of the date of 
importation or within such further period as the Director General may allow. 
 
[Del. S66 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 


Export and reimport of trade sample free of duty 
 
98. The Director General may, in any case, at his discretion and subject to such 
restriction as he may deem fit to impose, allow any goods, which on the exportation 
thereof have been declared as trade samples, to be reimported free of duty. 
 
 
Drawback on imported goods used in manufacture or in packing 
 
99. (1) Where any imported goods are re-exported by the manufacturer as part or 
ingredient of any goods manufactured in Malaysia or as the packing, or part or 
ingredient of the packing, of such manufactured goods, then, if customs duty has been 
paid on such imported goods, the Director General may, on such re-export, allow to the 
manufacturer a full drawback of the duty so paid, if— 
 
(a) 
the finished goods exported have been manufactured on premises approved 
by the Director General; 
 
(b) 
such books and account are kept as the Director General may require for the 
purpose of ascertaining the quantity of the goods used in such manufacture 
or for or in the packing of such manufactured goods; 
 
(c) 
such goods are re-exported within twelve months of the date upon which 
the import duty was paid or such further period as the Director General may 
approve; 
 
(d) 
written notice has been given on the prescribed export declaration form 
that a claim for drawback will be made, and such claim is made in the 
prescribed form to the satisfaction of a senior officer of customs within six 
months of the date of such re-export or such further period as the Director 
General may approve; and 
 
[Amd. S67 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(e) 
the finished goods shall be exported through such places or routes as the 
Director General may approve. 
 
(1A)  In determining the amount of drawback of customs duty paid, the Director 
General may allow drawback of such duty on waste or refuse resulting from such 
manufacture, whether re-exported or otherwise: 
 
Provided that such drawback shall only be allowed where the quantity of such 
waste or refuse has been proven to the satisfaction of the Director General. 
(2) In this section the expression “manufacturer” includes any person to whom 
the manufactured goods have been sold or otherwise disposed of. 
 
 
 
 


Offsetting of drawback or refund against amount owing 
 
99A.  Notwithstanding any provision of this Act, where any person has failed to pay, in 
whole or in part— 
 
(a) 
any amount of customs duty or any surcharge accruing, or any penalty, fee or 
other money payable under this Act; 
 
(b) 
any amount of excise duty or any surcharge accruing, or any penalty, fee or 
other money payable under Excise Act 1976; 
 
(c) 
any amount of sales tax due and payable, any surcharge accruing, or any 
penalty or other money payable under the Sales Tax Act 1972 [Act 64]; 
 
(d) 
any amount of service tax due and payable, any surcharge accruing, or any 
penalty or other money payable under the Service Tax Act 1975 [Act 151]; 
 
(e) 
any amount of good and services tax due and payable, any surcharge 
accruing, or any penalty or other money payable under the Goods and 
Services Tax Act 2014 [Act 762]; 
 
(f) 
any amount of sales tax due and payable, any surcharge accruing, or any 
penalty, fee or other money payable under the Sales Tax Act 2018 [Act 806]; 
or 
 
(g) 
any amount of service tax due and payable, any surcharge accruing, or any 
penalty, fee or other money payable under the Service Tax Act 2018 [Act 
807], 
 
the Director General may offset any amount or any part of any amount of 
drawback or refund due to that person against the unpaid amount referred to in 
paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g), and the Director General shall treat the 
amount offset as payment or part payment received from that person. 
 
[Ins. S68 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
PART XI 
 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Documents to be produced on demand 
 
100. On demand of the proper officer of customs the importer or exporter of any goods 
or his agent shall produce to such officer all invoices, bills of lading, certificates of 
origin or of analysis and any other documents, which such officer may require to test 
the accuracy of any declaration made by such importer or exporter to any officer of 


customs and such officers may retain any such invoice, bill of lading, certificate of 
origin or analysis or other documents. 
 
 
Records relating to customs matters  
 
100A. (1)  Every person shall keep full and true records up to date of all transactions 
which affect or may affect his obligation on any matters under the Act. 
 
(2) The records to be kept shall include— 
 
(a) all records of importation and exportation of goods including goods in 
transit and transhipment; 
 
(b) 
all payments and bank records including letter of credit, fund transfers 
application and debit advice; 
 
(c) 
all accounting, management and financial records; 
 
(d) sales and purchase records including invoices, receipts, debit note and 
credit note; 
 
(e) 
other business records including sales, distribution and royalty 
contracts or agreements; 
 
(f) 
accounting charts, access codes, program documentation and system 
instruction manuals; 
 
(g) inventory records; and 
 
(h) any other records as may be determined by the Director General. 
 
(3) Any records kept under this section shall be— 
 
(a) 
preserved for a period of seven years from the latest date to which such 
records relate; and 
 
(b) 
kept in Malaysia, except as otherwise approved by the Director General 
subject to such conditions as the Director General deems fit. 
 
(4)  Where the record is in an electronically readable form, the record shall be 
kept in such manner as to enable the record to be readily accessible and convertible into 
writing. 
 
(5)  Where the record is originally in a paper form and is subsequently converted 
into an electronic form, the record shall be retained in its original form prior to the 
conversion. 
 


(6)  A copy of the record shall be admissible in evidence in any proceedings to 
the same extent as the record itself. 
 
(7)  Any person who contravenes subsection (1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) shall be guilty 
of an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred 
thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both. 
 
[Subst. S70 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Requirement to provide translation 
 
100B. (1)  Where a senior officer of customs investigating into an offence finds, seizes, 
detains, or takes possession of any goods, record, report or document which wholly or 
partly, is in a language other than the national language or English language, or is in any 
sign or code, such officer may, orally or in writing, require the person who had the 
possession, custody or control of the goods, record, report or document to furnish to 
him a translation in the national language or English language within such period as the 
officer may specify. 
 
(2)  No person shall knowingly furnish a translation under subsection (1) which 
is not accurate, factful and true. 
 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsection (1), the senior officer of customs may require 
any other person to furnish the translation to him. 
 
(4)  The Director General may pay reasonable fees to the person who is required 
to furnish the translation under subsection (3). 
 
[Ins. S71 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Persons legally bound to give information 
 
101. Every person required by the proper officer of customs to give information or 
produce any documents on any subject into which it is such officer’s duty to enquire 
under this Act and which it is in such person’s power to give shall be legally bound to 
give such information or produce such documents. 
 
 
Service of notices 
 
102. (1)  Every notice or document required by this Act to be served on any 
person may be served— 
 
(a) 
personally upon that person; or 
 
(b) 
by sending such notice or document to that person by registered post. 
 
(2) A notice or document sent by registered post to a person shall be deemed to 
have been served on that person at the time at which it would have been delivered to 


that person in the ordinary course of the post if such notice or document was 
addressed— 
 
(a) 
in the case of a company, a firm, a society, an association or other body of 
persons— 
 
(i) 
to its registered office; 
 
(ii) to its last known address; or 
 
(iii) to any person authorized by it to accept service of process; and 
 
(b) 
in the case of an individual, to his last known address. 
 
[Amd. S72 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Submission of list of passengers and crews 
 
102A.(1) The master of every vessel or pilot of every aircraft, or his agent arriving at 
any customs airport, customs port or entry or exit point shall submit to the proper 
officer of customs a true and complete list of the passengers on board— 
 
(a) 
in the case of a vessel, not less than twenty-four hours before arrival; and 
 
(b) 
in the case of an aircraft, not less than two hours before arrival. 
 
(2) The master of every vessel or the pilot of every aircraft, or his agent leaving 
any customs airport, customs port or entry or exit point shall submit to the proper 
officer of customs a list of the passengers and crews— 
 
(a) 
in the case of a vessel, not less than twenty-four hours before departure; and 
 
(b) 
in the case of an aircraft, not less than two hours before departure. 
 
(3)  The carrier in charge of every train or the operator of a bus, or his agent, 
arriving at or leaving any customs airport, customs port or entry or exit point shall 
submit to the proper officer of customs a list of the passengers and crews as and when 
directed by such proper officer of customs. 
 
[Ins. S73 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Baggage of passengers 
 
103. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act contained, every passenger or other 
person arriving in or leaving Malaysia shall declare all dutiable or prohibited goods in 
his possession, either on his person or in any baggage or in any vehicle, to the proper 
officer of customs, and if he fails so to do such goods shall be deemed to be uncustomed 
goods. 


(2) The baggage of passengers or any other person may be examined and 
delivered in such manner as the Director General may direct, and it shall be the duty of 
the person in charge of such baggage to produce, open, unpack and repack such 
baggage. 
 
[Amd. S74 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
The proper officer of customs may take samples 
 
104. 
(1) The proper officer of customs may at any time, if his duty so requires, take 
samples of any goods to ascertain whether they are goods of a description liable to any 
customs duty, or to ascertain the customs duty payable on such goods or for such other 
purposes as the proper officer of customs may deem necessary, and such samples may 
be disposed of in such manner as the Director General shall direct. 
 
(2) No payment shall be made for the cost of any sample taken but the proper 
officer of customs shall give a receipt for any such sample. 
 
[Amd. S75 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Packing of dutiable goods 
 
105. (1)  No dutiable goods shall be packed in any manner calculated to deceive an 
officer of customs so that a proper account of such goods may not be taken. 
 
(2)  Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and 
shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both. 
 
[Ins. S76 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Addition or deduction of new or altered duties in the case of contract 
 
106. (1)  Where any new customs duty is imposed or where any customs duty is 
increased, and any goods in respect of which the duty is payable are delivered after the 
day on which the new or increased duty takes effect, in pursuance of a contract made 
before that day, the seller of the goods may, in the absence of agreement to the 
contrary, recover from the purchaser of the goods as an addition to the contract price, a 
sum equal to any amount paid by him in respect of the goods on account of the new 
duty or increase of duty, as the case may be. 
 
(2) Where any customs duty is cancelled or decreased and any goods affected 
by the duty are delivered after the day on which the duty is cancelled or the decrease in 
the duty takes effect, in pursuance of a contract made before that day, the purchaser of 
the goods, in the absence of agreement to the contrary, may if the seller of the goods 
has had in respect of those goods the benefit of the cancellation or decrease of the duty, 


deduct from the contract price a sum equal to the amount of the duty or decrease of 
duty, as the case may be. 
 
 
PART XII 
 
INSPECTION, INVESTIGATION, SEARCH, SEIZURE AND ARREST 
 
Access to place or premises 
 
106A. (1) For the purposes of this Act, any senior officer of customs shall at all times 
have access to any place or premises where— 
 
 
(a) 
any importer, exporter, manufacturer or person carries on his business; and 
 
(b) 
any person who has dealings with the importer, exporter, manufacturer or 
person referred to in paragraph (a) carries on his business. 
 
[Subst. S77 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
(2) 
Where any senior officer of customs enters upon any premises in 
accordance with the provisions of this section, then— 
 
(a) 
he may require the importer, exporter, manufacturer or person referred to in 
paragraph (1)(a), or any person who has dealings with such importer, 
exporter, manufacturer or person referred to in paragraph (1)(a), to produce 
any book, data, document or other record, or thing which is required to be 
kept under the provision of this Act, or which relate to any imported, 
exported or manufactured goods; 
 
[Subst. S77 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(b) 
he may examine any book, data, document or other record, or thing and 
make copies of or take extracts from any such book or document; 
 
(c) 
he may seize and detain any book, data, document or other record, or thing 
if in his opinion it may afford evidence of the commission of any offence 
under this Act; 
 
(d) 
he may require— 
 
(i) 
the importer, exporter, manufacturer or person referred to in 
paragraph (1)(a); 
 
(ii) the person who has dealings with such importer, exporter, 
manufacturer or person referred to in paragraph (1)(a); or 
 


(iii) any person employed by such importer, exporter, manufacturer or 
person referred to in paragraph (1)(a) or the first-mentioned person 
referred to in subparagraph (ii); 
 
to answer questions truthfully relating to— 
 
(A) any book, data, document or other record, or thing; 
 
(B) any entry in any book, data, document or other record; or 
 
(C) any goods imported, exported or manufactured; 
 
[Subst. S77 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(e) 
he may require any container, envelope or other receptacle in any such 
premises to be opened; 
 
(f) 
he may at the risk and expense of the importer, exporter, manufacturer or 
person referred to in paragraph (1)(a), or any person who has dealings with 
such importer, exporter, manufacturer or person referred to in paragraph 
(1)(a) open and examine any package, or any goods or materials, in any 
such premises. 
 
[Subst. S77 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(3) Where the senior officer of customs acting under the provisions of this 
section is unable to obtain free access to any premises where the importer, exporter, 
manufacturer or person referred to in paragraph (1)(a) carries on his business, or 
where the person who has dealings with such importer, exporter, manufacturer or 
person referred to in paragraph (1)(a) carries on his business or to any receptacle 
contained in those premises, he may, at any time, enter such premises and open such 
receptacle in such manner, if necessary by force, as he may think necessary. 
 
[Subst. S77 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(4) Where, on the entry upon any premises under the provisions of this section, 
any dutiable goods are found inrelation to which any offence under the provisions of 
this Act has been committed, then such dutiable goods shall be liable to forfeiture. 
 
(5)  Any person who refuses access to any place or premises to any senior officer 
of customs under subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be 
liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding one 
hundred thousand ringgit or to both. 
 
[Ins. S77 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
 
 


Power of enforcement, investigation and inspection 
 
106B. For the purposes of this Act, a senior officer of customs shall have all the powers 
of a police officer of whatever rank as provided for under the Criminal Procedure Code 
[Act 593] in relation to enforcement, investigation and inspection, and such powers 
shall be in addition to the powers provided for under this Act and not in derogation 
thereof. 
 
[Subst. S4 Act A1580 w.e.f. 2/1/2019] 
 
Magistrate may issue search warrant 
 
107. (1)  Whenever it appears to any Magistrate, upon written information upon 
oath, and after any enquiry which he may think necessary, that there is reasonable 
cause to believe that in any conveyance, premises or place, there are concealed or 
deposited any prohibited or uncustomed goods or goods liable to forfeiture under this 
Act or under any regulation made thereunder, or as to which any offence under this Act 
or such regulation has been committed, or any books or documents relating to any such 
goods such Magistrate may issue a warrant authorizing any officer of customs named 
therein, by day or night and with or without assistance— 
 
(a) 
to enter such conveyance, premises or place and there to search for and 
seize any goods reasonably suspected of being prohibited or uncustomed 
goods, or goods liable to forfeiture under this Act or any regulation made 
thereunder, or as to which any offence under this Act or such regulation is 
suspected to have been committed, and any books or documents which may 
reasonably be believed to contain information as to any offence under this 
Act or any regulation made thereunder; 
 
(b) 
to arrest any person or persons being in such conveyance, premises or 
place, in whose possession such goods as aforesaid may be found, or whom 
such officer may reasonably suspect to have concealed or deposited such 
goods. 
 
[Subst. S78 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) Such officer may if it is necessary so to do— 
 
(a) 
break open any outer or inner door of such conveyance, premises or place, 
and enter thereinto; 
 
(b) 
conveyance, premises or place and every part thereof; 
 
(c) 
remove by force any obstruction to such entry, search, seizure and removal 
as he is empowered to effect; and 
 
(d) 
detain every person found in su such conveyance, premises or place until the 
search has been completed. 
 
[Subst. S78 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 


(3) Where by reason of its nature, size or amount it is not practicable to remove 
any goods, document or thing seized under this section, the officer of customs may, by 
any means, seal the conveyance, premises or place or such goods, document or thing in 
the conveyance, premises or place in which it is found. 
 
(4) A person who, without lawful authority, breaks, tampers with or damages the 
seal referred to in subsection (3) or removes the goods, document or thing under seal, 
or attempts to do so, shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding one 
hundred thousand ringgit or to both. 
 
[Ins. S78 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
When search may be made without warrant 
 
108. 
Whenever it appears to any senior officer of customs that there is reasonable 
cause to believe that in any conveyance, premises or place there are concealed or 
deposited any prohibited or uncustomed goods or goods liable to forfeiture under this 
Act or any regulation made thereunder or as to which an offence under this Act or such 
regulation has been committed, and if he has reasonable grounds for believing that by 
reason of the delay in obtaining a search warrant such goods are likely to be removed, 
such officer may exercise in, upon and in respect of such conveyance, premises or place 
all the powers mentioned in section 107 in as full and ample a manner as if he were 
authorized so to do by a warrant issued under that section. 
 
[Subst. S79 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Power to search vessels and aircraft 
 
109. (1)  A proper officer of customs may— 
 
(a) 
go on board any vessel or aircraft in any customs port or customs airport or 
place or within territorial waters; 
 
(b) 
require the master of such vessel or the pilot of such aircraft to give such 
information relating to the vessel or aircraft, cargo, stores, crew, passengers 
or voyage as he may deem necessary; 
 
(c) 
rummage and search all parts of such vessel or aircraft for prohibited or 
uncustomed goods; 
 
(d) 
examine all goods on board and all goods then being loaded or unloaded; 
 
(e) 
demand all documents which ought to be on board such vessel or aircraft; 
and 
 
(f) 
require all or any such documents to be brought to him for inspection; 
 


and the master of any vessel and the pilot of any aircraft refusing to allow such 
officer to board or search such vessel or aircraft, or refusing to give such information 
or to produce such documents on demand shall be guilty of an offence against this Act. 
 
(2) If any place, box or chest on board such vessel or aircraft is locked and the 
key withheld, such officer may break open any such place, box or chest. 
 
(3) If any goods be found concealed on board any vessel or aircraft, they shall 
be deemed to be uncustomed goods. 
 
 
Proper officer of customs to exercise powers of search 
 
110. (1)  For the purposes of Part IX, a proper officer of customs may enter into and 
exercise in and upon and in respect of any vessel, aircraft, landing place, wharf, jetty, 
port installation or railway or any place all the powers mentioned in section 107 in as 
full and ample a manner as if he were authorized so to do by a warrant under that 
section. 
 
[Amd. S80 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) In this section the expression “railway” shall have the meaning assigned to 
it by any written law relating to railways. 
 
 
Officers of customs may stop and search conveyances 
 
111. (1) The person in charge or in control of any vehicle arriving at a prescribed place 
of import and export shall, on arrival at such place, produce his vehicle to the proper 
officer of customs, and shall, if so required, move his vehicle to another place for 
examination, and shall not proceed until permission to do so has been given by the 
proper officer of customs. 
 
(2) Any officer of customs may stop and examine any vehicle for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether any uncustomed or prohibited goods are contained therein, and 
the person in control or in charge of such vehicle shall if required so to do by such 
officer, stop such vehicle and allow such officer to examine the same. 
 
(3) The person in control or in charge of any vehicle examined under this 
section shall on request by the proper officer of customs open all parts of the vehicle 
for examination by such officers and take all measures necessary to enable such 
examination as such officer considers necessary to be made. 
 
 
Power to set up roadblocks 
 
111A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, any proper officer of 
customs may, if he deems it necessary to do so for the enforcement of the provisions of 
this Act, erect or place or cause to be erected or placed any barrier on or across any 


public road or street or in any public place in such manner as he may think fit; and any 
proper officer of customs may take all reasonable measures to prevent any person from 
passing or any vehicle from being driven past any such barrier, including any measure 
to pursue and apprehend any such person or stop any such vehicle where, having 
regard to the attendant circumstances at a given moment of time, it is apparent that if 
such measure is not taken the escape of such person and vehicle to avoid detection or 
otherwise is likely to be imminent. 
 
[Ins. S81 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) Any person who fails to comply with any reasonable signal of a proper 
officer requiring such person or vehicle to stop before reaching any such barrier, or 
attempt to cross or knock any such barrier, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be 
liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding five years or to both, and any proper officer of customs may, 
without warrant, arrest such person. 
 
[Subst. S81 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(3) No proper officer of customs shall be liable for any loss, injury or damage 
caused to any person or property consequent upon his taking the steps mentioned in 
subsection (1). 
 
[Ins. S81 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Access to recorded information or computerized data 
 
111B. (1) Any officer of customs exercising his powers under sections 106A, 107, 108, 
109 and 111 shall be given access to any recorded information or computerized data, 
whether stored in a computer or otherwise. 
 
(2) In addition, an officer of customs exercising his powers under sections 106A, 
107, 108, 109 and 111— 
 
(a) 
may inspect and check the operation of any computer and any associated 
apparatus or material which he has reasonable cause to suspect is or has 
been used in connection with that information or data;  
 
(aa) may make copies of or take extracts from the recorded information or 
computerized data referred to in subsection (1) as he deems necessary; and 
 
[Ins. S82 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(b) 
may require— 
 
(i) 
the person by whom or on whose behalf the officer of customs has 
reasonable cause to suspect the computer is or has been so used; or 
 


(ii) the person having charge of, or is otherwise concerned with, the 
operation of the computer, apparatus or material, 
 
to provide him with such reasonable assistanceas he may require for the 
purposes of this section. 
 
(3) For the purposes of subsection (1), “access” includes being provided with 
the necessary password, encryption code, decryption code, software or hardware and 
any other means required to enable comprehension of recorded information or 
computerized data. 
 
(4)  Any person who contravenes subsection (1) or the request to provide any 
reasonable assistance under paragraph (2)(b) shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on 
conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine not 
exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to both. 
 
[Ins. S82 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Power to intercept communications 
 
111C. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other written law, the Public 
Prosecutor may, if he considers that it is likely to contain any information which is 
relevant for the purposes of investigation into any offence under this Act, on the 
application of a senior officer of customs, authorize any proper officer of customs— 
 
(a) 
to intercept, detain and open any postal article in the course of transmission 
by post; 
 
(b) 
to intercept any message transmitted or received by any telecommunication; 
or 
 
(c) 
to intercept or listen to any conversation by any telecommunication. 
 
(2)  When any person is charged with an offence under this Act, any information 
obtained by any proper officer of customs in pursuance of subsection (1), whether 
before or after such person is charged, shall be admissible in evidence at his trial. 
 
(3)  An authorization by the Public Prosecutor under subsection (1) may be given 
either orally or in writing, but if an oral authorization is given, the Public Prosecutor 
shall, as soon as practicable, reduce the authorization into writing. 
 
(4)  A certificate by the Public Prosecutor stating that the action taken by the 
proper officer of customs in pursuance of subsection (1) had been authorized by him 
under subsection (1) shall be conclusive evidence that it had been so authorized, and 
such certificate shall be admissible in evidence without proof of signature thereof. 
 
(5)  No person shall be under any duty, obligation or liability, or be in any 
manner compelled, to disclose in any proceedings the procedure, method, manner or 


means, or any matter related thereto, of anything done under paragraphs (1)(a), (b) or 
(c). 
 
[Ins. S83 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Power to open packages and examine goods 
 
112. (1) 
Any proper officer of customs may examine any goods in the course of being 
imported or exported or intended to be imported or exported and may for the 
purposes of such examination bring the same to a customs office and may open any 
package or receptacle. 
 
(2) A proper officer of customs may use any tracing and tracking device, non-
intrusive instrument, or any other form of aids in the performance of his duty under this 
Act. 
 
[Ins. S84 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Search of persons arriving in Malaysia 
113.  (1)  Any person landing, or about to land, or having recently landed, from any 
vessel or aircraft, or leaving any vessel in territorial waters or aircraft, whether for the 
purpose of landing or otherwise, or entering or having recently entered Malaysia by 
road or railway shall, on demand by any proper officer of customs, — 
(a) 
permit his person, goods and baggage to be searched by such officer or 
otherwise examined by any other means; or 
 
(b) 
accompany such proper officer of customs together with his goods and 
baggage to a customs office or police station and there permit his person, 
goods and baggage to be searched by the proper officer of customs. 
(2)  If the person referred to in subsection (1) requests that his person be 
searched in the presence of a senior officer of customs, he shall not be searched except 
in the presence of and under the supervision of such officer, but such person may be 
detained until the arrival of such officer, or taken to any customs office or police station 
where such officer may be found. 
(3)  If the person referred to in subsection (1) requests the goods and baggage to 
be searched in his presence and so present himself within a reasonable time, the goods 
and baggage shall not be searched except in his presence. 
(4)  No person shall be searched except by another person of the same gender, 
and such search shall be conducted with strict regard to decency. 
[Subst. S85 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 


Seizure of goods the subject of an offence 
 
114. (1) All goods in respect of which there has been, or there is, reasonable cause to 
suspect that there has been committed any offence against this Act or any regulation 
made thereunder, or any breach of any of the provisions of this Act or of any regulation 
made thereunder or of any restriction or condition subject to or upon which any 
licence or permit has been granted, together with any receptacle, package, conveyance 
other than vessel exceeding two hundred tons nett registered tonnage or aircraft 
engaged in international carriage, in which the same may have been found or which has 
been used in connection with such offence or breach, and any books or documents 
which may reasonably be believed to have a bearing on the case, on the person or in 
any place either on land or in territorial waters. 
[Subst. S86 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) All such goods and such receptacles, packages or conveyances referred to in 
subsection (1) shall, as soon as conveniently may be, be delivered into the care of a 
proper officer of customs whose duty it is to receive the same. 
 
[Subst. S86 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(3) Whenever any goods, and such receptacles, packages or conveyances 
referred to in subsection (1) are seized under this Act, the seizing officer shall 
forthwith give notice in writing of such seizure and the grounds thereof to the owner of 
such goods, if known, either by delivering such notice to him personally or by post at 
the person’s last known address. 
[Subst. S86 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
[Proviso Del. S86 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(4) This section relating to the seizure of goods shall apply to all the contents of 
any package or receptacle in which the same are found and to any article used to 
conceal the same. 
 
(5) [Del. S86 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(6) This section relating to the seizure of conveyances shall apply to all tackles, 
equipment and furnishing thereof and to any animal by which the same is drawn. 
 
[Subst. S86 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
No costs or damages arising from entry, search or seizure to be recoverable  
 
114A. No person shall, in respect of any entry or search of any premises, place or 
conveyance or seizure of any goods, book, record, document or thing in the exercise of 
any powers conferred by this Act, be entitled to the costs of such entry, search or 
seizure, or to any damages or other relief unless such entry, search or seizure was made 
without reasonable cause. 
 
[Ins. S87 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 


Return or disposal of goods 
 
115. (1)  Where any goods have been seized under this Act, a senior officer of 
customs may, at his discretion— 
 
(a) 
temporarily return the goods to the owner thereof or to the person from 
whose possession, custody or control the goods were seized, or to such 
person as a senior officer of customs may consider entitled thereto, subject 
to such terms and conditions as a senior officer of customs may impose, and, 
subject, in any case, to sufficient security being furnished to the satisfaction 
of a senior officer of customs that the goods shall be surrendered to a senior 
officer of customs on demand being made by a senior officer of customs and 
that the said terms and conditions, if any, shall be complied with; or 
 
[Subst. S88 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(b) 
return return the goods to the owner thereof or to the person from whose 
possession, custody or control the goods were seized, or to such person as a 
senior officer of customs may consider entitled thereto, with liberty for the 
person to whom the goods are so returned to dispose of the same, such 
return being subject to such terms and conditions as a senior officer of 
customs may impose and security being furnished to the satisfaction of a 
senior officer of customs in an amount not less than an amount which, in the 
opinion of a senior officer of customs, represents— 
 
[Subst. S88 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(i) 
for goods other than dutiable or uncustomed goods, its open market 
value, and for dutiable or uncustomed goods, their value, on the date 
on which such goods are so returned 
 
[Subst. S88 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(ii) the customs duty payable in respect thereof, if any; and 
 
[Ins. S88 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(iii) any tax payable in respect thereof under any written law, if any, 
 
[Ins. S88 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
for the payment of the amount so secured to the Director General in the 
event of the court making an order for the forfeiture of such amount under 
subsection 127(1A) or 128(4), or in the event of such amount being 
forfeited under section 131, as the case may be; or 
 
(c) 
sell or destroy goods, as appropriate in the circumstances, where the goods 
are living creatures, where it is a living creature or where, in the opinion of a 
senior officer of customs, the goods are of perishable or dangerous nature 


or likely to speedily deteriorate in quality or value, and where the goods are 
so sold, he shall hold the proceeds of sale to abide the result of any 
prosecution or claim, or a forfeiture under section 131, as the case may be. 
 
[Subst. S88 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) Any person who— 
 
(a) 
fails to surrender on demand to a senior officer of customs the goods 
temporarily returned to him under paragraph (1)(a); or 
 
[Subst. S88 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(b) 
fails to comply with or contravenes any of the terms or conditions imposed 
under paragraph (1)(a) or (b), 
[Ins. S88 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit 
or to both. 
[Subst. S88 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(3) The criminal liability of any person under subsection (2) shall be in addition 
to any other liability that the said person or any other person may incur under the 
terms and conditions relating to the return of the goods under paragraph (1)(a) or (b). 
 
[Subst. S88 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(4) The provisions of subsection (2) shall not apply to such person, if any, who is 
the guarantor or surety of the person to whom the goods are returned under paragraph 
(1)(a) or (b). 
[Subst. S88 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(5) The Minister may, from time to time, either generally or in any particular 
case or class of cases, give such directions to the Director General as he may deem 
necessary or expedient with regard to the exercise of the powers conferred on a senior 
officer of customs under subsection (1). 
 
(6) No person shall be entitled to maintain any action on account of any act done 
or any decision taken by or on behalf of the Minister or by or on behalf of a senior 
officer of customs under this section, and no court shall have any jurisdiction to 
entertain any such action. 
 
(7) [Del. S88 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
 
 


Production of a certificate of an analyst, or a senior officer of customs, or a 
person authorized by the Minister 
 
115A. (1) In any proceedings in respect of any offence against this Act or any regulation 
made thereunder in which the existence, description, classification, composition, 
quantity, quality or value of, or any other matter in relation to, any goods returned 
under paragraph 115(1)(a) or (b) or sold or destroyed under paragraph 115(1)(c), is in 
question, any document produced by the prosecution purporting to be a certificate in 
respect of any such matter given and signed by— 
 
[Subst. S89 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(a) 
an “analyst” within the meaning of subsection 121(5); or 
 
(b) 
a senior officer of customs; or 
 
(c) 
any person, regardless whether or not he is a public officer, authorized by or 
on behalf of the Minister, either generally or in any particular case, for the 
purposes of this section, 
 
shall be admissible in evidence and its conclusiveness shall not be challenged on the 
ground that the goods in respect of which the certificate is given has not been produced 
before the court either in part or in entirety, and it shall be evidence of its contents, 
including the facts stated therein, without proof of the signature to such certificate. 
 
[Subst. S89 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) The provisions of this section shall apply notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other written law or rule of evidence to the contrary. 
 
 
Powers of arrest 
 
116. (1)   Any officer of customs may arrest without warrant— 
 
(a) 
any person found committing or attempting to commit, or employing or 
aiding any person to commit, or abetting the commission of, an offence 
against this Act or any regulation made thereunder; 
 
(b) 
any person whom he may reasonably suspect to have in his possession any 
uncustomed or prohibited goods or any goods liable to seizure under this 
Act; 
 
(c) 
any person against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has been 
guilty of an offence against this Act or any regulation made thereunder, 
 
and may search or cause to be searched, any person so arrested: 
 


Provided that no female shall be searched except by another female with strict regard 
to decency. 
 
(2) Every person so arrested shall be taken to a police station or may be 
detained in the custody of the proper officer of customs. 
 
(3) The proper officer of customs may take or cause to be taken photographs 
and finger and thumb impressions of any person arrested under subsection (1). 
 
[Subst. S90 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(4) If any person liable to arrest under this Act is not arrested at the time of 
committing the offence for which he is so liable, or after arrest makes his escape, he 
may at any time afterwards be arrested and be dealt with as if he had been arrested at 
the time of committing such offence. 
 
(5) Subject to such conditions as the Director General deems fit, every person so 
arrested may be released from custody— 
 
[Subst. S90 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(a) 
on his depositing such reasonable sum of money as the proper officer of 
customs may require; 
 
(b) 
on his executing a bond, with such surety or sureties, as the proper officer of 
customs may require; or 
 
 
(c) 
on his depositing such reasonable sum of money as the proper officer of 
customs may require and his executing a bond, with such surety or sureties, 
as the proper officer of customs may require. 
 
(6) Any person who has been released from custody under subsection (5) may 
be arrested without warrant by any officer of customs— 
 
(a) 
if such officer has reasonable grounds for believing that any condition on or 
subject to which such person was released or otherwise admitted to bail has 
been or is likely to be breached; or 
 
(b) 
on being notified in writing by the surety of such person that such person is 
likely to breach any condition on or subject to which such person was 
released and that the surety wishes to be relieved of his obligation as surety. 
 
(7)  Where a person who is arrested for an offence under this Act is serving a 
sentence of imprisonment or is under detention under any law relating to preventive 
detention, or is otherwise in lawful custody, he shall, upon an order in writing by a 
senior officer of customs of or above the rank of Senior Assistant Director, be produced 
before such officer or before any other senior officer of customs for the purpose of 


investigation, and for such purpose he may be kept in lawful custody for a period not 
exceeding fourteen days.  
 
(8)  A person who is detained in lawful custody under subsection (7) or 
otherwise under any other written law may—  
 
(a) 
at any time be made available to a senior officer of customs for the purpose 
of investigation; or  
 
(b) 
be taken to any other place for the purpose of searching the place, or seizing 
any goods, or identifying any person for any other purposes relating to the 
investigation under this Act. 
[Ins. S90 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Power to examine persons 
 
116A. (1) A senior officer of customs investigating an offence under this Act may— 
 
(a) 
order any person who appears to be acquainted with the facts and 
circumstances of the case to attend before him for the purpose of being 
examined orally in relation to anymatter which may, in his opinion, assist in 
the investigation into the offence; or 
 
(b) 
order any person to produce before him any book, document or any certified 
copy of it, or any other article which may, in his opinion, assist in the 
investigation into the offence. 
 
(2) Paragraph (1)(b) shall not apply to banker’s books. 
 
(3) A person to whom an order under paragraph (1)(a) has been given shall— 
 
(a) 
attend in accordance with the terms of the order to be examined, and shall 
continue to attend from day to day where so directed until the examination 
is completed; and 
 
(b) 
during such examination, be bound to answer all questions relating to the 
case put to him and shall be legally bound to state the truth, whether or not 
such answer is made wholly or partly in answer to questions but he may 
refuse to answer any question the answer to which would have a tendency 
to expose him to a criminal charge or penalty or forfeiture. 
 
(4) A person to whom an order has been given under paragraph (1)(b) shall not 
conceal, destroy, alter, remove from Malaysia, or deal with, expend, or dispose of, any 
book, document or article specified in the order, or alter or deface any entry in any such 
book or document, or cause such act to be done, or assist or conspire to do such act. 
 
(5) A person to whom an order is given under subsection (1) shall comply with 
such order and with the requirements of subsections (3) and (4) notwithstanding any 
written law to the contrary. 


(6) A statement made by any person in the course of investigation under this 
Act whether or not a caution has been administered to him under subsection 116B(3) 
shall be recorded in writing by the senior officer of customs examining him and the 
statement so recorded shall be read to and signed by the person, and where such 
person refuses to sign the record, the senior officer of customs shall endorse on it 
under his hand the fact of such refusal and the reason for it, if any, stated by the person 
examined. 
 
(7) The record of an examination made in the course of an investigation under 
this Act or any book, document or article produced under paragraph (1)(b) or 
otherwise in the course of an examination under paragraph (1)(a), shall, 
notwithstanding any written law to the contrary, be admissible in evidence in any 
proceedings under this Act in any court— 
 
(a) 
for offence under this Act; or 
 
(b) 
for the forfeiture of goods pursuant to section 127, 128 or 131, 
 
[Subst. S91 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
regardless whether such proceedings are against the person who was examined, or 
who produced the book, document or article, or against any other person. 
 
 
Admissibility of statements in evidence 
 
116B. (1) In any trial or inquiry by a court into an offence under this Act, any 
statement, whether the statement amounts to a confession or not or whether it is oral 
or in writing, made at anytime, whether before or after the person is charged and 
whether in the course of an investigation under this Act or not, and whether or not 
wholly or partly in answers to questions, by an accused person to or in the hearing of 
any officer of customs, and whether or not interpreted to him by any other officer of 
customs or any other person, shall, notwithstanding any written law to the contrary, be 
admissible at his trial in evidence and, if that person tenders himself as a witness, any 
such statement may be used in cross-examination and for the purpose of impeaching 
his credit. 
 
(2) No statement made under subsection (1) shall be admissible or used in 
cross-examination or for the purpose of impeaching the credit of the person making the 
statement if the making of the statement appears to the court to have been caused by 
any inducement, threat or promise having reference to the charge against the person, 
proceeding from a person in authority and sufficient in the opinion of the court to give 
that person grounds which would appear to him reasonable for supposing that by 
making it he would gain any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in 
reference to the proceedings against him. 
 
(3) Where any person is arrested for an offence under this Act, he shall be 
cautioned in the following words or words to the like effect: 
 


“It is my duty to warn you that you are not obliged to say anything or to answer 
any question, but anything you say, whether in answer to a question or not, may 
be given in evidence”. 
 
(4) A statement made by any person accused of an offence under this Act made 
before there is time to caution him shall not be rendered inadmissible in evidence 
merely by reason of no such caution having been administered if it has been 
administered as soon as possible. 
 
(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any written law, a 
person accused of an offence under this Act to which subsection (1) applies, shall not 
be bound to answer any question relating to the case after any caution referred to in 
subsection (3) has been administered to him. 
 
 
Procedure where investigation cannot be completed within twenty-four hours 
 
116C. (1) Whenever any person is arrested and detained in custody and it appears that 
the investigation cannot be completed within a period of twenty-four hours and there 
are grounds for believing that the accusation or information is well founded, the senior 
officer of customs making the investigation under this Act shall immediately transmit 
to a Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary prescribed under section 116D relating 
to the case and shall at the same time produce such person before the Magistrate. 
 
(2) The Magistrate before whom a person is produced under this section may, 
whether he has or has no jurisdiction to try the case, from time to time, authorize the 
detention of such person in such custody as the Magistrate considers fit for a term not 
exceeding fifteen days in the whole. 
 
(3) If the Magistrate has no jurisdiction to try the case and considers further 
detention unnecessary, he may order such person to be produced before a Magistrate 
having such jurisdiction or, if the case is triable only by the High Court, before himself 
or another Magistrate having jurisdiction with a view to transmitting the case for trial 
by the High Court. 
 
(4) A magistrate authorizing detention under this section shall record his 
reasons for so doing. 
 
 
Diary of proceedings in investigation 
 
116D. (1) Every officer of customs making an investigation under this Act shall day by 
day enter his proceedings in the investigation in a diary setting forth— 
 
(a) 
the time at which the order, if any, for investigation reached him; 
 
(b) 
the time at which he began and closed the investigation; 
 
(c) 
the place or places visited by him; and 


(d) 
a statement of the circumstances ascertained through his investigation. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Evidence Act 1950, an accused 
person shall not be entitled, either before or in the course of any proceedings under 
this Act, to call for or inspect any such diary: 
 
Provided that if the officer of customs who has made the investigation refers to 
the diary for the purposes of section 159 or 160 of the Evidence Act 1950, such entries 
only as the officer has referred to shall be shown to the accused, and the court shall at 
the request of the officer cause any other entries to be concealed from view or 
obliterated. 
 
 
PART XIII 
 
PROVISIONS AS TO TRIALS AND PROCEEDINGS 
 
117. [Deleted] 
 
 
Magistrate of the First Class to have full jurisdiction 
 
118. Notwithstanding the provisions of any written law to the contrary, a court of a 
Magistrate of the First Class shall have jurisdiction to try any offence under this Act and 
to award the full punishment for any such offence. 
 
 
Burden of proof 
 
119. If in any prosecution in respect of any goods seized for non-payment of duties or 
for any other cause of for-feiture or for the recovery of any penalty or surcharge under 
this Act, any dispute arises whether the customs duties have been paid in respect of 
such goods, or whether the same have been lawfully imported or exported or lawfully 
landed or loaded, or concerning the place whence such goods were brought or where 
such goods were loaded, or whether anything is exempt from duty under section 14 
then and in every such case the burden of proof there of shall lie on the defendant in 
such prosecution. 
 
[Subst. S92 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Proportional examination of goods seized to be accepted by courts 
 
120. (1)  When any goods suspected of being prohibited or uncustomed or otherwise 
liable to seizure have been seized, it shall be sufficient to open and examine five per 
centum only of each description of the package or receptacle in which such goods are 
contained. 
 


(2) If it is necessary to test any goods seized under this Act, it shall be sufficient 
to test only a sample not exceeding five per centum in volume or weight of the goods 
examined under subsection (1). 
 
(3) The court shall presume that the goods contained in the unopened packages 
or receptacles are of the same nature, quantity and quality as those found in the similar 
packages or receptacles which have been opened. 
 
 
Evidence of analysis may be given in writing 
 
121. (1)  In any prosecution for a breach of a provision of this Act or of any regulation 
made thereunder, a certificate of analysis purporting to be under the hand of an analyst 
shall, on production thereof by the prosecutor, be sufficient evidence of the facts stated 
therein unless the defendant requires that the analyst be called as a witness, in which 
case he shall give notice thereof to the prosecutor not less than three clear days before 
the day on which the summons is returnable. 
 
(2) In like manner a certificate of analysis purporting to be under the hand of an 
analyst shall, on production thereof by the defendant, be sufficient evidence of the facts 
stated therein, unless the prosecutor requires that the analyst be called as a witness. 
 
(3) A copy of the certificate referred to in subsections (1) and (2) shall be sent to 
the defendant or prosecutor not less than ten clear days before the day fixed for the 
hearing of the summons, and if it is not so sent the court may adjourn the hearing on 
such terms as it may think proper. 
 
(4) Analysts are by this Act bound to state the truth in certificates of analysis 
under their hands. 
 
(5) In this section, “analyst” means— 
 
(a) 
a registered chemist under the Chemists Act 1975 [Act 158] or a person 
authorized under section 23a of such Act, or his employee working under his 
supervision; 
 
(b) 
a registered pharmacist under the Registration of Pharmacists Act 1951 [Act 
371] or his employee working under his supervision; 
 
(c) 
a registered engineer under the Registration of Engineers Act 1967 [Act 
138]; or 
 
(d) 
a registered geologist under the Geologists Act 2008 [Act 689].”; 
 
[Subst. S93 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 


(5A)  The Minister may, after consultation with the relevant Minister, appoint any 
qualified person or class of qualified persons by notification in the Gazette to be an 
analyst for the purpose of this section.”. 
[Ins. S93 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(6) If an analyst is called by the defendant as provided by subsection (1), he 
shall be called at the expense of the defendant unless the court otherwise directs. 
 
(7) If in any trial or proceeding had under this Act it is necessary to determine 
the alcoholic content of any liquor, the certificate of a senior officer of customs as to 
such alcoholic content shall be accepted as if such officer were an analyst and in any 
such case subsections (1), (4) and (6) shall apply in the same manner and to the same 
extent as if such officer were an analyst. 
 
 
Admissibility of statements and documents of persons who are dead or cannot be 
traced, etc.  
 
121A.Notwithstanding any written law to the contrary—  
 
(a) 
any statement made by any person to an officer of customs in the course of 
an investigation under this Act; and  
 
(b) 
any document or copy of any document seized from any person by an officer 
of customs in the exercise of his powers under this Act,  
 
shall be admissible in evidence in any proceedings against any person for an 
offence under this Act before any court if—  
 
(A) the person who made the statement or the document or the copy of the 
document is dead, or cannot be traced or found;  
 
(B) the person who made the statement or the document or the copy of the 
document has become incapable of giving evidence; or  
 
(C) the attendance of the person who made the statement or the document or 
the copy of the document cannot be procured without an amount of delay or 
expense which appears to the court to be unreasonable. 
 
 
Evidential provisions  
 
121B. (1) For the purposes of any proceeding under this Act, any statement purporting 
to be signed by the Director General or any officer of customs authorized by the Director 
General which forms part of or is annexed to the information, demand, statement of 
claim, shall be prima facie evidence of any fact stated therein.  
 
 


(3) If a transcript of any particulars contained in a declaration or other 
document relating to the customs duty is certified under the hand of the Director 
General or any officer of customs authorized by the Director General to be a true copy of 
the particulars, the transcript shall be prima facie evidence as proof of those particulars.  
 
(3)  No statement made or document produced by or on behalf of any person 
shall be inadmissible in evidence against that person in any proceedings against him to 
which this section applies by reason only that he was or may have been induced to 
make such statement or produce such document by any inducement or promise lawfully 
given or made by any person having any official duty under, or being employed in the 
administration of this Act.  
 
(4)  Nothing in this Act shall affect the operation of Chapter IX of Part III of the 
Evidence Act 1950.  
 
(5) 
For the purposes of paragraph 135(1)(g) or section 135b or 135c, where in 
any proceedings it is proved that any false statement or entry has been made in any 
declaration rendered under this Act by or on behalf of any person, or in any books of 
account or records of any person—  
 
(a) 
the person shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, to have made the 
false statement or entry or to have caused the false statement or entry to be 
made or to have allowed it to be made with intent to evade the payment of 
customs duty or any prohibition of import or export, or to obtain a refund or 
drawback of customs duty to which the person is not entitled, as the case 
may be; and 
 
(b) 
any other person who made any false statement or entry shall be presumed, 
until the contrary is proved, to have made the false statement or entry with 
intent to assist the person referred to in paragraph (a) to evade the payment 
of customs duty or any prohibition of import or export, or to obtain a refund 
or drawback of customs duty to which the person referred to in paragraph 
(a) is not entitled.  
 
(6) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any written law, where any 
officer of customs has obtained any document or other evidence in exercise of his 
powers under this Act, the document or copy of the document or other evidence, as the 
case may be, shall be prima facie evidence in any proceedings under this Act.  
 
(7)  Where any document which is to be used in any proceedings against any 
person for an offence under this Act is in a language other than the national language or 
English language, a translation of the document into the national language or English 
language shall be admissible in evidence where the translation is accompanied by a 
certificate of the person who translated the document setting out that it is an accurate, 
faithful and true translation and the translation had been done by the person at the 
instance of any officer of customs.  
 
(8)  Subsection (7) shall apply to a document which is translated, regardless of 
whether the document was made in or outside Malaysia, or whether the translation 


was done in or outside Malaysia, or whether possession of the document was obtained 
by any officer of customs in or outside Malaysia.  
 
[Ins. S94 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Proof as to registration or licensing of conveyances in Malaysia or Singapore 
 
122. Where in any prosecution under this Act it is relevant to ascertain particulars as 
to the registration or licensing of any conveyance registered or licensed in any port or 
place in Malaysia or Singapore, a certificate purporting to be signed by the officer 
responsible under any written law for the time being in force in Malaysia or any part 
thereof or in Singapore for such registration or licensing shall be prima facie evidence 
as to all particulars concerning such registration or licensing contained therein, and the 
burden of proving the incorrectness of any particulars stated in such certificate shall be 
on the person denying the same. 
 
[Del. (Shoulder note “vessel and”) and “vessel or” S95 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Proof as to tonnage or build of a craft 
 
122A. (1) Where in any prosecution under this Act or any regulation made thereunder, 
it is relevant to ascertain the tonnage or build or such other particulars descriptive of 
the identity of a craft, and if any of these particulars relating to the identity of the craft 
is in question, then any document produced by the prosecution purporting to be a 
certificate in respect of any such matter given and signed by any officer responsible for 
such under any written law for the time being in force in Malaysia shall be admissible 
in evidence, and it shall be evidence of its contents, including the facts stated therein, 
without proof of the signature to such certificate. 
 
(2) The provisions of this section shall apply notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other written law or rule of evidence to the contrary. 
 
 
Proof as to accuracy of a compass radar, etc. 
 
122B. Where in any proceedings it is necessary to prove the accuracy of a compass, 
radar or any other navigational aid, a certificate purporting to be signed by a harbour 
master or any officer appointed by the Minister responsible in respect of such compass, 
radar or any other navigational aid, shall be accepted by the court as prima facie proof 
of the facts certified in such certificate. 
 
 
Proof as to countervailing, anti-dumping and safeguard duties payable 
 
122C. Where in any proceedings it is necessary to prove the amount of countervailing 
duty, anti-dumping duty or safeguard duty payable, the production of a certificate 


signed by the Director General stating the amount of duty payable shall be sufficient 
authority for the court to give judgement for that amount. 
 
[Subst. S3 Act A1279 w.e.f. 22/11/2007] 
 
Proof as to accuracy of a meter or other device for measuring petroleum 
 
122D. Where in any proceedings under this Act or any regulations made thereunder it 
is necessary to prove the accuracy of a meter or any other device for measuring 
petroleum, a certificate purporting to be signed by any officer responsible under any 
written law for the time being in force in Malaysia for such measurement shall be 
admissible in evidence and shall be accepted by the court as prima facie evidence of the 
facts stated in such certificate. 
 
 
Imprisonment for non-payment of fine 
 
123. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code [Act 593] the 
period of imprisonment imposed by any court in respect of the non-payment of any 
fine under this Act, or in respect of the default of a sufficient distress to satisfy any such 
fine, shall be such period of such description, as in the opinion of the court will satisfy 
the justice of the case, but shall not exceed in any case the maximum fixed by the 
following scale: 
 
Amount of fine  
Maximum period  
Not exceeding five thousand 
ringgit  
Two months  
Exceeding five thousand ringgit 
but does not exceed ten thousand 
ringgit  
Four months  
Exceeding ten thousand ringgit 
but does not exceed twenty 
thousand ringgit 
Six months  
 
with two additional months for every ten thousand ringgit after the first twenty 
thousand ringgit of the fine until a maximum period of six years is reached. 
 
[Subst. S96 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Manner of seizure not to be enquired into on trial before court or on appeal to 
High Court 
 
124. On any trial before any court and in any proceeding on appeal in the High Court, 
relating to the seizure of goods subject to forfeiture under this Act, the court shall 
proceed to such trial or hear such appeal on the merits of the case only, without 


enquiring into the manner or form of making any seizure, except in so far as the 
manner and form of seizure may be evidence on such merits. 
 
 
Obligation of secrecy 
 
124A. (1) Except as provided under section 125, the name, address, identification card 
number and passport number of an informer and the substance of the information 
received from an informer shall be kept secret and shall not be disclosed by any proper 
officer of customs or any person who in the ordinary course of his duties comes into 
possession of or has control of or access to such information to any person except the 
designated officer of customs authorized by the Director General. 
 
(2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and 
shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand ringgit or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years or to both. 
 
[Subst. S97 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Protection of informers from discovery 
 
125. (1) Except as hereinafter provided, no witness in any civil or criminal proceeding 
shall be obliged or permitted to disclose the name or address of an informer or the 
substance of the information received from him or to state any matter which might lead 
to his discovery. 
 
(2) If any books, documents or papers which are in evidence or liable to 
inspection in any civil or criminal proceeding whatsoever contain any entry in which 
any informer is named or described or which might lead to his discovery, the court 
shall cause all such passages to be concealed from view or to be obliterated so far only 
as may be necessary to protect the informer from discovery. 
 
(3) If on the trial for any offence against this Act or any regulation made 
thereunder the court after full enquiry into the case believes that the informer wilfully 
made in his complaint a material statement which he knew or believed to be false or 
did not believe to be true, or if in any other proceeding the court is of opinion that 
justice cannot be fully done between the parties thereto without the discovery of the 
informer, it shall be lawful for the court to require the production of the original 
complaint, if in writing, and permit enquiry, and require full disclosure, concerning the 
informer. 
 
 
Confidentiality of information 
 
125A. (1)  Any person having any official duty or being appointed or employed under 
this Act shall regard and deal with all information, documents or declarations relating 
to importation, exportation, valuation, classification or origin determination of any 
goods as confidential.  
 


(2)  Subject to subsection (4), any person having possession or control over any 
document, information or declaration, or copies thereof, relating to importation, 
exportation, valuation, classification or origin determination of any goods, who at any 
time, otherwise than for the purposes of this Act or with the express authority of the 
Director General—  
 
(a) 
communicates such information or anything contained in such document or 
declaration, or copies thereof, to any person; or  
 
(b) 
suffers or permits any person to have access to such information or to 
anything contained in such document or declaration, or copies thereof,  
 
shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit 
or to both.  
 
(3)  No person having any official duty or being appointed or employed under 
this Act shall be required—  
 
(a) 
to produce in any matters or proceedings in any court or tribunal any 
information, documents or declarations; or 
 
(b) 
to divulge or communicate in such matters or proceedings any matter or 
thing, coming under his notice in the performance of his duties under this 
Act,  
 
except as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this 
Act, or in order to institute a prosecution, or in the course of a prosecution for any 
offence committed under this Act.  
 
(4)  The Director General may transmit or communicate any information or 
documents referred to in subsection (2) as he deems expedient or necessary to allow 
disclosure of certain information to any person.  
 
(5)  Notwithstanding subsection (4), the Director General shall not transmit or 
communicate any information or documents to a corresponding authority in a foreign 
state unless—  
 
(a) 
an agreement or arrangement has been entered with that foreign state 
regarding the exchange of information; and  
 
(b) 
the Director General is satisfied that the corresponding authority has given 
appropriate undertaking for protecting the confidentiality of anything 
communicated to it and for controlling the use of it, including an undertaking 
that it will not be used as evidence in any proceeding.  
 
 
 


(6) The Director General shall record in writing all decisions to transmit or 
communicate any information or documents to a foreign state. 
 
[Subst. S98 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Goods liable to seizure liable to forfeiture 
 
126. All goods liable to seizure under this Act, shall be liable to forfeiture and all 
forfeited goods shall be disposed of in accordance with the directions of the Director 
General. 
 
[Subst. S99 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Court to order disposal of goods seized 
 
127. (1)  An order for the forfeiture or for the release of anything liable to forfeiture 
under this Act shall be made by the court before which the prosecution with regard 
thereto has been held, and an order for the forfeiture of goods shall be made if it is 
proved to the satisfaction of the court that an offence against this Act or any regulation 
made thereunder has been committed and that the goods were the subject matter of or 
were used in the commission of the offence notwithstanding that no person may have 
been convicted of such offence. 
 
(1A)  The amount secured under paragraph 115(1)(a) or (b) or the amount 
realized by sale under paragraph 115(1)(c) shall be forfeited by the court if it is proved 
to the satisfaction of the court that an offence against this Act or any regulation made 
thereunder has been committed and that the goods in respect of which the amount was 
secured or realized by sale, as the case may be, was the subject matter of or was used in 
the commission of the offence notwithstanding that no person may have been 
convicted of such offence. 
 
[Subst. S100 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) All things forfeited shall be delivered to a proper officer of customs and shall 
be disposed of in accordance with the directions of the Director General. 
 
 
Goods seized in respect of which there is no prosecution, or the proceeds of sale 
thereof, are forfeited if not claimed within one month 
 
128. (1) If there be no prosecution with regard to any goods seized under this Act, 
such goods or the proceeds of sale of such goods which are held pursuant to paragraph 
115(1)(c) shall be taken and deemed to be forfeited at the expiration of thirty days 
from the date of the notice of seizure of the goods  unless, before such expiration— 
 
[Subst. S101 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 


(a) 
a claim to such goods or the proceeds of sale of such goods is made under 
subsection (2); 
 
(b) 
a written application is made for the return of such goods under paragraph 
115(1)(a) or (b); or 
 
(c) 
such goods are returned under the said paragraph (a) or (b). 
 
(2) Any person asserting that he is the owner of such goods or the proceeds of 
sale of such goods, as the case may be, and that they are not liable to forfeiture may 
give written notice to a senior officer of customs that he claims the same. 
 
(3) If there is a claim or a written application made within the period of thirty 
days referred to in subsection (1) and there is no prosecution with regard to the goods, 
the senior officer of customs shall, on the expiration of the period of thirty days, refer 
the claim or the application to the Director General. 
 
[Subst. S101 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(3A) Upon reference by the senior officer of customs under subsection (3), the 
Director General may direct such senior officer of customs—  
 
(a) 
to release such goods or the proceeds of sale of such goods or the security 
furnished under paragraph 115(1)(a) or (b); or  
 
(b) 
by information in the prescribed form, to refer the matter to a Magistrate of 
the First Class for his decision. 
 
[Ins. S101 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(4) The Magistrate of the First Class shall issue a summons requiring the person 
asserting that he is the owner of the goods or the proceeds of sale of such goods, and 
the person from whom the goods were seized, to appear before him, and upon their 
appearance or default to appear, due service of such summons being proved, the 
Magistrate of the First Class shall proceed to the examination of the matter, and upon 
proof that an offence against this Act or any regulations made thereunder has been 
committed and that such goods were the subject matter, or were used in the 
commission, of such offence, shall order such goods or the proceeds of sale of such 
goods or the amount secured under paragraph 115(1)(a) or (b), as the case may be, to 
be forfeited, or in the absence of such proof, may order the release of such goods or the 
proceeds of sale of such goods or the security furnished under paragraph 115(1)(a) or 
(b), as the case may be. 
 
(5) In any proceedings under subsection (4), section 119 shall apply to the 
person asserting that he is the owner of the goods and to the person from whom they 
were seized as if such owner or person had been the defendant in a prosecution under 
this Act. 
 


Goods or amount forfeited may be delivered or refunded to the owner or other 
person 
 
129. The Minister may, upon application made to him in writing through the Director 
General, order— 
 
(a) 
any goods seized under this Act; or 
 
(b) 
any amount secured under paragraph 115(1)(a) or (b) or the amount 
realized by sale under paragraph 115(1)(c); 
 
whether forfeited, or taken and deemed to be forfeited, pursuant to section 127, 
128 or 131, to be delivered or refunded, as the case may be, to the owner or other 
person entitled thereto on payment of such amount and upon such terms and 
conditions as he may deem fit: 
 
[Subst. S102 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Provided that any such application shall be made before the expiration of one 
calendar month from the date on which such goods or amount are forfeited or are 
taken and deemed to be forfeited, as the case may be. 
 
 
Conviction under other law 
 
130. Nothing in this Act contained shall be deemed to prevent the prosecution, 
conviction and punishment of any person according to the provisions of any other 
written law; but so that no person shall be punished more than once for the same 
offence. 
 
 
Compounding of offences 
 
131. (1) The Minister may, with the approval of the Public Prosecutor, make 
regulations prescribing— 
  
(a) 
any offence under this Act or its subsidiary legislation as an offence which 
may be compounded;  
 
(b) 
criteria for compounding such offence; and  
 
(c) 
method and procedure for compounding such offence.  
 
 
(2)  Any senior officer of customs may, with the written consent of the Public 
Prosecutor, compound any offence committed by any person under this Act and 
prescribed to be a compoundable offence by making a written offer to the person 
suspected to have committed the offence to compound the offence upon payment to the 
Director General of an amount of money not exceeding fifty per centum of the amount 
of the maximum fine for that offence within the period specified in the offer. 


 
 
(3)  An offer under subsection (2) may be made at any time after the offence has 
been committed but before any prosecution for it has been instituted, and if the amount 
specified in the offer is not paid within the period specified in the offer or within any 
extended period as the Director General may grant, prosecution for the offence may be 
instituted at any time after that against the person to whom the offer was made.  
 
(4)  Where an offence has been compounded under subsection (2), no 
prosecution shall after that be instituted in respect of the offence against the person to 
whom the offer to compound was made.  
 
(5)  Subject to subsections (6) and (7), upon the payment of such sum of money 
as specified under subsection (1), any goods seized and the amount secured under 
paragraph 115(1)(a) or (b) or the amount realized by sale under paragraph 115(1)(c) 
shall be released and no further proceedings shall be taken against such goods.  
 
(6)  If dutiable goods are seized under this Act, such goods or the amount 
secured under paragraph 115(1)(a) or (b) or the amount realized by sale under 
paragraph 115(1)(c), as the case may be, shall be forfeited unless the customs duties 
payable is paid within thirty days from the date of payment of such amount of money.  
 
(7)  If prohibited goods are seized under this Act, such goods or the amount 
secured under paragraph 115(1)(a) or (b) or the amount realized by sale under 
paragraph 115(1)(c), as the case may be, shall be forfeited.  
 
 
(8)  Notwithstanding subsection (7), where the prohibition on the goods is 
conditional upon a licence being issued, a senior officer of customs may release such 
goods if a licence is issued by any relevant authority and produced to the senior officer 
of customs within thirty days from the date such amount of money is paid. 
 
[Subst. S103 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Cost of holding goods, document or thing seized  
 
131A. Where any goods, document or thing seized under this Act is held in the custody 
of the officer of customs pending completion of any proceedings in respect of an 
offence under this Act, the cost of holding such goods, document or thing in custody 
shall, in the event of any person found guilty of an offence, be a debt due to the 
Government by such person and shall be recoverable accordingly. 
 
[Ins. S104 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
 
 
 


No costs of damages arising from seizure to be recoverable unless seizure 
without reasonable or probable cause 
 
132. No person shall in any proceedings before any court in respect of the seizure of 
any goods seized in exercise or the purported exercise of any power conferred under 
this Act, be entitled to the costs of such proceedings or to any damages or other relief 
other than an order for the return of such goods or the payment of their value unless 
such seizure was made without reasonable or probable cause. 
 
 
Order to pay cost of damage to Government property  
 
132A. If any person is convicted of an offence under this Act or any regulation made 
thereunder, and it appears to the court before which he is convicted that the 
commission of such offence has caused damage to any Government property, the court 
may, in addition to any punishment specified for the offence, order the person so 
convicted to pay the Director General the costs and expenses incurred in repairing or 
replacing the property and any other cost and expenses incurred in connection with the 
damage to the property. 
 
[Ins. S105 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
PART XIV 
 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
 
Penalty on making incorrect declarations and on falsifying documents 
 
133. (1)   Whoever— 
 
(a) 
makes, orally or in writing, or signs any declaration, certificate or other 
document required by this Act which is untrue or incorrect in any 
particular; 
 
(b) 
makes, orally or in writing, or signs any declaration or document, made for 
consideration of any officer of customs on any application presented to him, 
which is untrue or incorrect in any particular; 
 
(c) 
counterfeits or causes to be counterfeited or falsifies or causes to be falsified 
any document which is or may be required under this Act or used in the 
transaction of any business or matter relating to customs, or uses or causes 
to be used or in any way assists in the use of such counterfeited or falsified 
document; 
 
[Ins. S6 Act A1580 w.e.f. 2/1/2019] 
 
(d) 
fraudulently alters any document, or counterfeits the seal, signature, initials 
or other mark of, or used by, any officer of customs for the verification of 


any such document or for the security of any goods or any other purpose in 
the conduct of business relating to customs; 
 
(e) 
being required by this Act to make a declaration of dutiable goods imported 
or exported, fails to make such declaration as required; 
 
(f) 
fails or refuses to produce to a proper officer of customs any document 
required to be produced under section 100; or 
 
(g) 
being so required under section 87A fails to make a declaration in the 
prescribed form, within the stipulated period thereunder, of goods imported 
or exported, 
 
[Subst. S106 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding 
*five hundred thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding **seven 
years or to both. 
[Subst. S6 Act A1580 w.e.f. 2/1/2019] 
 
(2) When any such declaration whether oral or written, or any such certificate 
or other document as is referred to in paragraphs (1)(a), (b) and (c) has been proved to 
be untrue or incorrect or counterfeited or falsified in whole or in part, it shall be no 
defence to allege that such declaration, certificate or other document was made or used 
inadvertently or without criminal or fraudulent intent, or that the person signing the 
same, was not aware of, or did not understand the contents of, such document, or 
where any declaration was made or recorded in National Language or in English by 
interpretation from any other language, that such declaration was misinterpreted or 
not fully interpreted by any interpreter provided by the declarant. 
 
(3) For the purposes of this section, “falsified” in relation to a document shall be 
deemed to include a document which is untrue or incorrect in any material particular, 
and “falsifies” has a similar meaning. 
 
 
Penalty on refusing to answer questions or on giving false information 
 
134. (1) Whoever, being required by this Act to give any information which may 
reasonably be required by a proper officer of customs and which it is in his power to 
give, refuses to give such information or furnishes as true information which he knows 
or has reason to believe to be false, shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit 
or to both. 
 
[Subst. S7 Act A1580 w.e.f. 2/1/2019] 
 
(2) When any such information is proved to be untrue or incorrect in whole or 
in part it shall be no defence to allege that such information or any part thereof was 


furnished inadvertently or without criminal or fraudulent intent, or was misinterpreted 
or not fully interpreted by an interpreter provided by the informant. 
 
 
Penalty relating to smuggling offences, evasion of duty, fraud, etc. 
 
135. (1)  Whoever— 
 
(a) 
is concerned in importing or exporting any uncustomed goods or any 
prohibited goods contrary to such prohibition whether such uncustomed or 
prohibited goods be shipped, unshipped, delivered or not; 
 
(b) 
ships, unships, delivers or assists or is concerned in the shipping, 
unshipping or delivery of any uncustomed goods or any prohibited goods 
contrary to such prohibition; 
 
(c) 
illegally removes or withdraws or in any way assists or is concerned in the 
illegal removal or withdrawal of any goods from any customs control; 
 
(d) 
knowingly harbours, keeps, conceals, or is in possession of, or permits, 
suffers, causes or procures to be harboured, kept or concealed, any 
uncustomed or prohibited goods; 
 
(e) 
is in any way knowingly concerned in conveying, removing, depositing or 
dealing with any dutiable, uncustomed or prohibited goods with intent to 
defraud the Government of any duties thereon, or to evade any of the 
provisions of this Act or to evade any prohibition applicable to such goods; 
 
(f) 
being a passenger or other person, is found to have in his baggage or upon 
his person or otherwise in his possession, after having denied that he has 
any dutiable or prohibited goods in his baggage or upon his person or 
otherwise in his possession, any dutiable or prohibited goods; or 
 
(g) 
is in any way knowingly concerned in any fraudulent evasion or attempt at 
fraudulent evasion of any customs duty, or in evasion or attempt at evasion 
of any prohibition of import or export; 
 
shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction— 
 
(i) 
in the case of goods included in a class of goods appearing in an order made 
under subsection 11(1)— 
 
(aa) be liable for the first offence to a fine of not less than ten times the 
amount of the customs duty or fifty thousand ringgit, whichever is the 
greater amount, and of not more than twenty times the amount of the 
customs duty or five hundred thousand ringgit, whichever is the 
greater amount, or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five 
years or to both; and 
 


(bb) be liable for a second offence or any subsequent offence to a fine of not 
less than twenty times the amount of the customs duty or one hundred 
thousand ringgit, whichever is the greater amount, and of not more 
than forty times the amount of the customs duty or one million ringgit, 
whichever is the greater amount, or to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding seven years or to both: 
 
[Subst. S8 Act A1580 w.e.f. 2/1/2019] 
 
Provided that when the amount of the customs duty cannot be ascertained, the 
penalty may amount to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand ringgit or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both; 
 
(ii) in the case of uncustomed goods, such goods not being dutiable or 
prohibited, be liable to a fine not exceeding twice the value of the goods or 
ten thousand ringgit whichever is the greater amount: 
 
Provided that where the value cannot be ascertained the penalty may amount to a 
fine not exceeding ten thousand ringgit; 
 
(iii) in the case of prohibited goods other than cigarettes containing tobacco and 
intoxicating liquor— 
 
(aa) be liable for the first offence to a fine of not less than ten times the 
value of the goods or fifty thousand ringgit, whichever is the greater 
amount, and of not more than twenty times the value of the goods or 
five hundred thousand ringgit, whichever is the greater amount, or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both; and 
 
(bb) be liable for a second offence or any subsequent offence to a fine of not 
less than twenty times the value of the goods or one hundred thousand 
ringgit, whichever is the greater amount, and of not more than forty 
times the value of the goods or one million ringgit, whichever is the 
greater amount, or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven 
years or to both: 
 
[Subst. S8 Act A1580 w.e.f. 2/1/2019] 
 
Provided that where the value of the goods cannot be ascertained, the penalty 
may amount to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand ringgit or to imprisonment 
for a term not exceeding five years or to both; 
(iv) in the case of cigarettes containing tobacco or intoxicating liquor included in 
a class of goods appearing in an order made under subsection 11(1)— 
 
(aa) be liable for the first offence to a fine of not less than ten times the 
amount of the customs duty or one hundred thousand ringgit, 
whichever is the greater amount, and of not more than twenty times 
the amount of the customs duty or five hundred thousand ringgit, 


whichever is the greater amount, or to imprisonment for a term of not 
less than six months and not more than five years or to both; and 
 
(bb) be liable for a second offence or any subsequent offence to a fine of not 
less than twenty times the amount of the customs duty or two hundred 
thousand ringgit, whichever is the greater amount, and of not more 
than forty times the amount of the customs duty or one million ringgit, 
whichever is the greater amount, or to imprisonment for a term of not 
less than six months and not more than seven years or to both; and 
 
[Subst. S107 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
(v) 
in the case of cigarettes containing tobacco or intoxicating liquor which are 
prohibited goods— 
(aa) be liable for the first offence to a fine of not less than ten times the 
value of the goods or one hundred thousand ringgit, whichever is the 
greater amount, and of not more than twenty times the value of the 
goods or five hundred thousand ringgit, whichever is the greater 
amount, or to imprisonment for a term of not less than six months and 
not more than five years or to both; and 
 
(bb) be liable for a second offence or any subsequent offence to a fine of not 
less than twenty times the value of the goods or two hundred thousand 
ringgit, whichever is the greater amount, and of not more than forty 
times the value of the goods or one million ringgit, whichever is the 
greater amount, or to imprisonment for a term of not less than six 
months and not more than seven years or to both. 
 
[Subst. S8 Act A1580 w.e.f. 2/1/2019] 
[Subst. S107 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(2) In any prosecution under this section or section 139 any dutiable, 
uncustomed or prohibited goods shall be deemed to be dutiable, uncustomed or 
prohibited goods, as the case may be, to the knowledge of the defendant unless the 
contrary be proved by such defendant. 
 
 
Penalty for offences relating to data stored in computer 
 
135A. (1) Any person who, without the authority of the Director General— 
 
(a) 
destroys, damages, erases or alters or manipulates the data stored in, or used 
in connection with, a computer; 
 
(b) 
introduces into, or records or stores in, a computer by any means data for 
the purpose of— 
 


(i) 
destroying, damaging, erasing, altering or manipulating other data 
stored in that computer; or 
 
(ii) interfering with, interrupting or obstructing the lawful use of that 
computer, or the data stored in that computer; or 
 
(c) 
otherwise uses a computer, the purpose or effect of which is to reduce, avoid 
or evade any liability to customs duty imposed or which would otherwise 
have been imposed by the Act, or to defeat any provision of the Act, shall be 
guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding 
one hundred thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 
five years or to both. 
 
(2)  In this section, “data” includes any computer program or part of a computer 
program. 
 
 
Penalty for offence relating to claims for drawback 
 
135B. Any person who obtains, or does anything which causes any other person to 
obtain, any amount by way of drawback of any customs duty in respect of any goods 
which is not lawfully payable or allowable in respect thereof, or which is higher than the 
amount so payable or allowable shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be 
liable to a fine not exceeding three times the amount of such duty or five hundred 
thousand ringgit, whichever is the greater, or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 
seven years or to both. 
 
 
Penalty for offence relating to claims for refund 
 
135C. Any person who obtains, or does anything which causes any other person to 
obtain, the refund of any money under section 16 of any amount in excess of the amount 
properly so refundable shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to 
a fine not exceeding three times the amount refunded in excess of the amount properly 
so refundable or five hundred thousand ringgit, whichever is the greater, or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years or to both. 
 
[Ins. S108 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
Penalty for assaulting or obstructing officers of customs and rescuing goods 
 
136. Every person who— 
 
(a) 
assaults, obstructs, hinders, threatens or molests any officer of customs or 
other public servant or any person acting in his aid or assistance or duly 
employed for the prevention of smuggling, in the execution of his duty or in 
the due seizing of any goods liable to seizure under this Act; 
 


(b) 
rescues or endeavours to rescue, or causes to be rescued, or any person who 
has been detained; or 
 
(c) 
before or after any seizure staves, breaks or otherwise destroys any package 
or goods to prevent the seizure thereof or the securing of the same, 
 
shall for any such offence be liable— 
 
(i) 
on the first conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years 
or to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand ringgit or to both; and 
 
(ii) on the second or subsequent conviction to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding seven years or to a fine not exceeding one million ringgit or to 
both. 
 
[Subst. S9 Act A1580 w.e.f. 2/1/2019] 
 
 
Penalty for offering or receiving bribes 
 
137. (1)  If any officer of customs or other person duly employed for the prevention 
of smuggling— 
 
(a) 
makes any collusive seizure or delivers up or makes any agreement to 
deliver up or not to seize any conveyance, or any goods liable to seizure; 
 
(b) 
accepts, agrees to accept, or attempts to obtain, any bribe, gratuity, 
recompense or reward for the neglect or nonperformance of his duty; or 
 
(c) 
conspires or connives with any person to import or export or is in any way 
concerned in the importation or exportation of any goods liable to customs 
duties or any goods prohibited to be imported or exported for the purpose 
of seizing any conveyance or any goods and obtaining any reward for such 
seizure or otherwise, 
 
[Del. S109 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
every such officer so offending shall be guilty of an offence against this Act and 
shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years 
or to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand ringgit or to both such 
imprisonment and fine, and shall be interdicted from holding office in the public 
service of the Federal Government or the Government of any State, and every 
person who gives or offers or promises to give or procures to be given any bribes, 
gratuity, recompense or reward to, or makes any collusive agreement with, any 
such officer or person as aforesaid to induce him in any way to neglect his duty or 
to do, conceal or connive at any act whereby any of the provisions of any other 
law relating to imports or to exports may be evaded, shall be guilty as an abettor 
and so punishable under this Act. 
[Subst. S10 Act A1580 w.e.f. 2/1/2019] 
 


(2) Any officer of customs who is found when on duty to have in his possession 
any monies in contravention of any departmental regulations issued in writing shall be 
presumed, until the contrary is proved, to have received the same in contravention of 
paragraph (1)(b). 
 
(3) If an officer of customs has reasonable suspicion that another officer of 
customs junior in rank to him has in his possession any money received in 
contravention of paragraph(1)(b) he may search such other officer. 
 
 
Penalty for offences not otherwise provided for 
 
138. Every omission or neglect to comply with, and every act done or attempted to be 
done contrary to, the provisions of this Act, or any breach of the conditions and 
restrictions subject to, or upon which, any licence or permit is issued or any exemption 
is granted under this Act, shall be an offence against this Act and in respect of any such 
offence for which no penalty is expressly provided the offender shall be liable to a fine 
of not exceeding fifty thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five 
years or to both. 
[Subst. S11 Act A1580 w.e.f. 2/1/2019] 
 
Attempts and abetments 
 
139. Whoever attempts to commit any offence punishable under this Act, or abets the 
commission of such offence, shall be punishable with the punishment provided for such 
offence. 
 
 
Offences by bodies of persons and by servants and agents 
 
140. (1)  Where an offence against this Act or any regulation made thereunder has 
been committed by a company, a firm, a society, an association or other body of 
persons, any person who at the time of the commission of the offence was a director, 
manager, secretary or other similar officer or a partner of the company, firm, society, 
association or other body of persons or was purporting to act in such capacity shall be 
deemed to be guilty of that offence unless he proves that the offence was committed 
without his consent or connivance and that he exercised all such diligence to prevent 
the commission of the offence as he ought to have exercised, having regard to the 
nature of his functions in that capacity and to all the circumstances. 
 
(2) Where any person would be liable under this Act to any punishment, penalty 
or forfeiture for any act, omission, neglect or default he shall be liable to the same 
punishment, penalty or forfeiture for every such act, omission, neglect or default of any 
clerk, servant or agent, or of the clerk or servant of such agent provided that such act, 
omission, neglect or default was committed by such clerk, or servant in the course of 
his employment or by such agent when acting on behalf of such person or by the clerk 
or servant of such agent when acting in the course of his employment in such 
circumstances that had such act, omission, neglect or default been committed by the 
agent his principal would have been liable under this section. 
 


Rewards 
 
141. The Director General may order such rewards as he may deem fit to be paid to any 
officer or other person for services rendered in connection with the detection of cases 
of smuggling or of offences under this Act, or in connection with any seizures made 
under this Act. 
 
PART XIVA 
 
CUSTOMS APPEAL TRIBUNAL 
 
Interpretation 
 
141A. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires— 
 
“Chairman” means the Chairman of the Tribunal appointed under paragraph 
141C(1)(a); 
 
“Deputy Chairman” means the Deputy Chairman of the Tribunal appointed under 
paragraph 141C(1)(a); 
 
“Secretary” means the Secretary to the Tribunal appointed under section 141H; 
 
“Tribunal” means the Customs Appeal Tribunal established under section 141B. 
 
 
Establishment of Tribunal 
 
141B. A tribunal to be known as “the Customs Appeal Tribunal” is established. 
 
 
Membership of Tribunal 
 
141C. (1) The Tribunal shall consist of the following members who shall be appointed 
by the Minister: 
 
(a) 
a Chairman and not more than two Deputy Chairmen from amongst 
members of the Judicial and Legal Service; and 
 
(b) 
not less than seven other members as the Minister deems fit from amongst 
the persons who, in the opinion of the Minister, have wide knowledge or 
extensive experience in any field of activities relating to customs or taxation. 
 
[Subst. S4 Act A1571 w.e.f. 1/9/2018] 
 
(2) The members referred to in paragraph (1)(b)— 
 
(a) 
shall hold office for a term not exceeding three years; and 
 


(b) 
shall be eligible for reappointment upon the expiry of his term of office 
but shall not be appointed for more than three consecutive terms. 
 
(3) The Minister shall determine the terms and conditions of the appointment of 
the Chairman, Deputy Chairman and other members of the Tribunal.” 
 
[Ins. S4 Act A1571 w.e.f. 1/9/2018] 
 
Temporary exercise of functions of Chairman 
 
141D. Where the Chairman is for any reason unable to perform his functions or during 
any period of vacancy in the office of the Chairman, the Deputy Chairman shall perform 
the functions of the Chairman. 
 
 
Revocation of appointment 
 
141E. The Minister may revoke the appointment of a member of the Tribunal 
appointed under paragraph 141C(1)(b) if— 
 
(a) 
his conduct, whether in connection with his duties as a member of the 
Tribunal or otherwise, has been such as to bring discredit to the Tribunal; 
 
(b) 
he has become incapable of properly carrying out his duties as a member of 
the Tribunal; 
 
(c) 
there has been proved against him, or he has been convicted on, a charge in 
respect of— 
 
(i) 
an offence involving fraud, dishonesty or moral turpitude; 
 
(ii) an offence under a law relating to corruption; 
 
(iii) an offence under this Act, the Excise Act 1976 [Act 176], the Sales 
Tax Act 2018 [Act 806] or the Service Tax Act 2018, or the repealed 
Sales Tax Act 1972 [Act 64], Service Tax Act 1975 [Act 151] or 
Goods and Services Tax Act 2014 [Act 762]; or 
 
(iv) any other offence punishable with imprisonment for more than two 
years; 
 
(d) 
he is adjudicated a bankrupt; 
 
(e) 
he has been found or declared to be of unsound mind or has otherwise 
become incapable of managing his affairs; or 
 
(f) 
he absents himself from three consecutive sittings of the Tribunal 
without leave of the Chairman. 
 
 


Resignation 
141F. (1)  Subject to subsection (2), a member of the Tribunal may at any time resign 
his office by giving notice in writing to the Minister. 
(2)  For the purpose of resignation, a member of the Tribunal appointed under 
paragraph 141C(1)(b) shall give three months' notice in writing to the Minister. 
 
Remuneration 
 
141G. All members of the Tribunal shall be paid such remuneration as the Minister may 
determine. 
 
 
Secretary to Tribunal and other officers 
 
141H. (1) There shall be appointed a Secretary to the Tribunal and such number of 
officers as may be necessary for carrying out the functions of the Tribunal. 
 
(2) The Chairman shall have general control of the Secretary and officers of the 
Tribunal. 
 
(3) The Secretary to the Tribunal shall be deemed to be an officer of the 
Tribunal. 
 
 
Public servant 
 
141I. All members, officers and the Secretary of the Tribunal while discharging their 
duties shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of the Penal Code [Act 
574]. 
 
 
Hearing of appeals 
 
141J. (1) The sitting of every appeal shall consist of a panel of three members. 
 
(2) In every appeal proceedings, the Tribunal shall be presided by— 
 
(a) 
the Chairman; 
 
(b) 
the Deputy Chairman; or 
 
(c) 
any other member appointed by the Chairman. 
 
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be determined in accordance with the 
opinion of the majority of the members of the panel. 
 


(4) Where a member of the panel under subsection (1), other than the person 
presiding over the proceedings referred to in subsection (2), dies or becomes incapable 
of exercising his functions as a member, the proceedings shall continue before, and 
decision shall be given by, the remaining members of the panel, and the panel shall, for 
the purposes of the proceedings, be deemed to be duly constituted notwithstanding the 
death or incapability of the member as aforesaid. 
 
(5) In the case where two members of the panel under subsection (1), other than 
the person presiding over the proceedings referred to in subsection (2), die or become 
incapable of exercising their functions as members, the proceedings shall be continued 
by the person presiding over the proceedings sitting alone. 
 
(6) In the case under subsection (4), the decision shall be determined in 
accordance with the opinion of the majority of the remaining members of the panel, and 
if there is no majority, the person presiding over the proceedings shall have a casting 
vote. 
 
(7)  If the person presiding over the proceedings referred to in subsection (2) 
dies or becomes incapacitated, or is for any other reason unable to complete or dispose 
of the proceedings, the appeal shall be heard afresh, unless the parties agree that the 
presiding person be replaced— 
 
(a) 
in the case where the presiding person is the Chairman, by a Deputy 
Chairman, or any other member appointed by the Deputy Chairman; 
 
(b) 
in the case where the presiding person is a Deputy Chairman, by the 
Chairman or another Deputy Chairman, or any other member appointed by 
the Chairman; or 
 
(c) 
in the case where the presiding person is the member appointed by the 
Chairman, by the Chairman or a Deputy Chairman, or any other member 
appointed by the Chairman. 
 
(8) Where the term of appointment of any member of the panel expires during 
the pendency of any proceedings in respect of an appeal, the term of his appointment 
shall be deemed to be extended until the final disposal of the appeal. 
 
(9)  The Tribunal may sit in one or more sittings on such day and at such time 
and place as the Chairman may determine. 
[Subst. S8 Act A1571 w.e.f. 1/9/2018] 
 
 
Hearing by single members 
 
141K. Notwithstanding section 141J, if the Chairman deems it fit in the interest of 
achieving expeditious and efficient conduct of the appeal, the proceedings of the appeal 
shall be presided over by any of the following persons sitting alone: 
 
(a) 
the Chairman; 


 
(b) 
any of the Deputy Chairmen; or 
 
(c) 
any other member of the Tribunal as the Chairman may determine. 
 
[Subst. S9 Act A1571 w.e.f. 1/9/2018] 
 
Disclosure of interest 
 
141L. (1) A member of the Tribunal having, directly or indirectly, by himself or his 
family member, any interest in an appeal brought before him as a member, such 
member shall, immediately, disclose the fact and the nature of his interest to the 
Chairman. 
 
(2) Upon receipt of the disclosure of interest under subsection (1), the Chairman 
shall appoint another member to hear and dispose of the appeal. 
 
 
Jurisdiction of Tribunal 
 
141M. (1) The Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to determine any appeal made under 
section 143 of the Act, section 47 of the Excise Act 1976, subsection 96(5) of the Sales 
Tax Act 2018, section 81 of the Service Tax Act 2018, and section 126 of the repealed 
Goods and Services Tax Act 2014 as provided under section 5 of the Goods and Services 
Tax (Repeal) Act 2018 [Act 805]. 
 
[Subst. S10 Act A1571 w.e.f. 1/9/2018] 
 
(2) Without affecting subsection (1), the Minister may by order prescribe any 
additional matters to be within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. 
 
(3) An appellant may lodge with the Tribunal an appeal in the prescribed form 
together with the prescribed fee. 
 
 
Exclusion of jurisdiction of court 
 
141N. (1) Where an appeal is lodged with the Tribunal and the appeal is within the 
jurisdiction of the Tribunal, the issues in dispute in such appeal, whether as shown in 
the initial appeal or as emerging in the course of the hearing, shall not be the subject of 
proceedings between the same parties in any court unless— 
 
(a) 
the proceedings before the court were commenced before the appeal was 
lodged with the Tribunal; or 
 
(b) 
the appeal before the Tribunal is withdrawn, abandoned or struck out. 
 
(2) Where paragraph (1)(a) applies, the issues in dispute in the appeal to which 
those proceedings relate, whether as shown in the initial appeal or as emerging in the 


course of the hearing, shall not be the subject of proceedings between the same parties 
before the Tribunal unless the appeal before the court is withdrawn, abandoned or 
struck out. 
 
 
Notice of appeal and hearing 
 
141O. Upon an appeal being lodged under section 141M, the Secretary shall give notice 
of the details of the day, time and place of hearing in the prescribed form to the 
Director General and the appellant. 
 
 
Negotiation for settlement 
 
141P. (1) The Tribunal shall, as regards every appeal within its jurisdiction, assess 
whether, in all the circumstances, it is appropriate for the Tribunal to assist the parties 
to the proceedings to negotiate an agreed settlement in relation to the appeal. 
 
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), in making an assessment 
the Tribunal shall have regard to any factor that in the opinion of the Tribunal, are 
likely to impair the ability of either or both of the parties to negotiate an agreed 
settlement. 
 
(3) Where the parties reach an agreed settlement, the Tribunal shall approve 
and record the settlement and the settlement shall then take effect as if it were a 
decision of the Tribunal. 
 
(4) Where— 
 
(a) 
it appears to the Tribunal that it would not be appropriate for it to assist the 
parties to negotiate an agreed settlement in relation to the appeal; or 
 
(b) 
the parties are unable to reach an agreed settlement in relation to the 
appeal, 
 
the Tribunal shall proceed to determine the appeal. 
 
 
Representation at hearing  
 
141Q. For the purpose of an appeal before the Tribunal— 
 
(a) 
the Director General may be represented by any officer authorized by him; 
and 
 
(b) 
the appellant may conduct the appeal himself or be represented by any 
person duly authorized by him. 
 
[Subst. S11 Act A1571 w.e.f. 1/9/2018] 


Proceedings to be closed 
 
141R. (1) Unless agreed by the parties to the appeal, all proceedings before the 
Tribunal shall be closed from the public. 
 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1), where the Tribunal is of the opinion that it 
would be in the interest of the public, the Tribunal may allow the publication of the facts 
of the appeal, decision of the appeal and reasons for the decision. 
 
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2), the Tribunal shall not publish information 
the disclosure of which is prohibited or restricted by or under this Act or any other 
written law. 
[Subst. S12 Act A1571 w.e.f. 1/9/2018] 
 
Evidence 
 
141S. (1) Any proceedings before the Tribunal shall be conducted without regard to 
formality and technicality and the Tribunal may— 
 
(a) 
procure and receive all such evidence on oath or affirmation, whether 
written or oral, and examine all such persons as witnesses, as the Tribunal 
thinks necessary to procure, receive or examine; 
 
(b) 
require the production before it of books, papers, documents, records and 
things; 
 
(c) 
administer such oath, affirmation or statutory declaration as the case may 
be; 
 
(d) 
seek and receive such other evidence and make such other inquiries as it 
thinks fit; 
 
(e) 
summon the parties to the proceedings or any other person to attend before 
it to give evidence or to produce any document, records or other thing in his 
possession or otherwise to assist the Tribunal in its deliberations; 
 
(f) 
receive expert evidence; and 
 
(g) 
generally direct and do all such things as may be necessary or expedient 
for the expeditious determination of the appeal. 
 
(2) A summons issued under this section shall be served and enforced as if it 
were a summons issued by a subordinate court. 
 
 
Decision of the Tribunal 
 
141T. (1) The Tribunal shall make its decision without delay and where practicable, 
within sixty days from the first day the hearing before the Tribunal commences. 


(2) The Tribunal shall have the power— 
 
(a) 
to affirm the decision of the Director General; 
 
(b) 
to vary the decision of the Director General; or 
 
(c) 
to set aside the decision of the Director General and substitute it with a new 
decision. 
 
(3) The Tribunal shall give its reason for its decision in any appeal heard before 
it. 
 
 
Provisions relating to costs and expenses 
 
141TA. The Tribunal may make an award as to costs and expenses as may be prescribed 
and may determine to what extent the costs and expenses are to be paid— 
 
(a) 
by the appellant, if the Tribunal is satisfied that the appellant had conducted 
his case in a frivolous or vexatious manner; or 
 
(b) 
by any party to the appeal, if the Tribunal is satisfied that in all 
circumstances of the case it would be unjust and inequitable not to award 
the costs and expenses. 
 
[Ins. S13 Act A1571 w.e.f. 1/9/2018] 
 
 
Decision and settlement to be recorded in writing 
 
141U. The Tribunal shall make or cause to be made a written record of the terms of— 
 
(a) 
every agreed settlement reached by the parties under subsection 141P(3); 
and 
 
(b) 
every decision made by it under section 141T. 
 
 
Decision of Tribunal to be final 
 
141V. (1)  A decision of the Tribunal shall be— 
 
(a) 
final and binding on all parties to the proceedings; and 
 
(b) 
deemed to be an order of a Sessions Court and be enforced accordingly 
by the parties to the proceedings. 
 
(2) For the purpose of subsection (1)(b), the Secretary shall send a copy of the 
decision made by the Tribunal to the Sessions Court having jurisdiction in the place to 


which the decision relates or in the place where the decision was made and the Court 
shall cause the copy to be recorded. 
 
 
Appeal to the High Court 
 
141W. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Tribunal may appeal to the High 
Court on a question of law or of mixed law and fact. 
 
 
Tribunal to adopt procedure 
 
141X. Subject to this Act, the Tribunal may adopt such procedure as it thinks fit and 
proper. 
 
 
Want of form 
 
141Y. No proceedings, decision or document of the Tribunal shall be set aside or 
quashed for want of form. 
 
 
Disposal of documents, etc. 
 
141Z. (1) The Tribunal may, at the conclusion of the proceedings before it, order that 
any document, record, material, thing, goods or other property produced during the 
proceedings be delivered to the rightful owner or be disposed of in such manner as it 
thinks fit. 
 
(2) Where no person has taken delivery of the document, record, material, 
things, goods or other property referred to in subsection (1) after a period of six 
months, the ownership in the document, record, material, thing, goods or other 
property shall be deemed to have passed to and become vested in the Government. 
 
 
Act or omission done in good faith 
 
141AA. No action or suit shall be instituted or maintained in any court against— 
 
(a) 
the Tribunal; 
 
(b) 
a member of the Tribunal; or 
 
(c) 
any person authorized to act for or on behalf of the Tribunal, 
 
for any act or omission done in good faith in the performance of its or his functions and 
the exercise of its or his powers under this Act. 
 
 
 


Regulations in respect of the Tribunal 
 
141AB. (1) The Minister may make such regulations as may be necessary or expedient 
in respect of the Tribunal. 
 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), regulations may be 
made for— 
 
(a) 
prescribing the responsibilities of members of the Tribunal; 
 
(b) 
prescribing the procedure of the Tribunal; 
 
(c) 
prescribing the forms to be used in the proceedings under this Part; 
 
(d) 
prescribing and imposing fees and providing the manner for collecting and 
disbursing such fees; 
 
(e) 
prescribing anything required to be prescribed under this Part. 
 
 
PART XV 
 
REGULATIONS 
 
Power to make regulations 
 
142. The Minister may make regulations— 
 
(1) 
to regulate the powers and duties to be exercised and performed by 
officers of customs; 
 
(2) 
to regulate the conduct of all matters relating to the collection of customs 
duties including the time of payment hereof and the imposition of a 
surcharge for late payment; 
 
(3) 
to prescribe the time and the manner for payment of customs duties in 
Sarawak; 
 
(4) 
to prescribe customs ports and legal landing places within those customs 
ports for the landing and shipping of goods imported, exported or 
transported by sea, and to define the limits of such ports and landing 
places and to prescribe the goods that may be landed or shipped thereat; 
 
(4A) 
to regulate the landing and loading of goods under section 33; 
 
[Ins. S110 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(5) 
to prescribe places of import and export by road and rail and the routes to 
be used for the import and export of goods by road; 
 


(6) 
to prescribe customs airports for the import or export of goods by air; 
 
(7) 
to prescribe inland customs stations at which customs duties may be 
collected; 
 
(7A)  to prescribe, for any purpose under this Act, places other than those 
mentioned in paragraphs (4), (5), (6) and (7); 
 
(8) 
to prescribe the days and times during which any customs office, customs 
station or customs or licensed warehouse may be open for business and 
the times during which any goods may be landed, shipped or loaded at any 
customs port or customs airport or imported or exported by road at any 
place of import and export; 
 
(9) 
to prescribe the rates of overtime fees to be paid by the masters or agents 
of vessels or by pilots of aircraft or agents of aircraft or by the persons in 
charge of vehicles or by the importers or exporters of goods or their agents 
in respect of the services of officers of customs rendered on request 
beyond the ordinary hours prescribed and the conditions under which 
such overtime may be permitted; 
 
(9A)  to regulate any matter relating to port clearance; 
 
[Ins. S110 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(10) 
to provide for the control by officers of customs of traffic carried on in 
coasting vessels in the territorial waters; 
 
(11) 
to prescribe the flag to be flown by vessels employed for the prevention of 
smuggling; 
 
(12) 
to prescribe the forms to be used under this Act; 
 
(13) 
to regulate the deposit, custody and withdrawal of goods in and from 
customs and licensed warehouses, warehouses or other places approved 
by the Director General or petroleum supply bases,  and the management 
and control of the same; 
[Ins. S110 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(14) 
to regulate the issue of licences; 
 
(15) 
to prescribe the fees, if any, to be paid for permits and licences; 
 
[Ins. S110 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(16) 
to prescribe the stock books to be kept by licensees and the method of 
keeping the same; 
 


(17) 
to prescribe the method of importing, exporting, transporting or removing 
any goods under a licence or permit; 
 
(18) 
to prescribe the manner in which the packages of goods imported or 
exported shall be marked and numbered and the manner in which the 
invoices shall be prepared; 
 
(19) 
to regulate the manner and to provide the conditions in which goods may 
be transshipped or goods in transit may be moved; 
 
[Amd. S110 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(19A)  to regulate any matter relating to customs agent; 
 
[Ins. S12 Act A1580 w.e.f. 2/1/2018] 
 
(19B)  to regulate any matter relating to manifest; 
 
[Ins. S110 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(20) 
to prescribe customs areas and to regulate or prohibit, either absolutely or 
conditionally, the movement of goods or persons within such areas for the 
purposes of this Act; 
 
(21) 
to prescribe the manner in which intoxicating liquor shall be denatured in 
customs or licensed warehouse; 
 
(22) 
to regulate the blending, compounding, varying and bottling of intoxicating 
liquor in customs or licensed warehouse; 
 
(23) 
to prohibit the payment of drawback upon the re-exportation of any 
specified goods or class of goods; 
 
(24) 
to specify the goods dutiable on import in respect of which drawback may 
be allowed on re-export as part or ingredient of any goods manufactured 
in Malaysia and to fix the rate of drawback thereon; 
 
(25) 
[Del. by S110 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(26) 
to prescribe the offences which may be compounded and the manner in 
which, and the officer of customs by whom, they may be compounded, the 
criteria for compounding the compoundable offence; 
 
[Amd. S110 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(27) 
to define for the purposes of this Act any goods; 
 
(28) 
to prescribe penalties for any contravention or failure to comply with any 
of the provisions of any regulation made under this section or with the 


restrictions of conditions of any licence or permission granted under any 
such regulations: 
 
Provided that no such penalty exceed the penalty prescribed under section 138; 
 
(29) 
to prescribe permits and other documents to be carried by local craft or 
barges transporting cargo from or to vessels in a customs port; 
 
(30) 
to prescribe the manner in which dutiable or prohibited goods shall or 
shall not be packed, and to regulate or prohibit the inclusion of dutiable or 
prohibited goods in the same package or receptacle with non-dutiable 
goods; 
 
(31) 
to prescribe standard containers in which dutiable goods shall be 
exported; 
 
(32) 
to regulate the erection, inspection, supervision, management and control 
of premises licensed under section 65A and the fittings, implements, 
machinery and apparatus maintained therein; 
 
(33) 
to regulate the hours during which manufacture may or may not take place 
and during which goods may be removed from premises licensed under 
this Act; 
 
(34) 
to prescribe what accommodation any person licensed under section 65A 
shall provide free of cost for such proper officers as the Director General 
may deem to be necessary for the control of the licensed premises; 
 
(35) 
to regulate the conduct of all matters relating to duty freeshops; 
 
(35A) to regulate the movement of goods into and from the Joint Development 
Area; 
 
(35B) to determine the customs value of imported goods; 
 
(35C) to regulate the conduct of all matters relating to customs rulings; 
 
(35D) to prescribe and impose fees relating to customs rulings and provide the 
manner for collecting and disbursing such fees; 
 
(35E) to prescribe the forms to be used for the purpose of customs rulings; 
(35F) to regulate any matter relating to the origin of goods including— 
(i) 
to prescribe the criteria for authorization or appointment of the 
authorized body or the issuing authority, as the case may be; 
(ii) to prescribe the procedures and conditions relating to the issuance of 
a preferential or non-preferential certification of origin or declaration 
of origin; 


(iii) to prescribe the criteria for importers, producers or exporters 
registered under section 99E; 
 
(iv) to prescribe the goods or type of goods entitled to preferential tariff 
treatment; 
 
(v) 
to prescribe the rules of origin of goods for preferential or non-
preferential tariff treatment; and 
 
(vi) generally to give effect to the provisions of Part XA; 
 (35G) to regulate the operation of the petroleum supply base and any matter 
relating to it. 
[Ins. S110 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
PART XVI 
 
GENERAL 
 
Review of and appeal against decision of the Director General 
 
143. (1)  Subject to subsection (4), any person aggrieved by any decision of the 
Director General may apply to the Director General to review any of his decision within 
thirty days from the date the person has been notified of such decision provided that no 
appeal has been made on the same decision to the Tribunal or High Court. 
 
(2)  An application under subsection (1) shall be made in the prescribed form. 
 
(3)  Where an application for review has been made under subsection (1), the 
Director General shall, where practicable within sixty days from the date of the receipt 
of such application, carry out the review and notify the decision of the review to the 
person. 
 
(4)  No review may be made in any matter relating to compound or subsection 
128(3A). 
 
(5)  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Director General under 
subsection (3) or any other provision of this Act, except any matter relating to 
compound or subsection 128(3A), may appeal to the Tribunal within thirty days from 
the date of notification in writing of the decision to the aggrieved person. 
 
[Amd. S111 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
(6)  Any customs duty payable under this Act shall be paid on the due date 
notwithstanding that any review or appeal has been made under this section. 
 
143A. [Deleted by Act 1282] 
 


Power of Director General to charge fees 
 
144. The Director General may charge such fee as he may consider reasonable in 
respect of any act or service done or rendered by the Customs Department which is not 
required to be done or rendered under this Act and for which no fee is prescribed by 
any written law. 
 
 
Forms to be used 
 
145. Where any forms have been prescribed under the provisions of paragraph 
142(12), no person shall, for the purposes of this Act use any form which is not printed 
or issued by authority of the Director General: 
 
Provided that the Director General may, at his discretion and subject to such 
conditions as he may deem fit to impose, permit any person to use forms which are not 
so printed or issued as aforesaid, or permit the use of any form submitted through an 
electronic data interchange. 
 
 
Customs duty, etc., to be payable notwithstanding any proceedings, etc. 
 
145A . The institution of proceedings or the imposition of a penalty, fine or term of 
imprisonment under this Act, or the compounding of an offence under section 131, shall 
not relieve any person from the liability to pay for customs duty, surcharge, penalty, fee 
or other money under this Act. 
 
[Subst. Section 112 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Protection against suit and legal proceedings 
 
145B. No action, suit, prosecution or other proceeding shall lie or be brought, instituted 
or maintained in any court against— 
 
(a) 
any officer of customs; 
 
(b) 
any police officer having the powers of a senior officer of customs or officer 
of customs under section 8; 
 
(c) 
any person employed under section 10; and 
 
(d) 
the authorized body and issuing authority, 
 
for or in respect of any act, neglect or default done or committed by him or it in good 
faith or any omission omitted by him or it in good faith in such capacity. 
 
[Ins. Section 113 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 


PART XVII 
 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS DEALING WITH PENANG 
 
146–153. [Deleted by Act 329] 
 
 
PART XVIII 
 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS DEALING WITH LABUAN 
 
Interpretation 
 
154. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires— 
 
“Labuan” means the Island of Labuan and its dependent islands, viz. Rusukan Besar, 
Rusukan Kecil, Keraman, Burong, Papan and Daat; 
 
“principal customs area” means Malaysia exclusive of Labuan, Langkawi, Tioman and 
Pangkor. 
 
[Amd. S114 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Customs duties on goods imported into or exported from Labuan or transported 
to or from Labuan from or to the principal customs area 
 
155. (1)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act— 
 
(a) 
no import duty shall be payable upon any goods imported into Labuan, 
other than goods which the Minister may from time to time declare by order 
published in the Gazette; 
 
(b) 
no export duty shall be payable upon any goods exported from Labuan; 
 
(c) 
import duty shall be payable upon all dutiable goods transported to the 
principal customs area from Labuan to all intents as if such transportation 
to the principal customs area were importation into Malaysia; 
 
(d) 
export duty shall be payable upon all dutiable goods transported from the 
principal customs area to Labuan to all intents as if such transportation 
from the principal customs area were export from Malaysia; 
 
(e) 
the Minister may, by order, prescribe the meaning of the word “value” in 
relation to goods transported from Labuan to the principal customs area. 
 
(2) Subsections 11(2), (3), (4) and (5) shall apply to any order made by the 
Minister under paragraph (1)(a). 
 


(3) Nothing in this section shall render inapplicable to Labuan any other 
customs duty which may be fixed by the Minister under subsection 11(1). 
 
 
Transportation of goods to or from Labuan from or to the principal customs area 
 
156. Where goods are transported— 
 
(a) 
from Labuan to the principal customs area; or 
 
(b) 
from the principal customs area to Labuan, 
 
the provisions of this Act shall, with such modifications and adaptations as may be 
necessary, apply as if such goods were imported into, or as the case may be, exported 
from, the principal customs area from or to a place outside Malaysia, and without 
prejudice to the above generality, the provisions of Part XII shall apply to goods 
transported to or from Labuan from or to the principal customs area and to persons 
and vessels and aircraft transporting such goods. 
 
[Del. S115 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Declaration of goods transported from Labuan to the principal customs area 
 
157. The person in charge of any vessel or aircraft on which goods are transported 
from Labuan to the principal customs area shall make a declaration substantially in the 
prescribed form giving particulars of the goods transported in such vessel or aircraft. 
 
 
Dutiable goods to be deemed to be non-dutiable while in Labuan 
 
158. Except for the purposes of section 48, any dutiable goods, other than goods 
declared by the Minister under paragraph 155(1)(a) or deemed to have been declared 
by the Minister under that section, shall, while in Labuan, be deemed to be non-dutiable 
goods and the provisions of this Act shall be construed accordingly. 
 
 
Collection of duties in Labuan 
 
159. In making regulations under section 142 the Minister may provide— 
 
(a) 
for the collection in Labuan of customs duties payable in respect of goods 
transported or about to be transported from or to Labuan to or from the 
principal customs area; 
 
(b) 
for the limitation or restriction of vessels and aircraft which may be used to 
transport such goods; and 
 
(c) 
for the licensing or control of persons or vessels or aircraft transporting 
such goods. 


Application of Part X to goods transported to Labuan 
 
160. The provisions of Part X (which deals with drawback) shall apply to goods (other 
than goods declared by the Minister under paragraph 155(1)(a) or deemed to have 
been declared by the Minister under that section), transported from the principal 
customs area to Labuan as if such goods had been re-exported. 
 
 
PART XIX 
 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS DEALING WITH SABAH AND SARAWAK 
 
Agreements between Sabah and Sarawak relating to movement of goods 
 
161. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act any agreement in 
force in respect of Sabah and Sarawak relating to the movement of goods between 
those States shall, until the Minister otherwise directs, have effect with such 
modifications as the Minister may specify by notification in the Government Gazettes of 
Sabah and Sarawak. 
 
 
Saving in respect of vessels entering territorial waters due to circumstances 
beyond the Master’s control or in respect of local craft from any other place 
without clearance or manifest 
 
162. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, sections 44 and 
45 shall not apply in Sabah and Sarawak to— 
 
(a) 
any vessel, the Master of which satisfies the proper officer of customs that 
its entry into the waters of Malaysia was due to circumstances beyond his 
control, and that its entry and the reason therefor was at the first possible 
opportunity reported to the nearest customs or police authority, and that 
after such entry no person on board or connected with the vessel has done 
any act contrary to any written law; or 
 
(b) 
any local craft if the person in charge thereof can show to the satisfaction of 
a proper officer of customs that he has come from a place of departure from 
which it is unusual to grant or carry clearances or manifests. 
 
 
Time and manner of payment of duty in Sarawak 
 
163. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, all customs duties 
payable in Sarawak under this Act shall be paid within such period after the date of 
importation or exportation, or loading of the goods for transhipment for export, as the 
case may be, as the Minister may by regulation made hereunder provide, or in default 
of any such regulation, before such goods are removed from customs control: 
 


Provided that the customs duty on goods stored in a customs or licensed 
warehouse, or warehouse or other place approved by the Director General in 
accordance with any regulation made hereunder in that behalf shall be paid at such 
time and in such manner as may be prescribed by such regulations. 
 
[Subst. S116 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
PART XIXA 
 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS DEALING WITH LANGKAWI 
 
Interpretation 
 
163A. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires— 
 
“Langkawi” means the Langkawi Island and all adjacent islands lying nearer to 
Langkawi Island than to the mainland; 
 
“principal customs area” means Malaysia exclusive of Labuan, Langkawi, Tioman and 
Pangkor. 
 
[Subst. S117 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Customs duties relating to Langkawi 
 
163B. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act— 
 
(a) 
no import duty shall be payable upon any goods imported into Langkawi, 
other than goods which the Minister may from time to time declare by 
order published in the Gazette; 
 
(b) 
no export duty shall be payable upon any goods exported from Langkawi, 
other than any goods which the Minister may from time to time declare by 
order published in the Gazette; 
 
(c) 
import duty shall be payable upon all dutiable goods transported to the 
principal customs area from Langkawi as if such transportation to the 
principal customs area were importation into Malaysia; 
 
(d) 
export duty shall be payable upon all dutiable goods transported from the 
principal customs area to Langkawi to all intents as if such transportation 
from the principal customs area were export from Malaysia; and 
 
(e) 
the Minister may by order, prescribe the meaning of the word “value” in 
relation to goods transported from Langkawi to the principal customs area. 
 


(2) Subsections 11(2), (3), (4) and (5) shall apply to any order made by the 
Minister under paragraph (1)(a) or (b). 
 
(3) Nothing in this section shall render inapplicable to Langkawi any other 
customs duty which may be fixed by the Minister under subsection 11(1). 
 
 
Transportation of goods to or from Langkawi from or to the principal customs 
area 
 
163C. Where goods are transported— 
 
(a) 
from Langkawi to the principal customs area; or 
 
(b) 
from the principal customs area to Langkawi, 
 
the provisions of this Act, other than sections 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86 and 87 and 
paragraph 87A(1)(b) thereof, shall with such modifications and adaptations as 
may be necessary, apply as if such goods were imported into, or as the case 
may be, exported from, the principal customs area from or to a place outside 
Malaysia, and without prejudice to the above generality, Part XII shall apply to 
goods transported to or from Langkawi from or to the principal customs area 
and to persons and vehicles, vessels and aircrafts transporting such goods. 
 
[Subst. S118 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Declaration of goods transported from Langkawi into the principal customs area 
 
163D. The person in charge of any vehicle, vessel or aircraft on which goods are 
transported from Langkawi to the principal customs area shall make a declaration 
substantially in the prescribed form giving particulars of the goods transported in such 
vehicle, vessel or aircraft. 
 
[Subst. S119 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Dutiable goods to be deemed to be non-dutiable while in Langkawi 
 
163E. Except for the purpose of section 48, any dutiable goods, other than goods 
declared by the Minister under paragraph 163B(1)(a) or deemed to have been declared 
by the Minister under that section, shall while in Langkawi, be deemed to be non-
dutiable goods and the provisions of this Act shall be construed accordingly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Collection of duties in Langkawi 
 
163F. In making regulations under section 142, the Minister may provide for the 
collection in Langkawi of the customs duties payable in respect of goods transported or 
about to be transported from or to Langkawi to or from the principal customs area. 
 
 
Application of Part X to goods transported to Langkawi 
 
163G. The provisions of Part X which deals with drawback shall apply to goods other 
than goods declared by the Minister under paragraph 163B(1)(a) or deemed to have 
been declared by the Minister under that section, transported from the principal 
customs area to Langkawi as if such goods had been exported. 
 
 
PART XIXB 
 
SPECIAL PROVISION DEALING WITH THE JOINT DEVELOPMENT AREA 
 
 
Movement of goods into or from Joint Development Area 
 
163H. (1) The movement of goods from a country other than Malaysia or the Kingdom 
of Thailand or from a licensed warehouse of Malaysia or the Kingdom of Thailand into 
the Joint Development Area shall be deemed to be an importation of such goods into 
the Joint Development Area. 
 
(2) The movement of goods produced in the Joint Development Area from the 
Joint Development Area into Malaysia, the Kingdom of Thailand or any other country 
shall be deemed to be an exportation of such goods from the Joint Development Area. 
 
(3) The movement of goods from Malaysia or the Kingdom of Thailand into the 
Joint Development Area for use in the Joint Development Area and the movement of 
such goods from the Joint Development Area into Malaysia or the Kingdom of Thailand 
shall be deemed to be an internal movement of such goods. 
 
 
Customs duty payable on importation into or exportation from Joint 
Development Area 
 
163I. (1) Import duty shall be payable on all goods imported into the Joint 
Development Area. 
 
(2) Export duty shall be payable on all goods exported from the Joint 
Development Area. 
 
 
 
 


PART XIXC 
 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS DEALING WITH TIOMAN 
 
Interpretation 
 
163J. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires— 
 
“Tioman” means the Island of Tioman and the islands of Soyak, Rengis, Tumok, Tulai, 
Chebeh, Labas, Sepoi and Jahat; 
 
“principal customs area” means Malaysia exclusive of Labuan, Langkawi, Tioman and 
Pangkor. 
[Subst. S120 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Customs duties relating to Tioman 
 
163K. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act— 
 
(a) 
no import duty shall be payable upon any goods imported into Tioman, 
other than goods which the Minister may from time to time declare by order 
published in the Gazette; 
 
(b) 
no export duty shall be payable upon any goods exported from Tioman, 
other than goods which the Minister may from time to time declare by order 
published in the Gazette; 
 
(c) 
import duty shall be payable upon all dutiable goods transported to the 
principal customs area from Tioman as if such transportation to the 
principal customs area were importation into Malaysia; 
 
(d) 
export duty shall be payable upon all dutiable goods transported from the 
principal customs area to Tioman to all intents as if such transportation 
from the principal customs area were export from Malaysia; and 
 
(e) 
the Minister may by order, prescribe the meaning of the word “value” in 
relation to goods transported from Tioman to the principal customs area. 
 
(2) Subsections 11(2), (3), (4) and (5) shall apply to any order made by the 
Minister under paragraph 1(a) or (b). 
 
(3) Nothing in this section shall render inapplicable to Tioman any other 
customs duty which may be fixed by the Minister under subsection 11(1). 
 
 
Transportation of goods from or to Tioman to or from the principal customs area 
 
163L. Where goods are transported— 
 


(a) 
from Tioman to the principal customs area; or 
 
(b) 
from the principal customs area to Tioman, 
 
the provisions of this Act, other than sections 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86 and 87 and 
paragraph 87A(1)(b) thereof, shall with such modifications and adaptations as may be 
necessary, apply as if such goods were imported into, or as the case may be, exported 
from, the principal customs area from or to a place outside Malaysia, and without 
prejudice to the above generality, Part XII shall apply to goods transported to or from 
Tioman from or to the principal customs area and to persons and vehicles, vessels and 
aircraft transporting such goods. 
[Subst. S121 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Declaration of goods transported from Tioman to the principal customs area 
 
163M. The person in charge of any vehicle, vessel or aircraft on which goods are 
transported from Tioman to the principal customs area shall make a declaration 
substantially in the prescribed form giving particulars of the goods transported in such 
vehicle, vessel or aircraft. 
 
[Subst. S122 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
Dutiable goods to be deemed to be non-dutiable while in Tioman 
 
163N. Except for the purpose of section 48, any dutiable goods, other than goods 
declared by the Minister under paragraph 163K(1)(a) or deemed to have been declared 
by the Minister under that section shall, while in Tioman, be deemed to be non-dutiable 
goods and the provisions of this Act shall be construed accordingly. 
 
 
Collection of duties in Tioman 
 
163O. In making regulations under section 142, the Minister may provide for the 
collection in Tioman of the customs duties payable in respect of goods transported or 
about to be transported from or to Tioman to or from the principal customs area. 
 
 
Application of Part X to goods transported to Tioman 
 
163P. The provisions of Part X which deals with drawback shall apply to goods other 
than goods declared by the Minister under paragraph 163K(1)(a) or deemed to have 
been declared by the Minister under that section, transported from the principal 
customs area to Tioman as if such goods had been exported. 
 
 
 
 


PART XIXD 
 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS DEALING WITH PANGKOR 
 
Interpretation 
 
163Q. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires— 
 
“Pangkor” means the Pangkor Island, Mentagor Island, Giam Island, Simpan Island, 
Tukun Terindak Island, Pelanduk Island, Anak Pelanduk Island, Landak Island, Batu 
Orang Tua and Batu Jambal; 
 
“principal customs area” means Malaysia exclusive of Labuan, Langkawi, Tioman 
and Pangkor. 
 
 
Customs duties relating to Pangkor 
 
163R. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act— 
 
(a) 
no import duty shall be payable upon any goods imported into Pangkor, 
other than goods which the Minister may from time to time declare by order 
published in the Gazette; 
 
(b) 
no export duty shall be payable upon any goods exported from Pangkor, 
other than any goods which the Minister may from time to time declare by 
order published in the Gazette; 
 
(c) 
import duty shall be payable upon all dutiable goods transported to the 
principal customs area from Pangkor as if such transportation to the 
principal customs area were importation into Malaysia; 
 
(d) 
export duty shall be payable upon all dutiable goods transported from the 
principal customs area to Pangkor as if such transportation from the 
principal customs area were exportation from Malaysia; and 
 
(e) 
the Minister may by order, prescribe the meaning of the word “value” in 
relation to goods transported from Pangkor to the principal customs area. 
 
(2)  Subsections 11(2), (3), (4) and (5) shall apply to any order made by the 
Minister under paragraph (1)(a) or (b). 
 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall render inapplicable to Pangkor any other 
customs duty which may be fixed by the Minister under subsection 11(1). 
 
 
Transportation of goods to or from Pangkor from or to the principal customs 
area 
 
163s. Where goods are transported— 


(a) 
from Pangkor to the principal customs area; or 
 
(b) 
from the principal customs area to Pangkor, the provisions of this Act, other 
than sections 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86 and 87 and paragraph 87a(1)(b), shall 
with such modifications and adaptations as may be necessary, apply as if 
such goods were imported into or, as the case may be, exported from, the 
principal customs area from or to a place outside Malaysia, and without 
prejudice to the above generality, Part XII shall apply to goods transported 
to or from Pangkor from or to the principal customs area and to persons and 
vehicles, vessels and aircrafts transporting such goods. 
 
 
Declaration of goods transported from Pangkor into the principal customs area 
 
163T. The person in charge of any vehicle, vessel or aircraft on which goods are 
transported from Pangkor to the principal customs area shall make a declaration 
substantially in the prescribed form giving particulars of the goods transported in such 
vehicle, vessel or aircraft. 
 
 
Dutiable goods to be deemed to be non-dutiable while in Pangkor 
 
163U. Except for the purpose of section 48, any dutiable goods, other than goods 
declared by the Minister under paragraph 163r(1)(a), shall while in Pangkor, be 
deemed to be non-dutiable goods and the provisions of this Act shall be construed 
accordingly. 
 
 
Collection of duties in Pangkor 
 
163V. In making regulations under section 142, the Minister may provide for the 
collection in Pangkor of the customs duties payable in respect of goods transported or 
about to be transported from or to Pangkor to or from the principal customs area. 
 
 
Application of Part X to goods transported to Pangkor 
 
163W. The provisions of Part X which deals with drawback shall apply to goods, other 
than goods declared by the Minister under paragraph 163r(1)(a), transported from the 
principal customs area to Pangkor as if such goods had been exported. 
 
[Ins. S123 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 
PART XX 
 
SINGAPORE PREVENTIVE VESSELS 
[Del. by S124 Act A1593 w.e.f. 1/1/2020] 
 
 


PART XXI 
 
REPEAL 
 
 
Repeal and saving 
 
169. (1)  The written laws specified in the Schedule are hereby repealed. 
 
(2) Unless the contrary intention appears in this Act— 
 
(a) 
all persons, things and circumstances appointed or created by or under any 
of the laws repealed by subsection (1) or existing or continuing under any of 
such laws immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, under 
and subject to this Act and regulations made thereunder, continue to have 
the same status, operation and effect as they respectively would have had as 
if such laws had not been so repealed; and 
 
in particular and without effecting the generality of paragraph (a) such repeal shall not 
affect licences, permits, appointments, orders, rules and regulations issued or made 
under or by virtue of the aforesaid laws and in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act and such licences, permits, appointments, orders, rules and 
regulations shall remain in force and shall continue to remain in force as if every such 
licence, permit, appointment, order, rule or regulation were issued or made under and 
by virtue of this Act until replaced or revoked by any licence, permit, appointment, 
order, rule or regulation made under or by virtue of this Act. 
 
 
 
 


SCHEDULE 
[Section 169] 
 
Customs Ordinance 1952 of the States of Malaya 
F.M. Ordinance No. 42 of 1952 
Customs Ordinance of Sabah 
Sabah Cap. 33 
Customs Ordinance of Sarawak 
Sarawak Cap. 26 
 
 
 
 
 


Note: 
 
Savings and transitional provision (section 125 of Act 1593) 
 
(1) 
Any licence— 
 
(a) 
granted under section 65A to carry on any manufacturing process and other 
operation in respect of the goods liable to customs duties and any other goods; 
or 
 
(b) 
granted under section 91A to any person to act as a licensed carrier, 
 
before the appointed date and in force immediately before the appointed date shall, 
on the appointed date, continue to remain in force and have effect until the licence 
expires, or is withdrawn or cancelled by the Director General. 
 
(2) 
Any approval granted by the Director General to any person to be an 
accredited person to benefit from simplified procedures for customs clearance as 
determined by the Director General before the appointed date and in force immediately 
before the appointed date shall, on the appointed date, be deemed to have been granted 
under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
 
(3) 
Any certificate of origin issued in the name of the Ministry of International 
Trade and Industry or chambers of commerce or trade associations appointed by the 
Minister of International Trade and Industry before the appointed date and in force 
immediately before the appointed date shall, on the appointed date, continue to remain in 
force and have effect until the certificate of origin expires, or is withdrawn or cancelled by 
the Ministry of International Trade and Industry or chambers of commerce or trade 
associations appointed by the Minister of International Trade and Industry. 
 
(4) 
Any application for— 
 
 
(a) 
a licence to carry on any manufacturing process and other operation in 
respect of the goods liable to customs duties and any other goods under 
section 65A; 
 
(b) 
a licence to act as a licensed carrier under section 91A; 
 
(c) 
an approval to be an accredited person to benefit from simplified procedures 
for customs clearance as determined by the Director General; or 
 
(d) 
a certificate of origin to be issued in the name of the Ministry of International 
Trade and Industry or chambers of commerce or trade associations appointed 
by the Minister of International Trade and Industry, 
 
made before the appointed date and pending before the Director General, or the 
Ministry of International Trade and Industry or chambers of commerce or trade 
associations appointed by the Minister of International Trade and Industry, as the 


case may be, immediately before the appointed date shall, on the appointed date, be 
dealt with in accordance with the provision of the principal Act as amended by this 
Act. 
 
(5) 
Any importer, producer or exporter registered by the Ministry of International 
Trade and Industry for the purpose of producing a declaration of origin before the 
appointed date shall, on the appointed date, be deemed to have been registered under the 
principal Act as amended by this Act. 
 
(6) 
Any compounding of effences under the existing section 131 of the principal 
Act which is pending immediately before the appointed date shall, on or after the 
appointed date, continue to be a compoundable offences as if the principal Act had not 
been amended by this Act. 
 
(7) 
In this section, "appointed date" means the date appointed by the Minister 
under subsection 1(2) of this Act for the coming into operation of this Act. 
 
 
Savings (section 14 of Act A1571) 
 
Any appeal before the Tribunal heard by a member of the Tribunal sitting alone or a 
panel of three members which is pending immediately before the date of coming into 
operation of this Act shall, on or after the date of coming into operation of this Act, 
continue to be heard and decided by the member of the Tribunal sitting alone or the panel 
of three members, as the case may be, as if the principal Act had not been amended by this 
Act.