BEIJING, September 30. On the occasion of celebrating the 75th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the flower basket laying ceremony in memory of the people's heroes on Martyrs' Day was grandly held on Tiananmen Square in Beijing on the morning of the 30th. Party and state leaders Xi Jinping, Li Qiang, Zhao Leji, Wang Huning, Cai Qi, Ding Xuexiang, Li Xi, Han Zheng and others attended the ceremony together with representatives from all walks of life. On the magnificent Tiananmen Square, the bright five-star red flag flutters in the wind. In the center of the square, the giant flower basket "Blessing the Motherland" expresses good wishes for the prosperity of the motherland. On the north side of the towering Monument to the People's Heroes, two groups of flower beds are inlaid with 18 wreaths composed of fresh flowers such as white chrysanthemums, expressing the deep remembrance of all Chinese people for the heroes and martyrs. As it approached 10 o'clock, Party and state leaders Xi Jinping, Li Qiang, Zhao Leji, Wang Huning, Cai Qi, Ding Xuexiang, Li Xi, Han Zheng and others came to Tiananmen Square to attend the flower basket laying ceremony in memory of the people's heroes. In front of the monument, more than 2,400 representatives from all walks of life held flowers and stood in solemn formation. Among them are old soldiers and comrades in their eighties and nineties, relatives of martyrs wearing red ribbons on their chests, representatives of recipients of national medals and national honorary titles, representatives of models for ethnic unity and progress who have been commended, and energetic young students and children. The trumpeters of the Military Band of the Chinese People's Liberation Army sounded the "Horn for Martyrs' Day". The deep and loud sound of the horn brings people's memories back to the turbulent historical years. "Honor guards, take positions!" At the command, the honor guards of the three services marched forward with firm steps and stood at attention with guns in front of the monument. At exactly 10 o'clock, the flower basket laying ceremony in memory of the people's heroes officially began. The military band played the "March of the Volunteers", and everyone in the audience sang the national anthem of the People's Republic of China in unison. After the national anthem was sung, everyone stood in silence and observed a moment of silence for the martyrs who heroically sacrificed themselves for the Chinese people's liberation cause and the cause of building the republic. After the moment of silence, children holding flowers faced the Monument to the People's Heroes and sang "We Are the Successors of Communism" loudly and saluted with the Young Pioneers' salute. In front of the formation, nine large flower baskets presented in the name of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, the State Council, the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, the Central Military Commission, democratic parties, the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce and non-party patriots, people's organizations and people from all walks of life, old soldiers, comrades in arms and relatives of martyrs, and the Chinese Young Pioneers were arranged in a row. The words "Eternal Glory to the People's Heroes" written on the red satin ribbon of the flower baskets were particularly eye-catching. The military band played the affectionate "Flower Offering Melody". Eighteen honor guards steadily lifted the flower baskets and slowly walked towards the Monument to the People's Heroes and placed the flower baskets on the base of the monument. Xi Jinping and other party and state leaders ascended the base of the monument and stopped to gaze at the flower baskets. The bright anthurium, blooming lilies, and graceful oncidium express endless thoughts and lofty respects for the people's heroes. Xi Jinping stepped forward and carefully adjusted the satin ribbon of the flower basket. Subsequently, Xi Jinping and other party and state leaders slowly walked around and paid their respects to the Monument to the People's Heroes. Since the 18th National Party Congress, under the strong leadership of the Party Central Committee with Xi Jinping as the core, the Party, the military, and the people of all ethnic groups across the country have united as one, forged ahead with determination, adhered to integrity and innovation, promoted historic achievements and changes in various undertakings of the Party and the country, and opened up a new situation for socialism with Chinese characteristics in the new era. Embarking on a new journey, more than 1.4 billion Chinese people are carrying on the spirit of heroes and martyrs and drawing strength for progress. They are full of vigor and vitality and are writing a new chapter of the times by further comprehensively deepening reform, and making unremitting efforts to comprehensively promote the great cause of building a powerful country and rejuvenating the nation through Chinese-style modernization. Children and representatives of people from all walks of life also took turns to walk in front of the monument, present the flowers in their hands and pay their respects to the monument. The flower basket laying ceremony was presided over by Yin Li, member of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee and secretary of the Beijing Municipal Party Committee. Members of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee and secretaries of the Central Secretariat, vice chairpersons of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, state councilors, president of the Supreme People's Court, procurator-general of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, vice chairpersons of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and members of the Central Military Commission attended the ceremony. Principal responsible comrades of relevant departments of the central Party, government, military and people's groups and Beijing Municipality, heads of central democratic parties, the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce and representatives of non-party personages, representatives of old soldiers, comrades in arms and relatives of martyrs in Beijing, representatives of recipients of meritorious honors, members of the national ethnic minority visiting delegation, and representatives of people from all walks of life in the capital participated in the ceremony. 

BEIJING, September 30 (Xinhua) -- The 19th issue of Qiushi magazine to be published on October 1 will carry an important article by Xi Jinping, general secretary of the Communist Party of China Central Committee, president of the state, and chairman of the Central Military Commission, titled "Vigorously Promote the Great Spirit of Patriotism and Continuously Push Forward the Great Cause of Building a Powerful Country and National Rejuvenation." This is an excerpt of Xi Jinping's important remarks from November 2012 to May 2024. The article emphasizes that patriotism is the deepest and most enduring emotion in the world. Patriotism is the core of the Chinese nation's spirit and has inspired generations of Chinese people to strive unremittingly for the country's development and prosperity. For more than 5,000 years, the reason why the Chinese nation has been able to withstand countless unimaginable risks and tests and always maintain strong vitality, perpetuating and passing on the flame, is inseparable from the Chinese nation's profound and lasting patriotic tradition. Patriotism is a powerful spiritual motivation that inspires the Chinese people to safeguard national independence and dignity and move forward bravely in the torrent of history. It is a powerful engine that drives the ship of the Chinese nation to brave the wind and waves and move forward bravely. It is a magnificent banner that leads the Chinese people and the Chinese nation to burst out with tremendous historical power and overcome all difficulties and obstacles on the road ahead! The article points out that patriotism is concrete and realistic. In contemporary China, to promote patriotism, we must deeply understand that the leadership of the Communist Party of China and the socialist system in China must be adhered to for a long time and cannot be shaken; the socialism with Chinese characteristics opened up by the Communist Party of China leading the Chinese people must be adhered to for a long time and cannot be shaken; the major policy of the Communist Party of China and the Chinese people taking root in China's land, learning from the excellent achievements of human civilization, and realizing national development independently must be adhered to for a long time and cannot be shaken. Only by unifying patriotism with loving the Party, socialism and the country can patriotism be vivid and real. This is the most important manifestation of the patriotic spirit in contemporary China. The article points out that to promote the spirit of patriotism, patriotism education must be taken as the eternal theme. We must unify patriotism and socialism. We must safeguard national unity and ethnic unity. We must respect and inherit the history and culture of the Chinese nation. We must adhere to being based on the nation while facing the world. The article points out that children are the future of the motherland. To promote the spirit of patriotism, we should start with children. We should educate and guide students to closely link their own ideals with the future of the motherland and their own destinies with the destiny of the nation. Guide students to establish and adhere to correct views on history, nationality, country, and culture, enhance their patriotic consciousness and emotions, enhance national pride and self-confidence, and let the spirit of patriotism take root firmly in students' hearts and never forget that they are Chinese. The article emphasizes that no matter how the times develop, we must gather the national strength of unity and concerted efforts. Today, socialist China stands towering in the east of the world. No force can shake the position of our great motherland, and no force can stop the forward steps of the Chinese people and the Chinese nation. We must vigorously promote the great spirit of patriotism, inherit and carry forward the spirit of not fearing difficulties and dangers, being brave in struggle and victory. Relying closely on the people, we will continuously push forward the great cause of building a powerful country and national rejuvenation. 

75 years of sincere cooperation and sharing weal and woe. On September 21, 1949, amid the triumphant songs of the Chinese people's historical victory in striving for national independence and people's liberation, the first plenary session of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference opened. The Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) is a great achievement of the Communist Party of China in combining Marxist-Leninist united front theory, political party theory, and democratic political theory with Chinese reality. It is a great creation in the political system by the Communist Party of China leading democratic parties, personages without party affiliation, people's organizations, and people from all ethnic groups and all sectors of society. Over the past 75 years, under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, the CPPCC has actively participated in the great practices of establishing New China, building New China, and exploring the path of reform, and has gone through a glorious journey. Entering the new era, the CPPCC adheres to the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, thoroughly studies and comprehends General Secretary Xi Jinping's important thought on strengthening and improving the work of the CPPCC. It adheres to the general tone of seeking progress while maintaining stability, combines leadership by the Party, the united front, and consultative democracy organically. It adheres to the two major themes of unity and democracy, carries forward fine traditions, remembers political responsibilities, and improves the levels of political consultation, democratic supervision, and participation in the deliberation and administration of state affairs. It always plans and carries out work under the overall situation of the Party and the country's work, and focuses on fulfilling its functions and gathering strength in promoting Chinese path to modernization. In the great practice of realizing the Chinese Dream, it has created new glories. Unswervingly adhere to the leadership of the Communist Party of China to ensure the correct political direction for the development of the cause of the CPPCC. On September 20, 2019, at the Central Conference on Work Regarding the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and the celebration of the 70th anniversary of the founding of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, General Secretary Xi Jinping pointed out: "The leadership of the Communist Party of China is the common choice of all the Chinese people, including democratic parties, social organizations, all ethnic groups, all social strata, and people from all sectors of society. It is the original aspiration when the CPPCC was established and the fundamental guarantee for the progress and development of the cause of the CPPCC. We must run through the leadership of the Party in all the work of the CPPCC and earnestly implement all the requirements of the Party Central Committee for the work of the CPPCC." The united front, armed struggle, and Party building are the three magic weapons formed by the Communist Party of China in the revolutionary struggle. As an organization of the patriotic united front of the Chinese people and an important institution for multiparty cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, since its birth, the CPPCC has unswervingly adhered to the leadership of the Communist Party of China, ensured the correct political direction for the development of the cause of the CPPCC, advanced together with people of all ethnic groups across the country, grew up together with the Republic, and gone through a glorious journey. From September 21 to 30, 1949, the first plenary session of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference was held. The conference represented the will of people of all ethnic groups across the country and exercised the functions and powers of the National People's Congress on behalf of the country. It adopted the "Common Program of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference" and the "Organizational Law of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference" and the "Organizational Law of the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China" with the nature of a provisional constitution. It made resolutions on the national capital, national flag, national anthem, and chronology, and elected the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and the Central People's Government Committee, marking the official establishment of the people's political consultative system. Over the past 75 years, the CPPCC has consciously run through the leadership of the Communist Party of China in all aspects of work such as consultative discussion on state affairs, democratic supervision, building consensus, investigation and research, unity and friendship, and self-construction. It has transformed the propositions of the Communist Party of China into extensive consensus and conscious actions of all sectors of society, and ensured that the decision-making and deployment of the Central Committee of the Communist Party are fully implemented in the CPPCC. Entering the new era, the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping as the core has comprehensively strengthened its leadership over the work of the CPPCC. General Secretary Xi Jinping's important thought on strengthening and improving the work of the CPPCC has pointed out the direction and provided fundamental guidance for the CPPCC to shoulder new missions and tasks in the new era. On March 4, 2018, General Secretary Xi Jinping visited the members of the China Democratic League, the China Zhi Gong Party, personages without party affiliation, and members of the China Federation of Returned Overseas Chinese attending the first session of the 13th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and participated in the joint group meeting. He pointed out: "As a basic political system in our country, the system of multi-party cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of the Communist Party of China is a great political creation of the Communist Party of China, the Chinese people, and all democratic parties and personages without party affiliation. It is a new type of political party system that grows out of Chinese soil." The proposal of the "new type of political party system" shows firm institutional confidence. "The CPPCC should, through effective work, strive to become an important position for adhering to and strengthening the Party's leadership over all work, an important platform for uniting, educating, and guiding representatives from all ethnic groups and sectors with the Party's innovative theories, and an important channel for resolving contradictions and building consensus on the basis of a common ideological and political foundation." On September 20, 2019, on the occasion of welcoming the 70th anniversary of the founding of New China and celebrating the 70th anniversary of the founding of the CPPCC, the Party Central Committee held the Central Conference on Work Regarding the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference for the first time. General Secretary Xi Jinping delivered an important speech and pointed out. In October 2018, the General Office of the CPC Central Committee issued the "Several Opinions on Strengthening the Party Building Work of the People's Political Consultative Conference in the New Era," pointing out that the leadership of the Communist Party of China is the most essential characteristic of socialism with Chinese characteristics and also the most essential characteristic of this institutional arrangement and political organization of the people's political consultative conference. In all levels of organizations and activities of the CPPCC, the Party is in a leading position. Adhering to the leadership of the Communist Party of China is the fundamental political principle that the CPPCC must abide by. In October 2019, the CPC Central Committee issued the "Opinions on Strengthening and Improving the Work of the People's Political Consultative Conference in the New Era," emphasizing that through effective work, the people's political consultative conference should become an important position for adhering to and strengthening the Party's leadership over all work, an important platform for uniting, educating, and guiding representatives from all ethnic groups and sectors with the Party's innovative theories, and an important channel for resolving contradictions and building consensus on the basis of a common ideological and political foundation. General Secretary Xi Jinping's important speech at the Central Conference on Work Regarding the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and a series of important arrangements of the Party Central Committee for the work of the people's political consultative conference in the new era have provided a fundamental political guarantee for the development of the cause of the people's political consultative conference, promoted practical innovation, theoretical innovation, and institutional innovation of the people's political consultative conference, and made new contributions to the development of the cause of the Party and the country. Give full play to the role of the CPPCC as a specialized consultative body and gather strong positive energy to realize the Chinese Dream. Under China's socialist system, it is the true meaning of people's democracy to have good discussions when there are matters, and for the matters of the people to be discussed by the people and find the greatest common divisor of the will and demands of the whole society. Consultative democracy is an important way to realize the leadership of the Party and is a unique form and unique advantage of China's socialist democratic politics. Over the past 75 years, the CPPCC has focused on giving full play to the role of a specialized consultative body. In consultation, it promotes extensive unity, advances multiparty cooperation, and practices people's democracy, fully reflecting the characteristics and advantages of China's socialist democracy in having more discussions when there are matters, having more discussions when there are problems, and having more discussions when doing things. Entering the new era, the CPPCC continuously expands the content and enriches the forms of consultation, and conducts special topic consultations, counterpart consultations, sectoral consultations, and consultations on the handling of proposals more flexibly and more frequently. It explores new forms such as online discussion of political affairs, remote consultations, and expert consultations to improve the effectiveness of consultations. Exploring new forms, new methods, and new paths of socialist consultative democracy is the focus of the work of the CPPCC. Since 2013, the special topic deliberative standing committee meetings of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference have increased from once a year to twice a year. Since 2014, the special topic consultations have increased from once a year to twice a year. Since October 2013, the bimonthly consultative symposium has "appeared on the stage." The content of consultations has also expanded from economy and society to many fields such as politics, culture, and ecology. On September 2, 2024, the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference held a special topic consultative meeting on "promoting high-level opening up" in Beijing. Nearly 100 members of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference attended the meeting. The person in charge of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference introduced the situation of the special topic research. Twenty-one members of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference made speeches and offered suggestions on steadily expanding institutional opening up, building a high-standard market system, optimizing the regional opening-up layout, promoting international cooperation in industrial chains and supply chains, developing new forms and models of foreign trade, building a higher-level pilot free trade zone, and promoting the high-quality development of the Belt and Road Initiative. "We should mobilize the enthusiasm of grain farmers and major grain-producing areas, strengthen policy support, improve the agricultural insurance guarantee system, build a modern grain industry system, and ensure national food security." On April 12, 2024, the 17th bimonthly consultative symposium of the 14th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference was held in Beijing. The symposium focused on "mobilizing the enthusiasm of grain farmers and major grain-producing areas in growing grain and consolidating the foundation of food security." Nine members of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, two large grain growers, and one expert representative spoke successively and actively contributed ideas and efforts to ensuring national food security. Big issues with small entry points, lively forms and active atmospheres. For more than 10 years, the bimonthly consultative symposium has been held every two weeks. Each time, some members of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference are invited to conduct consultative exchanges on major matters related to the national economy and people's livelihood and hot issues of concern to the people. Now it has become a regular platform and an important brand of consultative democracy of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference. "The bimonthly consultative symposium, centering on the new requirements of increasing consultation density and improving consultation effectiveness, innovates while inheriting. It comprehensively uses various forms of consultative democracy. Based on sectors, with special topics as content, taking counterparts as links, and using symposiums as methods, it has created a new form of consultative democracy." Li Junru, former vice president of the Party School of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, commented. On April 26, 2024, the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference held a remote consultative meeting to discuss and deliberate on "deepening the multi-scenario application of artificial intelligence and improving the high-quality development level of modern industries." On that day, 10 members of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and experts spoke respectively at the organs of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and in venues in Shanghai, Zhejiang, and Anhui, as well as in Beijing, Guangdong and other places through video links and other means. They also conducted consultative exchanges with responsible comrades of relevant ministries and commissions on relevant situations. The remote consultative meeting is an epitome of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference giving full play to the advantages of the Internet, effectively improving the quality of consultative discussion on state affairs, and continuously enriching the forms of consultation. Members of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference said that the remote consultative meeting gives fuller play to the unique advantages and important roles of various consultative platforms. With wide participation, strong immediacy, and good interactivity, it promotes issues to develop deeper and finer, injecting new vitality and vigor into the work of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference. Through continuous exploration and practice, the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference has gradually formed a new pattern of consultative discussion on state affairs with the plenary session of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference as the leader, special topic deliberative standing committee meetings and special topic consultative meetings as the focus, and bimonthly consultative symposiums, counterpart consultative meetings, and consultations on the handling of proposals as the norm. Entering the new era, the CPPCC adheres to running consultative democracy through the entire process of political consultation, democratic supervision, and participation in the deliberation and administration of state affairs. It further builds a mechanism-based and regular platform for consultative participation. Through strengthening institutionalization, standardization, and proceduralization, it gradually forms a vivid situation where consultative democracy is deeply practiced, the vitality of all sectors is fully released, public opinion and people's wisdom are widely gathered, and there is smooth connection with the Party and the government, gathering strong positive energy to realize the Chinese Dream. Strengthen the responsibilities and commitments of members of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, actively offer suggestions and proposals, and comprehensively enhance their ability to perform their duties. October 1 is the National Day of the People's Republic of China. And its origin is related to a proposal by a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference. On October 9, 1949, the first session of the first National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference was in full swing. Entrusted by member Ma Xulun who was unable to attend due to illness, member Xu Guangping submitted a short proposal: "Please have the government clearly designate October 1 as the National Day of the People's Republic of China to replace the old National Day on October 10." Eventually, the meeting adopted the "Resolution on the National Day of the People's Republic of China." Over the past 75 years, as representatives of various parties, groups, and people from all ethnic groups and sectors of society, members of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference have participated in national affairs and performed their duties on behalf of the masses. They have actively offered suggestions and proposals through various means such as submitting proposals, conducting member inspections, conducting special topic research, and reflecting social conditions and public opinions, and continuously enhanced their ability to perform their duties. On September 1, 2017, the 29th session of the Standing Committee of the 12th National People's Congress adopted the "National Anthem Law of the People's Republic of China," which came into effect on October 1, 2017. As early as 1995, two members of the 8th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, Jiang Jiaxiang and others, submitted the "Proposal on Determining the Legal Status of the National Anthem of the People's Republic of China as Soon as Possible and Formulating the National Anthem Law" at the third session of the 8th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference. Since 2008, Yu Hai, a member of the 11th and 12th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, has submitted proposals for 10 consecutive years, calling for legislation on the national anthem of the People's Republic of China. In March 2017, when Yu Hai, who was about to leave his position as a member of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, learned that his proposal on legislation for the national anthem had been approved and put on the agenda, he couldn't help but be filled with emotion. Without investigation and research, there is no right to speak. The Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference takes investigation and research as the foundation for planning and the way to success. It organizes members to conduct serious investigations and research and in-depth consultations and discussions. By improving the quality of investigations and research, it enhances the level of advice and contributes wisdom and strength to comprehensively promoting the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation through Chinese path to modernization. On the evening of July 1, 2024, in the conference room on the second floor of the Daqing Municipal People's Government in Heilongjiang Province, a research group of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference conducted a special topic research on "improving the social security system and care service system for people with disabilities." Members of the research group took advantage of the evening break to have in-depth discussions and exchanges with the person in charge of the Daqing Disabled Persons' Federation, specialized associations, social organizations for helping the disabled, and representatives of people with disabilities at the grassroots level, listening to their demands and voices. There is an urgent need for care and support for people with severe disabilities, the teaching staff for special education is relatively weak, the service efficiency for people with disabilities still needs to be further improved, and the spiritual and cultural life of people with disabilities is becoming increasingly diverse... More than ten representatives from the grassroots level opened their hearts and talked about the gains and confusions in the process of serving people with disabilities. The timely responses of the members received bursts of applause from the disabled workers and disabled representatives present. How can we innovate research methods? The 14th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 聊聊新话题

The Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), a great creation in the political system, is an important force for realizing national prosperity, national rejuvenation, and people's happiness. Since the 18th National Party Congress, the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping as the core has coordinated the strategic overall situation of national rejuvenation and the major changes unseen in a century in the world. Focusing on consolidating and developing the broadest patriotic united front, adhering to and improving the system of multi-party cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, it has led and promoted the innovative development of the cause of the People's Political Consultative Conference, continuously creating a vivid situation of unity, democracy, pragmatism, and progress. When the giant pen of history marks a new coordinate of struggle, the People's Political Consultative Conference, which has gone through a glorious journey of 75 years, stands at a new starting point once again - Marching towards the realization of the second centenary goal, the People's Political Consultative Conference in the new era adheres to the organic combination of the leadership of the Party, the united front, and consultative democracy, adheres to the two major themes of unity and democracy, further exerts the role of the People's Political Consultative Conference as a specialized consultative body, inherits the past and ushers in the future, and gathers a majestic force to jointly promote the great cause of strengthening the country and rejuvenating the nation. Setting the guidelines and pointing the way for the overall situation - "We must adhere to and develop the system of the People's Political Consultative Conference well." In early spring in March, flowers are in full bloom and everything is renewed. On the afternoon of March 6, 2024, at the Juying Hall of Beijing Friendship Hotel, many outstanding people gathered. Amid warm applause, General Secretary Xi Jinping walked into the venue and affectionately visited the members of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference from the Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang, the science and technology sector, and the environmental resources sector who were attending the second session of the 14th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and participated in the joint group meeting to listen to everyone's opinions and suggestions. "For more than ten years, I have met and had discussions with members of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference every year." The general secretary said affectionately. From the reform of the scientific and technological system to building a new development pattern, from food security to ecological environment protection, from education and healthcare to the social security system, from implementing the Party's ethnic policies to the peaceful development of cross-strait relations... During each plenary session of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, General Secretary Xi Jinping would go deep into the sectoral groups and discuss state affairs with the members. With profound care and earnest instructions, people's hearts are united and strength is inspired. Since the 18th National Party Congress, the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping as the core has proceeded from the overall situation of the cause of the Party and the country's development, looking far ahead and setting the direction. It has led the People's Political Consultative Conference to adhere to the mutual penetration of promoting democracy and enhancing unity, and the two-way efforts of offering advice and supervision and building consensus. It has continuously promoted practical innovation, theoretical innovation, and institutional innovation, and continuously promoted new progress and achievements in the cause of the People's Political Consultative Conference in the new era. On September 20, 2019, at the auditorium of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, the Central Conference on Work Regarding the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and the grand gathering to celebrate the 70th anniversary of the founding of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference were held. Holding a conference on the work of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference in the name of the CPC Central Committee is the first time in the history of the Communist Party of China and the history of the People's Political Consultative Conference. "The People's Political Consultative Conference is a great achievement of the Communist Party of China in combining Marxist-Leninist united front theory, party theory, and democratic political theory with Chinese reality. It is a great creation in the political system made by the Communist Party of China leading democratic parties, non-party personages, people's organizations, and people from all ethnic groups and all sectors of society." General Secretary Xi Jinping deeply summed up historical experience, grasped the general trend of the times, and greatly inspired the confidence and determination of all parties, groups, and people from all ethnic groups and all sectors of society to promote the innovative development of the cause of the People's Political Consultative Conference. Attending the central conference on work regarding united front on the 100th anniversary of the Communist Party of China's formulation of the united front policy and deploying the Party's united front work in the new era; conducting inspections in border ethnic areas to promote forging a strong sense of community for the Chinese nation; cordially meeting representatives of the World Federation of Overseas Chinese Associations and guiding overseas Chinese to contribute their wisdom and strength to national rejuvenation; and making important instructions on strengthening and improving the work of the People's Political Consultative Conference many times... General Secretary Xi Jinping has placed the work of the People's Political Consultative Conference in an important position in governance, pointed out the direction for the development of the cause of the People's Political Consultative Conference in the new era, and provided fundamental guidance. Setting an example and leading by demonstration. At around 9:10 on December 25, 2012, two minibuses drove into the central organ of the Jiu San Society. General Secretary Xi Jinping stepped down briskly from the bus. From December 24 to 25, shortly after the democratic parties and the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce successfully completed the leadership transition, the general secretary braved the severe cold of more than minus 10 degrees Celsius and visited in person the central committees of the eight democratic parties and the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce one by one. General Secretary Xi Jinping shook hands tightly with each comrade and affectionately recalled the scenes of interacting with the old-generation leaders of democratic parties. He held discussions with the leaders of the central committees of democratic parties and the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce to discuss plans for consolidating and developing the patriotic united front and adhering to and improving the system of multi-party cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of the Communist Party of China. General Secretary Xi Jinping pointed out: "'Be open-minded and listen attentively. Accept words without prejudice or partiality and follow only what is right.' This is the broad-mindedness that a ruling party should have. 'When discussing state affairs, discuss only the right and wrong and not be swayed by personal likes and dislikes.' This is the responsibility that a participating party should have." Having candid exchanges at the symposium for people without party affiliation, sending sincere greetings when celebrating the Spring Festival with people without party affiliation, and chatting freely at the New Year tea party of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference... General Secretary Xi Jinping has taken the lead in promoting new prospects and new steps in the work of the People's Political Consultative Conference and multi-party cooperation in the new era. This is a constantly improving "panoramic view" of top-level design - The Third Plenary Session of the 18th Central Committee deployed promoting extensive, multilevel, and institutionalized development of consultative democracy and proposed "building a consultative democracy system with reasonable procedures and complete links." The 19th National Party Congress emphasized giving play to the important role of socialist consultative democracy and "coordinately promoting consultations among political parties, people's congresses, governments, the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, people's organizations, grass-roots-level consultations, and consultations among social organizations." The Fourth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee required giving play to the effectiveness of the People's Political Consultative Conference as a political organization and democratic form, "improving the system of the People's Political Consultative Conference as a specialized consultative body, enriching consultative forms, improving consultative rules, and optimizing the setting of sectors." The 20th National Party Congress pointed out, "Strengthen functional construction in terms of institutionalization, standardization, and proceduralization, and raise the level of in-depth consultative interaction, full expression of opinions, and extensive building of consensus." The Third Plenary Session of the 20th Central Committee, from the perspective of improving the whole-process people's democracy system, made deployments on improving the consultative democracy mechanism and proposed reform tasks such as "strengthening the mechanisms of the People's Political Consultative Conference for reflecting social conditions and public opinion, connecting with the masses, and serving the people." This is an increasingly clear "compass" for innovative development - Adhering to fundamental principles and emphasizing that "for the cause of the People's Political Consultative Conference to develop in the right direction, we must unswervingly adhere to the leadership of the Communist Party of China." Defining the nature and position and proposing that "the People's Political Consultative Conference, as an organization of the united front, an institution for multi-party cooperation and political consultation, and an important form of people's democracy, is an important channel and specialized consultative body for socialist consultative democracy and an important part of the national governance system. It is an institutional arrangement with Chinese characteristics." Highlighting characteristic advantages and pointing out that socialist consultative democracy has roots, sources, and vitality in our country, and "has enriched the forms of democracy, expanded the channels of democracy, and deepened the connotations of democracy." Adhering to putting people first and requiring "adhering to the People's Political Consultative Conference serving the people" and "taking continuously meeting people's needs for a better life and promoting improvement of people's livelihood as an important focus, listening to the voices of the masses and reflecting their wishes." ... A series of important judgments scientifically answer major questions of what kind of People's Political Consultative Conference should be built in the new era and how to promote the development of the cause of the People's Political Consultative Conference, forming General Secretary Xi Jinping's important thought on strengthening and improving the work of the People's Political Consultative Conference, marking that the Communist Party of China has reached a new height in its understanding of the laws of the work of the People's Political Consultative Conference and providing fundamental guidance for doing the work of the People's Political Consultative Conference in the new era and on the new journey. The flag of thought leads the way, and a magnificent cause creates a new chapter. Under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping as the core and under the scientific guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the People's Political Consultative Conference has developed while inheriting and innovated while developing. It has actively engaged in the great practice of the new era and new journey and continuously radiated vigorous vitality. Offering advice and supervision to promote development - "We must give full play to the role of the People's Political Consultative Conference as a specialized consultative body and run consultative democracy throughout the whole process of fulfilling its functions." "'If one sees with the eyes of all under heaven, there is nothing that one does not see; if one listens with the ears of all under heaven, there is nothing that one does not hear; if one thinks with the mind of all under heaven, there is nothing that one does not know.'" On September 21, 2014, at the ceremony celebrating the 65th anniversary of the founding of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, General Secretary Xi Jinping clearly pointed out that "through the method of democratic centralism, we should open wide the channels for airing views and draw on the wisdom of the masses." Since the 18th National Party Congress, the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping as the core, focusing on developing whole-process people's democracy, has led the People's Political Consultative Conference to vigorously strengthen the construction of consultative democracy with reform thinking, innovative concepts, and practical measures, run consultative democracy throughout the whole process of political consultation, democratic supervision, and participation in the deliberation and administration of state affairs, and transform the institutional advantages of the People's Political Consultative Conference into national governance effectiveness. The content of consultative democracy is more abundant - In 2015, the General Office of the CPC Central Committee issued the "Implementation Opinions on Strengthening the Consultative Democracy Construction of the People's Political Consultative Conference," requiring "enriching the content of consultative democracy in practice" and clarifying that "encouraging people's political consultative conferences at all levels to enrich the content of consultative democracy and broaden the scope of consultation in light of the development of the situation and centering on the central work of the Party and the country and in combination with reality." Closely focusing on important fields and key links in reform, development, and stability, meeting decision-making needs and reflecting the wishes of the masses, the People's Political Consultative Conference carefully selects consultative topics. The scope of consultation has expanded from mainly concentrating in the economic and social fields in the past to covering all aspects of the overall layout of "five in one" and the strategic layout of "four comprehensives." Since the 12th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, a method of formulating an annual consultative plan to determine key consultative topics has been explored and formed. On the basis of extensive solicitation of opinions and full communication with Party and government departments, suggestions on key consultative topics are put forward to form a draft consultative plan, which is implemented after being reported to and approved by the CPC Central Committee. Nowadays, everything from the formulation of national economic and social development plans to small matters such as property management and promoting waste classification can be subject to consultation in the People's Political Consultative Conference, providing all-round assistance to scientific and democratic decision-making. The forms of consultative discussion are more diverse - On April 26, 2024, the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference held a remote consultative meeting on "deepening the multi-scenario application of artificial intelligence and enhancing the high-quality development level of modern industries." On the large screen used for remote connection at the meeting site, the real-time transmission of the road test scene of autonomous driving vehicles on a road in Hengyang City, Hunan Province was shown. Zhu Lei, the founder and CEO of Mushroom Vehicle Alliance, explained on the spot for the members. Remote consultation eliminates spatial barriers and becomes a vivid portrayal of the People's Political Consultative Conference keeping pace with the times and enriching the forms of consultative discussion. From establishing the biweekly consultative symposium to exploring and holding remote consultative meetings; from optimizing the procedures of special consultative sessions of the Standing Committee to increasing the frequency of holding special consultative meetings; from standardizing sectoral consultative meetings to setting up expert consultative meetings... After more than ten years of exploration and innovation, the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference has formed a consultative and deliberative pattern with the plenary session as the lead, special consultative sessions of the Standing Committee and special consultative meetings as the focus, and biweekly consultative symposiums, remote consultative meetings, expert consultative meetings, counterpart consultative meetings, and consultative meetings on proposal handling as the norm, continuously improving the quality and level of in-depth consultative discussion. The consultative system is more complete - "Strengthen the construction of consultative democracy systems and form a complete system of procedures and participation practices to ensure that the people have extensive, continuous, and in-depth rights to participate in daily political life." General Secretary Xi Jinping pointed out. The CPC Central Committee has successively formulated and issued a series of institutional documents such as the "Opinions on Strengthening the Construction of Socialist Consultative Democracy," the "Implementation Opinions on Strengthening the Consultative Democracy Construction of the People's Political Consultative Conference," the "Implementation Opinions on Strengthening Consultations among Political Parties," the "Opinions on Strengthening and Improving the Work of the People's Political Consultative Conference in the New Era," and the "Regulations on the Political Consultation Work of the Communist Party of China." The National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference continuously implements them, further clarifying what to consult on, who to consult with, how to consult, and how to apply consultative results, and building a consultative democracy system with clear rights and responsibilities, standardized procedures, smooth relations, and effective operation. Adapting to the new situation, making new norms, and promoting new development. The "four beams and eight pillars" of the socialist consultative democracy system are increasingly sound, with more systems to follow, rules to abide by, regulations to observe, and procedures to follow. "When there are matters, discuss more; when there are matters, discuss well; when there are matters, know how to discuss." On March 4, 2018, General Secretary Xi Jinping visited the members of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference from the China Democratic League, the China Zhi Gong Party, people without party affiliation, and the federation of overseas Chinese associations. He emphasized that we should "participate in politics by focusing on the key points and discuss state affairs by focusing on the crucial issues, and strive to achieve actual results in being good at consultation and discussion." Since the new era, one after another lively democratic practice and one innovative democratic form. The People's Political Consultative Conference has focused on "being well-grounded in evidence, reasonable in argument, appropriate in degree, and substantial in content," continuously enhancing the scientific nature and effectiveness of consultative democracy. Highlighting a "depth" character. Anchoring consultative discussion on the reform of the scientific and technological system. The 12th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference held a biweekly consultative symposium on "deepening the reform of the scientific and technological system and focusing on enhancing original innovation capabilities." The 13th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference held a special consultative meeting on "innovation-driven development." The 14th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference held a special consultative session of the Standing Committee on "improving the scientific and technological innovation system and accelerating the implementation of the innovation-driven development strategy." Focusing on democratic supervision on the issue of black soil. In 2021, a key research was conducted on the degradation of black soil. In 2022, attention was paid to protection investment, fund use management, and soil erosion control of black soil cultivated land. In 2023, the implementation of the "Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of Black Soil" was promoted. In 2024, emphasis was placed on strengthening scientific and technological support for protecting black soil. Conducting in-depth research on major decision-making arrangements. In 2023, major special research projects across committees and sectors were 聊聊新话题

This year marks the 75th anniversary of the founding of the CPPCC. Looking back on the magnificent journey, looking forward to a promising future, upholding the CPPCC system and developing the CPPCC cause well will surely inspire hundreds of millions of people to unite their strength, forge great achievements through struggle, and jointly write a magnificent chapter on the Chinese path to modernization.
In September 75 years ago, the first plenary session of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference was held amidst the triumph of the Chinese people's historic struggle for national independence and people's liberation. Over the past 75 years, under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, the CPPCC has actively participated in the great practice of building a new China, building a new China, exploring the path of reform and realizing the Chinese dream, and has gone through a glorious course. Especially since the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, under the strong leadership of the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping as the core, the CPPCC has adhered to the two themes of unity and democracy, adhered to the nature of the CPPCC, and closely promoted the overall layout of the "Five in One", coordinated and promoted the "Four Comprehensive" strategic layout.
Practice has shown that the CPPCC is a great achievement achieved by the Communist Party of China in integrating Marxist-Leninist united front theory, party theory, and democratic political theory with China's reality, and a great creation in the political system under the leadership of the Communist Party of China's democratic parties, non-partisan people, people's organizations, and people of all ethnic groups and all walks of life. As a united front organization, an institution for multi-party cooperation and political consultation, and an important form of people's democracy, the CPPCC is an important channel and specialized consultative body for socialist consultative democracy, an important part of the national governance system, and an institutional arrangement with Chinese characteristics. On the new journey of advancing the Chinese path to modernization, we must adhere to and improve the multi-party cooperation and political consultation system led by the Communist Party of China, adhere to the organic combination of party leadership, united front, and consultative democracy, and insist on promoting democracy and enhancing unity.
Since the new era, General Secretary Xi Jinping has put forward a series of new ideas, new viewpoints and new judgments on strengthening and improving the work of the CPPCC, profoundly expounded the status, role, goals, tasks, duties and missions, and practical requirements of the CPPCC, and scientifically answered a series of directional, overall, and strategic issues. It is a powerful ideological weapon to guide the work of the CPPCC in the new era. We must take Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era as the general program for overseeing the work of the CPPCC, ensure the correct political direction for the development of the CPPCC cause, and consolidate the common ideological foundation for unity and struggle. It is necessary to deeply study and implement General Secretary Xi Jinping's important ideas on strengthening and improving the work of the CPPCC, adhere to and strengthen the party's overall leadership over the work of the CPPCC, focus on the new era and new journey of the party and the state, and always plan and carry out work under the overall situation of the party and the state, and improve the level of political consultation, democratic supervision, and participation in politics.
Consultative democracy is an important form of people's democracy in the whole process of practice. It is an important institutional design for the Party to lead the people to effectively govern the country and ensure that the people are the masters of the country. It is a unique form and unique advantage of socialist democratic politics in our country. As a basic political system in our country, the multi-party cooperation and political consultation system led by the Communist Party of China is a new type of party system that has grown out of Chinese soil. It has played a unique role in building consensus, optimizing decision-making, coordinating relations, and maintaining stability. It has great superiority and strong vitality. To adhere to and improve our country's new-type party system and promote multi-party cooperation in the new era to be more standardized, orderly, and lively, the CPPCC should create conditions for democratic parties and people without party affiliation to play a better role in the CPPCC. In consultation, the CPPCC promotes broad unity, promotes multi-party cooperation, and practices people's democracy, fully reflecting the characteristics and advantages of China's socialist democracy. It is necessary to give full play to the role of the special consultative body of the CPPCC, and integrate consultative democracy throughout the whole process of performing its functions. The CPPCC should give full play to its united front organizational function, adhere to great unity and great alliance, adhere to consistency and diversity unity, continuously consolidate the common ideological and political foundation, strengthen ideological and political leadership, widely build consensus, strive to seek the greatest common divisor, draw the greatest concentric circle, and gather the majestic power to achieve national rejuvenation.
To seek common ground in business, and to achieve success through cooperation. Striving forward on a new journey full of glory and dreams, the CPPCC has a glorious mission and great responsibility. Unite more closely around the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping as the core, fully implement Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, deeply understand the decisive significance of the "Two Establishments", strengthen the "Four Consciousness", strengthen the "Four Confidence", achieve the "Two Maintenance", work together with one heart and one mind, work together, strengthen confidence and move forward with courage, and we will surely make new and greater contributions to the Chinese path to modernization to comprehensively promote the construction of a strong country and the great cause of national rejuvenation.