THE STATUTES OF THE REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
PATENTS ACT 1994
2020 REVISED EDITION
This revised edition incorporates all amendments up to and
including 1 December 2021 and comes into operation on 31 December 2021.
Prepared and Published by
THE LAW REVISION COMMISSION
UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF
THE REVISED EDITION OF THE LAWS ACT 1983
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Patents Act 1994
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
PRELIMINARY
Section
1.
Short title
2.
Interpretation
3.
Application to Government
PART 2
ADMINISTRATION
4.
Registrar of Patents and other officers
5.
Delegation by Registrar
6.
Registry of Patents
7.
Seal of Registry
8.
Powers of Registrar
9.
Disobedience to summons an offence
10.
Refusal to give evidence an offence
11.
Officers not to traffic in inventions
12.
Officers not to furnish information
PART 3
PATENTABILITY
13.
Patentable inventions
14.
Novelty
15.
Inventive step
16.
Industrial application
17.
Priority date
18.
Disclosure of matter, etc., between earlier and later applications
PART 4
RIGHT TO APPLY FOR AND OBTAIN PATENT
19.
Right to apply for and obtain patent
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022
1
2020 Ed.


Section
20.
Determination before grant of questions about entitlement to
patents, etc.
21.
Determination after grant of questions referred before grant
22.
Handling of application by joint applicants
23.
Effect of transfer of application under section 20 or 22
24.
Mention of inventor
PART 5
APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS
25.
Making of application
26.
Date of filing application
27.
Publication of application
PART 6
PROCEDURE FOR GRANT OF PATENT
28.
Preliminary examination
29.
Search and examination
29A.
Eligibility for grant of patent, etc.
29B.
Review of examination report, etc.
30.
Grant of patent
31.
General power to amend application before grant
32.
Observations by third party on patentability
33.
Information prejudicial to defence of Singapore or safety of
public
34.
Restrictions on applications abroad by Singapore residents
PART 7
PROVISIONS AS TO PATENTS AFTER GRANT
35.
Publication and certificate of grant
36.
Term of patent
36A.
Extension of term of patent
37.
Patent not to be impugned for lack of unity
38.
General power to amend specification after grant
38A.
Re-examination after grant
39.
Restoration of lapsed patents
40.
Surrender of patents
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
2
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


PART 8
PROPERTY IN PATENTS AND APPLICATIONS
FOR PATENTS AND REGISTRATION
Section
41.
Nature of, and transactions in, patents and applications for
patents
42.
Register of patents
43.
Effect of registration, etc., on rights in patents
44.
Rectification of register
45.
Evidence of register, documents, etc.
46.
Co-ownership of patents and applications for patents
47.
Determination of right to patent after grant
48.
Effect of transfer of patent under section 47
PART 9
EMPLOYEES’ INVENTIONS
49.
Right to employees’ inventions
50.
Supplementary provisions
PART 10
CONTRACTS AS TO PATENTED PRODUCTS
50A.
Application of this Part
51.
Avoidance of certain restrictive conditions
52.
Determination of parts of certain contracts
PART 11
LICENCES OF RIGHT AND COMPULSORY LICENCES
53.
Licences of right
54.
Cancellation of entry made under section 53
55.
Compulsory licences
PART 12
USE OF PATENTED INVENTIONS FOR
SERVICES OF GOVERNMENT
56.
Use of patented inventions by Government and authorised
parties
57.
Rights of third parties in respect of Government use
Patents Act 1994
3
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Section
58.
References of disputes as to Government use
59.
[Repealed]
60.
Nature and scope of rights under section 56
61.
Duty to inform patentee
62.
Patentee entitled to remuneration
63.
[Repealed]
64.
[Repealed]
65.
[Repealed]
PART 13
INFRINGEMENT OF PATENTS
66.
Meaning of infringement
67.
Proceedings for infringement of patent
68.
Reversal of burden of proof
69.
Restrictions on relief for infringement
70.
Relief for infringement of partially valid patent
71.
Right to continue use begun before priority date
72.
Certificate of contested validity of patent
73.
Proceedings for infringement by co-owner
74.
Proceedings for infringement by exclusive licensee
75.
Effect of non-registration on infringement proceedings
76.
Infringement of rights conferred by publication of application
77.
Remedy for groundless threats of infringement proceedings
78.
Declaration as to non-infringement
PART 14
REVOCATION OF PATENTS AND
VALIDITY PROCEEDINGS
79.
[Repealed]
80.
Power to revoke patents on application
81.
Registrar’s power to revoke patents on own initiative
82.
Proceedings in which validity of patent may be put in issue
PART 15
AMENDMENTS OF PATENTS AND APPLICATIONS
83.
Amendment of patent in infringement or revocation
proceedings, etc.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
4
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Section
84.
Amendments of applications and patents not to include added
matter
PART 16
INTERNATIONAL APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS
85.
Effect of filing international application for patent
86.
International and national phases of application
87.
Adaptation of provisions in relation to international application
88.
Evidence of Patent Co-operation Treaty and its instruments
PART 17
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
89.
Proceedings before court or Registrar
90.
Appeals from Registrar
91.
General powers of court
92.
Exercise of Registrar’s discretionary powers
93.
Right of audience in patent proceedings
94.
Extension of privilege for communications with solicitors
relating to patent proceedings
95.
Privilege for communications with patent agents, etc.
96.
Costs and expenses in proceedings before Registrar
97.
Licences granted by order of Registrar
PART 18
OFFENCES
98.
Falsification of register, etc.
99.
Unauthorised claim of patent rights
100.
Unauthorised claim that patent has been applied for
101.
Misuse of title “Registry of Patents”
102.
Offences by bodies corporate and partnerships
103.
Composition of offences
PART 19
PATENT AGENTS AND FOREIGN PATENT AGENTS
104.
Registration of patent agents and foreign patent agents
105.
Persons entitled to act as patent agents, etc.
105A.
Foreign patent agents
Patents Act 1994
5
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


PART 20
MISCELLANEOUS AND GENERAL
Section
106.
Immunity of Office, its officers and Examiners
107.
Correction of errors in patents and applications
108.
Information about patent applications and patents, and
inspection of documents
109.
[Repealed]
110.
Extension of time
111.
Hours of business and excluded days
112.
Government’s right to sell forfeited articles
113.
Extent of invention
114.
Availability of samples of micro-organisms
115.
Rules
115A.
Forms and directions of Registrar
116.
Fees
116A.
Amendment of Schedule
117.
Transitional provisions
The Schedule
An Act to establish a new law of patents, to enable Singapore to give
effect to certain international conventions on patents, and for
matters connected therewith.
[23 February 1995: Except sections 104 and 105(1) to
(6), (8) and (9)]
PART 1
PRELIMINARY
Short title
1. This Act is the Patents Act 1994.
Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —
“Convention
on
International
Exhibitions”
means
the
Convention relating to International Exhibitions signed in
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
6
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Paris on 22 November 1928, as amended or supplemented by
any protocol to that convention which is for the time being in
force;
“corresponding application”, in relation to an application for a
patent (called in this definition the application in suit), means
an application for protection filed, or treated as filed, with
any prescribed patent office that —
(a) forms the basis for a priority claim under section 17
in the application in suit; or
(b) is subject to a priority claim based on —
(i) the application in suit; or
(ii) an application which is also the basis for a
priority
claim
under
section
17
in
the
application in suit;
“corresponding international application”, in relation to an
application for a patent (called in this definition the
application in suit), means an application for protection
filed under the Patent Co-operation Treaty that —
(a) forms the basis for a priority claim under section 17
in the application in suit; or
(b) is subject to a priority claim based on —
(i) the application in suit; or
(ii) an application which is also the basis for a
priority
claim
under
section
17
in
the
application in suit;
“corresponding
patent”,
in
relation
to
a
corresponding
application, means a patent granted in respect of the
corresponding application by the prescribed patent office in
which the corresponding application was filed or treated as
filed;
“Council for TRIPS” means the Council for Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights established under the
TRIPS Agreement;
Patents Act 1994
7
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


“country” includes —
(a) a colony, protectorate or territory subject to the
authority or under the suzerainty of another country;
or
(b) a territory administered by another country under the
trusteeship of the United Nations;
“court” means the General Division of the High Court;
“date of filing”, in relation to —
(a) an application for a patent made under this Act,
means the date of filing that application by virtue of
section 26; and
(b) any other application, means the date which, under
the law of the country where the application was
made or in accordance with the terms of a treaty or
convention to which that country is a party, is to be
treated as the date of filing that application in that
country or is equivalent to the date of filing an
application in that country (whatever the outcome of
the application);
“designate”, in relation to an application or a patent, means
designate the country or countries (pursuant to the Patent
Co-operation Treaty) in which protection is sought for the
invention which is the subject of the application or patent;
“Doha
Declaration
Implementation
Decision”
means
the
Decision adopted by the General Council of the World
Trade
Organisation
on
30
August
2003
on
the
implementation of paragraph 6 of the Declaration on the
TRIPS Agreement and Public Health adopted in Doha on
14 November 2001;
“employee” means a person who works or (where the
employment has ceased) worked under a contract of
employment or in employment under or for the purposes of
a Government department;
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
8
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


“employer”, in relation to an employee, means the person by
whom the employee is or was employed;
“European Patent Convention” means the Convention on the
Grant of European Patents;
“European Patent Office” means the office of that name
established by the European Patent Convention;
“examination”
means
an
examination
conducted
by
an
Examiner in relation to an application for a patent to
determine such matters as may be prescribed;
“Examiner” means any person, organisation, entity or foreign or
international patent office or organisation appointed by the
Registrar for the purpose of referring any question or matter
relating to patents (including the conduct of any search,
examination or search and examination, in relation to an
application for a patent, whether before or after the patent is
granted), and includes any Deputy Registrar of Patents, and
any Assistant Registrar of Patents or public officer to whom
the Registrar has delegated, under section 5(1), any of the
Registrar’s powers or functions under this Act;
“exclusive licence” means a licence from the proprietor of or
applicant for a patent conferring on the licensee, or on the
licensee and persons authorised by the licensee, to the
exclusion of all other persons (including the proprietor or
applicant), any right in respect of the invention to which the
patent or application relates, and “exclusive licensee” and
“non-exclusive licence” are to be construed accordingly;
“filing fee” means the fee prescribed for the purposes of
section 25;
“formal requirements” means those requirements of this Act and
the rules which are designated by the rules as formal
requirements for the purposes of this Act;
“international application for a patent” means an application
made under the Patent Co-operation Treaty;
Patents Act 1994
9
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


“international application for a patent (Singapore)” means an
application of that description which, on its date of filing,
designates Singapore;
“International Bureau” means the secretariat of the World
Intellectual
Property
Organisation
established
by
a
convention signed at Stockholm on 14 July 1967;
“international exhibition” means an official or officially
recognised international exhibition falling within the terms
of the Convention on International Exhibitions or falling
within the terms of any subsequent treaty or convention
replacing that convention;
“inventor”, in relation to an invention, means the actual deviser
of the invention and “joint inventor” is to be construed
accordingly;
“journal” has the meaning given by section 115(4);
[Deleted by Act 33 of 2021 wef 14/01/2022]
“marketing approval”, in relation to a pharmaceutical product,
means —
(a) a product licence under section 5 of the Medicines
Act 1975 granted before 1 November 2016; or
(b) a registration under Part 7 of the Health Products
Act 2007 granted on or after 1 November 2016;
“medicinal health product” means any health product within the
meaning of the Health Products Act 2007 that is prescribed as
a medicinal health product;
“medicinal product” means —
(a) a medicinal product within the meaning of the
Medicines Act 1975; or
(b) a medicinal health product;
“missing part”, in relation to an application for a patent,
means —
(a) any drawing; or
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
10
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(b) any part of the description of the invention for which
the patent is sought,
which was missing from the application at the date of filing of
the application;
“mortgage”, when used as a noun, includes a charge for securing
money or money’s worth and, when used as a verb, is to be
construed accordingly;
“Office” means the Intellectual Property Office of Singapore
incorporated under the Intellectual Property Office of
Singapore Act 2001;
“Paris Convention” means the Convention for the Protection of
Industrial Property signed at Paris on 20 March 1883;
“patent” means a patent under this Act and includes a patent in
force by virtue of section 117(3);
“Patent Co-operation Treaty” means the treaty of that name
signed at Washington on 19 June 1970;
“patented invention” means an invention for which a patent is
granted
and
“patented
process”
is
to
be
construed
accordingly;
“patented product” means a product which is a patented
invention or, in relation to a patented process, a product
obtained directly by means of the process or to which the
process has been applied;
“person” includes the Government;
“pharmaceutical product” means a medicinal product which is a
substance used wholly or mainly by being administered to a
human being for the purpose of treating or preventing
disease, but does not include —
(a) any substance which is used solely —
(i) for diagnosis or testing; or
(ii) as a device or mechanism, or an instrument,
apparatus or appliance; or
Patents Act 1994
11
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(b) any substance or class of substances specified in
paragraph 2 or 3 of the Schedule;
“prescribed form” means a form published by the Registrar
under section 115A;
“priority date” means the date determined as such under
section 17;
“published” means made available to the public (whether in
Singapore or elsewhere) and a document is taken to be
published under any provision of this Act if it can be
inspected as of right at any place in Singapore by members of
the public, whether on payment of a fee or not, and
“republished” is to be construed accordingly;
“register”, when used as a noun, means the register of patents
maintained under section 42 and, when used as a verb, means,
in relation to any thing, to register or register particulars, or
enter notice, of that thing in the register and, when used in
relation to a person, means to enter the person’s name in the
register;
“registered foreign patent agent” means a person whose name is
entered in the register of foreign patent agents kept in
accordance with the rules made under section 104;
“registered patent agent” means a person whose name is entered
in the register of patent agents kept in accordance with the
rules made under section 104;
“Registrar” means the Registrar of Patents and includes any
Deputy Registrar of Patents holding office under this Act;
“Registry” means the Registry of Patents established under this
Act;
“related national phase application”, in relation to an application
for a patent (being an international application for a patent
(Singapore) that has entered the national phase in Singapore
under section 86(3)), or a new application filed in accordance
with section 26(11) which derived its filing date from an
international application for a patent (Singapore) (called in
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
12
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


this definition the application in suit), means an application
for protection treated as filed with any prescribed patent
office (being an international application for a patent
(Singapore) that has entered the national or regional phase
in the country or jurisdiction the patent office of which is that
prescribed patent office) which is derived from the same
international application for a patent (Singapore) (being an
international application for a patent (Singapore) that is not
subject to any priority claim) as the application in suit;
“related national phase patent”, in relation to a related national
phase application, means a patent granted in respect of the
related national phase application by the prescribed patent
office in which the related national phase application was
treated as filed;
“relevant authority”, in relation to a pharmaceutical product,
means the Health Sciences Authority established under the
Health Sciences Authority Act 2001;
“relevant health product” means a patented invention which is a
product referred to in —
(a) paragraph
1(a)
of
the
Doha
Declaration
Implementation Decision; or
(b) paragraph
1(a)
of
the
Annex
to
the
TRIPS
Agreement;
“right”, in relation to any patent or application, includes an
interest in the patent or application and, without prejudice to
the foregoing, any reference to a right in a patent includes a
reference to a share in the patent;
“scientific adviser” means any person with any scientific
qualification, any medical practitioner, engineer, architect,
surveyor, accountant, actuary and any other specially skilled
person;
“search” means a search conducted by an Examiner in relation to
an application for a patent to discover such matters as may be
prescribed;
Patents Act 1994
13
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


“supplementary
examination”
means
a
supplementary
examination conducted by an Examiner in relation to an
application for a patent to determine such matters as may be
prescribed;
“TRIPS Agreement” means the Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, set out in Annex 1C
to the WTO Agreement, as revised or amended from time to
time;
“WTO Agreement” means the World Trade Organisation
Agreement signed in Marrakesh in 1994 as revised or
amended from time to time.
[2/2007; 18/2008; 20/2009; 15/2012; 4/2014; 40/2019]
(2) Rules may provide for stating in the journal that an exhibition
falls
within
the
definition
of
“international
exhibition”
in
subsection (1) and any such statement is conclusive evidence that
the exhibition falls within that definition.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a matter is taken to have been
disclosed in any relevant application within the meaning of section 17
or in the specification of a patent if it was either claimed or disclosed
(otherwise than by way of disclaimer or acknowledgment of prior art)
in that application or specification.
(4) For the purposes of this Act —
(a) a claim is related to another claim if —
(i) the 2 claims are identical; or
(ii) each limitation in the second claim —
(A) is identical to a limitation in the first claim; or
(B) differs from a limitation in the first claim only
in expression but not in content; and
(b) more than one claim may be related to a single claim.
(5) References in this Act to an application for a patent, as filed, are
references to such an application in the state it was on the date of
filing.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
14
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(6) References in this Act to an application for a patent being
published are references to its being published under section 27.
(7) References in this Act to the Paris Convention or the Patent
Co-operation Treaty are references to that Convention or Treaty or
any other international convention or agreement replacing it, as
amended or supplemented by any convention or international
agreement (including in either case any protocol or annex) to
which Singapore is a party, or in accordance with the terms of any
such convention or agreement and include references to any
instrument made under any such convention or agreement.
(8) The Arbitration Act 2001 does not apply to any proceedings
before the Registrar under this Act.
Application to Government
3. This Act binds the Government.
PART 2
ADMINISTRATION
Registrar of Patents and other officers
4.—(1) There is to be a Registrar of Patents who has the chief
control of the Registry of Patents.
(2) There is to be one or more Deputy Registrars of Patents who,
subject to the control of the Registrar, have all the powers and
functions of the Registrar under this Act, other than the powers of the
Registrar under section 5.
(3) There is to be one or more Assistant Registrars of Patents.
(4) The Registrar and all the other officers under this section must
be appointed by the Minister.
Delegation by Registrar
5.—(1) The Registrar may, in relation to a particular matter or class
of matters, by writing under the hand of the Registrar, delegate all or
any of the Registrar’s powers or functions under this Act (except this
power of delegation) to an Assistant Registrar of Patents, any public
Patents Act 1994
15
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


officer, or any person with the relevant qualifications for or
experience in the matter or class of matters, so that the delegated
powers and functions may be exercised by the delegate with respect
to the matter or class of matters specified in the instrument of
delegation.
[4/2014]
(2) A delegation under this section is revocable at will and no
delegation prevents the exercise of a power or function by the
Registrar or by any Deputy Registrar of Patents.
(3) A person with the relevant qualifications or experience referred
to in subsection (1) is, when exercising the delegated powers and
functions, deemed to be a public servant for the purposes of the Penal
Code 1871.
[4/2014]
Registry of Patents
6. For the purposes of this Act, there is an office which is known as
the Registry of Patents.
Seal of Registry
7. There is a seal of the Registry and impressions of the seal are to
be judicially noticed.
Powers of Registrar
8. The Registrar may, for the purposes of this Act —
(a) summon witnesses;
(b) receive evidence on oath, whether orally or otherwise;
(c) require the production of documents or articles; and
(d) award costs against a party to proceedings before the
Registrar.
Disobedience to summons an offence
9.—(1) A person who has been summoned to appear as a witness
before the Registrar must not, without lawful excuse, fail to appear in
obedience to the summons.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
16
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(2) A person who has been required by the Registrar to produce a
document or article must not, without lawful excuse, fail to produce
the document or article.
(3) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) or (2) shall be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
3 months or to both.
Refusal to give evidence an offence
10.—(1) A person who appears before the Registrar must not,
without lawful excuse, refuse to be sworn or to make an affirmation,
or to produce documents or articles, or to answer questions, which the
person is lawfully required to produce or answer.
(2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months or to
both.
Officers not to traffic in inventions
11.—(1) An officer or person employed in the Registry must not
buy, sell, acquire or traffic in an invention or patent, whether granted
in Singapore or elsewhere, or in a right to, or licence under, a patent,
whether granted in Singapore or elsewhere.
(2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months or to
both.
(3) A purchase, sale, acquisition, assignment or transfer made or
entered into in contravention of this section is void.
(4) This section does not apply to the actual inventor or to an
acquisition by bequest or devolution in law.
Patents Act 1994
17
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Officers not to furnish information
12.—(1) An officer or person employed in the Registry must not,
except when required or authorised by this Act, or under a direction in
writing of the Registrar or by order of a court —
(a) furnish information on a matter which is being, or has
been, dealt with under this Act;
(b) prepare, or assist in the preparation of, a document required
or permitted by or under this Act to be lodged in the
Registry; or
(c) conduct a search in the records of the Registry.
(2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months or to
both.
PART 3
PATENTABILITY
Patentable inventions
13.—(1) Subject to subsection (2), a patentable invention is one
that satisfies the following conditions:
(a) the invention is new;
(b) it involves an inventive step; and
(c) it is capable of industrial application.
(2) An invention the publication or exploitation of which would be
generally expected to encourage offensive, immoral or anti-social
behaviour is not a patentable invention.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), behaviour is not to be
regarded as offensive, immoral or anti-social only because it is
prohibited by any law in force in Singapore.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
18
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Novelty
14.—(1) An invention is taken to be new if it does not form part of
the state of the art.
(2) The state of the art in the case of an invention is taken to
comprise all matter (whether a product, a process, information about
either, or anything else) which has at any time before the priority date
of that invention been made available to the public (whether in
Singapore or elsewhere) by written or oral description, by use or in
any other way.
(3) The state of the art in the case of an invention to which an
application for a patent or a patent relates is taken also to comprise
matter contained in an application for another patent which was
published on or after the priority date of that invention, if the
following conditions are satisfied:
(a) that matter was contained in the application for that other
patent both as filed and as published; and
(b) the priority date of that matter is earlier than that of the
invention.
(4) For the purposes of this section, the disclosure of matter
constituting an invention is to be disregarded in the case of a patent or
an application for a patent if occurring later than the beginning of the
period of 12 months immediately preceding the date of filing the
application for the patent and either —
(a) the disclosure was due to, or made in consequence of, the
matter having been obtained unlawfully or in breach of
confidence by any person —
(i) from the inventor or from any other person to whom
the matter was made available in confidence by the
inventor or who obtained it from the inventor
because the other person or the inventor believed
that the other person was entitled to obtain it; or
(ii) from any other person (A) to whom the matter was
made
available
in
confidence
by
any
person
mentioned
in
sub-paragraph
(i)
or
in
this
Patents Act 1994
19
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


sub-paragraph or who obtained it from any person so
mentioned because A or the person from whom A
obtained it believed that A was entitled to obtain it;
(b) the disclosure was made in breach of confidence by any
person who obtained the matter in confidence from the
inventor or from any other person to whom it was made
available, or who obtained it, from the inventor;
(c) the disclosure was due to, or made in consequence of, the
inventor displaying the invention at an international
exhibition;
(d) the disclosure was due to, or made in consequence of, the
inventor describing the invention in a paper read by the
inventor or another person with the inventor’s consent or
on the inventor’s behalf before any learned society or
published with the inventor’s consent in the transactions of
any learned society; or
(e) subject to subsections (6) and (7), the disclosure was made
to the public by the inventor, or by a person who obtained
the matter directly or indirectly from the inventor, in any
circumstances not described in paragraphs (a) to (d).
[18/2017]
(5) In subsection (4)(d), “learned society” includes any club or
association constituted in Singapore or elsewhere whose main object
is the promotion of any branch of learning or science.
(6) Subsection (4)(e) applies to the disclosure of matter constituting
an invention due to, or in consequence of, the publication by an
intellectual property administrator (being a person who obtained the
matter directly or indirectly from the inventor) of an application for
an intellectual property right (being an application containing the
matter, but not being the application for a patent mentioned in
subsection (4)), or a registration of an intellectual property right
pursuant to such an application, only if —
(a) the application was filed, without the consent of the
inventor, by a person who obtained the matter directly or
indirectly from the inventor; or
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
20
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(b) the publication was erroneous by reason that —
(i) the application had been withdrawn, refused or
abandoned before the date of the publication; and
(ii) consequently, the publication was not required under
the law (whether of Singapore or elsewhere) or treaty
governing the application.
[18/2017]
(7) For the purposes of subsection (4)(e), where —
(a) the disclosure of matter constituting an invention is due to,
or in consequence of, the publication by an intellectual
property administrator (being a person who obtained the
matter directly or indirectly from the inventor) of an
application for an intellectual property right (being an
application containing the matter, but not being the
application for a patent mentioned in subsection (4)), or
a registration of an intellectual property right pursuant to
such an application; and
(b) the
publication
was
erroneous
by
reason
that
the
publication occurred earlier than provided under the law
(whether of Singapore or elsewhere) or treaty governing
the application,
the matter is to be treated as disclosed to the public on the date when
the publication should have occurred under that law or treaty.
[18/2017]
(8) If the applicant relies on any circumstances described in any
paragraph of subsection (4) when —
(a) complying with section 29(1)(b) or (c), (3) or (9); or
(b) making a request under section 29B(1) for a review of an
examination report issued under section 29(4) or a search
and examination report issued under section 29(5),
the applicant must file written evidence complying with the
prescribed requirements in support of the applicant’s reliance on
those circumstances.
[18/2017]
Patents Act 1994
21
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(9) In this section, references to the inventor include references to
any proprietor of the invention for the time being.
(10) In the case of an invention consisting of a substance or
composition for use in a method of treatment of the human or animal
body by surgery or therapy or of diagnosis practised on the human or
animal body, the fact that the substance or composition forms part of
the state of the art does not prevent the invention from being taken to
be new if the use of the substance or composition in any such method
does not form part of the state of the art.
(11) In this section —
“foreign intellectual property office” means —
(a) any national or regional office outside Singapore that
performs
functions
similar
to
those
that
are
performed by —
(i) the Registry;
(ii) the Registry of Plant Varieties established
under
section
7
of
the
Plant
Varieties
Protection Act 2004;
(iii) the Registry of Designs established under
section
51
of
the
Registered
Designs
Act 2000; or
(iv) the Registry of Trade Marks established under
section 64 of the Trade Marks Act 1998;
(b) the International Bureau; or
(c) the International Bureau as defined in section 2(1) of
the Registered Designs Act 2000 or section 2(1) of
the Trade Marks Act 1998;
“intellectual property administrator” means —
(a) the Registrar;
(b) the Registrar of Designs;
(c) the Registrar of Plant Varieties;
(d) the Registrar of Trade Marks; or
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
22
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(e) a foreign intellectual property office;
“Registrar of Designs” means the Registrar of Designs
appointed under section 49 of the Registered Designs
Act 2000, and includes a Deputy Registrar of Designs and
an Assistant Registrar of Designs appointed under that
section;
“Registrar of Plant Varieties” means the Registrar of Plant
Varieties appointed under section 5 of the Plant Varieties
Protection Act 2004, and includes a Deputy Registrar of Plant
Varieties and an Assistant Registrar of Plant Varieties
appointed under that section;
“Registrar of Trade Marks” means the Registrar of Trade Marks
appointed under section 62 of the Trade Marks Act 1998, and
includes a Deputy Registrar of Trade Marks and an Assistant
Registrar of Trade Marks appointed under that section.
[18/2017]
Inventive step
15. An invention is taken to involve an inventive step if it is not
obvious to a person skilled in the art, having regard to any matter
which forms part of the state of the art by virtue only of section 14(2)
and without having regard to section 14(3).
Industrial application
16.—(1) Subject to subsection (2), an invention is taken to be
capable of industrial application if it can be made or used in any kind
of industry, including agriculture.
(2) An invention of a method of treatment of the human or animal
body by surgery or therapy or of diagnosis practised on the human or
animal body is not taken to be capable of industrial application.
(3) Subsection (2) does not prevent a product consisting of a
substance or composition from being treated as capable of industrial
application merely because it is invented for use in any such method.
Patents Act 1994
23
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Priority date
17.—(1) For the purposes of this Act, the priority date of an
invention to which an application for a patent relates and also of any
matter (whether or not the same as the invention) contained in the
application is, except as provided by the provisions of this Act, the
date of filing the application.
(2) Where in or in connection with an application for a patent
(called in this section the application in suit) a declaration is made,
whether by the applicant or any predecessor in title of the applicant,
complying with the relevant requirements of the rules and specifying
one or more earlier relevant applications for the purposes of this
section made by the applicant or a predecessor in title of the applicant,
and the application in suit has a date of filing, within the period
mentioned in subsection (3)(a) or (b), then —
(a) if an invention to which the application in suit relates is
supported by matter disclosed in the earlier relevant
application or applications, the priority date of that
invention, instead of being the date of filing the
application in suit, is the date of filing the relevant
application in which that matter was disclosed or, if it
was disclosed in more than one relevant application, the
earliest of them; and
(b) the priority date of any matter contained in the application
in suit which was also disclosed in the earlier relevant
application or applications is the date of filing the relevant
application in which that matter was disclosed or, if it was
disclosed in more than one relevant application, the earliest
of them.
[2/2007]
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), the period is —
(a) the period of 12 months immediately following the date of
filing of the specified earlier relevant application or, if
there is more than one relevant application, the earliest of
them; or
(b) where
the
Registrar
has
granted
a
request
under
subsection (4), the period commencing immediately after
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
24
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


the period referred to in paragraph (a) and ending at the end
of such period as may be prescribed.
[2/2007]
(4) The applicant may make a request to the Registrar for the
declaration referred to in subsection (2) to be made after the period
referred to in subsection (3)(a).
[2/2007]
(5) Where the applicant makes a request under subsection (4), the
applicant must, if the applicant has failed to file the application in suit
within the period mentioned in subsection (3)(a), indicate in the
request whether the applicant’s failure to file the application in suit
within the period mentioned in subsection (3)(a) —
(a) occurred in spite of due care required by the circumstances
having been taken; or
(b) was unintentional.
[2/2007]
(6) The Registrar must grant a request under subsection (4) if and
only if —
(a) the request is made within such period and in such manner,
and
complies
with
such
requirements,
as
may
be
prescribed; and
(b) where the applicant has failed to file the application in suit
within the period referred to in subsection (3)(a), the
Registrar is satisfied that the applicant’s failure to file the
application in suit within the period mentioned in
subsection (3)(a) —
(i) occurred in spite of due care required by the
circumstances having been taken; or
(ii) was unintentional.
[2/2007]
(7) Where an invention or other matter contained in the application
in suit was also disclosed in 2 earlier relevant applications filed by the
same applicant as in the case of the application in suit or a predecessor
in title of the applicant and the second of those relevant applications
was specified in or in connection with the application in suit, the
Patents Act 1994
25
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


second of those relevant applications, so far as it concerns that
invention or matter, is to be disregarded unless —
(a) it was filed in or in respect of the same country as the first;
and
(b) not later than the date of filing the second, the first
(whether
or
not
so
specified)
was
unconditionally
withdrawn, or was abandoned or refused, without —
(i) having been made available to the public whether in
Singapore or elsewhere;
(ii) leaving any right outstanding; and
(iii) having served to establish a priority date in relation
to another application, wherever made.
(8) This section applies for determining the priority date of an
invention for which a patent has been granted as it applies for
determining the priority date of an invention to which an application
for that patent relates.
(9) In this section and section 18, “relevant application” means any
of the following applications which has a date of filing:
(a) an application for a patent under this Act;
(b) an application in or for a convention country for protection
in respect of an invention or an application which, in
accordance with the law of a convention country or a treaty
or international convention to which a convention country
is a party, is equivalent to such an application.
(10) In subsection (9), “convention country” means —
(a) a country other than Singapore that is a party to the Paris
Convention or a member of the World Trade Organisation;
or
(b) any other country with which Singapore has entered into a
treaty, convention, arrangement or engagement and which
is declared by the Minister, by order in the Gazette, as a
convention country.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
26
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Disclosure of matter, etc., between earlier and later
applications
18.—(1) To avoid doubt, where an application (the application in
suit) is made for a patent and a declaration is made in accordance with
section 17(2) in or in connection with that application specifying an
earlier relevant application, the application in suit and any patent
granted in pursuance of it are not invalidated by reason only of the
relevant intervening acts.
(2) In subsection (1), “relevant intervening acts” means acts done in
relation to matter disclosed in an earlier relevant application between
the dates of the earlier relevant application and the application in suit,
as for example, filing another application for the invention for which
the earlier relevant application was made, making information
available to the public about that invention or that matter or
working that invention, but disregarding any application, or the
disclosure to the public of matter contained in any application, which
is itself to be disregarded for the purposes of section 17(7).
PART 4
RIGHT TO APPLY FOR AND OBTAIN PATENT
Right to apply for and obtain patent
19.—(1) Any person may make an application for a patent either
alone or jointly with another.
(2) A patent for an invention may be granted —
(a) primarily to the inventor or joint inventors;
(b) in preference to paragraph (a), to any person or persons
who, by virtue of any enactment or rule of law, or any
foreign law or treaty or international convention, or by
virtue of an enforceable term of any agreement entered into
with the inventor before the making of the invention, was
or were at the time of the making of the invention entitled
to the whole of the property in it (other than equitable
interests) in Singapore; or
Patents Act 1994
27
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(c) in any event, to the successor or successors in title of any
person or persons mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) or any
person so mentioned and the successor or successors in
title of another person so mentioned,
and to no other person.
(3) Except so far as the contrary is established, a person who makes
an application for a patent is taken to be the person who is entitled
under subsection (2) to be granted a patent and 2 or more persons who
make such an application jointly are taken to be the persons so
entitled.
Determination before grant of questions about entitlement to
patents, etc.
20.—(1) At any time before a patent has been granted for an
invention —
(a) any person may refer to the Registrar the question whether
the person is entitled to be granted (either alone or with any
other persons) a patent for that invention or has or would
have any right in or under any patent so granted or any
application for such a patent; or
(b) any of 2 or more co-proprietors of an application for a
patent for that invention may so refer the question whether
any right in or under application should be transferred or
granted to any other person,
and the Registrar must determine the question and may make such
order as the Registrar thinks fit to give effect to the determination.
[23/2019]
(2) Where a person refers a question relating to an invention under
subsection (1)(a) to the Registrar after an application for a patent for
the invention has been filed and before a patent is granted pursuant to
the application, then, unless the application is refused or withdrawn
before the reference is disposed of by the Registrar, the Registrar
may, without limiting subsection (1) and subject to subsection (6) —
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
28
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(a) order that the application proceeds in the name of that
person, either solely or jointly with that of any other
applicant or any specified applicant;
(b) where the reference was made by 2 or more persons, order
that the application proceeds in all their names jointly;
(c) refuse to grant a patent pursuant to the application or order
the application to be amended so as to exclude any of the
matter in respect of which the question was referred; or
(d) make an order transferring or granting any licence or other
right in or under the application and give directions to any
person for carrying out the provisions of any such order.
(3) Where
a
question
is
referred
to
the
Registrar
under
subsection (1)(a) and —
(a) the Registrar orders an application for a patent for the
invention to which the question relates to be so amended;
(b) any such application is refused under subsection (2)(c)
before the Registrar has disposed of the reference (whether
the reference was made before or after the publication of
the application); or
(c) any such application is refused under any other provision
of this Act or is withdrawn before the Registrar has
disposed of the reference, but after the publication of the
application,
the Registrar may order that any person by whom the reference was
made may within the prescribed period make a new application for a
patent for the whole or part of any matter comprised in the earlier
application or (as the case may be) for all or any of the matter
excluded from the earlier application, subject in either case to
section 84, and in either case that, if such a new application is made, it
is treated as having been filed on the date of filing the earlier
application.
(4) Where a person refers a question under subsection (1)(b)
relating to an application, any order under subsection (1) may contain
Patents Act 1994
29
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


directions to any person for transferring or granting any right in or
under the application.
(5) If any person to whom directions have been given under
subsection (2)(d) or (4) fails to do anything necessary for carrying out
any such directions within 14 days after the date of the directions, the
Registrar may, on application made to the Registrar by any person in
whose favour or on whose reference the directions were given,
authorise him, her or it to do that thing on behalf of the person to
whom the directions were given.
(6) Where on a reference under this section it is alleged that, by
virtue of any transaction, instrument or event relating to an invention
or an application for a patent, any person other than the inventor or
the applicant for the patent has become entitled to be granted (either
alone or with any other persons) a patent for the invention or has or
would have any right in or under any patent so granted or any
application for any such patent, an order must not be made under
subsection (2)(a), (b) or (d) on the reference unless notice of the
reference is given to the applicant and any such person, except any of
them who is a party to the reference.
[23/2019]
(7) If it appears to the Registrar on a reference of a question under
this section that the question involves a matter which would be more
conveniently dealt with by the court, the Registrar may decline to deal
with it and, without prejudice to the court’s jurisdiction to determine
any such question and make a declaration, the court has jurisdiction to
do so.
[23/2019]
(8) No direction may be given under this section so as to affect the
mutual rights or obligations of trustees or of the personal
representatives of deceased persons, or their rights or obligations
as such.
Determination after grant of questions referred before grant
21. If a question with respect to a patent or application is referred by
any person to the Registrar under section 20, and is not determined
before the time when the application is first in order for a grant of a
patent pursuant to the application, that fact does not prevent the grant
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
30
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


of a patent, but on its grant that person is treated as having referred to
the Registrar under section 47 any question mentioned in that section
which the Registrar thinks appropriate.
Handling of application by joint applicants
22. If any dispute arises between joint applicants for a patent
whether or in what manner the application should be proceeded with,
the Registrar may, on a request made by any of the parties, give such
directions as the Registrar thinks fit for enabling the application to
proceed in the name of one or more of the parties alone or for
regulating the manner in which it must be proceeded with, or for both
those purposes, as the case may require.
Effect of transfer of application under section 20 or 22
23.—(1) Where an order is made or directions are given under
section 20 or 22 that an application for a patent must proceed in the
name of one or some of the original applicants (whether or not it is
also to proceed in the name of some other person), any licences or
other rights in or under the application, subject to the provisions of the
order and any directions under either of those sections, continue in
force and are treated as granted by the persons in whose name the
application is to proceed.
(2) Where an order is made or directions are given under section 20
that an application for a patent must proceed in the name of one or
more persons none of whom was an original applicant (on the ground
that the original applicant or applicants was or were not entitled to be
granted the patent), any licences or other rights in or under the
application, subject to the provisions of the order and any directions
under that section and subject to subsection (3), lapse on the
registration of the person or those persons as the applicant or
applicants or, where the application has not been published, on the
making of the order.
(3) If before registration of a reference under section 20 resulting in
the making of any order mentioned in subsection (2) —
Patents Act 1994
31
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(a) the original applicant or any of the applicants, acting in
good faith, worked the invention in question in Singapore
or made effective and serious preparations to do so; or
(b) a licensee of the applicant, acting in good faith, worked the
invention in Singapore or made effective and serious
preparations to do so,
that or those original applicant or applicants or the licensee, on
making a request within the prescribed period to the person in whose
name the application is to proceed, are entitled to be granted a licence
(but not an exclusive licence) to continue working or (as the case may
be) to work the invention.
(4) Any such licence must be granted for a reasonable period and on
reasonable terms.
(5) Where an order is made as mentioned in subsection (2), the
person in whose name the application is to proceed or any person
claiming that he, she or it is entitled to be granted any such licence
may refer to the Registrar the question whether the latter is so entitled
and whether any such period is or terms are reasonable.
(6) The Registrar must determine the question under subsection (5)
and may, if the Registrar considers it appropriate, order the grant of
such a licence.
Mention of inventor
24.—(1) The inventor or joint inventors of an invention have a right
to be mentioned as such in any patent granted for the invention and
also have a right to be so mentioned if possible in any published
application for a patent for the invention and, if not so mentioned, a
right to be so mentioned in accordance with the rules in a prescribed
document.
(2) Unless an applicant for a patent has already given the Registry
the information mentioned in this subsection, the applicant for a
patent must, within the prescribed period, file with the Registry a
statement —
(a) identifying the person or persons whom the applicant
believes to be the inventor or inventors; and
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
32
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(b) where the applicant is not the sole inventor or the
applicants are not the joint inventors, indicating the
derivation of the applicant’s or the applicants’ right to be
granted the patent,
and, if the applicant fails to do so, the application is treated as having
been abandoned.
(3) Where a person has been mentioned as a sole or joint inventor
under this section, any other person who alleges that the former ought
not to have been mentioned may at any time apply to the Registrar for
a certificate to that effect, and the Registrar may issue such a
certificate.
PART 5
APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS
Making of application
25.—(1) Every application for a patent —
(a) must be made in the prescribed form and must be filed at
the Registry in the manner prescribed in the rules made
under section 115 and specified in the practice directions
issued by the Registrar; and
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(b) must be accompanied by the fee prescribed for the
purposes of this subsection.
(2) Where an application is not accompanied by the fee mentioned
in subsection (1)(b), the fee must be paid within the prescribed period.
(3) Every application for a patent must contain —
(a) a request for the grant of a patent;
(b) a specification containing a description of the invention, a
claim or claims and any drawing referred to in the
description or any claim; and
(c) an abstract,
but this subsection does not prevent an application being initiated by
documents complying with section 26(1).
Patents Act 1994
33
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(4) The specification of an application must disclose the invention
in a manner which is clear and complete for the invention to be
performed by a person skilled in the art.
(5) The claim or claims must —
(a) define the matter for which the applicant seeks protection;
(b) be clear and concise;
(c) be supported by the description; and
(d) relate to one invention or to a group of inventions which
are so linked as to form a single inventive concept.
(6) Without limiting subsection (5)(d), the rules may provide for
treating 2 or more inventions as being so linked as to form a single
inventive concept for the purposes of this Act.
(7) The purpose of the abstract is to give technical information and
on publication it does not form part of the state of the art by virtue of
section 14(3), and the Registrar may determine whether the abstract
adequately fulfils its purpose and, if it does not, may reframe it so that
it does.
(8) Subject to subsection (9), an application for a patent may be
withdrawn at any time before the patent is granted and any
withdrawal of such an application may not be revoked.
[15/2012]
(9) A request to withdraw an application for a patent must be made
in such manner as may be prescribed.
[15/2012]
Date of filing application
26.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the date of filing an
application for a patent is taken to be the earliest date on which the
documents filed at the Registry to initiate the application satisfy the
following conditions:
(a) the documents indicate that a patent is sought;
(b) the documents identify the applicant for the patent; and
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
34
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(c) the documents contain —
(i) something which is or appears to be a description of
the invention for which the patent is sought; or
(ii) where a declaration under section 17(2) is made in or
in connection with the application —
(A) a reference to an earlier relevant application
specified in the declaration;
(B) such
information
on
the
earlier
relevant
application as may be prescribed; and
(C) a statement that the description of the invention
for which the patent is sought is incorporated in
the
application
by
reference
to,
and
is
completely contained in, the earlier relevant
application, as filed.
[2/2007]
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(c)(i), it is immaterial
whether —
(a) the thing is in, or is accompanied by a translation into, a
language accepted by the Registry in accordance with the
rules; or
(b) the thing otherwise complies with the other provisions of
this Act and with any relevant rules.
[2/2007]
(3) Where the Registrar determines that the documents filed at the
Registry to initiate an application for a patent do not satisfy all of the
conditions in subsection (1)(a), (b) and (c)(i) or (ii) —
(a) the Registrar must, as soon as practicable after the filing of
those documents, notify the applicant of what else must be
filed in order for the application to have a date of filing; and
(b) the applicant must, within such period as may be
prescribed, do either or both of the following:
(i) make observations on the Registrar’s determination;
Patents Act 1994
35
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(ii) file every document which must be filed in order for
the application to have a date of filing.
[2/2007]
(4) Where subsection (3) applies, if the applicant fails to file every
document which must be filed in order for the application to have a
date of filing before the end of the period prescribed under
subsection (3)(b), the application is treated as having been
abandoned.
[2/2007]
(5) Subsection (4) does not apply if —
(a) the
applicant
makes
observations
as
mentioned
in
subsection
(3)(b)(i)
before
the
end
of
the
period
prescribed under subsection (3)(b); and
(b) as a result of the observations, the Registrar is satisfied that
the documents filed at the Registry to initiate the
application
satisfy
all
of
the
conditions
in
subsection (1)(a), (b) and (c)(i) or (ii).
[2/2007]
(6) Where the documents filed at the Registry to initiate an
application
for
a
patent
satisfy
all
of
the
conditions
in
subsection (1)(a), (b) and (c)(i) or (ii), the Registrar must, as soon
as practicable after the filing of the last of those documents, notify the
applicant of the date of filing of the application.
[2/2007]
(7) Where an application for a patent has a date of filing under
subsection (1) by reason only that the documents filed at the Registry
to initiate the application satisfy the conditions in subsection (1)(a),
(b) and (c)(ii), the applicant must, within such period as may be
prescribed, file at the Registry —
(a) a written notice confirming that the description of the
invention for which the patent is sought is incorporated in
the application by reference to the earlier relevant
application referred to in subsection (1)(c)(ii)(C);
(b) the description of the invention for which the patent is
sought; and
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
36
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(c) such other documents as may be prescribed.
[2/2007]
(7A) Subsection (7)(c) does not apply in prescribed circumstances.
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(8) If an application for a patent has a date of filing by virtue of
subsection (1), the applicant files at the Registry any missing part of
the application within such period and in such manner as may be
prescribed, and the applicant does not withdraw that missing part
before the end of that period, then —
(a) that missing part is treated as included in the application;
and
(b) the date of filing of the application is the date on which that
missing part is filed at the Registry.
[2/2007]
(9) Subsection (8)(b) does not apply if —
(a) on or before the date which is the date of filing of the
application for a patent by virtue of subsection (1), a
declaration is made under section 17(2), in or in connection
with the application, specifying an earlier relevant
application; and
(b) within such period as may be prescribed, the applicant —
(i) makes a request to the Registrar for subsection (8)(b)
not to apply to the application;
(ii) files a statement that the missing part referred to in
subsection (8) is incorporated in the application by
reference to, and is completely contained in, the
earlier relevant application, as filed;
(iii) furnishes such information on the earlier relevant
application as may be prescribed; and
(iv) except in prescribed circumstances, files such other
documents as may be prescribed.
[2/2007]
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
Patents Act 1994
37
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(10) Subsections (8) and (9) do not affect the power of the Registrar
under section 107(1) to correct an error or a mistake.
[2/2007]
(11) Where, after an application for a patent has been filed, but
before the applicant satisfies the condition under section 30(c), or the
application is refused, withdrawn, treated as or taken to be
withdrawn, or treated as abandoned or as having been abandoned —
(a) a new application is filed by the original applicant or the
original applicant’s successor in title in accordance with
the rules in respect of any part of the matter contained in
the earlier application; and
(b) the conditions in subsection (1)(a), (b) and (c)(i) or (ii) are
satisfied in relation to the new application (without the new
application contravening section 84),
the new application is treated as having, as its date of filing, the date
of filing of the earlier application.
[2/2007; 15/2012]
(12) Where an application has a date of filing by virtue of this
section, the application is treated as having been abandoned unless —
(a) the applicant files at the Registry, before the end of such
period as may be prescribed, one or more claims for the
purposes of the application;
(b) the applicant pays the filing fee under section 25(1)(b)
before the end of the period prescribed under section 25(2);
and
(c) where
the
application
has
a
date
of
filing
under
subsection (1) by reason only that the documents filed at
the
Registry
to
initiate
the
application
satisfy
the
conditions in subsection (1)(a), (b) and (c)(ii), the
applicant files at the Registry the documents referred to
in subsection (7)(a), (b) and (c) before the end of the period
prescribed under subsection (7).
[2/2007]
(13) In this section, “relevant application” has the meaning given
by section 17(9).
[2/2007]
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
38
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Publication of application
27.—(1) Subject to section 33, where an application has a date of
filing, then, as soon as possible after the end of the prescribed period,
the Registrar must, unless the application is withdrawn in the
prescribed manner, treated as having been abandoned or refused
before preparations for its publication have been completed by the
Registry, publish it as filed (including not only the original claims but
also any amendment of those claims and new claims subsisting
immediately before the completion of those preparations).
(2) The Registrar may, if so requested by the applicant, publish the
application as mentioned in subsection (1) during the prescribed
period, and in either event must publish the fact and date of its
publication in the journal.
(3) The Registrar may omit from the specification of a published
application for a patent any matter —
(a) which in the Registrar’s opinion disparages any person in a
way likely to damage the person; or
(b) the publication or exploitation of which would in the
Registrar’s opinion be generally expected to encourage
offensive, immoral or anti-social behaviour.
PART 6
PROCEDURE FOR GRANT OF PATENT
Preliminary examination
28.—(1) The Registrar must conduct a preliminary examination of
an application for a patent if —
(a) the application has a date of filing;
(b) the application has not been withdrawn or treated as
abandoned;
(c) the filing fee under section 25(1)(b) has been paid;
(d) one or more claims for the purposes of the application have
been filed under section 26(12)(a); and
Patents Act 1994
39
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(e) where
the
application
has
a
date
of
filing
under
section 26(1) by reason only that the documents filed at
the
Registry
to
initiate
the
application
satisfy
the
conditions in section 26(1)(a), (b) and (c)(ii), the
documents referred to in section 26(7)(a), (b) and (c)
(where applicable) have been filed at the Registry.
[2/2007]
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(2) If, after the Registrar has conducted a preliminary examination
of an application for a patent under subsection (1), the applicant files
at the Registry, and does not withdraw, any missing part of the
application in accordance with section 26(8), then the Registrar must
conduct another preliminary examination of the application, with the
missing part treated as included in the application.
[2/2007]
(3) On a preliminary examination of an application, the Registrar
must determine —
(a) whether the application complies with all the formal
requirements; and
(b) whether —
(i) any drawing referred to in the application; or
(ii) any part of the description of the invention for which
the patent is sought,
is missing from the application.
[2/2007]
(4) If the Registrar determines under subsection (3)(a) that not all
the formal requirements have been complied with, then the Registrar
must notify the applicant accordingly, and the applicant must, within
the prescribed period —
(a) make observations on the Registrar’s determination; and
(b) subject to section 84, amend the application in the
prescribed manner, so as to comply with all the formal
requirements.
[15/2012]
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
40
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(5) Where subsection (4) applies, the Registrar may refuse the
application if the applicant fails to amend the application as
mentioned in paragraph (b) of that subsection before the end of the
prescribed period under that subsection.
[2/2007; 15/2012]
(6) Subsection (5) does not apply if —
(a) the
applicant
makes
observations
as
mentioned
in
subsection (4)(a) before the end of the prescribed period
under subsection (4); and
(b) as a result of the observations, the Registrar is satisfied that
all the formal requirements have been complied with.
[2/2007; 15/2012]
(7) If the Registrar determines under subsection (3)(b) that a
drawing or part of the description of the invention is missing from the
application, then the Registrar must notify the applicant accordingly.
[2/2007]
(8) Where subsection (7) applies, if the applicant files the drawing
or part of the description of the invention that is missing from the
application within such period and in such manner as may be
prescribed, and the applicant does not withdraw that drawing or part
of the description of the invention before the end of that period,
then —
(a) that drawing or part of the description of the invention is
treated as included in the application; and
(b) the date of filing of the application is the date on which that
drawing or part of the description of the invention is filed at
the Registry.
[2/2007]
(9) Subsection (8)(b) does not apply if —
(a) on or before the date which is the date of filing of the
application by virtue of section 26(1), a declaration is made
under section 17(2), in or in connection with the
application, specifying an earlier relevant application; and
Patents Act 1994
41
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(b) within such period as may be prescribed, the applicant —
(i) makes a request to the Registrar for subsection (8)(b)
not to apply to the application;
(ii) files a statement that the drawing or part of the
description
of
the
invention
mentioned
in
subsection (8) is incorporated in the application by
reference to, and is completely contained in, the
earlier relevant application, as filed;
(iii) furnishes such information on the earlier relevant
application as may be prescribed; and
(iv) except in prescribed circumstances, files such other
documents as may be prescribed.
[2/2007]
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(10) In subsection (9), “relevant application” has the meaning given
by section 17(9).
[2/2007]
(11) Where an application for a patent complies with all the formal
requirements under this section within the prescribed period, the
Registrar must send a notification to the applicant.
[15/2012]
Search and examination
29.—(1) The applicant in an application for a patent (called in this
subsection the application in suit) must comply with one of the
following paragraphs within the period prescribed for that paragraph:
(a) except in prescribed circumstances, file a request in the
prescribed form for a search report;
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(b) file a request in the prescribed form for a search and
examination report;
(c) file a request in the prescribed form for an examination
report and (except in prescribed circumstances) the
prescribed documents, where the applicant relies on the
final results of —
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
42
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(i) a
search
in
one
corresponding
application,
corresponding international application or related
national phase application; or
(ii) a search during the international phase of the
application in suit (if the application in suit is an
international application for a patent (Singapore) that
has entered the national phase in Singapore under
section 86(3));
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(d) subject to subsection (12), file the prescribed documents
and a request in the prescribed form for a supplementary
examination report, where —
(i) the applicant relies on the final results of —
(A) any search and examination as to the substance
of
one
corresponding
application,
corresponding
international
application
or
related national phase application; or
(B) any search and examination as to the substance
of the application in suit during its international
phase
(if
the
application
in
suit
is
an
international
application
for
a
patent
(Singapore) that has entered the national
phase in Singapore under section 86(3));
(ii) each claim in the application in suit is related to at
least one claim in that corresponding application,
corresponding international application or related
national phase application, or in the application in
suit during its international phase, as the case may
be; and
(iii) according to those results, each claim in the
application in suit appears to satisfy the criteria of
novelty, inventive step (or non-obviousness) and
industrial applicability (or utility).
[15/2012; 18/2017]
Patents Act 1994
43
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(2) Where the applicant has complied with subsection (1)(a), the
Registrar must —
(a) cause the application to be subjected to a search by an
Examiner; and
(b) upon receiving the search report prepared by the Examiner,
send the applicant a copy of that report.
[15/2012]
(3) Upon receiving the search report under subsection (2)(b) from
the Registrar, the applicant must, within the prescribed period, file a
request in the prescribed form for an examination report.
[15/2012]
(4) Where the applicant has complied with subsection (1)(c) or (3),
the Registrar must —
(a) cause the application to be subjected to an examination by
an Examiner; and
(b) upon receiving the examination report prepared by the
Examiner, send the applicant a copy of that report.
[15/2012]
(5) Where the applicant has complied with subsection (1)(b), the
Registrar must —
(a) cause the application to be subjected to —
(i) a search by an Examiner; and
(ii) an examination by an Examiner; and
(b) upon receiving the search and examination report prepared
by the Examiner, send the applicant a copy of that report.
[15/2012]
(6) Where the applicant has complied with subsection (1)(d), the
Registrar must —
(a) cause the application to be subjected to a supplementary
examination by an Examiner; and
(b) upon receiving the supplementary examination report
prepared by the Examiner, send the applicant a copy of
that report.
[15/2012]
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
44
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(7) If it appears to an Examiner during the examination of an
application under subsection (4) or (5) that one or more of the matters
prescribed for the purposes of this subsection apply, the Examiner
must give the applicant at least one written opinion to that effect, and
the Registrar must, upon receiving the written opinion, send the
applicant a copy of the written opinion.
[15/2012]
(7A) The Examiner in subsection (7) may, instead of giving the
applicant a written opinion concerning a matter mentioned in that
subsection, ask the Registrar to give a notice to the applicant inviting
the applicant to amend the application (called in this section an
invitation to amend), if the Examiner is of the opinion that the matter
can be resolved by this means and without a written opinion and a
formal response to it.
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(7B) The Examiner may also ask the Registrar to give to the
applicant an invitation to amend after reviewing a response by the
applicant under subsection (9)(a) or an amendment by the applicant
under subsection (9)(b) to the application.
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(7C) An applicant may, within the prescribed period, respond to an
invitation to amend by —
(a) amending, in the prescribed manner (but subject to
section 84), the specification of the application in
accordance with the prescribed conditions; or
(b) rejecting the invitation to amend (with or without an
explanation) in the prescribed manner.
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(7D) The applicant need not respond to the invitation to amend if
the applicant withdraws under subsection (10) the request under
subsection (1)(c) or (3) for the examination report or the request
under subsection (1)(b) for the search and examination report, and
may not so respond after the examination report or search and
examination report is issued under subsection (4) or (5).
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(7E) The giving of an invitation to amend to the applicant does not
affect the power of the Examiner under subsection (7) to give to the
Patents Act 1994
45
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


applicant a written opinion, or another written opinion, but the
Examiner may not do so until after the applicant responds to the
invitation to amend in accordance with subsection (7C) or after the
expiry of the prescribed period mentioned in subsection (7C),
whichever is earlier.
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(8) If it appears to an Examiner during the supplementary
examination of an application under subsection (6) that one or
more of the matters prescribed for the purposes of this subsection
apply, the Examiner must give the applicant one written opinion to
that effect, and the Registrar must, upon receiving the written
opinion, send the applicant a copy of the written opinion.
[15/2012]
(9) Unless the request under subsection (1)(b), (c) or (d) or (3) for
the
examination
report,
search
and
examination
report
or
supplementary
examination
report
is
withdrawn
under
subsection (10) or (11), the applicant must, after receipt of a copy
of a written opinion and before the examination report, search and
examination report or supplementary examination report is issued
under subsection (4), (5) or (6), as the case may be —
(a) respond in the prescribed manner, within the prescribed
period, to the written opinion under subsection (7) or (8),
as the case may be; and
(b) subject to section 84, amend in the prescribed manner,
within the prescribed period, the specification of the
application in accordance with the prescribed conditions.
[15/2012; 18/2017]
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(10) Despite subsection (1), where an applicant has filed a request
for an examination report under subsection (1)(c) or (3), or a request
for a search and examination report under subsection (1)(b), the
applicant may —
(a) withdraw that request —
(i) in any case where an Examiner has given a written
opinion under subsection (7), and the applicant has
not responded to the written opinion — at any time
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
46
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


before the expiry of the prescribed period mentioned
in subsection (9)(a);
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(ia) in any case where the Registrar has given an
invitation to amend under subsection (7A) or (7B),
and the applicant has not responded to the invitation
to amend — at any time before the expiry of the
prescribed period mentioned in subsection (7C); or
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(ii) in any other case — at any time before the
examination report or search and examination
report is issued under subsection (4) or (5); and
(b) subject
to
subsection
(12),
file
a
request
for
a
supplementary
examination
report
under
subsection (1)(d) within the prescribed period for that
request.
[18/2017]
(11) Despite subsection (1), where an applicant has filed a request
for a supplementary examination report under subsection (1)(d), the
applicant may —
(a) withdraw that request —
(i) in any case where an Examiner has given a written
opinion under subsection (8), and the applicant has
not responded to the written opinion — at any time
before the expiry of the prescribed period mentioned
in subsection (9)(a); or
(ii) in any other case — at any time before the
supplementary examination report is issued under
subsection (6); and
(b) file a request for a search and examination report under
subsection (1)(b) or a request for an examination report
under subsection (1)(c) or (3) within the prescribed period
for that request.
[18/2017]
Patents Act 1994
47
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(12) Subsections (1)(d) and (10)(b) do not apply unless —
(a) in any case where the application in suit is a new
application
mentioned
in
section
20(3),
26(11)
or
47(4) — the actual date of filing of the application in
suit is before the prescribed date; or
(b) in any other case — the date of filing of the application in
suit is before the prescribed date.
[18/2017]
(13) The application is treated as abandoned —
(a) subject to subsection (14), if the applicant fails to do one of
the following:
(i) comply
with
paragraph
(b),
(c)
or
(d)
of
subsection (1) within the period prescribed under
that subsection for that paragraph;
(ii) where subsection (3) applies, comply with that
subsection;
(b) where subsection (10) applies, if the applicant fails to file a
request for a supplementary examination report under
subsection (1)(d) within the prescribed period mentioned
in subsection (10)(b); or
(c) where subsection (11) applies, if the applicant fails to file a
request for a search and examination report under
subsection (1)(b) or a request for an examination report
under subsection (1)(c) or (3) within the prescribed period
mentioned in subsection (11)(b).
[15/2012; 18/2017]
(14) Where —
(a) after receiving the search report under subsection (2)(b)
from the Registrar, the applicant does not file a request for
an examination report under subsection (3) within the
prescribed period mentioned in that subsection; and
(b) the time prescribed for filing a request for an extension of
the prescribed period mentioned in subsection (3) expires
before, or within 3 months after, 30 October 2017,
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
48
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


the application is treated as abandoned if the applicant fails to file the
request for an examination report under subsection (3) within
6 months after that date.
[18/2017]
(15) In this section, “actual date of filing”, in relation to an
application in suit that is a new application mentioned in
section 20(3), 26(11) or 47(4), means the actual date of filing of
the new application, and not the date of filing of the earlier
application mentioned in section 20(3) or 26(11) or of the
application for the patent to which the reference relates mentioned
in section 47(4), as the case may be.
[18/2017]
Eligibility for grant of patent, etc.
29A.—(1) Where an examination report issued under section 29(4),
a search and examination report issued under section 29(5) or a
supplementary examination report issued under section 29(6) does
not contain any unresolved objection, the Registrar must issue to the
applicant a notice of eligibility to proceed to the grant of a patent.
[15/2012]
(2) Where the Registrar has issued to the applicant a notice under
subsection (1) —
(a) the
applicant
must
satisfy
the
conditions
under
section 30(a) and (c) within the prescribed period; and
(b) if the applicant fails to comply with paragraph (a), the
application is treated as abandoned.
[15/2012]
(3) Where an examination report issued under section 29(4), a
search and examination report issued under section 29(5) or a
supplementary examination report issued under section 29(6)
contains one or more unresolved objections, the Registrar must
issue to the applicant a notice of intention to refuse the application for
a patent.
[15/2012]
(4) Where the Registrar has issued to the applicant a notice under
subsection (3) —
Patents Act 1994
49
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(a) the applicant may, within the prescribed period, apply for a
review of the examination report, search and examination
report or supplementary examination report, as the case
may be, in accordance with section 29B(1); and
(b) if the applicant fails to apply for the review under
paragraph (a), the application for a patent must be refused.
[15/2012]
Review of examination report, etc.
29B.—(1) A request for a review of an examination report issued
under section 29(4), a search and examination report issued under
section 29(5) or a supplementary examination report issued under
section 29(6) must be made by filing —
(a) the prescribed form for the request within the prescribed
period; and
(b) written submissions to overcome the unresolved objections
in the examination report, search and examination report or
supplementary examination report, as the case may be.
[15/2012]
(2) At the time the request under subsection (1) is made, the
applicant may, subject to section 84, amend in the prescribed manner
the specification of the application to overcome one or more
unresolved objections in the examination report, search and
examination report or supplementary examination report, as the
case may be.
[15/2012]
(3) Upon completing the review of the examination report, search
and examination report or supplementary examination report, as the
case may be, the Examiner must prepare an examination review
report.
[15/2012]
(4) Subject to subsection (4A), the examination review report must
specify —
(a) whether the Examiner agrees or disagrees with the
examination report, search and examination report or
supplementary examination report, as the case may be;
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
50
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(b) where the applicant has amended the specification of the
application under subsection (2), whether each unresolved
objection
in
the
examination
report,
search
and
examination report or supplementary examination report
(as the case may be) has been overcome in the amended
specification; and
(c) the
reasons
for
the
Examiner’s
decision
under
paragraph (a) and, where applicable, paragraph (b).
[15/2012]
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(4A) The examination review report need not specify whether the
Examiner agrees or disagrees with the examination report, search and
examination report or supplementary examination report (as the case
may be) if the applicant had amended the specification of the
application for the purpose of overcoming all unresolved objections
in the report.
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(5) Upon receiving the examination review report, the Registrar
must send the applicant —
(a) a copy of that report; and
(b) either —
(i) a notice of eligibility to proceed to the grant of a
patent, if the Registrar is satisfied by that report that
there is no unresolved objection; or
(ii) a notice of refusal of the application for a patent, if
the Registrar is satisfied by that report that there are
one or more unresolved objections.
[15/2012]
(6) Where the Registrar has issued to the applicant a notice under
subsection (5)(b)(i) —
(a) the
applicant
must
satisfy
the
conditions
under
section 30(a) and (c) within the prescribed period; and
(b) if the applicant fails to comply with paragraph (a), the
application is treated as abandoned.
[4/2014]
Patents Act 1994
51
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(7) Where the Registrar has sent the applicant a notice under
subsection (5)(b)(ii), the refusal of the application for a patent takes
effect upon the expiry of the prescribed period.
[15/2012]
Grant of patent
30. The Registrar must grant the applicant a patent if all of the
following conditions have been satisfied:
(a) all the formal requirements have been complied with;
(b) the applicant has received a notice of eligibility to proceed
to the grant of a patent under section 29A(1) or
29B(5)(b)(i);
(c) the prescribed documents for the grant of the patent have
been filed.
[15/2012]
General power to amend application before grant
31.—(1) Subject to subsections (2), (3) and (4), the applicant may,
of the applicant’s own volition or otherwise, amend the application or
the specification thereof.
[15/2012]
(2) The applicant is not entitled to amend the application or
specification unless —
(a) the applicant has made a request to do so to the
Registrar —
(i) in the prescribed manner; and
(ii) within the prescribed period; and
(b) the request is accompanied by the prescribed documents.
[15/2012]
(3) The applicant may only amend the application or specification
in accordance with the prescribed conditions and subject to
section 84.
[15/2012]
(4) If the applicant fails to comply with any requirement under
subsection (2) or (3), the Registrar must —
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
52
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(a) refuse the applicant’s request to amend the application or
specification; and
(b) inform the applicant of the refusal.
[15/2012]
Observations by third party on patentability
32.—(1) Where an application for a patent has been published, any
other person may make observations in writing to the Registrar on the
question whether the invention is a patentable invention, stating
reasons for the observations, and the Registrar must, subject to
subsection (2), consider the observations in accordance with the
rules.
[23/2019]
(2) The observations must be received by the Registrar before the
Registrar sends to the applicant in the application for the patent —
(a) a copy of an examination report under section 29(4);
(b) a copy of a search and examination report under
section 29(5); or
(c) a copy of a supplementary examination report under
section 29(6).
[23/2019]
(3) A person does not become a party to any proceedings under this
Act before the Registrar by reason only that the person makes
observations under this section.
[23/2019]
Information prejudicial to defence of Singapore or safety of
public
33.—(1) Where an application for a patent is filed in the Registry
(whether under this Act or any treaty or international convention to
which Singapore is a party) and it appears to the Registrar that the
application contains information of a description notified to the
Registrar by the Minister as being information the publication of
which might be prejudicial to the defence of Singapore, the Registrar
must give directions prohibiting or restricting the publication of that
information or its communication to any specified person or
description of persons.
Patents Act 1994
53
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(2) If it appears to the Registrar that any application so filed
contains information the publication of which might be prejudicial to
the safety of the public, the Registrar may give directions prohibiting
or restricting the publication of that information or its communication
to any specified person or description of persons until the end of a
period not exceeding 3 months from the end of a period prescribed for
the purposes of section 27.
(3) While directions are in force under this section with respect to
an application —
(a) if the application is made under this Act, it will be held in
abeyance after the formal requirements of this Act and the
rules have been met and will not proceed to be processed in
accordance with section 29 until the directions are revoked
under subsection (4)(e); and
(b) if it is an international application for a patent, a copy of it
must not be sent to the International Bureau or any
international searching authority appointed under the
Patent Co-operation Treaty.
(4) Where the Registrar gives directions under this section with
respect to any application, the Registrar must give notice of the
application and of the directions to the Minister, and the following
provisions must then have effect:
(a) the Minister must, on receipt of the notice, consider
whether
the
publication
of
the
application
or
the
publication or communication of the information in
question
would
be
prejudicial
to
the
defence
of
Singapore or the safety of the public;
(b) if the Minister determines under paragraph (a) that the
publication or communication of that information would
be prejudicial to the safety of the public, the Minister must
notify the Registrar who must continue the Registrar’s
directions under subsection (2) until they are revoked
under paragraph (e);
(c) if the Minister determines under paragraph (a) that the
publication of the application or the publication or
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
54
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


communication of that information would be prejudicial to
the defence of Singapore or the safety of the public, the
Minister must (unless a notice under paragraph (d) has
previously been given by the Minister to the Registrar)
reconsider that question during the period of 9 months
from the date of filing the application and at least once in
every subsequent period of 12 months;
(d) if on consideration of an application at any time it appears
to the Minister that the publication of the application or the
publication
or
communication
of
the
information
contained in it would not, or would no longer, be
prejudicial to the defence of Singapore or the safety of
the public, the Minister must give notice to the Registrar to
that effect; and
(e) on receipt of such a notice the Registrar must revoke the
directions and may, subject to such conditions (if any) as
the Registrar thinks fit, extend the time for doing anything
required or authorised to be done by or under this Act in
connection with the application, whether or not that time
has previously expired.
(5) The Minister may at any time, for the purpose of enabling the
Minister to decide the question referred to in subsection (4)(c), do one
or both of the following, that is to say, inspect or authorise any person
to inspect the application and any document sent to the Registrar in
connection with it and where a person is authorised to carry out such
inspection, the person must as soon as practicable report on the
person’s inspection to the Minister.
(6) Where directions given under this section in respect of an
application for a patent for an invention are revoked, and the
application is brought in order for the grant of a patent and a patent is
granted for the invention, then —
(a) if while the directions are in force the invention is worked
by (or with the written authorisation of or to the order of) a
Government department, the provisions of Part 12 apply as
if —
(i) the working were use made by section 56;
Patents Act 1994
55
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(ii) the application had been published at the end of the
prescribed period or at the time the directions were
revoked, whichever is earlier; and
(iii) a patent had been granted for the invention at the
time the application is brought in order for the grant
of a patent (taking the terms of the patent to be those
of the application as it stood at the time it was so
brought in order); and
(b) if it appears to the Minister that the applicant for the patent
has suffered hardship while the directions were in force,
the Minister may make such payment (if any) by way of
compensation to the applicant as appears to the Minister to
be reasonable having regard to the inventive merit and
utility of the invention, the purpose for which it is designed
and any other relevant circumstances.
(7) Where a patent is granted pursuant to an application in respect
of which directions have been given under this section, no renewal
fees are payable in respect of any period during which those
directions were in force.
(8) Any person who fails to comply with any direction under this
section shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction
to a fine not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 2 years or to both.
(9) Nothing in this section prevents the disclosure of information
concerning an invention to a Government department or authority for
the purpose of obtaining advice as to whether directions under this
section with respect to an application for a patent for that invention
should be made, amended or revoked.
Restrictions on applications abroad by Singapore residents
34.—(1) Subject to this section, no person resident in Singapore
may, without written authority granted by the Registrar, file or cause
to be filed outside Singapore an application for a patent for an
invention unless —
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
56
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(a) an application for a patent for the same invention has been
filed in the Registry at least 2 months before the
application outside Singapore; and
(b) no directions have been given under section 33 in relation
to the application in Singapore or all such directions have
been revoked.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to an application for a patent for
an invention for which an application for a patent has first been filed
in a country outside Singapore by a person resident outside
Singapore.
(3) Any person who files or causes to be filed an application for the
grant of a patent in contravention of this section shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or to both.
(4) In this section —
(a) any reference to an application for a patent includes a
reference to an application for other protection for an
invention;
(b) any reference to either kind of application is a reference to
an application under this Act, under the law of any country
other than Singapore or under any treaty or international
convention to which Singapore is a party; and
(c) “person resident in Singapore” includes a person who, at
the material time, is residing in Singapore by virtue of a
valid pass lawfully issued to the person under the
Immigration Act 1959 to enter and remain in Singapore
for any purpose.
PART 7
PROVISIONS AS TO PATENTS AFTER GRANT
Publication and certificate of grant
35.—(1) As soon as practicable after a patent has been granted
under this Act, the Registrar must —
Patents Act 1994
57
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(a) send to the proprietor of the patent a certificate in the
prescribed form that the patent has been granted to the
proprietor; and
(b) publish in the journal a notice that the patent has been
granted.
(2) The Registrar must, at the same time as the Registrar publishes a
notice under subsection (1)(b) in relation to a patent, publish the
specification of the patent, the names of the proprietor and (if
different) the inventor and any other matters constituting or relating
to the patent which in the Registrar’s opinion it is desirable to publish.
[15/2012]
Term of patent
36.—(1) A patent granted under this Act is treated for the purposes
of this Act as having been granted, and takes effect, on the date of
issue of the certificate of grant and, subject to subsection (2) and
section 36A, continues in force until the end of the period of 20 years
beginning with the date of filing the application for the patent or with
such other date as may be prescribed.
(2) A patent ceases to have effect at the end of the prescribed period
for the payment of any renewal fee if it is not paid within that period.
(3) If, during the prescribed period immediately after the end of the
period prescribed for the payment of any renewal fee under
subsection (2), the renewal fee and any prescribed additional fee
are paid, the patent is treated for the purposes of this Act as if it had
never expired, and accordingly —
(a) anything done under or in relation to it during that further
period is valid;
(b) an act which would constitute an infringement of it if it had
not expired constitutes such an infringement; and
(c) an act which would constitute the use of the patented
invention in accordance with section 56 if the patent had
not expired constitutes that use.
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
58
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(4) Rules must include provision requiring the Registrar to notify
the registered proprietor of a patent that a renewal fee has not been
received from the registered proprietor in the Registry before the end
of the prescribed period for the payment of any renewal fee under
subsection (2) and before the framing of the notification.
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
Extension of term of patent
36A.—(1) The proprietor of a patent may apply to the Registrar to
extend the term of the patent on any of the following grounds:
(a) that there was an unreasonable delay by the Registrar in
granting the patent;
(b) where the patent was granted on the basis of any prescribed
documents referred to in section 29(1)(d) relating to one
corresponding
application
or
related
national
phase
application, that —
(i) there was an unreasonable delay in the issue of the
corresponding patent or related national phase patent
(as the case may be); and
(ii) the patent office that granted the corresponding
patent or related national phase patent (as the case
may be) has extended the term of the corresponding
patent or related national phase patent (as the case
may be) on the basis of such delay;
(c) where the subject of the patent includes any substance
which is an active ingredient of any pharmaceutical
product, that —
(i) there was an unreasonable curtailment of the
opportunity to exploit the patent caused by the
process of obtaining marketing approval for a
pharmaceutical
product,
being
the
first
pharmaceutical
product
to
obtain
marketing
approval which uses the substance as an active
ingredient; and
Patents Act 1994
59
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(ii) the term of the patent has not previously been
extended on this ground.
[15/2012]
(2) A delay by the Registrar in granting a patent is not treated as an
unreasonable delay under subsection (1)(a) unless such requirements
as may be prescribed are satisfied.
[15/2012]
(3) Where the proprietor of a patent has made an application under
subsection (1)(a) and has satisfied the Registrar that there was in fact
a particular type of unreasonable delay by the Registrar in granting
the patent, the Registrar must extend the term of the patent by such
period as may be prescribed for that type of unreasonable delay.
[15/2012]
(4) Where the proprietor of a patent has made an application under
subsection (1)(b) and has satisfied the Registrar of the matters
referred to in sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) of subsection (1)(b), the
Registrar may, if the Registrar thinks fit, extend the term of the patent
by such period, not exceeding 5 years, as the Registrar may
determine.
(5) A curtailment of the opportunity to exploit a patent, the subject
of which includes a substance which is an active ingredient of any
pharmaceutical product, caused by the process of obtaining
marketing approval for a pharmaceutical product, being the first
pharmaceutical product to obtain marketing approval which uses the
substance as an active ingredient, is not treated as an unreasonable
curtailment under subsection (1)(c) unless such requirements as may
be prescribed are satisfied.
[15/2012]
(6) Subject to subsections (7), (8) and (9), where the proprietor of a
patent has made an application under subsection (1)(c) and has
satisfied the Registrar that there was in fact an unreasonable
curtailment
of
the
opportunity
to
exploit
the
patent
under
subsection (1)(c), the Registrar must extend the term of the patent
by such period as may be prescribed.
[15/2012]
(7) The Registrar must not extend the term of the patent under
subsection (6) unless the applicant has procured and submitted to the
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
60
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Registrar a certificate from the relevant authority stating such matters
as may be prescribed.
[15/2012]
(8) In determining the period by which to extend the term of the
patent under subsection (6), the Registrar must rely on, and is not
concerned to inquire into the truth of, the statements contained in the
certificate from the relevant authority under subsection (7).
(9) Where the term of a patent has been extended under
subsection (6), the protection conferred by the patent during the
term of the extension applies only to the substance mentioned in
subsection (1)(c).
(10) Every application to extend the term of a patent must be —
(a) made by the proprietor of the patent in the prescribed form
within the prescribed period;
(b) filed in the prescribed manner; and
(c) accompanied by the prescribed fee and any prescribed
documents,
and the Registrar may reject any application that fails to comply with
any requirement under this subsection.
(11) As soon as practicable after the Registrar has extended the term
of a patent, the Registrar must —
(a) send to the proprietor of the patent a certificate of
extension
of
patent
term
in
the
prescribed
form
specifying —
(i) the period of the extension; and
(ii) any limitation on the protection conferred by the
patent during the term of the extension; and
(b) publish in the journal a notice of the extension.
(12) The proprietor of a patent who has made an application under
subsection (1) may withdraw the application by informing the
Registrar in writing of the withdrawal of the application, and any such
withdrawal is not revocable.
Patents Act 1994
61
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Patent not to be impugned for lack of unity
37. No person may in any proceeding object to a patent or to an
amendment of a specification of a patent on the ground that the claims
contained in the specification of the patent, as they stand or (as the
case may be) as proposed to be amended, relate —
(a) to more than one invention; or
(b) to a group of inventions which are not so linked as to form
a single inventive concept.
General power to amend specification after grant
38.—(1) Subject to this section and section 84, the Registrar may,
on an application made by the proprietor of a patent, allow the
specification of the patent to be amended subject to such conditions,
if any, as the Registrar thinks fit.
(2) No such amendment is allowed under this section where there
are pending before the court or the Registrar proceedings in which the
validity of the patent may be put in issue.
(3) An amendment of a specification of a patent under this section
has effect and is deemed always to have had effect from the grant of
the patent.
(4) A person may give notice to the Registrar of the person’s
opposition to an application under this section by the proprietor of a
patent, and if the person does so the Registrar must notify the
proprietor and consider the opposition in deciding whether to grant
the application.
Re-examination after grant
38A.—(1) Any person may, at any time after a patent is granted, file
a request for the Registrar to conduct a re-examination of the
specification of a patent for an invention on any of the following
grounds:
(a) the invention is not a patentable invention;
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
62
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(b) the specification does not disclose the invention clearly
and completely for it to be performed by a person skilled in
the art;
(c) the matter disclosed in the specification extends beyond
that disclosed —
(i) in the application for the patent, as filed; or
(ii) where the patent was granted on a new application
filed under section 20(3) or 47(4) or section 116(6) of
the Patents Act (Cap. 221, 1995 Revised Edition), or
in accordance with section 26(11), in —
(A) the earlier application made under this Act;
(B) the
application
made
under
the
United
Kingdom Patents Act 1977; or
(C) the application under the European Patent
Convention designating the United Kingdom
filed at the European Patent Office,
as the case may be, from which the filing date and the
right of priority has been derived, as filed;
(d) an amendment has been made to the specification of the
patent under section 38(1), 81 or 83 which —
(i) results in the specification disclosing any additional
matter; or
(ii) extends the protection conferred by the patent;
(e) an amendment has been made to the specification of the
application for the patent under section 31 which results in
the specification disclosing any matter extending beyond
that disclosed in the application as filed;
(f) a correction has been made to the specification of the
patent or of the application for the patent under section 107
which should not have been allowed;
Patents Act 1994
63
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(g) the patent is one of 2 or more patents for the same
invention having the same priority date and filed by the
same party or the party’s successor in title.
[23/2019]
(2) Every request under subsection (1) must be —
(a) filed in the prescribed manner;
(b) accompanied by the prescribed fee; and
(c) accompanied, at the time the request is filed, by —
(i) reasons to substantiate the ground specified in the
request; and
(ii) any document that the person considers to be
relevant for the purposes of the re-examination.
[23/2019]
(3) The Registrar may reject any request that fails to comply with
any requirement in subsection (2).
[23/2019]
(4) The Registrar must not grant a request under subsection (1) if
the Registrar is of the view that the request is frivolous, vexatious or
an abuse of the process.
[23/2019]
(5) No request under subsection (1) may be filed where there are
pending before the court or the Registrar any proceedings in which
the validity of the patent may be put in issue.
[23/2019]
(6) Where proceedings before the court or the Registrar, in which
the validity of the patent may be put in issue, are filed after a request
under subsection (1) is made, the Registrar may make such order or
give such direction as the Registrar thinks fit concerning the request.
[23/2019]
(7) Where the Registrar grants a request under subsection (1), the
Registrar must cause the specification of the patent to be re-examined
by an Examiner so as to determine whether the ground specified in
the request is made out.
[23/2019]
(8) If it appears to the Examiner during the re-examination of the
specification of the patent that —
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
64
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(a) the ground specified in the request; or
(b) based
on
any
document
submitted
under
subsection (2)(c)(ii), any other ground mentioned in
subsection (1),
is made out, the Examiner must give the proprietor of the patent a
written opinion to that effect, and the Registrar must, upon receiving
the written opinion, send the proprietor a copy of the written opinion.
[23/2019]
(9) The proprietor of the patent must respond to the written opinion
in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed period.
[23/2019]
(10) Upon receiving the re-examination report prepared by the
Examiner, the Registrar must send to the proprietor of the patent a
copy of the report.
[23/2019]
(11) Where the re-examination report issued under this section
contains one or more unresolved objections (being an objection
mentioned in the written opinion), the Registrar must make an order
revoking the patent.
[23/2019]
(12) An order under subsection (11) may be —
(a) an order for the unconditional revocation of the patent; or
(b) where one of the grounds mentioned in subsection (1) has
been established, but only so as to invalidate the patent to a
limited extent, an order that the patent should be revoked
unless within a specified time the specification is amended
under section 83 to the satisfaction of the Registrar.
[23/2019]
(13) A decision of the Registrar or on appeal from the Registrar
does not estop any party to any civil proceedings in which
infringement of a patent is in issue from alleging invalidity of the
patent on any of the grounds mentioned in subsection (1), whether or
not any of the issues involved were decided in the decision.
[23/2019]
Patents Act 1994
65
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(14) A decision of the Registrar to revoke a patent under this section
has effect from the date of the grant of the patent.
[23/2019]
(15) A person does not become a party to any proceedings under
this Act before the Registrar by reason only that the person files a
request under subsection (1), unless the person is the proprietor of the
patent.
[23/2019]
Restoration of lapsed patents
39.—(1) Where a patent has ceased to have effect by reason of a
failure to pay any renewal fee, an application for the restoration of the
patent may be made to the Registrar within the prescribed period.
(2) An application under this section may be made by the person
who was the proprietor of the patent or by any other person who
would have been entitled to the patent if it had not ceased to have
effect.
(3) Where the patent was held by 2 or more persons jointly, the
application may, with the permission of the Registrar, be made by one
or more of them without joining the others.
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
(4) Notice of the application must be published by the Registrar in
the prescribed manner.
(5) If the Registrar is satisfied that the failure of the proprietor of the
patent to pay any renewal fee within the period prescribed under
section 36(2), or to pay that fee and any prescribed additional fee
within the period prescribed under section 36(3), was unintentional,
the Registrar must by order restore the patent on payment of any
unpaid renewal fee and any prescribed additional fee.
[15/2012]
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(6) An order under this section may be made subject to such
conditions as the Registrar thinks fit (including a condition requiring
compliance with any provision of the rules relating to registration
which have not been complied with), and if the proprietor of the
patent does not comply with any such condition of the order, the
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
66
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Registrar
may
revoke
the
order
and
give
such
directions
consequential on the revocation as the Registrar thinks fit.
(7) The effect of an order for the restoration of a patent is as
provided in subsections (8) to (13).
(8) Anything done under or in relation to the patent during the
period between expiry and restoration is treated as valid.
(9) Anything done during that period which would have constituted
an infringement if the patent had not expired is treated as an
infringement —
(a) if done at a time when it was possible for the patent to be
renewed under section 36(3); or
(b) if it was a continuation or repetition of an earlier infringing
act.
(10) If after it was no longer possible for the patent to be so
renewed, and before publication of notice of the application for
restoration, a person —
(a) began in good faith to do an act which would have
constituted an infringement of the patent if it had not
expired; or
(b) made in good faith effective and serious preparations to do
such an act,
the person has the right to continue to do the act or (as the case may
be) to do the act, despite the restoration of the patent.
(11) The right referred to in subsection (10) does not extend to
granting a licence to another person to do the act.
(12) If the act was done, or the preparations were made, in the
course of a business, the person entitled to the right conferred by
subsection (10) may —
(a) authorise the doing of that act by any partner of the
person’s for the time being in that business; and
(b) assign that right, or transmit it on death (or in the case of a
body corporate on its dissolution), to any person who
Patents Act 1994
67
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


acquires that part of the business in the course of which the
act was done or the preparations were made.
(13) Where a product is disposed of to another in exercise of the
rights conferred by subsection (10) or (12), that other and any person
claiming through him may deal with the product in the same way as if
it had been disposed of by the registered proprietor of the patent.
(14) Subsections (8) to (13) apply in relation to the use of a patent in
accordance with section 56 as they apply in relation to infringement
of the patent.
Surrender of patents
40.—(1) The proprietor of a patent may at any time by notice given
to the Registrar offer to surrender the proprietor’s patent.
(2) If the Registrar is satisfied that the patent may properly be
surrendered, the Registrar may accept the offer and, as from the date
when notice of the Registrar’s acceptance is published in the journal,
the patent ceases to have effect, but no action for infringement shall
lie in respect of any act done before that date and no right to
compensation shall accrue for any use of the patented invention
before that date in accordance with section 56.
PART 8
PROPERTY IN PATENTS AND APPLICATIONS
FOR PATENTS AND REGISTRATION
Nature of, and transactions in, patents and applications for
patents
41.—(1) Any patent or application for a patent is personal property
(without being a thing in action), and any patent or any such
application and rights in or under it may be transferred, created or
granted in accordance with this section.
(2) Subject to section 46(3), any patent or any such application, or
any right in it, may be assigned or mortgaged.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
68
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(3) Any patent or any such application or right vests by operation of
law in the same way as any other personal property and may be vested
by an assent of personal representatives.
(4) Subject to section 46(3), a licence may be granted under any
patent or any such application for working the invention which is the
subject of the patent or the application; and —
(a) to the extent that the licence so provides, a sub-licence may
be granted under any such licence and any such licence or
sub-licence may be assigned or mortgaged; and
(b) any such licence or sub-licence vests by operation of law in
the same way as any other personal property and may be
vested by an assent of personal representatives.
(5) Subsections (2) to (4) have effect subject to the provisions of
this Act.
(6) Any of the following transactions, that is to say —
(a) any assignment or mortgage of a patent or any such
application, or any right in a patent or any such application;
(b) any assent relating to any patent or any such application or
right,
shall be void unless it is in writing and is signed by or on behalf of the
assignor or mortgagor (or, in the case of an assent or other transaction
by a personal representative, by or on behalf of the personal
representative) or in the case of a body corporate is so signed or is
under the seal of that body.
[15/2012]
(7) An assignment of a patent or any such application or a share in
it, and an exclusive licence granted under any patent or any such
application, may confer on the assignee or licensee the right of the
assignor or licensor to bring proceedings by virtue of section 67 or 76
for a previous infringement or to bring the proceedings under
section 58 for a previous act.
Register of patents
42.—(1) The Registrar must maintain a register of patents in
accordance with the rules made by virtue of this section.
Patents Act 1994
69
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(2) Without affecting any other provisions of this Act or the rules,
the rules may make provision with respect to the following matters,
including provision imposing requirements as to any of those matters:
(a) the registration of patents and of published applications for
patents;
(b) the registration of transactions, instruments or events
affecting rights in or under patents and applications;
(c) the furnishing to the Registrar of any prescribed document
or description of documents in connection with any matter
which is required to be registered;
(d) the correction of errors in the register and in any document
filed at the Registry in connection with registration;
(e) the publication and advertisement of anything done under
this Act or the rules in relation to the register.
(3) Despite anything in subsection (2)(b), no notice of any implied
or constructive trust is to be entered in the register and the Registrar is
not affected by any such notice.
[4/2014]
(4) A notice of an express trust or of the beneficiary of an express
trust, or both, may be entered in the register; but —
(a) the Registrar is not affected by any such notice in the
register; and
(b) to avoid doubt, a failure to enter such notice in the register
does not affect any rights or duties under the trust.
[4/2014]
(5) The register need not be kept in documentary form.
(6) Subject to the rules, the public has a right to inspect the register
at the Registry at all convenient times.
(7) Any person who applies for a certified copy of an entry in the
register or a certified extract from the register is entitled to obtain
such a copy or extract on payment of a fee prescribed in relation to
certified copies and extracts.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
70
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(8) Applications under subsection (7) must be made in such manner
as may be prescribed.
[15/2012]
(9) In relation to any portion of the register kept otherwise than in
documentary form —
(a) the right of inspection conferred by subsection (6) is a right
to inspect the material on the register; and
(b) the right to a copy or extract conferred by subsection (7) or
the rules is a right to a copy or extract in a form in which it
can be taken away and in which it is visible and legible.
Effect of registration, etc., on rights in patents
43.—(1) Any person who claims to have acquired the property in a
patent or application for a patent by virtue of any transaction,
instrument or event to which this section applies is entitled as against
any other person who claims to have acquired that property by virtue
of an earlier transaction, instrument or event to which this section
applies if, at the time of the later transaction, instrument or event —
(a) the earlier transaction, instrument or event was not
registered;
(b) in the case of any application which has not been
published, notice of the earlier transaction, instrument or
event had not been given to the Registrar; and
(c) in any case, the person claiming under the later transaction,
instrument or event did not know of the earlier transaction,
instrument or event.
(2) Subsection (1) applies equally to the case where any person
claims to have acquired any right in or under a patent or application
for a patent, by virtue of a transaction, instrument or event to which
this section applies, and that right is incompatible with any such right
acquired by virtue of an earlier transaction, instrument or event to
which this section applies.
(3) This section applies to the following transactions, instruments
and events:
Patents Act 1994
71
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(a) the assignment of a patent or application for a patent, or a
right in it;
(b) the mortgage of, or grant of any other security interest in, a
patent or application;
(c) the grant or assignment of a licence or sub-licence, or
mortgage of, or grant of any other security interest in, a
licence or sub-licence, under a patent or application;
(d) the death of the proprietor or one of the proprietors of any
such patent or application or any person having a right in or
under a patent or application and the vesting by an assent of
personal representatives of a patent, application or any
such right; and
(e) any order or directions of a court or other competent
authority —
(i) transferring a patent or application or any right in or
under it to any person; or
(ii) that an application should proceed in the name of any
person,
and in either case the event by virtue of which the court or
authority had power to make any such order or give any
such directions.
[15/2012]
(4) Where an application for the registration of a transaction,
instrument or event has been made, but the transaction, instrument or
event
has
not
been
registered,
then,
for
the
purposes
of
subsection (1)(a), registration of the application is treated as
registration of the transaction, instrument or event.
(5) Provision may be made by rules as to the amendment, alteration
or removal from the register of any particulars in the register relating
to any transaction, instrument or event referred to in subsection (3).
[15/2012]
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
72
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Rectification of register
44.—(1) The court may, on the application of any person aggrieved,
order the register to be rectified by the making, or the variation or
deletion, of any entry in it.
(2) In proceedings under this section, the court may determine any
question which may be necessary or expedient to decide in
connection with the rectification of the register.
Evidence of register, documents, etc.
45.—(1) The register is prima facie evidence of anything required
or authorised by this Act or the rules to be registered.
(2) A certificate purporting to be signed by the Registrar and
certifying that any entry which the Registrar is authorised by this Act
or any of its rules to make has or has not been made, or that any other
thing which the Registrar is so authorised to do has or has not been
done, is prima facie evidence of the matter so certified.
(3) Each of the following, that is to say —
(a) a copy of an entry in the register or an extract from the
register which is supplied under section 42(7);
(b) a copy of any document kept in the Registry or an extract
from any such document; or
(c) any specification of a patent or any application for a patent
which has been published,
which purports to be a certified copy or a certified extract is to be
admitted in evidence without further proof and without production of
the original.
(4) In this section, “certified copy” and “certified extract” mean a
copy and an extract certified by the Registrar.
[15/2012]
Co-ownership of patents and applications for patents
46.—(1) Where a patent is granted to 2 or more persons, each of
them, subject to any agreement to the contrary, is entitled to an equal
undivided share in the patent.
Patents Act 1994
73
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(2) Where 2 or more persons are proprietors of a patent, then,
subject to this section and subject to any agreement to the contrary —
(a) each of them is entitled, by himself, herself or itself or his,
her or its agents, to do in respect of the invention, for the
person’s own benefit and without the consent of or the need
to account to the other or others, any act which would,
apart from this subsection and section 56, amount to an
infringement of the patent; and
(b) any such act does not amount to an infringement of the
patent.
(3) Subject to sections 20 and 47 and to any agreement for the time
being in force, where 2 or more persons are proprietors of a patent,
one of them may not without the consent of the other or others grant a
licence under the patent or assign or mortgage a share in the patent.
(4) Subject to sections 20 and 47 where 2 or more persons are
proprietors of a patent, anyone else may supply one of those persons
with the means, relating to an essential element of the invention, for
putting the invention into effect, and the supply of those means by
virtue of this subsection does not amount to an infringement of the
patent.
(5) Where a patented product is disposed of by any of 2 or more
proprietors to any person, that person and any other person claiming
through that person are entitled to deal with the product in the same
way as if it had been disposed of by a sole registered proprietor.
(6) Nothing in subsection (1) or (2) affects the mutual rights or
obligations of trustees or of the personal representatives of a deceased
person, or their rights or obligations as such.
(7) This section has effect in relation to an application for a patent
which is filed as it has effect in relation to a patent and —
(a) references to a patent and a patent being granted
accordingly include references respectively to any such
application and to the application being filed; and
(b) the reference in subsection (5) to a patented product is to be
construed accordingly.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
74
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Determination of right to patent after grant
47.—(1) After a patent has been granted for an invention, any
person having or claiming a proprietary interest in or under the patent
may refer to the Registrar the question —
(a) who is or are the true proprietor or proprietors of the patent;
(b) whether the patent should have been granted to the person
or persons to whom it was granted; or
(c) whether any right in or under the patent should be
transferred or granted to any other person or persons,
and the Registrar must determine the question and make such order as
the Registrar thinks fit to give effect to the determination.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), an order under that subsection
may contain provision —
(a) directing that the person by whom the reference is made
under that subsection is included (whether or not to the
exclusion of any other person) among the persons
registered as proprietors of the patent;
(b) directing the registration of a transaction, instrument or
event by virtue of which that person has acquired any right
in or under the patent;
(c) granting any licence or other right in or under the patent;
and
(d) directing the proprietor of the patent or any person having
any right in or under the patent to do anything specified in
the order as necessary to carry out the other provisions of
the order.
(3) If any person to whom directions have been given (A) under
subsection (2)(d) fails to do anything necessary for carrying out any
such directions within 14 days after the date of the order containing
the directions, the Registrar may, on an application made to the
Registrar by any person in whose favour or on whose reference the
order containing the directions was made (B), authorise B to do that
thing on behalf of A.
Patents Act 1994
75
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(4) Where the Registrar finds on a reference under this section that
the patent was granted to a person not entitled to be granted that
patent (either alone or with other persons) and on an application made
under section 80 makes an order on that ground for the conditional or
unconditional revocation of the patent, the Registrar may order that
the person by whom the application was made or that person’s
successor in title may, subject to section 84, make a new application
for a patent —
(a) in the case of unconditional revocation, for the whole of the
matter comprised in the specification of that patent; and
(b) in the case of conditional revocation, for the matter which
in the opinion of the Registrar should be excluded from
that specification by amendment under section 83,
and where such a new application is made, it is treated as having been
filed on the date of filing the application for the patent to which the
reference relates.
[23/2019]
(5) On any reference under subsection (1) —
(a) no order may be made under this section transferring the
patent to which the reference relates on the ground that the
patent was granted to a person not so entitled; and
(b) no order may be made under subsection (4) on that ground
if the reference was made after the end of the period of
2 years beginning with the date of the grant, unless it is
shown that any person registered as a proprietor of the
patent knew at the time of the grant or, as the case may be,
of the transfer of the patent to the person that the person
was not entitled (either alone or with other persons, as the
case may be) to the patent.
[23/2019]
(6) An order under this section must not be so made as to affect the
mutual rights or obligations of trustees or of the personal
representatives of a deceased person, or their rights or obligations
as such.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
76
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(7) Where a question is referred to the Registrar under this section,
an order must not be made by virtue of subsection (2) or under
subsection (4) on the reference unless notice of the reference is given
to all persons registered as proprietor of the patent or as having a right
in or under the patent, except those who are parties to the reference.
(8) If it appears to the Registrar on a reference under this section
that the question referred to the Registrar would be more
conveniently dealt with by the court, the Registrar may decline to
deal with it and, without prejudice to the court’s jurisdiction to
determine any such question and make a declaration, the court has
jurisdiction to do so.
[23/2019]
(9) The court must not determine a question whether a patent was
granted to a person not entitled to be granted the patent —
(a) in the exercise of any such declaratory jurisdiction in an
action for a declaration; or
(b) in the exercise of jurisdiction pursuant to a reference under
this section,
if the action or the reference (as the case may be) was commenced or
made after the end of the period of 2 years beginning with the date of
the grant of the patent, unless it is shown that any person registered as
a proprietor of the patent knew at the time of the grant or, as the case
may be, of the transfer of the patent to the person that the person was
not entitled (either alone or with other persons, as the case may be) to
the patent.
[23/2019]
Effect of transfer of patent under section 47
48.—(1) Where an order is made under section 47 that a patent be
transferred from any person or persons (the old proprietor or
proprietors) to one or more persons (whether or not including an
old proprietor) then, except in a case falling within subsection (2), any
licences or other rights granted or created by the old proprietor or
proprietors are, subject to section 43 and to the provisions of the
order, to continue in force and to be treated as granted by the person
Patents Act 1994
77
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


or persons to whom the patent is ordered to be transferred (the new
proprietor or proprietors).
(2) Where an order is so made that a patent be transferred from the
old proprietor or proprietors to one or more persons none of whom
was an old proprietor (on the ground that the patent was granted to a
person not entitled to be granted the patent), any licences or other
rights in or under the patent, subject to the provisions of the order and
subsection (3), lapse on the registration of that person or those
persons as the new proprietor or proprietors of the patent.
(3) Where an order is so made that —
(a) a patent be transferred as mentioned in subsection (2); or
(b) a person other than an old proprietor may make a new
application for a patent,
and before the reference of the question under that section resulting in
the making of any such order is registered, the old proprietor or
proprietors or a licensee of the patent, acting in good faith —
(c) worked the invention in question in Singapore; or
(d) made effective and serious preparations to do so,
the old proprietor or proprietors or the licensee shall, on making a
request to the new proprietor or proprietors within the prescribed
period, be entitled to be granted a licence (but not an exclusive
licence) to continue working or, as the case may be, to work the
invention, so far as it is the subject of the new application.
(4) Any such licence must be granted for a reasonable period and on
reasonable terms.
(5) The new proprietor or proprietors of the patent or any person
claiming that the person is entitled to be granted any such licence may
refer to the Registrar the question whether that person is so entitled
and whether any such period is or terms are reasonable.
(6) The Registrar must determine the question mentioned in
subsection (5) and may, if he or she considers it appropriate, order
the grant of such a licence.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
78
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


PART 9
EMPLOYEES’ INVENTIONS
Right to employees’ inventions
49.—(1) Despite anything in any rule of law, an invention made by
an employee, as between the employee and the employee’s employer,
is taken to belong to the employee’s employer for the purposes of this
Act and all other purposes if —
(a) the invention was made in the course of the normal duties
of the employee or in the course of duties falling outside
the employee’s normal duties, but specifically assigned to
the employee, and the circumstances in either case were
such that an invention might reasonably be expected to
result from the carrying out of the employee’s duties; or
(b) the invention was made in the course of the duties of the
employee and, at the time of making the invention, because
of the nature of the employee’s duties and the particular
responsibilities arising from the nature of the employee’s
duties the employee had a special obligation to further the
interests of the employer’s undertaking.
(2) Any other invention made by an employee, as between the
employee and his or her employer, is taken for those purposes to
belong to the employee.
(3) Where by virtue of this section an invention belongs, as between
the employee and his or her employer, to an employee, nothing
done —
(a) by or on behalf of the employee or any person claiming
under the employee for the purposes of pursuing an
application for a patent; or
(b) by any person for the purpose of performing or working the
invention,
is to be taken to infringe any copyright or design right to which, as
between the employee and his or her employer, his or her employer is
entitled in any model or document relating to the invention.
Patents Act 1994
79
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(4) In subsection (3), the reference to application for a patent
includes an application for other protection for an invention, and
includes an application for a patent or any other protection under the
law of a country other than Singapore or under any treaty to which
Singapore is a party.
Supplementary provisions
50.—(1) This Part does not apply to an invention made by an
employee unless at the time the employee made the invention one of
the following conditions was satisfied in the employee’s case:
(a) the employee was mainly employed in Singapore;
(b) the employee was not mainly employed anywhere or his or
her place of employment could not be determined, but his
or her employer had a place of business in Singapore to
which the employee was attached, whether or not the
employee was also attached elsewhere.
(2) In this Part, except so far as the context otherwise requires,
references to the making of an invention by an employee are
references to the employee making it alone or jointly with any other
person, but do not include references to the employee merely
contributing advice or other assistance in the making of an invention
by another employee.
(3) Any references in section 49 to a patent and to a patent being
granted are respectively references to a patent or other protection and
to its being granted whether under the law of Singapore or the law in
force in any other country or under any treaty or international
convention.
(4) Nothing in this Part is to be construed as precluding the
operation of an agreement or a contract in relation to the right to an
invention.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
80
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


PART 10
CONTRACTS AS TO PATENTED PRODUCTS
Application of this Part
50A. This Part applies only to —
(a) any contract for the supply of a patented product;
(b) any licence to work a patented invention; and
(c) any contract relating to any such supply or licence,
that was entered into or granted on or after 23 February 1995 but
before 1 December 2008.
[18/2008]
Avoidance of certain restrictive conditions
51.—(1) Subject to this section, any condition or term of a contract
for the supply of a patented product or of a licence to work a patented
invention, or of a contract relating to any such supply or licence, is
void insofar as it purports —
(a) in the case of a contract for supply, to require the person
supplied to acquire from the supplier, or the supplier’s
nominee, or prohibit the person supplied from acquiring
from any specified person, or from acquiring except from
the supplier or the supplier’s nominee, anything other than
the patented product;
(b) in the case of a licence to work a patented invention, to
require the licensee to acquire from the licensor or the
licensor’s nominee, or prohibit the licensee from acquiring
from any specified person, or from acquiring except from
the licensor or the licensor’s nominee, anything other than
the product which is the patented invention or (if it is a
process) other than any product obtained directly by means
of the process or to which the process has been applied; or
(c) in either case, to prohibit the person supplied or the
licensee from using articles (whether patented products or
not) which are not supplied by, or any patented process
which does not belong to, the supplier or licensor, or the
Patents Act 1994
81
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


supplier’s or licensor’s nominee, or to restrict the right of
the person supplied or the licensee to use any such articles
or process.
(2) In proceedings against any person for infringement of a patent,
it is a defence to prove that at the time of the infringement there was in
force a contract relating to the patent made by or with the consent of
the claimant or a licence under the patent granted by or with the
consent of the claimant and containing in either case a condition or
term void by virtue of this section.
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
[Act 31 of 2022 wef 01/11/2022]
(3) A condition or term of a contract or licence shall not be void by
virtue of this section if —
(a) at the time of the making of the contract or granting of the
licence, the supplier or licensor was willing to supply the
product, or grant a licence to work the invention, (as the
case may be) to the person supplied or the licensee, on
reasonable terms specified in the contract or licence and
without any such condition or term as is mentioned in
subsection (1); and
(b) the person supplied or the licensee is entitled under the
contract or licence to relieve himself, herself or itself of
his, her or its liability to observe the condition or term on
giving to the other party 3 months’ notice in writing, and
subject
to
payment
to
that
other
party
of
such
compensation (being, in the case of a contract to supply,
a lump sum or rent for the residue of the term of the
contract and, in the case of a licence, a royalty for the
residue of the term of the licence) as may be determined by
an arbitrator appointed by the Minister.
(4) If in any proceedings it is alleged that any condition or term of a
contract or licence is void by virtue of this section, it shall lie on the
supplier or licensor to prove the matters set out in subsection (3)(a).
(5) A condition or term of a contract or licence shall not be void by
virtue of this section by reason only that it prohibits any person from
selling goods other than those supplied by a specific person or, in the
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
82
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


case of a contract for the hiring of or licence to use a patented product,
that it reserves to the bailor or licensor, or the bailor’s or licensor’s
nominee, the right to supply such new parts of the patented product as
may be required to put or keep it in repair.
Determination of parts of certain contracts
52.—(1) Any contract for the supply of a patented product or
licence to work a patented invention, or contract relating to any such
supply or licence, may at any time after the patent or all the patents by
which the product or invention was protected at the time of the
making of the contract or granting of the licence has or have ceased to
be in force, and despite anything to the contrary in the contract or
licence or in any other contract, be determined, to the extent (and only
to the extent) that the contract or licence relates to the product or
invention, by either party on giving 3 months’ notice in writing to the
other party.
(2) In subsection (1), “patented product” and “patented invention”
include respectively a product and an invention which is the subject
of an application for a patent, and that subsection applies in relation to
a patent by which any such product or invention was protected and
which was granted after the time of the making of the contract or
granting of the licence, on an application which had been filed before
that time, as it applies to a patent in force at that time.
(3) If, on an application under this section made by either party to a
contract or licence falling within subsection (1), the court is satisfied
that, in consequence of the patent or patents ceasing to be in force, it
would be unjust to require the applicant to continue to comply with all
the terms and conditions of the contract or licence, the court may
make such order varying those terms or conditions as, having regard
to all the circumstances of the case, it thinks just as between the
parties.
(4) Without prejudice to any other right of recovery, nothing in
subsection (1) is to be taken to entitle any person to recover property
let under a hire-purchase agreement within the meaning of the
Hire-Purchase Act 1969.
Patents Act 1994
83
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(5) This section is without prejudice to any rule of law relating to
the frustration of contracts and any right of determining a contract or
licence exercisable apart from this section.
PART 11
LICENCES OF RIGHT AND COMPULSORY LICENCES
Licences of right
53.—(1) At any time after the grant of a patent, its proprietor may
apply to the Registrar for an entry to be made in the register to the
effect that licences under the patent are to be available as of right.
(2) Where an application under subsection (1) is made, the
Registrar must give notice of the application to any person
registered as having a right in or under the patent and, if satisfied
that the proprietor of the patent is not precluded by contract from
granting licences under the patent, the Registrar must make that entry.
(3) Where an entry under subsection (2) is made in respect of a
patent —
(a) any person, at any time after the entry is made, is entitled as
of right to a licence under the patent on such terms as may
be settled by agreement or, in default of agreement, by the
Registrar on the application of the proprietor of the patent
or the person requiring the licence;
(b) the Registrar may, on the application of the holder of any
licence granted under the patent before the entry was made,
order the licence to be exchanged for a licence of right on
terms so settled;
(c) if, in proceedings for infringement of the patent, the
defendant undertakes to take a licence on such terms, no
injunction may be granted against the defendant and the
amount (if any) recoverable against the defendant by way
of damages must not exceed twice the amount which
would have been payable by the defendant as licensee if
such a licence on those terms had been granted before the
earliest infringement; and
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
84
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(d) the renewal fee payable in respect of the patent after the
date of the entry is half the fee which would be payable if
the entry had not been made.
(4) An undertaking under subsection (3)(c) may be given at any
time before final order in the proceedings, without any admission of
liability.
(5) The licensee under a licence of right may (unless, in the case of
a licence the terms of which are settled by agreement, the licence
otherwise expressly provides) request the proprietor of the patent to
take proceedings to prevent any infringement of the patent.
(6) If the proprietor refuses or neglects to take proceedings under
subsection (5) within 2 months after being so requested, the licensee
may institute proceedings for the infringement in the licensee’s own
name as if the licensee were the proprietor, making the proprietor a
defendant.
(7) A proprietor so added as defendant shall not be liable for any
costs or expenses unless the proprietor files and serves a notice of
intention to contest or not contest and takes part in the proceedings.
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
Cancellation of entry made under section 53
54.—(1) At any time after an entry has been made under section 53
in respect of a patent, the proprietor of the patent may apply to the
Registrar for cancellation of the entry.
(2) Where an application under subsection (1) is made and the
balance paid of all renewal fees which would have been payable if the
entry had not been made, the Registrar may cancel the entry if
satisfied that there is no existing licence under the patent or that all
licensees under the patent consent to the application.
(3) Within the prescribed period after an entry had been made under
section 53 in respect of a patent, any person who claims that the
proprietor of the patent is, and was at the time of the entry, precluded
by a contract in which the claimant is interested from granting
licences under the patent may apply to the Registrar for cancellation
of the entry.
Patents Act 1994
85
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(4) Where the Registrar is satisfied, on an application under
subsection (3), that the proprietor of the patent is and was so
precluded, the Registrar must cancel the entry.
(5) The proprietor shall be liable to pay, within the prescribed
period, a sum equal to the balance of all renewal fees which would
have been payable if the entry had not been made, and the patent
ceases to have effect at the expiration of that period if that sum is not
so paid.
[15/2012]
(6) Where an entry is cancelled under this section, the rights and
liabilities of the proprietor of the patent after the cancellation are the
same as if the entry had not been made.
(7) Where an application has been made under this section —
(a) in the case of an application under subsection (1), any
person; and
(b) in the case of an application under subsection (3), the
proprietor of the patent,
may, within the prescribed period, give notice to the Registrar of
opposition to the cancellation.
(8) The Registrar must, in considering the application made under
this section, determine whether the opposition is justified.
Compulsory licences
55.—(1) Any interested person may apply to the court for the grant
of a licence under a patent on the ground that the grant of the licence
is necessary to remedy an anti-competitive practice.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the court may determine that
the grant of a licence is necessary to remedy an anti-competitive
practice if —
(a) there is a market for the patented invention in Singapore;
(b) that market —
(i) is not being supplied; or
(ii) is not being supplied on reasonable terms; and
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
86
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(c) the court is of the view that the proprietor of the patent has
no valid reason for failing to supply that market with the
patented invention, whether directly or through a licensee,
on reasonable terms.
(3) Subject to this section, if the court is satisfied that the ground
mentioned in subsection (1) is established, the court may make an
order for the grant of a licence in accordance with the application
upon such terms as the court thinks fit.
(4) A licence granted under this section —
(a) is not exclusive; and
(b) must not be assigned otherwise than in connection with the
goodwill of the business in which the patented invention is
used.
(5) Any licence granted under this section may, on the application
of any interested party, be terminated by the court where the court is
satisfied that the ground upon which the licence was granted has
ceased to exist and is unlikely to recur.
(6) Where a licence is granted under this section to any person, the
person must pay such remuneration to the patentee as may be agreed,
or as may be determined by a method agreed between the person and
the patentee or, in default of agreement, as is determined by the court
on the application of the person or the patentee.
(7) The powers of the court on an application under this section are
to be exercised with a view to securing that the inventor or other
person
beneficially
entitled
to
a
patent
receives
reasonable
remuneration having regard to the economic value of the licence.
(8) No order may be made pursuant to any application under this
section which would be at variance with any treaty or international
convention relating to patents to which Singapore is a party.
Patents Act 1994
87
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


PART 12
USE OF PATENTED INVENTIONS FOR
SERVICES OF GOVERNMENT
Use of patented inventions by Government and authorised
parties
56.—(1) Subject to sections 60, 61 and 62, but despite any other
section of this Act, the Government and any party authorised in
writing by the Government may do anything in relation to a patented
invention —
(a) for a public non-commercial purpose; or
(b) for or during a national emergency or other circumstances
of extreme urgency,
and anything done by virtue of this section does not amount to an
infringement of the patent.
[18/2008]
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), subject to sections 60, 61 and
62, but despite any other section of this Act, the Government and any
party authorised in writing by the Government may import any
relevant health product, and do anything in relation to any relevant
health product so imported, for or during a national emergency or
other circumstances of extreme urgency, if the Government has given
the Council for TRIPS a relevant notification in relation to the
relevant health product.
[18/2008]
(3) For the purposes of this section and section 57 —
(a) any use of an invention for the supply to the government of
any country outside Singapore, pursuant to any agreement
or arrangement between the Government of Singapore and
the government of that country, of articles required for the
defence of that country is deemed to be a use of the
invention for a public non-commercial purpose; and
(b) the power of the Government or any party authorised by
the Government to do anything in accordance with this
section does not, in the case of a patent relating to an
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
88
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


integrated circuit, extend to sale of the invention to the
public.
(4) The purchaser of any article sold in the exercise of the powers
conferred by this section, and any person claiming through the
purchaser, has power to deal with it in the same manner as if the
patent were held on behalf of the Government.
(5) In this section —
“integrated circuit” means a product, in its final or an
intermediate form, in which the elements, at least one of
which is an active element, and some or all of the
interconnections are integrally formed in and on, or in or
on, a piece of material and which is intended to perform an
electronic function;
“relevant notification” means a notification that satisfies the
requirements of —
(a) paragraph
2(a)
of
the
Doha
Declaration
Implementation Decision; or
(b) paragraph
2(a)
of
the
Annex
to
the
TRIPS
Agreement.
[18/2008]
Rights of third parties in respect of Government use
57.—(1) In relation to —
(a) anything done in accordance with section 56 by the
Government or any party authorised in writing by the
Government; or
(b) anything done to the order of the Government —
(i) for a public non-commercial purpose; or
(ii) for or during a national emergency or other
circumstances of extreme urgency,
by the proprietor of a patent in respect of the patented
invention or by the proprietor of an application for a patent
in respect of the invention for which the application has
been filed and is still pending,
Patents Act 1994
89
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


the provisions of any licence, assignment or agreement to which this
subsection applies, subject to sections 60, 61 and 62, are of no effect
so far as those provisions restrict or regulate the working of the
invention, or the use of any model, document or information relating
to it, or provide for the making of payments in respect of, or
calculated by reference to, such working or use.
(2) The reproduction or publication of any model or document in
connection with the said working or use is not to be deemed to be an
infringement of any copyright or design right subsisting in the model
or document.
(3) Subsection (1) applies to any licence, assignment or agreement
which is made, whether before or after 23 February 1995, between
(on the one hand) any person who is a proprietor of or an applicant for
the patent, or anyone who derives title from any such person or from
whom such person derives title, and (on the other hand) any person
other than the Government.
References of disputes as to Government use
58.—(1) Any dispute as to the exercise by the Government or a
party authorised by the Government of the powers conferred by, or as
to the terms for doing anything in accordance with, section 56 may be
referred to the court by either party to the dispute after a patent has
been granted for the invention.
(2) In determining any dispute referred to the court under this
section, the court is to have regard to —
(a) any benefit or compensation that the patentee of the
invention may have received, or may be entitled to receive,
directly or indirectly, from the Government or any party
authorised by the Government in respect of the patented
invention; and
(b) the need to ensure that the patentee receives reasonable
remuneration having regard to the economic value of the
patented invention.
(3) If the validity of a patent is put in issue in proceedings under this
section and it is found that the patent is only partially valid, the court
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
90
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


may, subject to subsection (4), grant relief to the proprietor of the
patent in respect of that part of the patent which is found to be valid
and to have been used in accordance with section 56.
(4) Where in any such proceedings it is found that a patent is only
partially valid, the court is not to grant relief by way of costs or
expenses except where the proprietor of the patent proves that the
specification of the patent was framed in good faith and with
reasonable skill and knowledge, and in that event the court may grant
relief in respect of that part of the patent which is valid and has been
so used, subject to the discretion of the court as to costs and expenses.
(5) As a condition of any such relief, the court may direct that the
specification of the patent be amended to its satisfaction upon an
application made for that purpose under section 83, and an
application may be so made accordingly, whether or not all other
issues in the proceedings have been determined.
(6) In any proceedings under this section, the court may at any time
order the whole proceedings or any question or issue of fact arising in
them to be referred, on such terms as the court may direct, to an
arbitrator; and references to the court in this section are to be
construed accordingly.
(7) One of the 2 or more joint proprietors of a patent or an
application for a patent may, without the concurrence of the others,
refer a dispute to the court under this section, but must not do so
unless the others are made parties to the proceedings; but any of the
others if made a defendant shall not be liable for any costs or expenses
unless the defendant files and serves a notice of intention to contest or
not contest and takes part in the proceedings.
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
59. [Repealed by Act 19 of 2004]
Nature and scope of rights under section 56
60.—(1) The right to use a patented invention under section 56 —
(a) is not exclusive;
Patents Act 1994
91
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(b) must not be assigned otherwise than in connection with the
goodwill of the business in which the patented invention is
used; and
(c) is, despite subsection (3)(a) of section 56, limited to the
supply
of
the
patented
invention
predominantly
in
Singapore by the Government or a party authorised by
the Government under that section.
(2) The right under section 56 to use a relevant health product
which is imported under section 56(2) does not include a right to
export the relevant health product.
[18/2008]
(3) The right to use a patented invention under section 56 may, on
the application of any interested party, be terminated by the court,
where the court is satisfied that the circumstances that gave rise to the
right to use the patented invention have ceased to exist and are
unlikely to recur.
(4) Where the court has terminated the right under section 56 to use
a patented invention, the court may make such consequential orders
as it thinks necessary.
[18/2008]
Duty to inform patentee
61.—(1) Where any thing set out in section 66(1) is done in relation
to a patented invention by the Government or a party authorised in
writing by the Government for a public non-commercial purpose, the
Government department that did or authorised the doing of the thing
must inform the patentee promptly of the doing of the thing.
(2) Where any thing set out in section 66(1) is done in relation to a
patented invention by the Government or a party authorised in writing
by the Government for or during a national emergency or other
circumstances of extreme urgency, the Government department that
did or authorised the doing of the thing must, as soon as reasonably
practicable, inform the patentee of the doing of the thing.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
92
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Patentee entitled to remuneration
62.—(1) Subject to subsection (2), where an act is done under
section 56, the Government must pay such remuneration to the
patentee as may be agreed, or as may be determined by a method
agreed, between the Government and the patentee having regard to
the economic value of the patented invention or as may, in default of
agreement, be determined by the court under section 58.
[18/2008]
(2) No remuneration is payable under subsection (1) in respect of
the import or subsequent use under section 56(2) of any relevant
health product, if the patentee has received or will receive any other
remuneration in respect of that relevant health product.
[18/2008]
63. [Section number not in use]
64. [Section number not in use]
65. [Section number not in use]
PART 13
INFRINGEMENT OF PATENTS
Meaning of infringement
66.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a person infringes a
patent for an invention if, but only if, while the patent is in force, the
person does any of the following things in Singapore in relation to the
invention without the consent of the proprietor of the patent:
(a) where the invention is a product, the person makes,
disposes of, offers to dispose of, uses or imports the
product or keeps it whether for disposal or otherwise;
(b) where the invention is a process, the person uses the
process or the person offers it for use in Singapore when
the person knows, or it is obvious to a reasonable person in
the circumstances, that its use without the consent of the
proprietor would be an infringement of the patent;
(c) where the invention is a process, the person disposes of,
offers to dispose of, uses or imports any product obtained
Patents Act 1994
93
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


directly by means of that process or keeps any such product
whether for disposal or otherwise.
(2) An act which, apart from this subsection, would constitute an
infringement of a patent for an invention is not an infringement of a
patent if —
(a) it is done privately and for purposes which are not
commercial;
(b) it is done for experimental purposes relating to the subject
matter of the invention;
(c) it consists of the extemporaneous preparation of a
medicine
for
an
individual
in
accordance
with
a
prescription given by a registered medical or dental
practitioner or consists of dealing with a medicine so
prepared;
(d) it consists of the use of a product or process in the body or
operation of a relevant aircraft, hovercraft or vehicle which
has temporarily or accidentally entered or is crossing
Singapore (including the airspace above it and its territorial
waters) or the use of accessories for such a relevant
aircraft, hovercraft or vehicle;
(e) it consists of the use, exclusively for the needs of a relevant
ship, of a product or process in the body of the ship or in its
machinery, tackle, apparatus or other accessories, in a case
where the ship has temporarily or accidentally entered the
territorial waters of Singapore;
(f) it consists of the use of an exempted aircraft which has
lawfully entered or is lawfully crossing Singapore as
mentioned in paragraph (d) or of the importation into
Singapore, or the use or storage, of any part or accessory
for that aircraft;
(g) subject to subsections (3) and (6), it consists of the import,
use or disposal of, or the offer to dispose of, any patented
product or any product obtained by means of a patented
process or to which a patented process has been applied,
which is produced by or with the consent (conditional or
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
94
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


otherwise) of the proprietor of the patent or any person
licensed by the proprietor, and for this purpose “patent”
includes a patent granted in any country outside Singapore
in respect of the same or substantially the same invention
as that for which a patent is granted under this Act and
“patented product”, “patented process” and “licensed” are
to be construed accordingly;
(h) it consists of the doing of any thing set out in subsection (1)
in relation to the subject matter of the patent to support any
application for marketing approval for a pharmaceutical
product, provided that any thing produced to support the
application is not —
(i) made, used or sold in Singapore; or
(ii) exported outside Singapore,
other than for purposes related to meeting the requirements
for marketing approval for that pharmaceutical product; or
(i) subject to subsection (6), it consists of the import, disposal
or offer to dispose of a patented pharmaceutical product for
use by or on a specific patient in Singapore, or the use of
that product by or on that patient, where —
(i) that product is required for use by or on that patient;
(ii) the
relevant
authority
has
granted
approval
specifically for the import of that product for use
by or on that patient; and
(iii) that product was produced by or with the consent
(conditional or otherwise) of the proprietor of the
patent or any person licensed by the proprietor (and
for this purpose “patent” includes a patent granted in
any country outside Singapore in respect of the same
or substantially the same product and “licensed” is to
be construed accordingly).
[18/2008]
(3) Subsection (2)(g) does not apply to the import of any patented
pharmaceutical product by any person (called in this subsection and
subsection (4) the importer) if —
Patents Act 1994
95
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(a) the product has not previously been sold or distributed in
Singapore
by
or
with
the
consent
(conditional
or
otherwise) of the proprietor of the patent or any person
licensed by the proprietor of the patent to sell or distribute
the product in Singapore;
(b) the import of the product by the importer would result in
the product being distributed in breach of a contract
between —
(i) the proprietor of the patent; and
(ii) any person licensed by the proprietor of the patent to
distribute the product outside Singapore; and
(c) the importer has actual or constructive knowledge of the
matters referred to in paragraph (b).
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3), where the importer has
received a written notice containing the prescribed particulars, the
importer is deemed to have constructive knowledge of the matters
referred to in subsection (3)(b).
(5) To avoid doubt, in subsection (3), “patent” does not include a
patent granted in any country outside Singapore in respect of the same
or substantially the same product and “licensed” is to be construed
accordingly.
(6) Subsection (2)(g) and (i) does not apply to the import or sale of,
or the offer to sell, any relevant health product produced for export to
any country, other than Singapore, which is an eligible importing
member of the World Trade Organisation.
[18/2008]
(7) In this section —
“eligible importing member”, in relation to the World Trade
Organisation,
means
a
member
of
the
World
Trade
Organisation which —
(a) is a least-developed country; or
(b) has given the Council for TRIPS the notification
referred to in —
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
96
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(i) paragraph
1(b)
of
the
Doha
Declaration
Implementation Decision; or
(ii) paragraph 1(b) of the Annex to the TRIPS
Agreement;
“exempted aircraft” means an aircraft to which section 30 of the
Air Navigation Act 1966 applies;
“relevant ship” and “relevant aircraft, hovercraft or vehicle”
mean, respectively, a ship and an aircraft, a hovercraft or a
vehicle registered in, or belonging to, any country, other than
Singapore, which is —
(a) a party to the Paris Convention; or
(b) a member of the World Trade Organisation.
[18/2008]
Proceedings for infringement of patent
67.—(1) Subject to this Part, civil proceedings may be brought in
the court by the proprietor of a patent in respect of any act alleged to
infringe the patent and (without prejudice to any other jurisdiction of
the court) in those proceedings a claim may be made —
(a) for an injunction restraining the defendant from any
apprehended act of infringement;
(b) for an order for the defendant to deliver up or destroy any
patented product in relation to which the patent is infringed
or any article in which that product is inextricably
comprised
or
any
material
and
implement
the
predominant use of which has been in the creation of the
infringing product;
(c) for damages in respect of the infringement;
(d) for an account of the profits derived by the defendant from
the infringement; and
(e) for a declaration that the patent is valid and has been
infringed by the defendant.
Patents Act 1994
97
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(2) The court must not, in respect of the same infringement, both
award the proprietor of a patent damages and order that the proprietor
be given an account of the profits.
(3) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, any reference
to a claimant includes a reference to the proprietor of the patent.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
(4) [Deleted by Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(5) [Deleted by Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(6) Subject to this Part, in determining whether or not to grant any
kind of relief claimed under this section and the extent of the relief
granted, the court must apply the principles applied by the court in
relation to that kind of relief immediately before 23 February 1995.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
Reversal of burden of proof
68.—(1) In any proceedings for the infringement of a patent, where
the subject matter of the patent is a process for obtaining a new
product, the burden of proving that a product is not made by the
process is on the alleged infringer if the product is new or a
substantial likelihood exists that the product is made by the process
and the proprietor of the patent has been unable through reasonable
efforts to determine the process actually used.
(2) In considering whether a party has discharged the burden
imposed upon the party by this section, the court is not to require the
party to disclose any manufacturing or commercial secret if it appears
to the court that it would be unreasonable to do so.
Restrictions on relief for infringement
69.—(1) In proceedings for infringement of a patent, damages must
not be awarded and no order may be made for an account of profits
against a defendant who proves that at the date of the infringement the
defendant was not aware, and had no reasonable grounds for
supposing, that the patent existed.
(2) A person is not to be taken to have been aware or to have had
reasonable grounds for supposing by reason only of the application to
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
98
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


a product of the word “patent” or “patented”, or any word or words
expressing or implying that a patent has been obtained for the
product, unless the number of the patent accompanied the word or
words.
(3) In proceedings for infringement of a patent, the court may, if the
court thinks fit, refuse to award any damages, make an order for an
account of profits or grant any other relief (including an injunction) in
respect of an infringement committed during the period prescribed
under section 36(3), but before the payment of the renewal fee and
any additional fee prescribed for the purposes of section 36(3).
[15/2012]
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(4) Where an amendment of the specification of a patent has been
allowed under any of the provisions of this Act, the court must not, in
proceedings for an infringement of the patent committed before the
decision to allow the amendment, award any damages, make an order
for an account of profits or grant any other relief (including an
injunction) unless the court is satisfied that the specification of the
patent as published was framed in good faith and with reasonable skill
and knowledge.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
Relief for infringement of partially valid patent
70.—(1) If the validity of a patent is put in issue in proceedings for
infringement of the patent and it is found that the patent is only
partially valid, the court may, subject to subsection (2), grant relief in
respect of that part of the patent which is found to be valid and
infringed.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(2) Where in any such proceedings it is found that a patent is only
partially valid, the court must not grant relief by way of damages,
costs or expenses, except where the claimant proves that the
specification for the patent was framed in good faith and with
reasonable skill and knowledge, and in that event the court may grant
relief in respect of that part of the patent which is valid and infringed,
Patents Act 1994
99
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


subject to the discretion of the court as to costs or expenses and as to
the date from which damages should be reckoned.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
(3) As a condition of relief under this section, the court may direct
that the specification of the patent be amended to the court’s
satisfaction upon an application made for that purpose under
section 83, and an application may be so made accordingly,
whether or not all other issues in the proceedings have been
determined.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
Right to continue use begun before priority date
71.—(1) Where a patent is granted for an invention, a person who in
Singapore before the priority date of the invention —
(a) does in good faith an act which would constitute an
infringement of the patent if it were in force; or
(b) makes in good faith effective and serious preparations to
do such an act,
has the right to continue to do the act or, as the case may be, to do the
act, despite the grant of the patent.
(2) The right conferred by subsection (1) does not extend to
granting a licence to another person to do the act.
(3) If the act was done, or the preparations were made, in the course
of a business, the person entitled to the right conferred by
subsection (1) may —
(a) authorise the doing of that act by any partner of that person
for the time being in that business; and
(b) assign that right, or transmit it on death (or in the case of a
body corporate on its dissolution) to any person who
acquires that part of the business in the course of which the
act was done or the preparations were made.
(4) Where a product is disposed of to another person in exercise of
the rights conferred by subsection (1) or (3), that other person and any
person claiming through that other person may deal with the product
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
100
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


in the same way as if it had been disposed of by the registered
proprietor of the patent.
Certificate of contested validity of patent
72.—(1) Where in any proceedings before the court or the Registrar
the validity of a patent to any extent is contested and that patent is
found by the court or the Registrar to be wholly or partially valid, the
court or the Registrar may certify the finding and the fact that the
validity of the patent was so contested.
(2) Where a certificate is granted under this section, then, if in any
subsequent proceedings before the court for infringement of the
patent or before the court or the Registrar for revocation of the patent,
a final order or judgment is made or given in favour of the party
relying on the validity of the patent as found in the earlier
proceedings, that party, unless the court or the Registrar otherwise
directs, is entitled to that party’s costs or expenses as between
solicitor and own client other than the costs or expenses of any appeal
in the subsequent proceedings.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
Proceedings for infringement by co-owner
73.—(1) In the application of section 66 to a patent of which there
are 2 or more joint proprietors, the reference to the proprietor is to be
construed —
(a) in relation to any act, as a reference to that proprietor or
those proprietors who, by virtue of section 46 or any
agreement mentioned in that section, is or are entitled to do
that act without its amounting to an infringement; and
(b) in relation to any consent, as a reference to that proprietor
or those proprietors who, by virtue of section 46 or any
such agreement, is or are the proper person or persons to
give the requisite consent.
(2) One of 2 or more joint proprietors of a patent may without the
concurrence of the others bring proceedings in respect of an act
alleged to infringe the patent, but must not do so unless the others are
made parties to the proceedings; but any of the others if made a
Patents Act 1994
101
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


defendant shall not be liable for any costs or expenses unless the
defendant files and serves a notice of intention to contest or not
contest and takes part in the proceedings.
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
Proceedings for infringement by exclusive licensee
74.—(1) The holder of an exclusive licence under a patent has the
same right as the proprietor of the patent to bring proceedings in
respect of any infringement of the patent committed after the date of
the licence; and references to the proprietor of the patent in this Act
relating to infringement are to be construed accordingly.
(2) In awarding damages or granting any other relief in any such
proceedings, the court is to take into consideration any loss suffered
or likely to be suffered by the exclusive licensee as such as a result of
the infringement, or, as the case may be, the profits derived from the
infringement, so far as it constitutes an infringement of the rights of
the exclusive licensee as such.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(3) In any proceedings taken by an exclusive licensee by virtue of
this section, the proprietor of the patent need not be made a party to
the proceedings, but if made a defendant shall not be liable for any
costs or expenses unless the defendant files and serves a notice of
intention to contest or not contest and takes part in the proceedings.
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
Effect of non-registration on infringement proceedings
75. Where by virtue of a transaction, instrument or event to which
section 43 applies a person becomes the proprietor or one of the
proprietors or an exclusive licensee of a patent and the patent is
subsequently infringed, the court is not to award the person damages
or order that the person be given an account of the profits in respect of
such a subsequent infringement occurring before the transaction,
instrument or event is registered unless —
(a) the transaction, instrument or event is registered within the
period of 6 months beginning with its date; or
(b) the court is satisfied that it was not practicable to register
the transaction, instrument or event before the end of that
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
102
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


period and that it was registered as soon as practicable
thereafter.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
Infringement of rights conferred by publication of application
76.—(1) Where an application for a patent for an invention is
published, then, subject to this section, the applicant has, as from the
publication and until the grant of the patent, the same right as the
applicant would have had, if the patent had been granted on the date
of the publication of the application, to bring proceedings in the court
for damages in respect of any act which would have infringed the
patent.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(2) References in sections 66 to 69 and 73 to 75 to a patent and the
proprietor of a patent are to be respectively construed as including
references to any such application and the applicant, and references to
a patent being in force, being granted, being valid or existing are to be
construed accordingly.
(3) The applicant is entitled to bring proceedings by virtue of this
section in respect of any act only —
(a) after the patent has been granted; and
(b) if the act would, if the patent had been granted on the date
of the publication of the application, have infringed not
only the patent, but also the claims (as interpreted by the
description and any drawings referred to in the description
or claims) in the form in which they were contained in the
application immediately before the preparations for its
publication were completed by the Registry.
(4) Section 69(3) and (4) does not apply to an infringement of the
rights conferred by this section but in considering the amount of any
damages for such an infringement, the court is to consider whether or
not it would have been reasonable to expect, from a consideration of
the application as published under section 27, that a patent would be
granted conferring on the proprietor of the patent protection from an
act of the same description as that found to infringe those rights, and
Patents Act 1994
103
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


if the court finds that it would not have been reasonable, the court is to
reduce the damages to such an amount as the court thinks just.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
Remedy for groundless threats of infringement proceedings
77.—(1) Where a person (whether or not the proprietor of, or
entitled to any right in, a patent) by circulars, advertisements or
otherwise threatens another person with proceedings for any
infringement of a patent, a person aggrieved by the threats
(whether or not he or she is the person to whom the threats are
made) may, subject to subsection (4), bring proceedings in the court
against the person making the threats, claiming any relief mentioned
in subsection (3).
(2) In any such proceedings, the claimant, if the claimant proves
that the threats were so made and satisfies the court that the claimant
is a person aggrieved by them, is entitled to the relief claimed
unless —
(a) the defendant proves that the acts in respect of which
proceedings were threatened constitute or, if done, would
constitute an infringement of a patent; and
(b) the patent alleged to be infringed is not shown by the
claimant to be invalid in a relevant respect.
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
(3) The said relief is —
(a) a declaration to the effect that the threats are unjustifiable;
(b) an injunction against the continuance of the threats; and
(c) damages in respect of any loss which the claimant has
sustained by the threats.
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
(4) Proceedings may not be brought under this section for a threat to
bring proceedings for an infringement alleged to consist of making or
importing a product for disposal or of using a process.
(5) A mere notification of the existence of a patent does not
constitute a threat of proceedings within the meaning of this section.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
104
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(6) Nothing in this section renders an advocate and solicitor or any
other person liable to an action under this section in respect of an act
done by the advocate and solicitor or the other person in the advocate
and solicitor’s or the other person’s professional capacity on behalf of
a client.
Declaration as to non-infringement
78.—(1) Without prejudice to the jurisdiction of the court to make a
declaration apart from this section, a declaration that an act does not,
or a proposed act would not, constitute an infringement of a patent
may be made by the court in proceedings between the person doing or
proposing to do the act and the proprietor of the patent, even though
no assertion to the contrary has been made by the proprietor, if it is
shown —
(a) that that person has applied in writing to the proprietor for a
written acknowledgment to the effect of the declaration
claimed, and has furnished the proprietor with full
particulars in writing of the act in question; and
(b) that the proprietor has refused or failed to give any such
acknowledgment.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(2) [Deleted by Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
PART 14
REVOCATION OF PATENTS AND
VALIDITY PROCEEDINGS
79. [Repealed by Act 19 of 2004]
Power to revoke patents on application
80.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the court or the
Registrar may, on the application of any person, by order revoke a
patent for an invention on (but only on) any of the following grounds:
(a) the invention is not a patentable invention;
Patents Act 1994
105
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(b) the patent was granted to a person who was not entitled
(either alone or with other persons) to be granted that
patent;
(c) the specification of the patent does not disclose the
invention clearly and completely for it to be performed
by a person skilled in the art;
(d) the matter disclosed in the specification of the patent
extends beyond that disclosed —
(i) in the application for the patent, as filed; or
(ii) where the patent was granted on a new application
filed under section 20(3) or 47(4) or section 116(6) of
the Patents Act (Cap. 221, 1995 Revised Edition), or
in accordance with section 26(11), in —
(A) the earlier application made under this Act;
(B) the
application
made
under
the
United
Kingdom Patents Act 1977; or
(C) the application under the European Patent
Convention designating the United Kingdom
filed at the European Patent Office,
(as the case may be) from which the filing date and
the right of priority has been derived, as filed;
(e) an amendment or a correction has been made to the
specification of —
(i) the patent; or
(ii) the application for the patent,
which should not have been allowed;
(f) the patent was obtained —
(i) fraudulently;
(ii) on any misrepresentation; or
(iii) on any non-disclosure or inaccurate disclosure of any
prescribed material information, whether or not the
person under a duty to provide the information knew
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
106
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


or ought reasonably to have known of such
information or the inaccuracy;
(g) the patent is one of 2 or more patents for the same
invention having the same priority date and filed by the
same party or the party’s successor in title.
[2/2007; 23/2019]
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(2) On the application of any person for an order to revoke a patent
on any of the grounds specified in subsection (1)(a), (c), (d) and (e),
the court or the Registrar may, subject to subsection (3), cause the
patent to be re-examined by an Examiner so as to determine whether
the patent should be revoked on any of those grounds and require the
applicant to pay the prescribed re-examination fee.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(3) The court or the Registrar must not cause a patent to be
re-examined under subsection (2) where, within the prescribed
period, the applicant for the revocation of the patent fails to give such
security for the costs or expenses of the proceedings as the court or
the Registrar may specify; in which case, the application for
revocation is treated as having been abandoned.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(4) An application for the revocation of a patent on the ground
mentioned in subsection (1)(b) —
(a) may only be made by a person found by the court in an
action for a declaration or found by the court or the
Registrar on a reference under section 47, to be entitled to
be granted that patent or to be granted a patent for part of
the matter comprised in the specification of the patent
sought to be revoked; and
(b) may not be made if that action was commenced or that
reference was made after the end of the period of 2 years
beginning with the date of the grant of the patent sought to
be revoked, unless it is shown that any person registered as
a proprietor of the patent knew at the time of the grant or of
the transfer of the patent to the person that the person was
Patents Act 1994
107
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


not entitled (either alone or with other persons, as the case
may be) to the patent.
[23/2019]
(5) An order under this section may be —
(a) an order for the unconditional revocation of the patent; or
(b) where one of the grounds mentioned in subsection (1) has
been established, but only so as to invalidate the patent to a
limited extent, an order that the patent should be revoked
unless within a specified time the specification is amended
under section 83 to the satisfaction of the court or the
Registrar, as the case may be.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(6) A decision of the Registrar or on appeal from the Registrar does
not estop any party to any civil proceedings in which infringement of
a patent is in issue from alleging invalidity of the patent on any of the
grounds mentioned in subsection (1), whether or not any of the issues
involved were decided in the decision.
(7) An order under this section revoking a patent has effect from the
date of the grant of the patent.
(8) Where an applicant for the revocation of a patent discontinues
or withdraws the application, the applicant must pay such costs or
expenses of the proceedings as the court or the Registrar may
determine.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(9) An application to the Registrar for an order to revoke a patent
must be —
(a) made in the prescribed form and filed at the Registry in the
prescribed manner; and
(b) accompanied by the prescribed fee.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(10) Section 92 does not apply in relation to the decision of the
Registrar to cause a patent to be re-examined under this section.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
108
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(11) Where an application is made to the Registrar under this
section, the Registrar may at any stage of the proceedings refer the
application to the court.
[23/2019]
Registrar’s power to revoke patents on own initiative
81. If it appears to the Registrar that an invention for which a patent
has been granted formed part of the state of the art by virtue only of
section 14(3), the Registrar may on the Registrar’s own initiative by
order revoke the patent, but must not do so without giving the
proprietor of the patent an opportunity of making any observation and
of amending the specification of the patent so as to exclude any
matter which formed part of the state of the art as aforesaid without
contravening section 84.
[23/2019]
Proceedings in which validity of patent may be put in issue
82.—(1) Subject to this section, the validity of a patent may be put
in issue —
(aa) in a request for re-examination of the specification of a
patent under section 38A;
(a) by way of defence, in proceedings for infringement of the
patent under section 67 or proceedings under section 76 for
infringement of rights conferred by the publication of an
application;
(b) in proceedings under section 77;
(c) in proceedings in which a declaration in relation to the
patent is sought under section 78;
(d) in proceedings before the court or the Registrar under
section 80 for the revocation of the patent; or
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(e) in proceedings under section 56 or 58.
[23/2019]
(2) The validity of a patent may not be put in issue in any other
proceedings and, in particular, no proceedings may be instituted
Patents Act 1994
109
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(whether under this Act or otherwise) seeking only a declaration as to
the validity or invalidity of a patent.
(3) The only grounds on which the validity of a patent may be put in
issue (whether in proceedings for revocation under section 80 or
otherwise) are the grounds on which the patent may be revoked under
that section.
(4) No determination may be made in any proceedings mentioned
in subsection (1) on the validity of a patent which any person puts in
issue on the ground mentioned in section 80(1)(b) unless —
(a) it
has
been
determined
in
entitlement
proceedings
commenced by that person or in the proceedings in
which the validity of the patent is in issue that the patent
should have been granted to that person and not some other
person; and
(b) except where it has been so determined in entitlement
proceedings, the proceedings in which the validity of the
patent is in issue are commenced before the end of the
period of 2 years beginning with the date of the grant of the
patent or it is shown that any person registered as a
proprietor of the patent knew at the time of the grant or of
the transfer of the patent to the person that he or she was
not entitled (either alone or with other persons, as the case
may be) to the patent.
[23/2019]
(5) Where the validity of a patent is put in issue by way of defence
or counterclaim, the court or the Registrar must, if the court or
Registrar thinks it just to do so, give the defendant an opportunity to
comply with the condition in subsection (4)(a).
(6) In subsection (4), “entitlement proceedings”, in relation to a
patent, means a reference under section 47(1) on the ground that the
patent was granted to a person not entitled (either alone or with other
persons) to it or proceedings for a declaration that it was so granted.
[23/2019]
(7) Where proceedings with respect to a patent are pending in the
court under any provision of this Act mentioned in subsection (1), no
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
110
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


proceedings may be instituted without the permission of the court
before the Registrar with respect to that patent under section 80.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(8) For the purposes of this Act, the validity of a patent is not put in
issue merely because the Registrar is considering its validity in order
to decide whether to revoke it under section 81.
PART 15
AMENDMENTS OF PATENTS AND APPLICATIONS
Amendment of patent in infringement or revocation
proceedings, etc.
83.—(1) In any proceedings before the court or the Registrar in
which the validity of a patent is put in issue, the court or, as the case
may be, the Registrar may, subject to section 84, allow the proprietor
of the patent to amend the specification of the patent in such manner,
and subject to such terms as to the publication and advertisement of
the proposed amendment and as to costs, expenses or otherwise, as
the court or Registrar thinks fit.
[23/2019]
(2) A person may give notice to the court or the Registrar of the
person’s opposition to an amendment proposed by the proprietor of
the patent under this section, and if the person does so the court or the
Registrar must notify the proprietor and consider the opposition in
deciding whether the amendment or any amendment should be
allowed.
(3) An amendment of a specification of a patent under this section
has effect and is deemed always to have had effect from the grant of
the patent.
(4) Where an application for an order under this section is made to
the court, the applicant must notify the Registrar, who is entitled to
appear and be heard and must appear if so directed by the court.
Patents Act 1994
111
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Amendments of applications and patents not to include added
matter
84.—(1) An application for a patent which —
(a) is made in respect of matter disclosed in an earlier
application, or in the specification of a patent which has
been granted; and
(b) discloses additional matter, that is, matter extending
beyond that disclosed in the earlier application made
under this Act or in the application made under the United
Kingdom Patents Act 1977 or the application under the
European Patent Convention designating the United
Kingdom filed at the European Patent Office from which
the filing date and right of priority is sought to be derived,
as filed, or the application for the patent, as filed,
may be filed under section 20(3) or 47(4) or section 116(6) of the
Patents Act (Cap. 221, 1995 Revised Edition), or as mentioned in
section 26(11), but is not allowed to proceed unless it is amended so
as to exclude the additional matter.
[2/2007]
(2) Where, in relation to an application for a patent —
(a) the documents filed at the Registry to initiate the
application contain —
(i) a
reference
to
an
earlier
relevant
application
specified in a declaration under section 17(2) made
in or in connection with the application; and
(ii) a statement mentioned in section 26(1)(c)(ii)(C); and
(b) the description filed under section 26(7)(b) discloses
additional matter, that is, matter extending beyond that
disclosed in the earlier relevant application,
the application is not allowed to proceed unless it is amended to
exclude the additional matter.
[2/2007]
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
112
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(3) No amendment of an application for a patent is allowed under
section 31 if it results in the application disclosing any matter
extending beyond that disclosed in the application as filed.
(4) No amendment of the specification of a patent is allowed under
section 38(1), 81 or 83 if it —
(a) results in the specification disclosing any additional
matter; or
(b) extends the protection conferred by the patent.
(5) In subsection (2), “relevant application” has the meaning given
by section 17(9).
[2/2007]
PART 16
INTERNATIONAL APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS
Effect of filing international application for patent
85.—(1) An international application for a patent (Singapore) for
which a date of filing has been accorded under the Patent
Co-operation Treaty, subject to sections 86 and 87, is treated for
the purposes of this Act as an application for a patent under this Act.
(2) If the application, or the designation of Singapore in it, is
withdrawn or (except as mentioned in subsection (3)) deemed to be
withdrawn under the Patent Co-operation Treaty, it is treated as
withdrawn under this Act.
(3) An application is not treated as withdrawn under this Act if it, or
the designation of Singapore in it, is deemed to be withdrawn under
the Patent Co-operation Treaty —
(a) because of an error or omission in an institution having
functions under the Treaty; or
(b) because, owing to circumstances outside the applicant’s
control, a copy of the application was not received by the
International Bureau before the end of the time limited for
that purpose under the Treaty; or
(c) in such other circumstances as may be prescribed.
Patents Act 1994
113
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(4) If an international application for a patent which designates
Singapore is refused a filing date under the Patent Co-operation
Treaty and the Registrar determines that the refusal was caused by an
error or omission in an institution having functions under that Treaty,
the Registrar may direct that the application is treated as an
application under this Act, having such date of filing as the
Registrar may direct.
(5) The Registry must act as a receiving Office under Article 2 of
the Patent Co-operation Treaty in respect of international applications
filed by citizens of Singapore or persons resident in Singapore.
(6) The prescribed transmittal fee, in addition to the fees prescribed
by the Patent Co-operation Treaty, must be paid to the Registry by
any person filing an international application under that Treaty.
International and national phases of application
86.—(1) The provisions of the Patent Co-operation Treaty relating
to publication, search, examination and amendment, and not those of
this Act, apply to an international application for a patent (Singapore)
during the international phase of the application.
(2) The international phase of the application means the period
from the filing of the application in accordance with the Patent
Co-operation Treaty until the national phase of the application
begins.
(3) The national phase of the application begins —
(a) when the prescribed period expires, provided —
(i) where
the
application
has
been
published
in
accordance with the Patent Co-operation Treaty in
a language other than English, and the application is
not in English, an English translation of the
application has been filed at the Registry; and
(ii) the prescribed fee has been paid,
by the applicant; or
(b) when the applicant expressly requests the Registrar to
proceed earlier with the national phase of the application,
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
114
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


pays the prescribed fee and complies with any of the
following sub-paragraphs which is applicable:
(i) where, at the time of the request, the application has
not been published in accordance with the Patent
Co-operation Treaty, file at the Registry —
(A) a copy of the application; and
(B) if the copy is not in English, an English
translation of the application;
(ii) where, at the time of the request, the application has
been published in accordance with the Patent
Co-operation Treaty in a language other than
English, and the application is not in English, file
at the Registry an English translation of the
application.
[2/2007]
(4) If the prescribed period expires without the conditions
mentioned in subsection (3)(a) being satisfied, the application is
taken to be withdrawn.
(5) Where, during the international phase, the application is
amended in accordance with the Patent Co-operation Treaty, the
amendment is treated as made under this Act if, and is disregarded
unless —
(a) when the prescribed period expires, where —
(i) the amendment is not in English; and
(ii) if
any
copy
of
the
amendment
has
been
communicated to the Registry in accordance with
the Treaty, that copy is in a language other than
English,
an English translation of the amendment has been filed at
the Registry; or
(b) where the applicant expressly requests the Registrar to
proceed earlier with the national phase of the application,
there is then filed at the Registry —
Patents Act 1994
115
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(i) a copy of the amendment, if none has been
communicated to the Registry in accordance with
the Treaty; and
(ii) an English translation of the amendment, if —
(A) the amendment is not in English; and
(B) where any copy of the amendment has been
communicated to the Registry in accordance
with the Treaty, that copy is in a language other
than English.
[2/2007]
(6) The Registrar must publish any translation filed at the Registry
under subsection (3) or (5).
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
Adaptation of provisions in relation to international
application
87.—(1) Where
an
international
application
for
a
patent
(Singapore) is accorded a filing date under the Patent Co-operation
Treaty —
(a) that date or, if the application is re-dated under the Treaty
to a later date, that later date is treated as the date of filing
the application under this Act;
(b) any declaration of priority made under the Treaty is treated
as made under section 17(2), and where in accordance with
the Treaty any extra days are allowed, the period of
12 months mentioned in section 17(3)(a) is treated as
altered accordingly; and
(c) any statement of the name of the inventor under the Treaty
is treated as a statement filed under section 24(2).
[2/2007]
(2) If the application, not having been published under this Act, is
published in accordance with the Patent Co-operation Treaty, it is
treated, for purposes other than those mentioned in subsection (3), as
published under section 27 when the national phase of the application
begins or, if later, when published in accordance with the Treaty.
[2/2007]
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
116
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(3) For the purposes of sections 56 and 76, the application, not
having been published under this Act, is treated as published under
section 27 —
(a) if
it
is
published
in
accordance
with
the
Patent
Co-operation
Treaty
in
English,
on
its
being
so
published; and
(b) if it is so published in a language other than English —
(i) on the publication of an English translation of the
application in accordance with section 86(6); or
(ii) on the service by the applicant of an English
translation of the specification of the application
on the Government department concerned or, as the
case may be, on the person committing the infringing
act.
[2/2007]
(4) The reference in subsection (3)(b)(ii) to the service of an
English translation on a Government department or other person is to
its being sent by post or delivered to that department or person.
[2/2007]
(5) During the international phase of the application, section 20
does not apply (determination of questions of entitlement in relation
to application under this Act); but after the end of the international
phase section 20 applies.
Evidence of Patent Co-operation Treaty and its instruments
88.—(1) Judicial notice is to be taken of the Patent Co-operation
Treaty and any Gazette, bulletin or journal published under the
Treaty.
(2) Any such document mentioned in subsection (1) is admissible
as evidence of any instrument or other act thereby communicated of
any institution having functions under the Treaty.
(3) Evidence
of
any
instrument
issued
under
the
Patent
Co-operation Treaty by any institution or of any document in the
custody of any institution or reproducing in legible form any
information in such custody otherwise than in legible form, or any
Patents Act 1994
117
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


entry or extract from such a document, may be given in any legal
proceedings by production of a copy certified as a true copy by an
official of that institution.
(4) Any document purporting to be such a copy as is specified by
subsection (3) shall be received in evidence without proof of the
official position or handwriting of the person signing the certificate.
(5) Evidence of any instrument mentioned in subsection (3) may
also be given in any legal proceedings —
(a) by production of a copy purporting to be printed by the
Government Printers; or
(b) where the instrument is in the custody of a Government
department, by production of a copy certified on behalf of
the department to be a true copy by an officer of the
department generally or specially authorised to do so.
(6) Any document purporting to be such a copy as is mentioned in
subsection (5)(b) of an instrument in the custody of a Government
department shall be received in evidence without proof of the official
position or handwriting of the person signing the certificate, or of the
person’s authority to do so, or of the document being in the custody of
the department.
(7) In this section, “legal proceedings” includes proceedings before
the Registrar.
PART 17
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
Proceedings before court or Registrar
89.—(1) Any proceedings before the court relating to patents and
other matters under this Act are to be dealt with by a judge sitting
alone or, if the judge thinks fit, with one or more scientific advisers
selected by the judge from the panel appointed under subsection (2).
(2) Rules under this Act may make provision for the appointment of
a panel of scientific advisers to assist the court and the Registrar in
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
118
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


proceedings under this Act, for regulating the functions of such
advisers and for remunerating such advisers.
Appeals from Registrar
90.—(1) An appeal shall lie to the court from any decision of the
Registrar under this Act or the rules except any of the following
decisions:
(a) a decision falling within section 25(7);
(b) a decision under section 27(3) to omit any matter from a
specification;
(c) a decision to give directions under section 33(1) or (2);
(ca) a decision under section 38A(4) not to grant a request for
re-examination;
(cb) a decision under section 38A not to revoke a patent;
(d) a decision under the rules which is excepted by the rules
from the right of appeal conferred by this section.
[23/2019]
(2) For the purpose of hearing appeals under this section, the court
may consist of one or more judges of the court in accordance with
directions given by or on behalf of the Chief Justice.
(3) An appeal shall not lie to the appellate court from a decision of
the court on appeal from a decision of the Registrar under this Act or
the rules —
(a) except where the decision of the Registrar was given under
section 20, 38, 47, 80, 81 or 83, or was a decision to revoke
a patent given under section 38A; or
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 01/04/2022]
(b) except where the ground of appeal is that the decision of
the court is wrong in law,
but an appeal shall only lie to the appellate court under this section if
permission to appeal is given by the appellate court.
[40/2019]
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
Patents Act 1994
119
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(4) In this section, “appellate court” means the appellate court to
which an appeal under subsection (3) is to be made under section 29C
of the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1969.
[40/2019]
General powers of court
91.—(1) The court may, for the purpose of determining any
question in the exercise of its original or appellate jurisdiction
under this Act, make any order or exercise any other power which the
Registrar could have made or exercised for the purpose of
determining that question.
(2) In all proceedings before the court under this Act, the costs of
the Registrar are in the discretion of the court, but the Registrar is not
to be ordered to pay the costs of any other of the parties.
Exercise of Registrar’s discretionary powers
92. Without prejudice to any rule of law, the Registrar must give
any party to a proceeding before the Registrar an opportunity of being
heard before exercising adversely to that party any discretion vested
in the Registrar by this Act or the rules.
Right of audience in patent proceedings
93.—(1) Any party to any proceedings before the Registrar under
this Act or any treaty to which Singapore is a party may appear before
the Registrar in person or be represented by an advocate and solicitor
or a registered patent agent.
(2) The Government may be represented by a Judicial Service
Officer or Legal Service Officer in any proceedings before the
Registrar under this Act or any treaty to which Singapore is a party.
[20/2009]
[Act 33 of 2021 wef 14/01/2022]
(3) Without affecting the right of counsel to appear before the court,
an advocate and solicitor who is not in actual practice has, despite
anything in the Legal Profession Act 1966, the right to appear and be
heard on behalf of any party to an appeal under this Act from the
Registrar to the court.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
120
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Extension of privilege for communications with solicitors
relating to patent proceedings
94.—(1) The rule of law which confers privilege from disclosure in
legal proceedings in respect of communications made with an
advocate and solicitor or a person acting on the advocate and
solicitor’s behalf, or in relation to information obtained or supplied
for submission to an advocate and solicitor or a person acting on the
advocate and solicitor’s behalf, for the purpose of any pending or
contemplated proceedings before a court in Singapore extends to
such communications so made for the purpose of any pending or
contemplated proceedings before the Registrar under this Act.
(2) In this section, “legal proceedings” includes proceedings before
the Registrar; and references to “legal proceedings” and “pending or
contemplated proceedings” include references to applications for a
patent and to international applications for a patent.
Privilege for communications with patent agents, etc.
95.—(1) A communication with respect to any matter relating to
patents —
(a) between a person and any of the following:
(i) a registered patent agent or a registered foreign
patent agent;
(ii) a partnership entitled under Part 19 to describe itself
as a firm of patent agents or as a firm of foreign
patent agents; or
(iii) a body corporate entitled under Part 19 to describe
itself as a patent agent or as a foreign patent agent; or
(b) for the purpose of obtaining, or in response to a request for,
information which a person is seeking for the purpose of
instructing the person’s patent agent or a registered foreign
patent agent,
is privileged from disclosure in legal proceedings in Singapore in the
same way as a communication between a person and the person’s
solicitor or, as the case may be, a communication for the purpose of
Patents Act 1994
121
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


obtaining, or in response to a request for, information which a person
seeks for the purpose of instructing the person’s solicitor.
[15/2012]
(2) In this section —
“legal proceedings” includes proceedings before the Registrar;
“patent” includes any patent or other protection for an invention
granted in any country or jurisdiction other than Singapore.
[15/2012]
Costs and expenses in proceedings before Registrar
96.—(1) The Registrar may, in proceedings before the Registrar
under this Act, by order award to any party such costs as the Registrar
may consider reasonable and direct how and by what parties they are
to be paid.
(2) Any costs awarded under this section are, if a District Court or a
Magistrate’s Court so orders, recoverable by an enforcement order
issued from that Court or otherwise as if they were payable under an
order of that Court.
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
(3) If any person by whom —
(a) a reference is made to the Registrar under section 20 or 47;
(b) an application is made to the Registrar for the revocation of
a patent; or
(c) notice of opposition is given to the Registrar under
section 38(4), 54(7) or 107(2),
neither resides nor carries on business in Singapore, the Registrar
may require the person to give security for the costs or expenses of the
proceedings and in default of such security being given may treat the
reference, application or notice as abandoned.
[15/2012]
Licences granted by order of Registrar
97. Any order by the Registrar for the grant of a licence under this
Act has, without prejudice to any other method of enforcement, effect
as if it were a deed, executed by the proprietor of the patent and all
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
122
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


other necessary parties, granting a licence in accordance with the
order.
PART 18
OFFENCES
Falsification of register, etc.
98. If a person makes or causes to be made a false entry in any
register kept under this Act, or a writing falsely purporting to be a
copy or reproduction of an entry in any such register, or produces or
tenders or causes to be produced or tendered in evidence any such
writing, knowing the entry or writing to be false, the person shall be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not
exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
12 months or to both.
Unauthorised claim of patent rights
99.—(1) If a person falsely represents that anything disposed of by
the person for value is a patented product, the person shall, subject to
this section, be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction
to a fine not exceeding $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months or to both.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), a person who for value
disposes of an article having stamped, engraved or impressed on it or
otherwise applied to it the word “patent” or “patented” or anything
expressing or implying that the article is a patented product, is taken
to represent that the article is a patented product.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply where the representation is made
in respect of a product after the patent for that product or, as the case
may be, the process in question has expired or been revoked and
before the end of a period which is reasonably sufficient to enable the
accused to take steps to ensure that the representation is not made or
does not continue to be made.
(4) In proceedings for an offence under this section, it is a defence
for the accused to prove that the accused used due diligence to
prevent the commission of the offence.
Patents Act 1994
123
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Unauthorised claim that patent has been applied for
100.—(1) If a person represents that a patent has been applied for in
respect of any article disposed of for value by the person and —
(a) no such application has been made; or
(b) any such application has been refused, withdrawn or
treated as having been abandoned,
the person shall, subject to this section, be guilty of an offence and
shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $10,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or to both.
(2) Subsection (1)(b) does not apply where the representation is
made or continues to be made before the expiry of a period which
commences with the refusal, withdrawal or abandonment and which
is reasonably sufficient to enable the accused to take steps to ensure
that the representation is not made or does not continue to be made.
(3) For the purpose of subsection (1), a person who for value
disposes of an article having stamped, engraved or impressed on it or
otherwise applied to it the words “patent applied for” or “patent
pending”, or anything expressing or implying that a patent has been
applied for in respect of the article, is taken to represent that a patent
has been applied for in respect of it.
(4) In any proceedings for an offence under this section, it is a
defence for the accused to prove that the accused used due diligence
to prevent the commission of the offence.
Misuse of title “Registry of Patents”
101. If any person uses on the person’s place of business, or on any
document issued by the person, or otherwise, the words “Registry of
Patents” or any other words suggesting that the person’s place of
business is, or is officially connected with, the Registry of Patents, the
person shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction
to a fine not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months or to both.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
124
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Offences by bodies corporate and partnerships
102.—(1) Where an offence under this Act which has been
committed by a body corporate is proved to have been committed
with the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect
on the part of, a director, manager, secretary or any similar officer of
the body corporate, or any person who was purporting to act in any
such capacity, he or she, as well as the body corporate, shall be guilty
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
(2) Where the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its
members, subsection (1) applies in relation to the acts and defaults of
a member in connection with the member’s functions of management
as if the member were a director of the body corporate.
(3) Proceedings for an offence under this Act alleged to have been
committed by a partnership must be brought in the name of the
partnership and not in that of the partners; but without prejudice to
any liability of the partners under subsection (5).
(4) A fine imposed on a partnership on its conviction in such
proceedings must be paid out of the partnership assets.
(5) Where a partnership is guilty of an offence under this Act, every
partner, other than a partner who is proved to have been ignorant of or
to have attempted to prevent the commission of the offence, is also
guilty of the offence and liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
Composition of offences
103.—(1) The Registrar or any person authorised in writing by the
Registrar may compound any offence under this Act that is prescribed
as a compoundable offence by collecting from a person reasonably
suspected of having committed the offence a sum not exceeding the
lower of the following:
(a) one half of the amount of the maximum fine that is
prescribed for the offence;
(b) $5,000.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 10/06/2022]
Patents Act 1994
125
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(2) The Office may, with the approval of the Minister, make
regulations to prescribe the offences which may be compounded.
(3) On payment of the sum of money, no further proceedings may
be taken against such person in respect of the offence.
(4) All sums collected under this section must be paid into the
Consolidated Fund.
[Act 23 of 2019 wef 10/06/2022]
PART 19
PATENT AGENTS AND FOREIGN PATENT AGENTS
[15/2012]
Registration of patent agents and foreign patent agents
104.—(1) The Minister may make rules for the registration of
individuals as patent agents or as foreign patent agents.
[15/2012]
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the rules may provide —
(a) for the keeping, by such person as the Minister may
determine, of a register of patent agents and a register of
foreign patent agents;
(b) for the form and manner of application for registration as a
patent agent or as a foreign patent agent, the qualifications
and other requirements for registration, the fees payable for
registration, and the conditions of registration;
(c) for the issue of practising certificates to registered patent
agents;
(d) for the correction of errors and updating of entries in the
register of patent agents and the register of foreign patent
agents; and
(e) for transitional matters in relation to the registration of
individuals as patent agents or as foreign patent agents, and
exclude or vary the operation of this Act in relation to such
transitional matters.
[15/2012]
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
126
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(3) The rules may make provision to regulate the professional
conduct of registered patent agents, registered foreign patent agents
and the practices of registered patent agents and registered foreign
patent agents and, for that purpose, may make provision for and in
relation to all or any of the following:
(a) making complaints against registered patent agents and
registered foreign patent agents and hearing and deciding
upon such complaints;
(b) imposing penalties on registered patent agents and
registered foreign patent agents, including issuing a
reprimand, and suspending or cancelling registration;
(c) summoning witnesses;
(d) receiving evidence from persons on oath or affirmation;
(e) administering oaths or affirmations to persons giving
evidence;
(f) requiring persons to produce documents or articles;
(g) restoring any registration that has been cancelled and
lifting the suspension imposed on any registration.
[15/2012]
(4) The rules may provide that a contravention of the rules shall be
an offence and may provide penalties not exceeding a fine of $5,000
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or to both.
Persons entitled to act as patent agents, etc.
105.—(1) An individual must not carry on a business, practise or
act as a patent agent unless the individual is a registered patent agent,
or an advocate and solicitor, who has in force a practising certificate.
(2) A partnership must not carry on a business, practise or act as
patent agents unless at least one partner is a registered patent agent, or
an advocate and solicitor, who has in force a practising certificate.
(3) A body corporate must not carry on a business, practise or act as
a patent agent unless at least one director is a registered patent agent,
or an advocate and solicitor, who has in force a practising certificate.
Patents Act 1994
127
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(4) For the purposes of this section and section 105A, a person is
taken to carry on a business, practise or act as a patent agent if, and
only if, the person does, or undertakes to do, on behalf of someone
else, any of the following in Singapore for gain:
(a) applying for or obtaining patents at the Registry or any
other place;
(b) preparing specifications or other documents for the
purposes of this Act or the patent law of another country;
(c) giving advice (other than advice of a scientific or technical
nature) about the validity, or infringement, of patents.
[15/2012]
(5) An individual must not —
(a) carry on a business under any name or other description
which contains the words “patent agent” or “patent
attorney”; or
(b) in the course of a business otherwise describe himself or
herself, hold himself or herself out or permit himself or
herself to be described or held out as a “patent agent” or
“patent attorney”,
unless the individual is a registered patent agent who has in force a
practising certificate.
[15/2012]
(6) A partnership must not —
(a) carry on a business under any name or other description
which contains the words “patent agent” or “patent
attorney”; or
(b) in the course of a business otherwise describe itself, hold
itself out or permit itself to be described or held out as a
firm of “patent agents” or “patent attorneys”,
unless at least one partner is a registered patent agent who has in force
a practising certificate.
[15/2012]
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
128
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(7) A body corporate must not —
(a) carry on a business under any name or other description
which contains the words “patent agent” or “patent
attorney”; or
(b) in the course of a business otherwise describe itself, hold
itself out or permit itself to be described or held out as a
“patent agent” or “patent attorney”,
unless at least one director is a registered patent agent who has in
force a practising certificate.
[15/2012]
(8) Any person who contravenes this section shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or to
both.
(9) Where subsection (5), (6) or (7) would be contravened by the
use of the words “patent agent” or “patent attorney” in reference to an
individual, a partnership or a body corporate, it is equally
contravened by the use of any other expression in reference to that
person, or that person’s business or place of business, which is likely
to be understood as indicating that that person is entitled to be
described as a “patent agent” or “patent attorney”.
[15/2012]
(10) Where an individual’s employer does not carry on a business,
practise or act as a patent agent or as a foreign patent agent, the
individual does not contravene subsection (1) in respect of anything
done, or undertaken to be done, by the individual for his or her
employer in his or her capacity as employee of his or her employer.
[2/2007; 15/2012]
(10A) Where —
(a) an individual’s employer is a member of a related company
group;
(b) the individual’s employer does not carry on a business,
practise or act as a patent agent or as a foreign patent agent;
and
Patents Act 1994
129
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(c) every other member of the related company group does not
carry on a business, practise or act as a patent agent or as a
foreign patent agent,
the individual does not contravene subsection (1) in respect of
anything done, or undertaken to be done, by the individual for that
other member of the related company group in his or her capacity as
employee of his or her employer.
[2/2007; 15/2012]
(11) A person (being a Judicial Service Officer or Legal Service
Officer) does not commit an offence against subsection (1) in respect
of anything done, or undertaken to be done, by the person on behalf of
the Government.
[Act 33 of 2021 wef 14/01/2022]
(12) A body corporate that is a member of a related company group
does not contravene subsection (3) in respect of anything done, or
undertaken to be done, by the body corporate for another member of
the group.
(13) This section is not to be construed as prohibiting an advocate
and solicitor from taking part in proceedings relating to patents and
applications for patents and, in particular, does not derogate from
section 93 as it applies to advocates and solicitors.
(14) No offence is committed under section 33 of the Legal
Profession Act 1966 by any person by reason only of the preparation
by the person of a document (other than a deed) for use in proceedings
before the Registrar in relation to any patent or application for a
patent.
(15) In this section —
“director”, in relation to a body corporate whose affairs are
managed by its members, means any member of the body
corporate;
“patent” includes any patent or other protection for an invention
granted in any country or jurisdiction other than Singapore;
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
130
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


“practising certificate” means —
(a) in relation to a registered patent agent, a practising
certificate issued to him or her under rules made
under section 104; or
(b) in relation to an advocate and solicitor, a practising
certificate issued to him or her under section 25 of the
Legal Profession Act 1966; and
“related company group” means a group of 2 or more
corporations
within
the
meaning
of
the
Companies
Act 1967 which are related to each other in accordance
with section 6 of that Act.
[15/2012]
Foreign patent agents
105A.—(1) Despite anything in section 105, an individual may
carry on a business, practise or act as a foreign patent agent if, and
only if, the individual is a registered foreign patent agent.
[15/2012]
(2) Despite anything in section 105, a partnership may carry on a
business, practise or act as foreign patent agents if, and only if, at least
one partner of the partnership is a registered foreign patent agent.
[15/2012]
(3) Despite anything in section 105, a body corporate may carry on
a business, practise or act as a foreign patent agent if, and only if, at
least one director thereof is a registered foreign patent agent.
[15/2012]
(4) For the purposes of section 105 and this section, a person is
taken to carry on a business, practise or act as a foreign patent agent
if, and only if, the person does, or undertakes to do, on behalf of
someone else, any of the following in Singapore for gain:
(a) applying for or obtaining patents at any place other than the
Registry;
(b) preparing specifications or other documents for the
purposes of —
Patents Act 1994
131
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(i) the patent law of any country other than Singapore;
or
(ii) an international application for a patent which, on its
date of filing, designates any country other than
Singapore
(whether
or
not
it
also
designates
Singapore);
(c) giving advice (other than advice of a scientific or technical
nature) about the validity, or infringement, of patents under
the patent law of any country other than Singapore.
[15/2012]
(5) Except as permitted under subsections (1) to (4), a registered
foreign patent agent —
(a) must not carry on a business, practise or act as a patent
agent; and
(b) must not purport to carry on a business, practise or act as a
patent agent.
[15/2012]
(6) Despite anything in section 105, if an individual is a registered
foreign patent agent, the individual —
(a) may carry on a business under any name or other
description which contains the words “foreign patent
agent” or “foreign patent attorney”; and
(b) may in the course of a business otherwise describe himself
or herself, hold himself or herself out or permit himself or
herself to be described or held out as a “foreign patent
agent” or “foreign patent attorney”.
[15/2012]
(7) Despite anything in section 105, if at least one partner of a
partnership is a registered foreign patent agent, the partnership —
(a) may carry on a business under any name or other
description which contains the words “foreign patent
agent” or “foreign patent attorney”; and
(b) may in the course of a business otherwise describe itself,
hold itself out or permit itself to be described or held out as
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
132
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


a firm of “foreign patent agents” or “foreign patent
attorneys”.
[15/2012]
(8) Despite anything in section 105, if at least one director of a body
corporate is a registered foreign patent agent, the body corporate —
(a) may carry on a business under any name or other
description which contains the words “foreign patent
agent” or “foreign patent attorney”; and
(b) may in the course of a business otherwise describe itself,
hold itself out or permit itself to be described or held out as
a “foreign patent agent” or “foreign patent attorney”.
[15/2012]
(9) No person (other than an individual, a partnership and a body
corporate referred to in subsections (6), (7) and (8), respectively)
may —
(a) carry on a business under any name or other description
which contains the words “foreign patent agent” or
“foreign patent attorney”; or
(b) describe the person, hold the person out or permit the
person to be described or held out as a “foreign patent
agent” or “foreign patent attorney”.
[15/2012]
(10) Any person who contravenes subsection (5) or (9) shall be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not
exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
12 months or to both.
[15/2012]
(11) Where subsection (9) would be contravened by the use of the
words “foreign patent agent” or “foreign patent attorney” in reference
to an individual, a partnership or a body corporate, it is equally
contravened by the use of any other expression in reference to that
person, or that person’s business or place of business, which is likely
to be understood as indicating that that person is entitled to be
described as a “foreign patent agent” or “foreign patent attorney”.
[15/2012]
Patents Act 1994
133
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(12) In this section —
“director”, in relation to a body corporate whose affairs are
managed by its members, means any member of the body
corporate;
“patent” includes any patent or other protection for an invention
granted in any country or jurisdiction other than Singapore.
[15/2012]
PART 20
MISCELLANEOUS AND GENERAL
Immunity of Office, its officers and Examiners
106. The Office, any officer of the Registry and any Examiner shall
not —
(a) be taken to warrant the validity of any patent granted under
this Act or any treaty to which Singapore is a party;
(b) incur any liability by reason of or in connection with any
examination or investigation required or authorised by this
Act or any such treaty or any report or other proceedings
consequent on any such examination or investigation; or
(c) incur any liability by reason of an incorrect entry in the
register of patent agents or the register of foreign patent
agents maintained under Part 19.
[15/2012]
Correction of errors in patents and applications
107.—(1) The Registrar may, subject to any provision of the rules,
correct any error of translation or transcription, clerical error or
mistake in any specification of a patent or application for a patent or
any document filed in connection with a patent or such an application.
(2) Where the Registrar is requested to correct such an error or
mistake, any person may in accordance with the rules give the
Registrar notice of opposition to the request and the Registrar must
determine the matter.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
134
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Information about patent applications and patents, and
inspection of documents
108.—(1) After publication of an application for a patent in
accordance with section 27, the Registrar must, on request being
made to the Registrar in the prescribed manner and on payment of the
prescribed fee (if any), give the person making the request such
information, and permit the person to inspect such documents,
relating to the application or to any patent granted pursuant to the
application as may be specified in the request, subject, however, to
any prescribed restriction.
(1A) Without affecting subsection (1), the Registrar may, on his or
her own initiative, publish or communicate any information or
documents relating to an application for a patent published in
accordance with section 27 or relating to any patent granted pursuant
to such application, subject to any prescribed restriction.
[Act 7 of 2022 wef 26/05/2022]
(2) Subject to this section, until an application for a patent is so
published, documents or information constituting or relating to the
application must not, without the consent of the applicant, be
published or communicated to any person by the Registrar.
(3) Subsection (2) does not prevent —
(a) the Registrar from publishing or communicating to others
any bibliographic information about an unpublished
application for a patent; or
(b) the Minister from inspecting or authorising the inspection
of an application for a patent or any connected document
under section 33(5).
(4) Where a person is notified that an application for a patent has
been made, but not published in accordance with section 27, and that
the applicant will, if the patent is granted, bring proceedings against
that person in the event of that person doing an act specified in the
notification after the application is so published, that person may
make a request under subsection (1), even though the application has
not been published, and that subsection applies accordingly.
Patents Act 1994
135
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(5) Where an application for a patent is filed, but not published, and
a new application is filed in respect of any part of the subject matter of
the earlier application (either in accordance with the rules or in
pursuance of an order under section 20) and is published, any person
may make a request under subsection (1) relating to the earlier
application and on payment of the prescribed fee the Registrar must
give the person such information and permit the person to inspect
such documents as could have been given or inspected if the earlier
application had been published.
(6) The publication of the whole or part of a specification of a
patent or an application for a patent does not constitute an
infringement of any copyright subsisting under the Copyright
Act 2021 in any literary or artistic work.
[22/2021]
109. [Repealed by Act 16 of 2016]
Extension of time
110.—(1) The Minister may, after consulting with the Office, make
rules to provide for the extension of any period of time specified for
the doing of any act in relation to —
(a) any application for or grant of a patent;
(b) any proceedings before the Registrar under this Act or the
rules; or
(c) any other matter under this Act or the rules.
(2) The rules may contain such provision as the Minister thinks fit
regulating the circumstances in which such an extension may be
granted and may also provide for the protection and compensation of
persons affected by the grant of extension of time and may authorise
the Registrar to grant an extension of time even though the period has
already expired.
Hours of business and excluded days
111.—(1) The Registrar may issue practice directions to specify —
(a) the hours of business of the Registry; and
(b) the days which are to be treated as excluded days.
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
136
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(2) The Minister may prescribe the effect of doing any business
under this Act —
(a) on any day after the hours of business of the Registry; or
(b) on any day which is an excluded day.
(3) For the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) —
(a) different hours of business may be specified for different
classes of business;
(b) different excluded days may be specified for different
classes of business; and
(c) different effects of doing business —
(i) outside the hours of business of the Registry; or
(ii) on an excluded day,
may be prescribed for different classes of business.
Government’s right to sell forfeited articles
112. Nothing in this Act affects the right of the Government or any
person deriving title, directly or indirectly, from the Government to
dispose of or use articles forfeited under the laws relating to customs
or excise.
Extent of invention
113.—(1) For the purposes of this Act, an invention for a patent for
which an application has been made or for which a patent has been
granted is, unless the context otherwise requires, taken to be that
specified in a claim of the specification of the application or patent (as
the case may be) as interpreted by the description and any drawings
contained in that specification, and the extent of the protection
conferred by a patent or application for a patent is to be determined
accordingly.
(2) To avoid doubt, where more than one invention is specified in
any such claim, each invention may have a different priority date
under section 17.
Patents Act 1994
137
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Availability of samples of micro-organisms
114.—(1) Provision may be made by rules prescribing the
circumstances in which the specification of an application for a
patent, or of a patent, for an invention which requires for its
performance the use of a micro-organism is to be treated as disclosing
the invention in a manner which is clear enough and complete enough
for the invention to be performed by a person skilled in the art.
(2) The rules may in particular require the applicant or patentee —
(a) to take such steps as may be prescribed for the purposes of
making
available
to
the
public
samples
of
the
micro-organism; and
(b) not to impose or maintain restrictions on the uses to which
such samples may be put, except as may be prescribed.
(3) The rules may provide that, in such cases as may be prescribed,
samples need only be made available to such persons or descriptions
of persons as may be prescribed.
(4) The rules may identify a description of persons by reference to
whether the Registrar has given his or her certificate as to any matter.
(5) An
application
for
revocation
of
the
patent
under
section 80(1)(c) may be made if any of the requirements of the
rules ceases to be complied with.
Rules
115.—(1) The Minister may, after consulting with the Office, make
such rules as the Minister thinks expedient for regulating the business
of the Registry in relation to patents and applications for patents
(including international applications for patents) and for regulating
all matters placed by this Act under the direction or control of the
Registrar.
(2) Without
limiting
subsection
(1),
the
rules
may
make
provision —
(a) prescribing the contents of applications for patents and
other documents which may be filed at the Registry and
requiring copies to be furnished of any such documents;
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
138
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(b) regulating the procedure to be followed in connection with
any proceeding or other matter before the Registrar or the
Registry and authorising the rectification of irregularities
of the procedure;
(c) requiring fees to be paid in connection with any such
proceeding or matter or in connection with the provision of
any service by the Registry and providing for the remission
of fees in the prescribed circumstances;
(d) regulating the mode of giving evidence in any such
proceeding and empowering the Registrar to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the discovery of and
production of documents;
(e) requiring
the
Registrar
to
publish
any
proposed
amendment of patents and any other prescribed matters
including any prescribed steps in any such proceeding;
(f) providing for the appointment of scientific advisers to
assist the court and the Registrar in any proceeding before
the court or the Registrar and for the remuneration of such
advisers;
(g) prescribing time limits for doing anything required to be
done in connection with any such proceeding by this Act or
the rules;
(h) giving effect to the right of an inventor of an invention to
be mentioned in an application for a patent for the
invention;
(i) providing for the publication and sale of documents in the
Registry and of information about such documents;
(j) prescribing, in relation to international applications,
matters necessary or convenient to be prescribed for
carrying out or giving effect to the Patent Co-operation
Treaty;
(k) excluding or varying the operation of the provisions of this
Act
in
relation
to
international
applications
and
applications for patents made under section 117;
Patents Act 1994
139
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(l) requiring and regulating the translation of documents in
connection with any application for a patent and the filing
and authentication of any such translations;
(m) prescribing the scale of costs for proceedings before the
Registrar; and
(n) prescribing anything that is required or permitted to be
prescribed under this Act.
(3) The rules may make different provisions for different cases.
(4) The rules must provide for the publication by the Registrar of a
journal (called in this Act the journal) containing particulars of
applications for and grants of patents, particulars of application for
and the registration of patent agents and foreign patent agents, and of
other proceedings under this Act.
[15/2012]
(5) The rules may require or authorise the Registrar to make
arrangements for the publication of reports of cases relating to patents
decided by the Registrar or by any court or body whether in
Singapore or elsewhere.
Forms and directions of Registrar
115A. The Minister may make rules for the publication by the
Registrar of —
(a) the forms to be used for any purpose relating to —
(i) any application for or grant of a patent;
(ii) any proceedings before the Registrar under this Act
or the rules; or
(iii) any other matter under this Act or the rules; and
(b) the practice directions issued by the Registrar.
Fees
116.—(1) There must be paid in respect of applications, grants,
registrations and other matters under this Act such fees as may be
prescribed.
[15/2012]
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
140
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


(2) All fees collected must be paid into the funds of the Office.
[15/2012]
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply to fees paid under section 85
which are to be forwarded to the International Bureau.
[15/2012]
Amendment of Schedule
116A.—(1) The Minister may, by order in the Gazette, amend the
Schedule.
[4/2014]
(2) The Minister may prescribe in an order amending the Schedule
such transitional provisions as may be necessary or expedient.
[4/2014]
Transitional provisions
117.—(1) Where an application has been made under section 3 of
the repealed Registration of United Kingdom Patents Act (Cap. 271,
1985 Revised Edition) before 23 February 1995, the Registrar may
issue a certificate of registration under section 5 of that Act after that
date as if that Act had not been repealed.
(2) Where a patent has been granted under the United Kingdom
Patents Act 1977 not earlier than 36 months before, or not later than
12 months after, 23 February 1995, the proprietor of the patent may,
within a period of 24 months from that date, make an application for a
certificate of registration and the Registrar may issue a certificate on
such application as if the Registration of United Kingdom Patents Act
had not been repealed.
(3) Any certificate of registration issued under section 5 of the
repealed Registration of United Kingdom Patents Act and is in force
immediately before 23 February 1995, or issued after that date by
virtue of subsection (1) or (2) continues in force and the patent to
which the certificate relates is treated for the purposes of this Act as if
it were a patent under this Act granted pursuant to an application
made under this Act and the proprietor of the patent accordingly has
the same rights, remedies, privileges and obligations and subject to
the same conditions (including the payment of any fee prescribed
Patents Act 1994
141
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


under section 36), as the proprietor of a patent under this Act subject
to the following modifications:
(a) the term of the patent dates from the date of the patent in
the United Kingdom and the patent remains, subject to this
Act, in force for 20 years from that date and only so long as
the patent has not been revoked in the United Kingdom
before 17 October 2001;
(b) such other modifications as may be prescribed.
(4) A patent to which subsection (3) applies is treated for the
purposes of sections 14(3) and 17(2) as being granted on an
application with a date of filing under this Act and published under
this Act.
(5) The date of filing an application for a patent as mentioned in
subsection (4), and the priority date of an invention or other matter
contained in that application, is to be determined in accordance with
the provisions of the United Kingdom Patents Act 1949 or 1977, as
the case may be.
(6) Where an act is commenced before 23 February 1995 and
continues to be done on or after that date, then, if it would not, under
the law in force immediately before that date, amount to an
infringement of a patent or the privileges or rights arising under a
specification, its continuance on or after that date does not amount to
the infringement of that patent or those privileges or rights.
THE SCHEDULE
Sections 2(1) and 116A
SUBSTANCES WHICH ARE NOT PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS
1. In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires —
“Chinese proprietary medicine” means any medicinal product used in the
system of therapeutics according to the traditional Chinese method, that is
to say, any medicinal product —
(a) which has been manufactured into a finished product;
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
142
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


THE SCHEDULE — continued
(b) which contains one or more active substances derived wholly
from any plant, animal or mineral, or any combination thereof;
and
(c) which is, or all of the active substances of which are, described
in the current edition of “A Dictionary of Chinese Pharmacy”
<<中药大辞典>> or “The Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia
Medica” <<本草纲目>>,
but does not include —
(d) any medicinal product to be administered by injection into a
human body; or
(e) any medicinal product which contains as an active substance
any chemically-defined isolated constituent of any plant, animal
or mineral, or any combination thereof;
“current edition”, in relation to any publication which describes a Chinese
proprietary medicine, means an edition which is current at the time the
Chinese proprietary medicine in question is sold or supplied, and includes
any amendment, addition or deletion made to that edition of the
publication up to that time;
“homoeopathic medicine” means any substance used in the system of
therapeutics in which a disease is treated by the use of minute amounts of
one or more substances which, in their undiluted forms, are capable of
producing in a healthy human being symptoms similar to those of the
disease being treated;
“medicated oil or balm” means any external medicated embrocation,
medicated cream, ointment or inhalant —
(a) which is used mainly for soothing purposes; and
(b) which contains one or more of the following substances as an
active ingredient or as active ingredients:
(i) any essential oil;
(ii) any fixed oil derived from a plant;
(iii) methyl salicylate;
(iv) menthol;
(v) camphor;
(vi) peppermint;
Patents Act 1994
143
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


THE SCHEDULE — continued
“quasi-medicinal product” means —
(a) any anti-dandruff preparation;
(b) any medicated cosmetic product for the treatment of pimples or
acne,
except
any
preparation
containing
etretinate
or
13-cis-retinoic acid;
(c) any medicated soap;
(d) any sweet for relieving coughs or throat irritations;
(e) any medicated plaster;
(f) any sunscreen or suntan preparation;
(g) any medicated beverage;
(h) any vitamin or nutritional preparation from any plant, animal or
mineral, or any combination thereof; or
(i) any medicated toothpaste;
“traditional medicine” means any medicinal product consisting of one or
more substances derived from any plant, animal or mineral, or any
combination thereof, but does not include the following:
(a) any medicinal product to be administered by injection into a
human body;
(b) any vaccine to be administered to a human being;
(c) any product derived from human blood;
(d) any item specified in the Poisons List in the Schedule to the
Poisons Act 1938;
(e) any Chinese proprietary medicine.
2. For the purposes of this Act, “pharmaceutical product” does not include —
(a) any traditional medicine;
(b) any homoeopathic medicine;
(c) any quasi-medicinal product;
(d) any raw material which is used as an ingredient in the preparation or
manufacture of any medicinal product; or
(e) any medicated oil or balm.
3. To avoid doubt, for the purposes of this Act, “pharmaceutical product” does
not include any substance —
Patents Act 1994
2020 Ed.
144
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


THE SCHEDULE — continued
(a) which is a type of food, a food additive or a food supplement; or
(b) which occurs naturally in any plant, animal or mineral.
[4/2014]
Patents Act 1994
145
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


LEGISLATIVE HISTORY
PATENTS ACT 1994
This Legislative History is a service provided by the Law Revision Commission
on a best-efforts basis. It is not part of the Act.
PICTORIAL OVERVIEW OF PREDECESSOR ACTS
LEGISLATIVE HISTORY DETAILS
PART 1
INVENTIONS ORDINANCE
(CHAPTER 158, 1936 REVISED EDITION)
1. Ordinance XII of 1871 — Inventions Ordinance, 1871
Bill
:
S.S.G.G. No. 22/1871
First Reading
:
23 May 1871
Second Reading
:
5 June 1871
Select Committee Report
:
Information not available
Notice of Amendments
:
13 November 1871
Third Reading
:
13 November 1871
Commencement
:
15 November 1871
2. 1920 Revised Edition — Ordinance No. 15 (Inventions)
Operation
:
28 November 1921
3. Ordinance 24 of 1922 — Ordinance No. 15 (Inventions) Amendment
Ordinance, 1922
Bill
:
G.N. No. 825/1922
First Reading
:
12 June 1922
Second Reading
:
14 August 1922
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Third Reading
:
11 September 1922
Commencement
:
24 September 1922
4. Ordinance 15 of 1924 — Inventions (Amendment) Ordinance, 1924
Bill
:
G.N. No. 1145/1924
First Reading
:
30 June 1924
Second Reading
:
15 September 1924
Third Reading
:
3 November 1924
Commencement
:
22 November 1924
5. 1926 Revised Edition — Ordinance No. 15 (Inventions)
Operation
:
1 August 1926
6. 1936 Revised Edition — Inventions Ordinance (Chapter 158)
Operation
:
1 September 1936
PART 2
PATENTS (COMPULSORY LICENSING) ACT
(CHAPTER 221, 1985 REVISED EDITION)
7. Act 12 of 1968 — Patents (Compulsory Licensing) Act, 1968
Bill
:
15/1968
First Reading
:
9 May 1968
Second and Third Readings
:
22 May 1968
Commencement
:
16 April 1969
8. 1970 Revised Edition — Patents (Compulsory Licensing) Act
(Chapter 196)
Operation
:
1 July 1971
9. 1985 Revised Edition — Patents (Compulsory Licensing) Act
(Chapter 221)
Operation
:
30 March 1987
ii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


PART 3
REGISTRATION OF UNITED KINGDOM PATENTS ACT
(CHAPTER 271, 1985 REVISED EDITION)
10. Ordinance 2 of 1937 — Registration of United Kingdom Patents
Ordinance, 1937
Bill
:
G.N. No. 290/1937
First Reading
:
15 February 1937
Second Reading
:
26 April 1937
Notice of Amendments
:
26 April 1937
Third Reading
:
26 April 1937
Commencement
:
10 May 1937
11. Ordinance 55 of 1941 — Registration of United Kingdom Patents
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1941
Bill
:
G.N. No. 2316/1941
First Reading
:
13 October 1941
Second and Third Readings
:
5 November 1941
Commencement
:
27 November 1941
12. Ordinance 2 of 1947 — Registration of United Kingdom Patents
(Amendment) Ordinance 1947
Bill
:
G.N. No. S 302/1946
First, Second and Third
Readings
:
9 January 1947
Commencement
:
31 January 1947
13. Ordinance 6 of 1949 — Registration of United Kingdom Patents
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1949
Bill
:
G.N. No. S 20/1949
First Reading
:
16 February 1949
Second and Third Readings
:
15 March 1949
Commencement
:
29 March 1949
14. Ordinance 10 of 1952 — Registration of United Kingdom Patents
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1952
Bill
:
2/1952
First Reading
:
19 February 1952
iii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Second and Third Readings
:
18 March 1952
Commencement
:
27 March 1952
15. Ordinance 8 of 1955 — Revised Edition of the Laws (Miscellaneous
Amendments) Ordinance, 1955
(Amendments made by section 2 read with item 29 of the Schedule to the
above Ordinance)
Bill
:
45/1954
First Reading
:
14 December 1954
Second and Third Readings
:
28 January 1955
Commencement
:
4 February 1955 (section 2 read with
item 29 of the Schedule)
16. 1955 Revised Edition — Registration of United Kingdom Patents
Ordinance (Chapter 181)
Operation
:
1 July 1956
17. Ordinance 4 of 1959 — Registration of United Kingdom Patents
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1959
Bill
:
182/1958
First Reading
:
3 December 1958
Second and Third Readings
:
22 January 1959
Commencement
:
20 February 1959
18. Ordinance 72 of 1959 — Transfer of Powers (No. 2) Ordinance, 1959
(Amendments made by section 3 read with the Second Schedule to the above
Ordinance)
Bill
:
31/1959
First Reading
:
22 September 1959
Second Reading
:
11 November 1959
Notice of Amendments
:
11 November 1959
Third Reading
:
11 November 1959
Commencement
:
20 November 1959 (section 3 read
with the Second Schedule)
19. G.N. No. S (N.S.) 179/1959 — Singapore Constitution (Modification of
Laws) (No. 5) Order, 1959
Commencement
:
20 November 1959
iv
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


20. Act 48 of 1970 — Statute Law Revision Act, 1970
(Amendments made by section 3 read with the Second Schedule to the above
Act)
Bill
:
36/1970
First Reading
:
2 September 1970
Second Reading
:
4 November 1970
Notice of Amendments
:
4 November 1970
Third Reading
:
4 November 1970
Commencement
:
11 December 1970 (section 3 read
with the Second Schedule)
21. 1970 Revised Edition — Registration of United Kingdom Patents Act
(Chapter 199)
Operation
:
1 July 1971
22. 1985 Revised Edition — Registration of United Kingdom Patents Act
(Chapter 271)
Operation
:
30 March 1987
PART 4
PATENTS ACT 1994
(2020 REVISED EDITION)
23. Act 21 of 1994 — Patents Act 1994
Bill
:
4/1994
First Reading
:
23 February 1994
Second Reading
:
21 March 1994
Select Committee Report
:
Parl. 5 of 1994
Third Reading
:
31 October 1994
Commencement
:
23 February 1995 (except sections 104
and 105(1) to (6), (8) and (9))
24. 1995 Revised Edition — Patents Act (Chapter 221)
Operation
:
15 March 1995
25. Act 40 of 1995 — Patents (Amendment) Act 1995
Bill
:
31/1995
First Reading
:
27 September 1995
v
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Second and Third Readings
:
1 November 1995
Commencement
:
1 January 1996
26. Act 3 of 2001 — Intellectual Property Office of Singapore Act 2001
(Amendments made by section 38(1) read with item (5) of the Fourth
Schedule to the above Act)
Bill
:
1/2001
First Reading
:
12 January 2001
Second and Third Readings
:
22 February 2001
Commencement
:
1 April 2001 (section 38(1) read with
item (5) of the Fourth Schedule)
27. Act 30 of 2001 — Patents (Amendment) Act 2001
Bill
:
28/2001
First Reading
:
25 July 2001
Second and Third Readings
:
13 August 2001
Commencement
:
17 October 2001 (except sections 6
and 14)
2 January 2002 (section 14)
25 February 2002 (section 6)
28. 2002 Revised Edition — Patents Act (Chapter 221)
Operation
:
31 July 2002
29. G.N. No. S 622/2002 — Revised Edition of the Laws (Patents Act)
(Rectification) Order 2002
Operation
:
31 July 2002
30. Act 19 of 2004 — Patents (Amendment) Act 2004
Bill
:
19/2004
First Reading
:
19 May 2004
Second and Third Readings
:
15 June 2004
Commencement
:
1 July 2004
31. 2005 Revised Edition — Patents Act (Chapter 221)
Operation
:
31 July 2005
32. Act 2 of 2007 — Statutes (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2007
(Amendments made by section 6 of the above Act)
Bill
:
14/2006
vi
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


First Reading
:
8 November 2006
Second and Third Readings
:
22 January 2007
Commencement
:
1 April 2007 (section 6)
33. Act 18 of 2008 — Patents (Amendment) Act 2008
Bill
:
15/2008
First Reading
:
21 July 2008
Second and Third Readings
:
25 August 2008
Commencement
:
1 December 2008
34. Act 20 of 2009 — Legal Profession (Amendment) Act 2009
(Amendments made by section 14 of the above Act)
Bill
:
13/2009
First Reading
:
20 July 2009
Second and Third Readings
:
18 August 2009
Commencement
:
9 October 2009 (section 14)
35. Act 15 of 2012 — Patents (Amendment) Act 2012
Bill
:
13/2012
First Reading
:
14 May 2012
Second and Third Readings
:
10 July 2012
Commencement
:
8 April 2013 (section 2(b))
14 February 2014 (sections 2(a), (c),
(e), (f) and (g) and 3 to 28)
1 November 2016 (section 2(d))
36. Act 4 of 2014 — Statutes (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2014
(Amendments made by section 7 of the above Act)
Bill
:
25/2013
First Reading
:
11 November 2013
Second and Third Readings
:
21 January 2014
Commencement
:
10 March 2014 (section 7 except
section 7(1)(c) and (d))
30 April 2014 (section 7(1)(c) and (d))
37. Act 16 of 2016 — Statutes (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2016
(Amendments made by section 26 of the above Act)
Bill
:
15/2016
vii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


First Reading
:
14 April 2016
Second and Third Readings
:
9 May 2016
Commencement
:
10 June 2016 (section 26)
38. Act 18 of 2017 — Patents (Amendment) Act 2017
Bill
:
6/2017
First Reading
:
6 February 2017
Second and Third Readings
:
28 February 2017
Commencement
:
30 October 2017
39. Act 40 of 2019 — Supreme Court of Judicature (Amendment) Act 2019
(Amendments made by section 28(1) read with item 112 of the Schedule to the
above Act)
Bill
:
32/2019
First Reading
:
7 October 2019
Second Reading
:
5 November 2019
Notice of Amendments
:
5 November 2019
Third Reading
:
5 November 2019
Commencement
:
2 January 2021 (section 28(1) read
with item 112 of the Schedule)
40. Act 22 of 2021 — Copyright Act 2021
(Amendments made by section 507(5) of the above Act)
Bill
:
17/2021
First Reading
:
6 July 2021
Second Reading
:
13 September 2021
Notice of Amendments
:
13 September 2021
Third Reading
:
13 September 2021
Commencement
:
21 November 2021 (section 507(5))
41. 2020 Revised Edition — Patents Act 1994
Operation
:
31 December 2021
42. Act 33 of 2021 — Judicial Service (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2021
Bill
:
30/2021
First Reading
:
4 October 2021
viii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Second and Third Readings
:
3 November 2021
Commencement
:
14 January 2022
43. Act 25 of 2021 — Courts (Civil and Criminal Justice) Reform Act 2021
Bill
:
18/2021
First Reading
:
26 July 2021
Second and Third Readings
:
14 September 2021
Commencement
:
1 April 2022
44. Act 7 of 2022 — Intellectual Property (Amendment) Act 2022
(Amendments made by Part 2 of the above Act)
Bill
:
39/2021
First Reading
:
1 November 2021
Second and Third Readings
:
12 January 2022
Commencement
:
26 May 2022
45. Act 23 of 2019 — Intellectual Property (Dispute Resolution) Act 2019
(Amendments made by Part 5 of the above Act)
Bill
:
17/2019
First Reading
:
8 July 2019
Second and Third Readings
:
5 August 2019
Commencement
:
21 November 2019 (sections 9, 12,
20(b), (e) and (i), 21 and 22(c) and (d))
1 October 2021 (sections 10, 11,
22(a), 23 and 24(a))
1 April 2022
10 June 2022
46. Act 31 of 2022 — Statutes (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2022
(Amendments made by the above Act)
Bill
:
24/2022
First Reading
:
12 September 2022
Second and Third Readings
:
3 October 2022
Commencement
:
1 November 2022
ix
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Abbreviations
.
(updated on 29 August 2022)
G.N.
Gazette Notification
G.N. Sp.
Gazette Notification (Special Supplement)
L.A.
Legislative Assembly
L.N.
Legal Notification (Federal/Malaysian)
M.
Malaya/Malaysia
(including
Federated
Malay
States,
Malayan Union, Federation of Malaya and Federation of
Malaysia)
Parl.
Parliament
S
Subsidiary Legislation
S.I.
Statutory Instrument (United Kingdom)
S (N.S.)
Subsidiary Legislation (New Series)
S.S.G.G.
Straits Settlements Government Gazette
S.S.G.G. (E)
Straits Settlements Government Gazette (Extraordinary)
x
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


COMPARATIVE TABLE
PATENTS ACT 1994
This Act has undergone renumbering in the 2020 Revised Edition. This
Comparative Table is provided to help readers locate the corresponding provisions
in the last Revised Edition.
2020 Ed.
2005 Ed.
14—(6)
14—(5A)
(7)
(5B)
(8)
(5C)
(9)
(6)
(10)
(7)
(11)
(8)
17—(3)
17—(2A)
(4)
(2B)
(5)
(2C)
(6)
(2D)
(7)
(3)
(8)
(4)
(9)
(5)
(10)
(6)
29—(12)
29—(11A)
(13)
(12)
(14)
(13)
(15)
(14)
29B—(6)
29B—(5A)
(7)
(6)
—
36A—(13) [Deleted by Act 15 of 2012]
—
(14) [Deleted by Act 15 of 2012]
—
40—(2) [Deleted by Act 15 of 2012]
40—(2)
(3)
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


2020 Ed.
2005 Ed.
42—(4)
42—(3A)
(5)
(4)
(6)
(5)
(7)
(6)
—
(7) [Deleted by Act 15 of 2012]
56—(2)
56—(1A)
(3)
(2)
(4)
(3)
(5)
(4)
60—(2)
60—(1A)
(3)
(2)
(4)
(3)
66—(6)
66—(5A)
(7)
(6)
84—(2)
84—(1A)
(3)
(2)
(4)
(3)
(5)
(4)
—
86—(4) [Deleted by Act 2 of 2007]
86—(4)
(5)
(5)
(6)
(6)
(7)
ii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/11/2022


Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Published by the Minister of Justice at the following address:
http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca
Publié par le ministre de la Justice à l’adresse suivante :
http://lois-laws.justice.gc.ca
CANADA
CONSOLIDATION
Patent Act
CODIFICATION
Loi sur les brevets
R.S.C., 1985, c. P-4
L.R.C. (1985), ch. P-4


Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
OFFICIAL STATUS
OF CONSOLIDATIONS
CARACTÈRE OFFICIEL
DES CODIFICATIONS
Subsections 31(1) and (2) of the Legislation Revision and
Consolidation Act, in force on June 1, 2009, provide as
follows:
Les paragraphes 31(1) et (2) de la Loi sur la révision et la
codification des textes législatifs, en vigueur le 1er juin
2009, prévoient ce qui suit :
Published consolidation is evidence
Codifications comme élément de preuve
31 (1) Every copy of a consolidated statute or consolidated
regulation published by the Minister under this Act in either
print or electronic form is evidence of that statute or regula-
tion and of its contents and every copy purporting to be pub-
lished by the Minister is deemed to be so published, unless
the contrary is shown.
31 (1) Tout exemplaire d'une loi codifiée ou d'un règlement
codifié, publié par le ministre en vertu de la présente loi sur
support papier ou sur support électronique, fait foi de cette
loi ou de ce règlement et de son contenu. Tout exemplaire
donné comme publié par le ministre est réputé avoir été ainsi
publié, sauf preuve contraire.
Inconsistencies in Acts
Incompatibilité — lois
(2) In the event of an inconsistency between a consolidated
statute published by the Minister under this Act and the origi-
nal statute or a subsequent amendment as certified by the
Clerk of the Parliaments under the Publication of Statutes
Act, the original statute or amendment prevails to the extent
of the inconsistency.
(2) Les dispositions de la loi d'origine avec ses modifications
subséquentes par le greffier des Parlements en vertu de la Loi
sur la publication des lois l'emportent sur les dispositions in-
compatibles de la loi codifiée publiée par le ministre en vertu
de la présente loi.
LAYOUT
The notes that appeared in the left or right margins are
now in boldface text directly above the provisions to
which they relate. They form no part of the enactment,
but are inserted for convenience of reference only.
MISE EN PAGE
Les notes apparaissant auparavant dans les marges de
droite ou de gauche se retrouvent maintenant en carac-
tères gras juste au-dessus de la disposition à laquelle
elles se rattachent. Elles ne font pas partie du texte, n’y
figurant qu’à titre de repère ou d’information.
NOTE
NOTE
This consolidation is current to June 20, 2024. The last
amendments came into force on June 30, 2021. Any
amendments that were not in force as of June 20, 2024
are set out at the end of this document under the heading
“Amendments Not in Force”.
Cette codification est à jour au 20 juin 2024. Les dernières
modifications sont entrées en vigueur le 30 juin 2021.
Toutes modifications qui n'étaient pas en vigueur
au 20 juin 2024 sont énoncées à la fin de ce document
sous le titre « Modifications non en vigueur ».


Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
iii
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
TABLE OF PROVISIONS
TABLE ANALYTIQUE
An Act respecting patents of invention
Loi concernant les brevets d’invention
Short Title
Titre abrégé
1
Short title
1
Titre abrégé
Interpretation
Définitions
2
Definitions
2
Définitions
Her Majesty
Sa Majesté
2.1
Binding on Her Majesty
2.1
Obligation de Sa Majesté
Patent Office and Officers
Bureau des brevets et fonctionnaires
3
Patent Office
3
Bureau des brevets
4
Commissioner of Patents
4
Commissaire aux brevets
5
Assistant Commissioner
5
Sous-commissaire
6
Staff
6
Personnel
7
Officers of Patent Office not to deal in patents, etc.
7
Aucune vente ni aucun achat de brevets, etc.
8.1
Electronic form and means
8.1
Moyens et forme électroniques
9
Destroyed or lost patents
9
Perte ou destruction de brevets
10
Inspection by the public
10
Consultation des documents
Rules and Regulations
Règles et règlements
12
Rules and regulations
12
Règles et règlements
Seal
Sceau
13
Seal of office
13
Sceau du Bureau
Proof of Patents
Preuve des brevets
14
Certified copies of patents as evidence
14
Copies certifiées de brevets admises en preuve
Patent Agents
Agents de brevets
16.1
Privileged communication
16.1
Communication protégée
Appeals
Appels
17
Practice on appeals
17
Pratique d’appel
18
Notice on appeal
18
Avis d’appel


Patent
Brevets
TABLE OF PROVISIONS
TABLE ANALYTIQUE
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
iv
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Use of Patents by Government
Usages de brevets par le
gouvernement
19
Government may apply to use patented invention
19
Demande d’usage d’une invention brevetée par le
gouvernement
19.1
Conditions for authorizing use
19.1
Conditions préalables
19.2
Appeal
19.2
Appel
19.3
Regulations
19.3
Règlements
19.4
Application by Minister
19.4
Demande du ministre
Government Owned Patents
Brevets appartenant au
gouvernement
20
Assignment to Minister of National Defence
20
Cession au ministre de la Défense nationale
21
Agreement between Canada and other government
21
Accord entre le Canada et un autre gouvernement
Use of Patents for International
Humanitarian Purposes to Address
Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins
humanitaires internationales en vue
de remédier aux problèmes de santé
publique
21.01
Purpose
21.01
Objet
21.02
Definitions
21.02
Définitions
21.03
Amending Schedules
21.03
Modification des annexes
21.04
Authorization
21.04
Autorisation
21.05
Form and content of authorization
21.05
Forme et contenu de l’autorisation
21.06
Disclosure of information on website
21.06
Affichage sur site Internet
21.07
Export notice
21.07
Avis d’exportation
21.08
Royalty
21.08
Redevances
21.09
Duration
21.09
Durée de l’autorisation
21.1
Use is non-exclusive
21.1
Usage non exclusif
21.11
Authorization is non-transferable
21.11
Autorisation incessible
21.12
Renewal
21.12
Renouvellement de l’autorisation
21.13
Termination
21.13
Expiration de l’autorisation
21.14
Termination by Federal Court
21.14
Cour fédérale
21.15
Notice to patentee
21.15
Avis
21.16
Obligation to provide copy of agreement
21.16
Obligation de fournir une copie de l’accord
21.17
Application when agreement is commercial in nature
21.17
Demande – accord de nature commerciale
21.18
Advisory committee
21.18
Comité consultatif
21.19
Website for notices to Canada
21.19
Établissement d’un site Internet
21.2
Review
21.2
Examen


Patent
Brevets
TABLE OF PROVISIONS
TABLE ANALYTIQUE
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
v
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Patents Relating to Nuclear Energy
Brevets liés à l’énergie nucléaire
22
Communication to Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission
22
Communication à la Commission canadienne de sûreté
nucléaire
General
Dispositions générales
23
Patented invention in vessels, aircraft, etc., of any
country
23
Usage d’une invention brevetée, sur navires, aéronefs,
etc. d’un pays
25
Cost of proceedings before the court
25
Frais de procédure devant le tribunal
26
Annual report
26
Rapport annuel
Application for Patents
Demandes de brevets
27
Commissioner may grant patents
27
Délivrance de brevet
27.01
Reference to previously filed application
27.01
Renvoi à une demande déposée antérieurement
27.1
Maintenance fees
27.1
Taxes pour maintenir une demande en état
28
Filing date
28
Date de dépôt
28.01
Addition to specification or addition of drawing to
application
28.01
Ajout d’éléments au mémoire descriptif ou d’un dessin
28.1
Claim date
28.1
Date de la revendication
28.2
Subject-matter of claim must not be previously disclosed
28.2
Objet non divulgué
28.3
Invention must not be obvious
28.3
Objet non évident
28.4
Request for priority
28.4
Demande de priorité
Joint Applications
Demandes collectives
31
Effect of refusal of a joint inventor to proceed
31
Effet du refus par un inventeur conjoint de poursuivre la
demande
Improvements
Perfectionnement
32
Improvements
32
Perfectionnement
Filing of Prior Art
Dossier d’antériorité
34.1
Filing
34.1
Dépôt
Examination
Examen
35
Request for examination
35
Requête d’examen
Divisional Applications
Demandes divisionnaires
36
Patent for one invention only
36
Brevet pour une seule invention
Biological Materials
Matières biologiques
38.1
Biological material may be deposited
38.1
Matières biologiques


Patent
Brevets
TABLE OF PROVISIONS
TABLE ANALYTIQUE
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
vi
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Amendments to Specifications and
Drawings
Modification du mémoire descriptif et
des dessins
38.2
Amendments to specifications and drawings
38.2
Modification du mémoire descriptif et des dessins
Refusal of Patents
Rejet des demandes de brevets
40
Refusal by Commissioner
40
Le commissaire peut refuser le brevet
41
Appeal to Federal Court
41
Appel à la Cour fédérale
Grant of Patents
Octroi des brevets
42
Contents of patent
42
Contenu du brevet
Form and Term of Patents
Forme et durée des brevets
43
Form and duration of patents
43
Délivrance
44
Term of patents based on applications filed on or after
October 1, 1989
44
Durée du brevet
45
Term of patents based on applications filed before
October 1, 1989
45
Durée de dix-sept ans
46
Maintenance fees
46
Taxes pour maintenir des droits en état
Reissue of Patents
Redélivrance de brevets
47
Issue of new or amended patents
47
Délivrance de brevets nouveaux ou rectifiés
Disclaimers
Renonciations
48
Patentee may disclaim anything included in patent by
mistake
48
Cas de renonciation
Re-examination
Réexamen
48.1
Request for re-examination
48.1
Demande
48.2
Establishment of re-examination board
48.2
Constitution d’un conseil de réexamen
48.3
Re-examination proceeding
48.3
Procédure de réexamen
48.4
Certificate of board
48.4
Constat
48.5
Appeals
48.5
Appel
Transfers
Transferts
49
Patent, application and right or interest in invention
49
Droits ou intérêts dans une invention, demandes de
brevets et brevets
52
Jurisdiction of Federal Court
52
Juridiction de la Cour fédérale
Standard-Essential Patents
Brevets essentiels à une norme
52.1
Subsequent patentee or holder bound
52.1
Titulaire subséquent lié — brevet ou certificat
52.2
Regulations
52.2
Règlements


Patent
Brevets
TABLE OF PROVISIONS
TABLE ANALYTIQUE
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
vii
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Legal Proceedings in Respect of
Patents
Procédures judiciaires relatives aux
brevets
53
Void in certain cases, or valid only for parts
53
Nul en certains cas, ou valide en partie seulement
53.1
Admissible in evidence
53.1
Admissibilité en preuve
Infringement
Contrefaçon
54
Jurisdiction of courts
54
Juridiction des tribunaux
55
Liability for patent infringement
55
Contrefaçon et recours
55.01
Limitation
55.01
Prescription
55.1
Burden of proof for patented process
55.1
Nouveau produit
55.11
Exception — third party rights
55.11
Exception — droits des tiers
55.2
Exception
55.2
Exception
55.3
Exception — experimentation
55.3
Exception — expérimentation
56
Exception — prior use
56
Exception — utilisation antérieure
57
Injunction may issue
57
Interdiction
58
Invalid claims not to affect valid claims
58
Revendications invalides
59
Defence
59
Défense
Impeachment
Invalidation
60
Impeachment of patents or claims
60
Invalidation de brevets ou de revendications
Judgments
Jugements
62
Judgment voiding patent
62
Jugement annulant un brevet
63
Appeal
63
Appel
Conditions
Conditions
65
Abuse of rights under patents
65
Abus des droits de brevets
66
Powers of Commissioner in cases of abuse
66
Pouvoirs du commissaire en cas d’abus
68
Contents of applications
68
Teneur des requêtes
69
Opposition and counter statement
69
Opposition et contre-mémoire
70
Licence deemed to be by deed
70
La licence considérée comme un acte
71
Appeal to Federal Court
71
Appel à la Cour fédérale
Abandonment and Reinstatement of
Applications
Abandon et rétablissement des
demandes
73
Deemed abandonment of applications
73
Abandon
73.1
Patent not invalid
73.1
Brevet non invalide
Offences and Punishment
Infractions et peines
75
Offences
75
Infractions et peines
76
False representations, false entries, etc.
76
Exposé faux, fausses inscriptions, etc.


Patent
Brevets
TABLE OF PROVISIONS
TABLE ANALYTIQUE
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
viii
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
76.1
Offence respecting patented medicines
76.1
Infractions relatives aux médicaments brevetés
Written Demands
Demandes écrites
76.2
Requirements
76.2
Exigences
76.3
Regulations
76.3
Règlements
Miscellaneous Matters
Dispositions diverses
78
Time period extended
78
Délai prorogé
Transitional Provisions
Dispositions transitoires
78.1
Definition of coming-into-force date
78.1
Définition de date d’entrée en vigueur
78.2
Filing date
78.2
Date de dépôt
78.21
Applications — no filing date
78.21
Demandes — aucune date de dépôt
78.22
Applications — filing date before October 1, 1989
78.22
Demandes — date de dépôt antérieure au 1er octobre
1989
78.3
Previous version of section 43 applies
78.3
Version antérieure de l’article 43
78.4
Applications — filing date October 1, 1989 to before
October 1, 1996
78.4
Demandes — date de dépôt le 1er octobre 1989 ou après
cette date mais avant le 1er octobre 1996
78.5
Applications — filing date October 1, 1996 to before
coming-into-force date
78.5
Demandes — date de dépôt le 1er octobre 1996 ou après
cette date mais avant la date d’entrée en vigueur
78.51
Abandonment before coming-into-force date
78.51
Abandon avant la date d’entrée en vigueur
78.52
Abandonment — requisition or notice before coming-
into-force date
78.52
Abandon — demande de l’examinateur faite ou avis
envoyé avant la date d’entrée en vigueur
78.53
Patents — filing date before October 1, 1989
78.53
Brevets — date de dépôt antérieure au 1er octobre 1989
78.54
Patents — filing date October 1, 1989 to before coming-
into-force date
78.54
Brevets — date de dépôt le  1er octobre 1989 ou après
cette date mais avant la date d’entrée en vigueur
78.55
Application of section 46 — item 31 of Schedule II to
Patent Rules
78.55
Application de l’article 46 — article 31 de l’annexe II des
Règles sur les brevets
78.56
Non-application of subsection 27.1(4) and section 73.1
78.56
Non-application du paragraphe 27.1(4) et de l’article 73.1
78.57
Reissued patents
78.57
Brevets redélivrés
78.58
Regulations
78.58
Règlements
78.6
Payment of prescribed fees
78.6
Paiement de taxes réglementaires
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Interpretation
Définitions
79
Definitions
79
Définitions
Pricing Information
Renseignements sur les prix
80
Pricing information, etc., required by regulations
80
Renseignements réglementaires à fournir sur les prix
81
Pricing information, etc. required by Board
81
Renseignements sur les prix exigés par le Conseil
82
Notice of introductory price
82
Avis du prix de lancement


Patent
Brevets
TABLE OF PROVISIONS
TABLE ANALYTIQUE
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
ix
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Excessive Prices
Prix excessifs
83
Order re excessive prices
83
Ordonnance relative aux prix excessifs
84
Compliance
84
Exécution
85
Factors to be considered
85
Facteurs de fixation du prix
86
Hearings to be public
86
Audiences publiques
87
Information, etc., privileged
87
Protection des renseignements
Sales and Expense Information
Renseignements sur les recettes et
dépenses
88
Sales and expense information, etc., to be provided
88
Obligations des titulaires de droits relatifs à un
médicament
89
Report
89
Rapport
Inquiries
Enquêtes
90
Inquiries
90
Enquêtes
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board
Conseil d’examen du prix des médicaments
brevetés
91
Establishment
91
Constitution
92
Advisory panel
92
Comité consultatif
93
Chairperson and Vice-chairperson
93
Président et vice-président
94
Staff
94
Personnel
95
Principal office
95
Siège
96
General powers, etc.
96
Attributions générales du Conseil
97
Proceedings
97
Procédures
98
Orders
98
Entrée en vigueur des ordonnances
99
Enforcement of orders
99
Assimilation
100
Report of Board
100
Rapport
Regulations
Règlements
101
Regulations
101
Règlements
Meetings with Minister
Réunions ministérielles
102
Meetings with Minister
102
Réunions ministérielles
Agreements with Provinces
Ententes avec les provinces
103
Agreements with provinces
103
Ententes avec les provinces
Supplementary Protection for
Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les
inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Interpretation
Définitions et interprétation
104
Definitions
104
Définitions
105
Interpretation
105
Interprétation


Patent
Brevets
TABLE OF PROVISIONS
TABLE ANALYTIQUE
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
x
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Application for Certificate of Supplementary
Protection
Demande de certificat de protection
supplémentaire
106
Application
106
Demande
107
Information to be provided
107
Renseignements à fournir
108
Order of priority — same authorization for sale
108
Ordre de priorité — même autorisation de mise en
marché
109
Applications with same authorization for sale and
priority
109
Demandes — même autorisation de mise en marché et
même priorité
110
Declaration of non-compliance
110
Déclaration de non-conformité
111
Expiry of pending applications
111
Expiration des demandes pendantes
112
Withdrawal
112
Retrait d’une demande
Certificate of Supplementary Protection
Certificat de protection supplémentaire
113
Issue of certificate
113
Délivrance d’un certificat
114
Contents of certificate
114
Contenu du certificat
115
Scope of supplementary protection
115
Portée de la protection supplémentaire
116
Validity
116
Validité
117
Revocation of certificate
117
Révocation du certificat
Transfer
Transfert
118
Transfer of patent
118
Transfert du brevet
Administrative Matters
Administration
119
Applications, fees and documents
119
Demandes, taxes et documents
120
Inspection by public
120
Consultation des documents
121
Copy in case of loss or destruction
121
Copie en cas de perte ou de destruction
122
Issuance of patent under section 47
122
Redélivrance d’un brevet en vertu de l’article 47
Use of Certificates of Supplementary
Protection by Government
Usage par le gouvernement de certificats
de protection supplémentaire
123
Application
123
Application
Legal Proceedings in Respect of
Certificates of Supplementary Protection
Procédures judiciaires relatives aux
certificats de protection supplémentaire
123.1
Admissible in evidence
123.1
Admissibilité en preuve
Infringement and Impeachment
Contrefaçon et invalidation
124
Action for infringement
124
Action en contrefaçon
125
Impeachment
125
Invalidation
126
Judgment voiding certificate or claim
126
Jugement annulant le certificat ou la revendication
Abuse of Rights
Abus de droits
127
Abuse of patent rights
127
Abus de droits de brevets
128
Provisions that apply
128
Application en conséquence
General
Dispositions générales
129
Electronic form and means
129
Moyens et forme électroniques


Patent
Brevets
TABLE OF PROVISIONS
TABLE ANALYTIQUE
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
xi
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
130
Certified copies as evidence
130
Copies certifiées admises en preuve
131
Costs of proceedings
131
Frais de procédure
132
Time limit deemed extended
132
Prorogation de délais
133
Service Fees Act
133
Loi sur les frais de service
134
Regulations
134
Règlements
SCHEDULE 1
ANNEXE 1
SCHEDULE 2
ANNEXE 2
SCHEDULE 3
ANNEXE 3
SCHEDULE 4
ANNEXE 4


Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
1
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
R.S.C., 1985, c. P-4
L.R.C., 1985, ch. P-4
An Act respecting patents of invention
Loi concernant les brevets d’invention
Short Title
Titre abrégé
Short title
Titre abrégé
1 This Act may be cited as the Patent Act.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 1.
1 Loi sur les brevets.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 1.
Interpretation
Définitions
Definitions
Définitions
2 In this Act, except as otherwise provided,
applicant includes an inventor and the legal representa-
tives of an applicant or inventor; (demandeur)
certificate of supplementary protection means a cer-
tificate issued by the Minister of Health under section
113; (certificat de protection supplémentaire)
claim date means the date of a claim in an application
for a patent in Canada, as determined in accordance with
section 28.1;
Commissioner means the Commissioner of Patents;
(commissaire)
country includes a WTO Member, as defined in subsec-
tion 2(1) of the World Trade Organization Agreement
Implementation Act; (pays)
filing date means the date on which an application for a
patent in Canada is filed, as determined in accordance
with section 28 or subsection 28.01(2) or 36(4); (date de
dépôt)
holder means, with respect to a certificate of supple-
mentary protection, the person for the time being that is
entitled to the benefit of the certificate; (titulaire)
invention means any new and useful art, process, ma-
chine, manufacture or composition of matter, or any new
2 Sauf disposition contraire, les définitions qui suivent
s’appliquent à la présente loi.
agent de brevets S’entend au sens de l’article 2 de la
Loi sur le Collège des agents de brevets et des agents de
marques de commerce. (patent agent)
brevet Lettres 
patentes 
couvrant 
une 
invention.
(patent)
breveté ou titulaire d’un brevet Le titulaire ayant pour
le moment droit à l’avantage d’un brevet. (patentee)
certificat de protection supplémentaire Le certificat
délivré par le ministre de la Santé en vertu de l’article
113. (certificate of supplementary protection)
commissaire Le commissaire aux brevets. (Commis-
sioner)
date de dépôt La date du dépôt d’une demande de bre-
vet déposée au Canada, déterminée conformément à l’ar-
ticle 28 ou aux paragraphes 28.01(2) ou 36(4). (filing
date)
date de priorité [Abrogée, 1993, ch. 15, art. 26]
demande de priorité La demande visée à l’article 28.4.
(request for priority)


Patent
Brevets
Interpretation
Définitions
Section 2
Article 2
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
2
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
and useful improvement in any art, process, machine,
manufacture or composition of matter; (invention)
legal representatives includes heirs, executors, admin-
istrators of the estate, liquidators of the succession,
guardians, curators, tutors, transferees and all other per-
sons claiming through applicants for patents and paten-
tees of inventions or through holders of certificates of
supplementary protection; (représentants légaux)
Minister means the Minister of Industry or such other
member of the Queen’s Privy Council for Canada as is
designated by the Governor in Council as the Minister for
the purposes of this Act; (ministre)
patent means letters patent for an invention; (brevet)
patent agent has the same meaning as in section 2 of
the College of Patent Agents and Trademark Agents Act;
(agent de brevets)
patentee means the person for the time being entitled
to the benefit of a patent; (breveté ou titulaire d’un bre-
vet)
predecessor in title includes any person through whom
an applicant for a patent in Canada claims the right to
the patent; (prédécesseur en droit)
prescribed means prescribed by rules or regulations of
the Governor in Council and, in the case of a fee, includes
a fee determined in the manner prescribed; (réglemen-
taire)
prescribed fee [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s.
1]
priority date [Repealed, 1993, c. 15, s. 26]
regulation includes a rule or form; (règlement)
regulation and rule [Repealed, 2017, c. 6, s. 32]
request for priority means a request under section 28.4;
(demande de priorité)
rule includes a regulation or form. (règle)
work on a commercial scale [Repealed, 1993, c. 44, s.
189]
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 2; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 1; 1992, c. 1, s. 145(F); 1993, c. 2,
s. 2, c. 15, s. 26, c. 44, s. 189; 1994, c. 47, s. 141; 1995, c. 1, s. 62; 2014, c. 20, s. 366(E);
2014, c. 39, s. 114; 2017, c. 6, ss. 32, 135; 2018, c. 27, s. 249.
demandeur Sont assimilés à un demandeur un inven-
teur et les représentants légaux d’un demandeur ou d’un
inventeur. (applicant)
exploitation sur une échelle commerciale [Abrogée,
1993, ch. 44, art. 189]
invention Toute réalisation, tout procédé, toute ma-
chine, fabrication ou composition de matières, ainsi que
tout perfectionnement de l’un d’eux, présentant le carac-
tère de la nouveauté et de l’utilité. (invention)
ministre Le ministre de l’Industrie ou tel autre membre
du Conseil privé de la Reine pour le Canada chargé par le
gouverneur en conseil de l’application de la présente loi.
(Minister)
pays Notamment un membre de l’OMC au sens du pa-
ragraphe 2(1) de la Loi de mise en œuvre de l’Accord sur
l’Organisation mondiale du commerce. (country)
prédécesseur en droit Est assimilée à un prédécesseur
en droit toute personne par l’intermédiaire de laquelle le
demandeur de brevet réclame le droit à celui-ci. (prede-
cessor in title)
règle S’entend notamment d’un règlement ou d’une for-
mule. (rule)
règlement S’entend notamment d’une règle ou d’une
formule. (regulation)
règlement et règle [Abrogée, 2017, ch. 6, art. 32]
réglementaire Prescrit par règle ou règlement du gou-
verneur en conseil; dans le cas où le terme qualifie une
taxe, s’entend en outre d’une taxe dont le montant est dé-
terminé 
selon 
les 
modalités 
réglementaires. (pre-
scribed)
représentants légaux Sont assimilés aux représentants
légaux les héritiers, exécuteurs testamentaires, adminis-
trateurs successoraux, liquidateurs de la succession, cu-
rateurs, tuteurs, cessionnaires, ainsi que toutes autres
personnes réclamant par l’intermédiaire de demandeurs
et de titulaires de brevets ou de certificats de protection
supplémentaire. (legal representatives)
taxe réglementaire [Abrogée, L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e sup-
pl.), art. 1]
titulaire Relativement à un certificat de protection sup-
plémentaire, la personne ayant pour le moment droit à
l’avantage du certificat. (holder)
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 2; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 1; 1992, ch. 1, art. 145(F);
1993, ch. 2, art. 2, ch. 15, art. 26, ch. 44, art. 189; 1994, ch. 47, art. 141; 1995, ch. 1, art.


Patent
Brevets
Interpretation
Définitions
Sections 2-4
Articles 2-4
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
3
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
62; 2014, ch. 20, art. 366(A); 2014, ch. 39, art. 114; 2017, ch. 6, art. 32 et 135; 2018, ch.
27, art. 249.
Her Majesty
Sa Majesté
Binding on Her Majesty
Obligation de Sa Majesté
2.1 This Act is binding on Her Majesty in right of
Canada or a province.
1993, c. 44, s. 190.
2.1 La présente loi lie Sa Majesté du chef du Canada ou
d’une province.
1993, ch. 44, art. 190.
Patent Office and Officers
Bureau des brevets et
fonctionnaires
Patent Office
Bureau des brevets
3 There shall be attached to the Department of Industry,
or to such other department of the Government of
Canada as may be determined by the Governor in Coun-
cil, an office called the Patent Office.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 3; 1992, c. 1, s. 145(F); 1995, c. 1, s. 63.
3 Est attaché au ministère de l’Industrie, ou à tout autre
ministère fédéral que le gouverneur en conseil peut dési-
gner, un bureau appelé le Bureau des brevets.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 3; 1992, ch. 1, art. 145(F); 1995, ch. 1, art. 63.
Commissioner of Patents
Commissaire aux brevets
4 (1) The Governor in Council may appoint a Commis-
sioner of Patents who shall, under the direction of the
Minister, exercise the powers and perform the duties
conferred and imposed on that officer by or pursuant to
this Act.
4 (1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut nommer un com-
missaire aux brevets. Sous la direction du ministre, celui-
ci exerce les pouvoirs et fonctions qui lui sont attribués
en conformité avec la présente loi.
Duties of Commissioner
Fonctions du commissaire
(2) The Commissioner shall receive all applications, fees,
and documents relating to patents, shall perform and do
all acts and things requisite for the granting and issuing
of patents, shall have the charge and custody of the
books, records and other things belonging to the Patent
Office and shall have, for the purposes of this Act, all the
powers that are or may be given by the Inquiries Act to a
commissioner appointed under Part II of that Act.
(2) Le commissaire reçoit les demandes, taxes et docu-
ments relatifs aux brevets et fait et exécute tous les actes
et choses nécessaires pour la concession et la délivrance
des brevets; il assure la gestion et la garde des livres, ar-
chives et autres choses appartenant au Bureau des bre-
vets, et, pour l’application de la présente loi, est revêtu de
tous les pouvoirs conférés ou qui peuvent être conférés
par la Loi sur les enquêtes à un commissaire nommé en
vertu de la partie II de cette loi.
Tenure of office and salary
Occupation de poste et traitement
(3) The Commissioner holds office during pleasure and
shall be paid such annual salary as may be determined by
the Governor in Council.
(3) Le commissaire occupe son poste à titre amovible et
reçoit le traitement annuel fixé par le gouverneur en
conseil.
Delegation
Délégation
(4) The Commissioner may, after consultation with the
Minister, delegate to any person he deems qualified any
of his powers, duties and functions under this Act, except
the power to delegate under this subsection.
(4) Le commissaire peut, après consultation avec le mi-
nistre, déléguer à toute personne qu’il estime compétente
les pouvoirs et fonctions que lui confère la présente loi,
sauf le pouvoir de déléguer prévu au présent paragraphe.
Appeal
Appel
(5) Any decision under this Act of a person authorized to
make the decision pursuant to subsection (4) may be
(5) Il peut être interjeté appel d’une décision prise en
vertu de la présente loi par une personne autorisée


Patent
Brevets
Patent Office and Officers
Bureau des brevets et fonctionnaires
Sections 4-8.1
Articles 4-8.1
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
4
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
appealed in the like manner and subject to the like condi-
tions as a decision of the Commissioner under this Act.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 4; 2014, c. 39, s. 115.
conformément au paragraphe (4) de la façon dont il peut
être interjeté appel d’une décision du commissaire prise
en vertu de la présente loi, et aux mêmes conditions.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 4; 2014, ch. 39, art. 115.
Assistant Commissioner
Sous-commissaire
5 (1) An Assistant Commissioner of Patents may be ap-
pointed in the manner authorized by law and shall be a
technical officer experienced in the administration of the
Patent Office.
5 (1) Un sous-commissaire aux brevets peut être nom-
mé de la manière autorisée par la loi. Il doit être un fonc-
tionnaire spécialiste possédant de l’expérience dans l’ad-
ministration du Bureau des brevets.
Absence, inability to act or vacancy
Absence, empêchement ou vacance
(2) If the Commissioner is absent or unable to act or the
office of Commissioner is vacant, the Assistant Commis-
sioner or, if at the same time the Assistant Commissioner
is absent or unable to act or the office of Assistant Com-
missioner is vacant, another officer designated by the
Minister may exercise the powers and shall perform the
duties of the Commissioner.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 5; 2015, c. 36, s. 50.
(2) En cas d’absence ou d’empêchement du commissaire
ou de vacance de son poste, le sous-commissaire ou, en
cas d’absence ou d’empêchement de celui-ci ou de va-
cance de son poste, un autre fonctionnaire désigné par le
ministre exerce les pouvoirs et fonctions du commissaire.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 5; 2015, ch. 36, art. 50.
Staff
Personnel
6 There may be appointed in the manner authorized by
law such principal examiners, examiners, associate ex-
aminers and assistant examiners, clerks, stenographers
and other assistants as are necessary for the administra-
tion of this Act.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 6.
6 Sont nommés, de la manière autorisée par la loi, les
examinateurs principaux, les examinateurs, les examina-
teurs associés, les examinateurs adjoints et les autres
personnes nécessaires à l’application de la présente loi.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 6.
Officers of Patent Office not to deal in patents, etc.
Aucune vente ni aucun achat de brevets, etc.
7 (1) No officer or employee of the Patent Office shall
buy, sell, acquire or traffic in any invention, patent, right
to a patent, certificate of supplementary protection or
right to such a certificate, or any interest in any of them,
and every purchase, sale, acquisition or transfer of any of
them, or of any interest in any of them, made by or to
such an officer or employee is void or, in Quebec, null.
7 (1) Il est interdit au personnel du Bureau des brevets
d’acheter, de vendre ou d’acquérir une invention, un bre-
vet ou un droit à un brevet, un certificat de protection
supplémentaire ou un droit à un tel certificat, ou tout in-
térêt afférent, ou d’en faire le commerce. Est nul tout
achat, toute vente, toute acquisition ou tout transfert
d’une invention, d’un brevet, d’un droit à un brevet, d’un
certificat de protection supplémentaire ou d’un droit à un
tel certificat, ou de tout intérêt afférent, auquel est partie
un membre du personnel du Bureau.
Restriction
Restriction
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a sale by an original
inventor or to an acquisition under the last will, or by the
intestacy, of a deceased person.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 7; 2017, c. 6, s. 33.
(2) Le paragraphe (1) ne s’applique pas à une vente ef-
fectuée par l’auteur original d’une invention, ni à une ac-
quisition par dernier testament ou par succession ab in-
testat d’une personne décédée.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 7; 2017, ch. 6, art. 33.
8 [Repealed, 2015, c. 36, s. 51]
8 [Abrogé, 2015, ch. 36, art. 51]
Electronic form and means
Moyens et forme électroniques
8.1 (1) Subject to the regulations, any document, infor-
mation or fee that is submitted to the Commissioner or
the Patent Office under this Act may be submitted in any
8.1 (1) Sous réserve des règlements, les documents,
renseignements ou taxes à transmettre au commissaire
ou au Bureau des brevets sous le régime de la présente loi


Patent
Brevets
Patent Office and Officers
Bureau des brevets et fonctionnaires
Sections 8.1-10
Articles 8.1-10
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
5
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
electronic form, and by any electronic means, that is
specified by the Commissioner.
peuvent lui être transmis sous la forme électronique —
ou par les moyens électroniques — que le commissaire
précise.
Collection, storage, etc.
Collecte, mise en mémoire, etc.
(2) Subject to the regulations, the Commissioner and the
Patent Office may use electronic means to create, collect,
receive, store, transfer, distribute, publish, certify or oth-
erwise deal with documents or information or to seal a
patent or other document.
(2) Sous réserve des règlements, le commissaire et le Bu-
reau des brevets peuvent utiliser des moyens électro-
niques pour créer, recueillir, recevoir, mettre en mé-
moire, transférer, diffuser, publier, certifier ou traiter de
quelque autre façon des documents ou des renseigne-
ments ou pour apposer un sceau sur les brevets ou autres
documents.
Definition of electronic
Moyens et formes optiques ou magnétiques
(3) In this section, electronic, in reference to a form or
means, includes optical, magnetic and other similar
forms or means.
1993, c. 15, s. 27; 2014, c. 39, s. 117.
(3) Au présent article, les moyens ou formes électro-
niques visent aussi, respectivement, les moyens ou
formes optiques ou magnétiques ainsi que les autres
moyens ou formes semblables.
1993, ch. 15, art. 27; 2014, ch. 39, art. 117.
8.2 [Repealed, 2014, c. 39, s. 117]
8.2 [Abrogé, 2014, ch. 39, art. 117]
Destroyed or lost patents
Perte ou destruction de brevets
9 If any patent is destroyed or lost, a certified copy may
be issued in lieu thereof on payment of the prescribed
fee.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 9.
9 En cas de destruction ou de perte d’un brevet, il peut
en être délivré une copie certifiée, en remplacement du
brevet qui aura été détruit ou perdu, sur paiement de la
taxe réglementaire.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 9.
Inspection by the public
Consultation des documents
10 (1) Subject to subsections (2) to (6) and section 20,
all patents, applications for patents and documents relat-
ing to patents or applications for patents that are in the
possession of the Patent Office shall be open to public in-
spection at the Patent Office, under any conditions that
may be prescribed.
10 (1) Sous réserve des paragraphes (2) à (6) et de l’ar-
ticle 20, les brevets, demandes de brevet et documents re-
latifs à ceux-ci que le Bureau des brevets a en sa posses-
sion 
peuvent 
y 
être 
consultés 
aux 
conditions
réglementaires.
Confidentiality period
Période de non-consultation
(2) Except with the approval of the applicant, an applica-
tion for a patent, or a document relating to the applica-
tion, shall not be open to public inspection before a confi-
dentiality period of 18 months has expired.
(2) Sauf sur autorisation du demandeur, une demande
de brevet et les documents relatifs à celle-ci ne peuvent
être consultés avant l’expiration d’une période de dix-
huit mois.
Beginning of confidentiality period
Calcul de la période
(3) The confidentiality period begins on the filing date of
the application or, where a request for priority has been
made in respect of the application, it begins on the earli-
est filing date of any previously regularly filed application
on which the request is based.
(3) La période se calcule à compter de la date de dépôt
de la demande de brevet ou, si une demande de priorité a
été présentée à l’égard de celle-ci, de la date de dépôt de
la première demande antérieurement déposée de façon
régulière sur laquelle la demande de priorité est fondée.


Patent
Brevets
Patent Office and Officers
Bureau des brevets et fonctionnaires
Sections 10-12
Articles 10-12
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
6
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Withdrawal of request
Demande de priorité retirée
(4) Where a request for priority is withdrawn on or be-
fore the prescribed date, it shall, for the purposes of sub-
section (3) and to the extent that it is withdrawn, be
considered never to have been made.
(4) Pour l’application du paragraphe (3), le retrait total
ou partiel d’une demande de priorité, au plus tard à la
date réglementaire, vaut présomption de non-présenta-
tion de la demande.
Withdrawn applications
Demande de brevet retirée
(5) An application shall not be open to public inspection
if it is withdrawn in accordance with the regulations on
or before the prescribed date.
(5) La demande de brevet qui est retirée, conformément
aux règlements, à la date réglementaire ou avant celle-ci
ne peut être consultée.
Prescribed date
Dates
(6) A prescribed date referred to in subsection (4) or (5)
must be no later than the date on which the confidentiali-
ty period expires.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 10; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 2; 1993, c. 15, s. 28; 2018, c. 27,
s. 187.
(6) Les dates réglementaires visées aux paragraphes (4)
et (5) ne peuvent être postérieures à la date de l’expira-
tion de la période visée au paragraphe (2).
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 10; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 2; 1993, ch. 15, art. 28;
2018, ch. 27, art. 187.
11 [Repealed, 2015, c. 36, s. 52]
11 [Abrogé, 2015, ch. 36, art. 52]
Rules and Regulations
Règles et règlements
Rules and regulations
Règles et règlements
12 (1) The Governor in Council may make rules or regu-
lations
(a) respecting the form and contents of applications
for patents;
(a.1) defining drawing for the purposes of this Act
and respecting the circumstances in which certain
drawings may be furnished as part of applications for
patents;
(a.2) respecting abstracts in applications for patents,
including authorizing the Commissioner to amend or
replace abstracts;
(a.3) respecting the consequences of a failure to com-
ply with a notice given under subsection 27(7);
(a.4) respecting the processing and examination of
applications for patents;
(b) respecting the form of the Register of Patents and
of the indexes thereto;
(c) respecting the registration of transmissions, dis-
claimers, judgments or other documents relating to a
patent or an application for a patent;
(c.1) respecting the recording of transfers of patents
or applications for patents;
12 (1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par règle ou règle-
ment :
a) régir la forme et le contenu des demandes de bre-
vet;
a.1) définir le terme dessin pour l’application de la
présente loi et régir les circonstances dans lesquelles
certains dessins peuvent être fournis en tant que par-
tie des demandes de brevet;
a.2) régir les abrégés contenus dans les demandes de
brevet, notamment en autorisant le commissaire à les
modifier ou à les remplacer;
a.3) régir les conséquences de l’omission de se
conformer à l’avis mentionné au paragraphe 27(7);
a.4) régir le traitement et l’examen des demandes de
brevet;
b) prévoir la forme du registre des brevets et de ses
index;
c) régir l’enregistrement de documents — transmis-
sions, renonciations, jugements ou autres — relatifs à
une demande de brevet ou à un brevet;
c.1) régir l’inscription des transferts de demandes de
brevet ou des transferts de brevets;


Patent
Brevets
Rules and Regulations
Règles et règlements
Section 12
Article 12
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
7
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(d) respecting the form and contents of any certificate
issued pursuant to this Act;
(e) prescribing the fees or the manner of determining
the fees that may be charged in respect of the filing of
applications for patents or the taking of other proceed-
ings under this Act or under any rule or regulation
made pursuant to this Act, or in respect of any services
or the use of any facilities provided thereunder by the
Commissioner or any person employed in the Patent
Office;
(f) prescribing the fees or the manner of determining
the fees that shall be paid to maintain in effect an ap-
plication for a patent or to maintain the rights accord-
ed by a patent;
(g) respecting the payment of any prescribed fees in-
cluding the time when and the manner in which such
fees shall be paid, the additional fees that may be
charged for the late payment of such fees and the cir-
cumstances in which any fees previously paid may be
refunded in whole or in part;
(g.1) authorizing the Commissioner to waive, subject
to any prescribed terms and conditions, the payment
of a fee if the Commissioner is satisfied that the cir-
cumstances justify it;
(h) for carrying into effect the terms of any treaty,
convention, arrangement or engagement that subsists
between Canada and any other country;
(i) for carrying into effect, notwithstanding anything
in this Act, the Patent Cooperation Treaty done at
Washington on June 19, 1970, including any amend-
ments, modifications and revisions made from time to
time to which Canada is a party;
(i.1) for carrying into effect the Patent Law Treaty,
done at Geneva on June 1, 2000, including any amend-
ments and revisions made from time to time to which
Canada is a party;
(j) [Repealed, 2018, c. 27, s. 250]
(j.001) [Repealed, 2018, c. 27, s. 259]
(j.002) [Repealed, 2018, c. 27, s. 259]
(j.01) respecting the circumstances in which an appli-
cant, patentee or other person may or must be repre-
sented in business before the Patent Office by a patent
agent whose licence is not suspended or by another
person;
d) prévoir la forme et le contenu des certificats déli-
vrés sous le régime de la présente loi;
e) prescrire les taxes qui peuvent être levées pour le
dépôt des demandes de brevet ou les autres formalités
d’application de la présente loi ou de ses règles ou rè-
glements ou pour des services ou l’utilisation d’instal-
lations qui y sont prévus par le commissaire ou par
tout fonctionnaire du Bureau des brevets ou prescrire
les modalités de la détermination de ces taxes;
f) prescrire les taxes à payer pour le maintien en état
des demandes de brevet ainsi que des droits conférés
par les brevets ou les modalités de leur détermination;
g) régir le paiement des taxes réglementaires, y com-
pris le moment et la manière selon laquelle ces taxes
doivent être payées, les surtaxes qui peuvent être le-
vées pour les paiements en souffrance, ainsi que les
circonstances dans lesquelles les taxes peuvent être
remboursées en tout ou en partie;
g.1) autoriser le commissaire à renoncer, si celui-ci
est convaincu que les circonstances le justifient et aux
conditions réglementaires, au versement de taxes;
h) rendre effectives les stipulations de tout traité,
convention, accord ou entente qui subsiste entre le
Canada et tout autre pays;
i) par dérogation aux autres dispositions de la pré-
sente loi, mettre en œuvre le Traité de coopération en
matière de brevets, conclu à Washington le 19 juin
1970, ainsi que les modifications et révisions éventuel-
lement apportées à celui-ci et auxquelles le Canada est
partie;
i.1) mettre en œuvre le Traité sur le droit des brevets,
conclu à Genève le 1er juin 2000, ainsi que les modifi-
cations et révisions subséquentes apportées à celui-ci
et auxquelles le Canada est partie;
j) [Abrogé, 2018, ch. 27, art. 250]
j.001) [Abrogé, 2018, ch. 27, art. 259]
j.002) [Abrogé, 2018, ch. 27, art. 259]
j.01) régir les circonstances dans lesquelles une per-
sonne — demandeur de brevet, breveté ou autre —
peut ou doit être représentée par un agent de brevets
dont le permis n’est pas suspendu ou une autre per-
sonne dans toute affaire devant le Bureau des brevets;
j.1) régir la fourniture — sous forme électronique ou
autre ou par des moyens électroniques — de docu-
ments ou de renseignements au commissaire ou au


Patent
Brevets
Rules and Regulations
Règles et règlements
Section 12
Article 12
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
8
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(j.1) respecting the submission, including in electron-
ic form and by electronic means, of documents and in-
formation to the Commissioner or the Patent Office,
including the time at which they are deemed to be re-
ceived by the Commissioner or the Patent Office;
(j.2) respecting the use of electronic means for the
purposes of subsection 8.1(2);
(j.3) respecting the withdrawal of an application for a
patent and, for the purposes of subsections 10(4) and
(5), prescribing the date, or the manner of determin-
ing the date, on or before which a request for priority
or an application for a patent is to be withdrawn;
(j.31) respecting additions to the specification and
additions of drawings for the purposes of subsection
28.01(1);
(j.4) respecting requests for priority, including
(i) the period within which priority is to be request-
ed,
(ii) the information and documents that are to be
submitted in support of requests for priority,
(iii) the period within which that information and
those documents are to be submitted,
(iv) the withdrawal of requests for priority, and
(v) the correction of requests for priority or of in-
formation or documents submitted in support of
them and the effect of corrections on the duration
of the confidentiality period referred to in subsec-
tion 10(3);
(j.41) respecting the application of subsection 28.4(6);
(j.5) respecting divisional applications, including the
time period within which divisional applications may
be filed and the persons who may file divisional appli-
cations;
(j.51) defining one invention for the purposes of sec-
tion 36;
(j.6) respecting the deposit of biological material for
the purposes of section 38.1;
(j.7) respecting the manner in which amendments
may be made to specifications or drawings furnished
as part of an application for a patent;
(j.71) respecting amendments to the specification or
drawings for the purposes of subsection 38.2(1);
Bureau des brevets, notamment le moment où ils sont
réputés les avoir reçus;
j.2) régir l’usage de moyens électroniques pour l’ap-
plication du paragraphe 8.1(2);
j.3) régir le retrait des demandes de brevet et, pour
l’application des paragraphes 10(4) et (5), préciser les
dates, ou leur mode de détermination, de retrait des
demandes de priorité et des demandes de brevet;
j.31) régir l’ajout d’éléments ou de dessins pour l’ap-
plication du paragraphe 28.01(1);
j.4) régir les demandes de priorité, notamment en ce
qui a trait :
(i) à leur délai de présentation,
(ii) aux renseignements et documents à fournir à
l’appui de ces demandes,
(iii) au délai de transmission de ces renseigne-
ments et documents,
(iv) au retrait de ces demandes,
(v) aux corrections à apporter à ces demandes, ren-
seignements ou documents et à l’effet de ces correc-
tions sur le calcul de la période visée au paragraphe
10(3);
j.41) régir l’application du paragraphe 28.4(6);
j.5) régir les demandes divisionnaires, notamment en
ce qui a trait à leur délai de présentation et aux per-
sonnes qui peuvent les déposer;
j.51) définir l’expression une seule invention pour
l’application de l’article 36;
j.6) régir le dépôt de matières biologiques visé à l’ar-
ticle 38.1;
j.7) déterminer les modalités de modification des mé-
moires descriptifs et des dessins faisant partie de la
demande de brevet;
j.71) régir la modification des dessins et du mémoire
descriptif pour l’application du paragraphe 38.2(1);
j.72) régir, pour l’application de l’alinéa 38.2(3)b), le
remplacement de tout ou partie du texte des dessins
ou du mémoire descriptif compris dans une demande
de brevet qui est dans une langue autre que le français
ou l’anglais par une traduction en français ou en an-
glais;


Patent
Brevets
Rules and Regulations
Règles et règlements
Section 12
Article 12
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
9
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(j.72) respecting the replacement of all or part of the
text matter of a specification or drawing contained in
an application for a patent that is in a language other
than English or French with a translation into English
or French, for the purposes of paragraph 38.2(3)(b);
(j.73) respecting the conditions set out in subsection
46(5), including the circumstances in which subpara-
graph 46(5)(a)(ii) and paragraph 46(5)(b) do not ap-
ply;
(j.74) establishing a period for the purposes of sub-
section 55.11(2);
(j.75) establishing a period for the purposes of sub-
sections 55.11(3), (7) and (9);
(j.76) respecting the reinstatement of applications for
patents under subsection 73(3), including the circum-
stances in which subparagraph 73(3)(a)(ii) and para-
graph 73(3)(b) do not apply;
(j.77) respecting communications between the Com-
missioner and any other person;
(j.8) authorizing the Commissioner to, during or after
the end of the time period fixed under this Act in re-
spect of any business before the Patent Office, for do-
ing anything, extend that time period, subject to any
prescribed terms and conditions, if the Commissioner
considers that the circumstances justify the extension;
(j.81) respecting the correction of obvious errors in
documents submitted to the Commissioner or the
Patent Office or in patents or other documents grant-
ed or issued under this Act, other than under sections
106 to 134, including
(i) the determination of what constitutes an obvi-
ous error, and
(ii) the effect of the correction;
(k) prescribing any other matter that by any provision
of this Act is to be prescribed; and
(l) generally, for carrying into effect the objects and
purposes of this Act or for ensuring the due adminis-
tration thereof by the Commissioner and other officers
and employees of the Patent Office.
j.73) régir les conditions prévues au paragraphe
46(5), notamment les circonstances dans lesquelles le
sous-alinéa 46(5)a)(ii) et l’alinéa 46(5)b) ne s’ap-
pliquent pas;
j.74) prévoir une période pour l’application du para-
graphe 55.11(2);
j.75) prévoir une période pour l’application des para-
graphes 55.11(3), (7) et (9);
j.76) régir le rétablissement des demandes de brevet
au titre du paragraphe 73(3), notamment les circons-
tances dans lesquelles le sous-alinéa 73(3)a)(ii) et l’ali-
néa 73(3)b) ne s’appliquent pas;
j.77) régir les communications entre le commissaire
et toute autre personne;
j.8) autoriser le commissaire à proroger, si celui-ci es-
time que les circonstances le justifient, aux conditions
réglementaires et même après son expiration, tout dé-
lai fixé sous le régime de la présente loi, relativement à
toute affaire devant le Bureau des brevets, pour l’ac-
complissement d’un acte;
j.81) régir la correction d’erreurs évidentes dans les
documents transmis au commissaire ou au Bureau des
brevets ou dans les brevets ou autres documents ac-
cordés ou délivrés sous le régime de la présente loi, à
l’exception des articles 106 à 134, notamment en ce qui
a trait :
(i) à ce qui constitue une erreur évidente,
(ii) aux effets de la correction;
k) prendre toute autre mesure d’ordre réglementaire
prévue par la présente loi;
l) prendre toute autre mesure d’application de la pré-
sente loi ou pour en assurer la mise en œuvre par le
commissaire et le personnel du Bureau des brevets.


Patent
Brevets
Rules and Regulations
Règles et règlements
Sections 12-16
Articles 12-16
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
10
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Effect
Effet
(2) Any rule or regulation made by the Governor in
Council has the same force and effect as if it had been en-
acted herein.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 12; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 3; 1993, c. 15, s. 29; 2014, c. 39,
s. 118; 2015, c. 36, s. 53; 2017, c. 6, ss. 34, 135, 136; 2018, c. 27, ss. 204, 250, 259.
(2) Toute règle ou tout règlement pris par le gouverneur
en conseil a la même force et le même effet que s’il avait
été édicté aux présentes.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 12; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 3; 1993, ch. 15, art. 29;
2014, ch. 39, art. 118; 2015, ch. 36, art. 53; 2017, ch. 6, art. 34, 135 et 136; 2018, ch. 27,
art. 204, 250 et 259.
Seal
Sceau
Seal of office
Sceau du Bureau
13 (1) The Commissioner shall cause a seal to be made
for the purposes of this Act and may cause to be sealed
therewith every patent and other instrument and copy
thereof issuing from the Patent Office.
13 (1) Le commissaire fait faire un sceau répondant aux
fins de la présente loi, et peut le faire apposer sur tous les
brevets et autres documents, et leurs copies, émanant du
Bureau des brevets.
Seal to be evidence
Le sceau fait foi
(2) Every court, judge and person shall take notice of the
seal of the Patent Office, shall admit the impressions
thereof in evidence in like manner as the impressions of
the Great Seal are admitted in evidence and shall take
notice of and admit in evidence, without further proof
and without production of the originals, all copies or ex-
tracts certified under the seal of the Patent Office to be
copies of or extracts from documents deposited in that
Office.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 13.
(2) Les tribunaux, juges et autres personnes admettent
d’office le sceau du Bureau des brevets et en admettent
les empreintes en preuve, au même titre que les em-
preintes du grand sceau. Il en va de même, sans autre
justification et sans production des originaux, pour
toutes les copies ou tous les extraits certifiés, sous le
sceau du Bureau des brevets, être des copies ou des ex-
traits conformes de documents déposés à ce Bureau.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 13.
Proof of Patents
Preuve des brevets
Certified copies of patents as evidence
Copies certifiées de brevets admises en preuve
14 In any action or proceeding respecting a patent au-
thorized to be had or taken in Canada under this Act, a
copy of any patent granted in any other country, or any
official document connected therewith, purporting to be
certified under the hand of the proper officer of the gov-
ernment of the country in which the patent has been ob-
tained, may be produced before the court or a judge
thereof, and the copy of the patent or document purport-
ing to be so certified may be admitted in evidence with-
out production of the original and without proof of the
signature or official character of the person appearing to
have signed it.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 14.
14 Dans toute poursuite ou procédure relative à un bre-
vet, autorisée à être prise ou exercée au Canada en vertu
de la présente loi, une copie de tout brevet accordé dans
un autre pays, ou de tout document officiel qui s’y rap-
porte, paraissant certifiée de la main du fonctionnaire
compétent du gouvernement du pays dans lequel ce bre-
vet a été obtenu, peut être produite au tribunal, ou à un
juge du tribunal, et la copie de ce brevet ou de ce docu-
ment paraissant être ainsi certifiée peut être admise en
preuve sans production de l’original et sans justification
de la signature ou du caractère officiel de la personne qui
paraît l’avoir signée.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 14.
Patent Agents
Agents de brevets
15 [Repealed, 2018, c. 27, s. 251]
15 [Abrogé, 2018, ch. 27, art. 251]
16 [Repealed, 2018, c. 27, s. 251]
16 [Abrogé, 2018, ch. 27, art. 251]


Patent
Brevets
Patent Agents
Agents de brevets
Section 16.1
Article 16.1
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
11
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Privileged communication
Communication protégée
16.1 (1) A communication that meets the following con-
ditions is privileged in the same way as a communication
that is subject to solicitor-client privilege or, in civil law,
to professional secrecy of advocates and notaries and no
person shall be required to disclose, or give testimony on,
the communication in a civil, criminal or administrative
action or proceeding:
(a) it is between a patent agent and their client;
(b) it is intended to be confidential; and
(c) it is made for the purpose of seeking or giving ad-
vice with respect to any matter relating to the protec-
tion of an invention.
16.1 (1) La communication qui remplit les conditions
ci-après est protégée de la même façon que le sont les
communications visées par le secret professionnel de
l’avocat ou du notaire et nul ne peut être contraint, dans
le cadre de toute action ou procédure civile, pénale ou ad-
ministrative, de la divulguer ou de fournir un témoignage
à son égard :
a) elle est faite entre un agent de brevets et son client;
b) elle est destinée à être confidentielle;
c) elle vise à donner ou à recevoir des conseils en ce
qui a trait à toute affaire relative à la protection d’une
invention.
Waiver
Renonciation
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the client expressly
or implicitly waives the privilege.
(2) Le paragraphe (1) ne s’applique pas si le client re-
nonce expressément ou implicitement à la protection de
la communication.
Exceptions
Exceptions
(3) Exceptions to solicitor-client privilege or, in civil law,
to professional secrecy of advocates and notaries apply to
a communication that meets the conditions set out in
paragraphs (1)(a) to (c).
(3) Les exceptions au secret professionnel de l’avocat ou
du notaire s’appliquent à la communication qui remplit
les conditions visées aux alinéas (1)a) à c).
Patent agents — country other than Canada
Agents de brevets d’un pays étranger
(4) A communication between an individual who is au-
thorized to act as the equivalent of a patent agent under
the law of a country other than Canada and that individu-
al’s client that is privileged under the law of that other
country and that would be privileged under subsection
(1) had it been made between a patent agent and their
client is deemed to be a communication that meets the
conditions set out in paragraphs (1)(a) to (c).
(4) La communication faite entre une personne physique
autorisée, en vertu du droit d’un pays étranger, à agir
dans un rôle équivalent à celui d’agent de brevets et son
client qui est protégée au titre de ce droit et qui serait
protégée au titre du paragraphe (1) si elle avait été faite
entre un agent de brevets et son client est réputée être
une communication qui remplit les conditions visées aux
alinéas (1)a) à c).
Individual acting on behalf of patent agent or client
Personnes physiques agissant au nom des agents de
brevets ou clients
(5) For the purposes of this section, a patent agent or an
individual who is authorized to act as the equivalent of a
patent agent under the law of a country other than
Canada includes an individual acting on their behalf and
a client includes an individual acting on the client’s be-
half.
(5) Pour l’application du présent article, l’agent de bre-
vets ou la personne physique qui est autorisée, en vertu
du droit d’un pays étranger, à agir dans un rôle équi-
valent à celui d’agent de brevets comprend la personne
physique agissant en son nom, et le client comprend la
personne physique agissant en son nom.
Application
Application
(6) This section applies to communications that are
made before the day on which this section comes into
force if they are still confidential on that day and to com-
munications that are made after that day. However, this
(6) Le présent article s’applique aux communications qui
sont faites avant la date d’entrée en vigueur de celui-ci si,
à cette date, elles sont toujours confidentielles et à celles
qui sont faites après cette date. Toutefois, il ne s’applique


Patent
Brevets
Patent Agents
Agents de brevets
Sections 16.1-19
Articles 16.1-19
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
12
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
section does not apply in respect of an action or proceed-
ing commenced before that day.
2015, c. 36, s. 54; 2018, c. 27, s. 252.
pas dans le cadre de toute action ou procédure commen-
cée avant cette date.
2015, ch. 36, art. 54; 2018, ch. 27, art. 252.
Appeals
Appels
Practice on appeals
Pratique d’appel
17 In all cases where an appeal is provided from the de-
cision of the Commissioner to the Federal Court under
this Act, the appeal shall be had and taken pursuant to
the Federal Courts Act and the rules and practice of that
Court.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 17; 2002, c. 8, s. 182.
17 Dans tous les cas où appel est prévu de la décision du
commissaire à la Cour fédérale en vertu de la présente
loi, cet appel est interjeté conformément à la Loi sur les
Cours fédérales et aux règles et à la pratique de ce tribu-
nal.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 17; 2002, ch. 8, art. 182.
Notice on appeal
Avis d’appel
18 (1) Whenever an appeal to the Federal Court from
the decision of the Commissioner is permitted under this
Act, notice of the decision shall be mailed by the Com-
missioner by registered letter addressed to the interested
parties or their respective agents.
18 (1) Lorsque, aux termes de la présente loi, il peut
être fait appel de sa décision devant la Cour fédérale, le
commissaire adresse, par courrier recommandé, un avis
de sa décision aux parties intéressées ou à leurs agents
respectifs.
Time for taking appeal
Délai
(2) The appeal shall be taken within three months after
the date of mailing of the notice, unless otherwise provid-
ed by or under this Act.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 18; 1993, c. 15, s. 30.
(2) L’appel doit être interjeté dans un délai de trois mois
à compter de la date de l’envoi de cet avis, à moins qu’un
autre délai ne soit fixé sous le régime de la présente loi.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 18; 1993, ch. 15, art. 30.
Use of Patents by Government
Usages de brevets par le
gouvernement
Government may apply to use patented invention
Demande d’usage d’une invention brevetée par le
gouvernement
19 (1) Subject to section 19.1, the Commissioner may,
on application by the Government of Canada or the gov-
ernment of a province, authorize the use of a patented in-
vention by that government.
19 (1) Sous réserve de l’article 19.1, le commissaire
peut, sur demande du gouvernement du Canada ou d’une
province, autoriser celui-ci à faire usage d’une invention
brevetée.
Terms of use
Modalités
(2) Subject to section 19.1, the use of the patented inven-
tion may be authorized for such purpose, for such period
and on such other terms as the Commissioner considers
expedient but the Commissioner shall settle those terms
in accordance with the following principles:
(a) the scope and duration of the use shall be limited
to the purpose for which the use is authorized;
(b) the use authorized shall be non-exclusive; and
(c) any use shall be authorized predominantly to sup-
ply the domestic market.
(2) Sous réserve de l’article 19.1, l’usage de l’invention
brevetée peut être autorisé aux fins, pour la durée et se-
lon les autres modalités que le commissaire estime
convenables. Celui-ci fixe ces modalités en tenant compte
des principes suivants :
a) la portée et la durée de l’usage doivent être limitées
aux fins auxquelles celui-ci a été autorisé;
b) l’usage ne peut être exclusif;
c) l’usage doit être avant tout autorisé pour l’approvi-
sionnement du marché intérieur.


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents by Government
Usages de brevets par le gouvernement
Sections 19-19.1
Articles 19-19.1
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
13
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Notice
Avis
(3) The Commissioner shall notify the patentee of any
use of the patented invention that is authorized under
this section.
(3) Le commissaire avise le breveté des usages de l’in-
vention brevetée qui sont autorisés sous le régime du
présent article.
Payment of remuneration
Paiement d’une rémunération
(4) Where the use of the patented invention is autho-
rized, the authorized user shall pay to the patentee such
amount as the Commissioner considers to be adequate
remuneration in the circumstances, taking into account
the economic value of the authorization.
(4) L’usager de l’invention brevetée paie au breveté la ré-
munération que le commissaire estime adéquate en l’es-
pèce, compte tenu de la valeur économique de l’autorisa-
tion.
Termination of authorization
Fin de l’autorisation
(5) The Commissioner may, on application by the paten-
tee and after giving all concerned parties an opportunity
to be heard, terminate the authorization if the Commis-
sioner is satisfied that the circumstances that led to the
granting of the authorization have ceased to exist and are
unlikely to recur, subject to such conditions as the Com-
missioner deems appropriate to protect the legitimate in-
terests of the authorized user.
(5) Le commissaire peut, sur demande du breveté et
après avoir donné aux intéressés la possibilité de se faire
entendre, mettre fin à l’autorisation s’il est convaincu que
les circonstances qui y ont conduit ont cessé d’exister et
ne se reproduiront vraisemblablement pas. Le cas
échéant, il doit toutefois veiller à ce que les intérêts légi-
times des personnes autorisées soient protégés de façon
adéquate.
Authorization not transferable
Incessibilité
(6) An authorization granted under this section is not
transferable.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 19; 1993, c. 44, s. 191.
(6) L’autorisation prévue au présent article est inces-
sible.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 19; 1993, ch. 44, art. 191.
Conditions for authorizing use
Conditions préalables
19.1 (1) The Commissioner may not authorize the use
of a patented invention under section 19 unless the appli-
cant establishes that
(a) it has made efforts to obtain from the patentee on
reasonable commercial terms and conditions the au-
thority to use the patented invention; and
(b) its efforts have not been successful within a rea-
sonable period.
19.1 (1) Le commissaire ne peut donner l’autorisation
visée à l’article 19 que si le demandeur lui démontre que :
a) d’une part, il s’est efforcé d’obtenir l’autorisation
auprès du breveté, à des conditions et modalités com-
merciales raisonnables;
b) d’autre part, ses efforts n’ont pas abouti dans un
délai raisonnable.
Exception
Exception
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in cases of national
emergency or extreme urgency or where the use for
which the authorization is sought is a public non-com-
mercial use.
(2) Le paragraphe (1) ne s’applique pas dans les cas de
situation nationale critique ou d’extrême urgence ou
dans les cas où l’autorisation est demandée à des fins pu-
bliques non commerciales.
Prescribed uses
Usages prévus par règlement
(3) The Commissioner may not, under section 19, autho-
rize any use that is a prescribed use unless the proposed
user complies with the prescribed conditions.
(3) Le commissaire ne peut s’appuyer sur l’article 19
pour autoriser des usages prévus par règlement, à moins
que l’usager éventuel ne respecte les conditions régle-
mentaires.


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents by Government
Usages de brevets par le gouvernement
Sections 19.1-19.4
Articles 19.1-19.4
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
14
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Limitation on use of semi-conductor technology
Limitation — semi-conducteurs
(4) The Commissioner may not, under section 19, autho-
rize any use of semi-conductor technology other than a
public non-commercial use.
1993, c. 44, s. 191; 1994, c. 47, s. 142.
(4) Le commissaire ne peut s’appuyer sur l’article 19
pour autoriser l’usage de la technologie des semi-conduc-
teurs, sauf dans les cas où l’autorisation est demandée à
des fins publiques non commerciales.
1993, ch. 44, art. 191; 1994, ch. 47, art. 142.
Appeal
Appel
19.2 Any decision made by the Commissioner under
section 19 or 19.1 is subject to appeal to the Federal
Court.
1993, c. 44, s. 191.
19.2 Toute décision rendue par le commissaire dans le
cadre des articles 19 ou 19.1 peut faire l’objet d’un appel
devant la Cour fédérale.
1993, ch. 44, art. 191.
Regulations
Règlements
19.3 (1) The Governor in Council may make regulations
for the purpose of implementing, in relation to patents,
Article 1720 of the Agreement.
19.3 (1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut prendre, concer-
nant les brevets, des règlements pour la mise en œuvre
de l’article 1720 de l’Accord.
Definition of Agreement
Définition de Accord
(2) In subsection (1), Agreement has the same meaning
as in subsection 2(1) of the North American Free Trade
Agreement Implementation Act.
1993, c. 44, s. 191.
(2) Au paragraphe (1), Accord s’entend au sens du para-
graphe 2(1) de la Loi de mise en œuvre de l’Accord de
libre-échange nord-américain.
1993, ch. 44, art. 191.
Application by Minister
Demande du ministre
19.4 (1) The Commissioner shall, on the application of
the Minister of Health, authorize the Government of
Canada and any person specified in the application to
make, construct, use and sell a patented invention to the
extent necessary to respond to the public health emer-
gency described in the application.
19.4 (1) Le commissaire doit, sur demande du ministre
de la Santé, autoriser le gouvernement du Canada et
toute personne précisée dans la demande à fabriquer, à
construire, à utiliser et à vendre une invention brevetée
dans la mesure nécessaire pour répondre à l’urgence de
santé publique indiquée dans la demande.
Contents of application
Contenu de la demande
(2) The application must
(a) set out the name of the patentee and the number,
as recorded in the Patent Office, of the patent issued
in respect of the patented invention;
(b) include a confirmation that the Chief Public
Health Officer, appointed under subsection 6(1) of the
Public Health Agency of Canada Act, believes that
there is a public health emergency that is a matter of
national concern;
(c) include a description of the public health emer-
gency; and
(d) specify a person, if any, that is to be authorized to
make, construct, use and sell the patented invention
for the purposes of responding to the public health
emergency.
(2) La demande :
a) indique le nom du breveté et le numéro d’enregis-
trement au Bureau des brevets du brevet délivré pour
l’invention brevetée;
b) contient une confirmation selon laquelle l’adminis-
trateur en chef de la santé publique nommé en appli-
cation du paragraphe 6(1) de la Loi sur l’Agence de la
santé publique du Canada estime qu’il y a une ur-
gence de santé publique d’intérêt national;
c) contient une description de l’urgence de santé pu-
blique;
d) précise, s’il y a lieu, toute personne qui sera autori-
sée à fabriquer, à construire, à utiliser et à vendre l’in-
vention brevetée en vue de répondre à l’urgence de
santé publique.


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents by Government
Usages de brevets par le gouvernement
Section 19.4
Article 19.4
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
15
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Cessation of effect
Expiration de l’autorisation
(3) The authorization ceases to have effect the earlier of
(a) the day on which the Minister of Health notifies
the Commissioner that the authorization is no longer
necessary to respond to the public health emergency
set out in the application, and
(b) one year after the day on which it is granted.
(3) L’autorisation cesse d’avoir effet à la date à laquelle le
ministre de la Santé avise le commissaire que l’autorisa-
tion n’est plus nécessaire pour répondre à l’urgence de
santé publique indiquée dans la demande, mais au plus
tard un an après la date à laquelle elle est accordée.
Notice
Avis
(4) The Commissioner shall notify the patentee of any
authorization that is granted under this section and pro-
vide them with the information referred to in subsection
(2).
(4) Le commissaire avise le breveté de toute autorisation
accordée sous le régime du présent article et lui fournit
les renseignements visés au paragraphe (2).
Payment of remuneration
Paiement d’une rémunération
(5) The Government of Canada and any person autho-
rized under subsection (1) shall pay the patentee any
amount that the Commissioner considers to be adequate
remuneration in the circumstances, taking into account
the economic value of the authorization and the extent to
which they make, construct, use and sell the patented in-
vention.
(5) Le gouvernement du Canada et toute personne auto-
risée sous le régime du paragraphe (1) paient au breveté
la rémunération que le commissaire estime adéquate en
l’espèce, compte tenu de la valeur économique de l’auto-
risation et de la mesure dans laquelle ils fabriquent,
construisent, utilisent ou vendent l’invention brevetée.
Authorization not transferable
Incessibilité
(6) An authorization granted under this section is not
transferable.
(6) L’autorisation accordée sous le régime du présent ar-
ticle est incessible.
For greater certainty
Précision
(7) For greater certainty, the use or sale, in relation to a
public health emergency, of a patented invention that is
made or constructed in accordance with an authorization
granted under this section is not an infringement of the
patent.
(7) Il est entendu que l’utilisation ou la vente, liée à une
urgence de santé publique, d’une invention brevetée qui
est fabriquée ou construite en conformité avec une auto-
risation accordée sous le régime du présent article n’est
pas une contrefaçon du brevet.
Power of Federal Court
Pouvoir de la Cour fédérale
(8) On the application of the patentee, the Federal Court
may make an order requiring the Government of Canada
or any person authorized under subsection (1) to cease
making, constructing, using or selling the patented in-
vention in a manner that is inconsistent with the autho-
rization granted under this section.
(8) Sur demande du breveté, la Cour fédérale peut
rendre une ordonnance enjoignant au gouvernement du
Canada ou à toute personne autorisée sous le régime du
paragraphe (1) de cesser de fabriquer, de construire, d’u-
tiliser ou de vendre l’invention brevetée d’une manière
qui est incompatible avec l’autorisation accordée sous le
régime du présent article.
Restriction
Restriction
(9) The Commissioner shall not make an authorization
under subsection (1) after September 30, 2020.
2020, c. 5, s. 51.
(9) Le commissaire ne peut donner une autorisation au
titre du paragraphe (1) après le 30 septembre 2020.
2020, ch. 5, art. 51.


Patent
Brevets
Government Owned Patents
Brevets appartenant au gouvernement
Section 20
Article 20
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
16
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Government Owned Patents
Brevets appartenant au
gouvernement
Assignment to Minister of National Defence
Cession au ministre de la Défense nationale
20 (1) Any officer, servant or employee of the Crown or
of a corporation that is an agent or servant of the Crown,
who, acting within the scope of his duties and employ-
ment, invents any invention in instruments or munitions
of war shall, if so required by the Minister of National
Defence, assign to that Minister on behalf of Her Majesty
all the benefits of the invention and of any patent ob-
tained or to be obtained for the invention.
20 (1) Tout membre de l’administration publique fédé-
rale ou du personnel d’une personne morale qui est un
agent ou au service de la Couronne, qui, dans l’exercice
de ses fonctions ou dans le cadre de son emploi, réalise
une invention portant sur des instruments ou munitions
de guerre, est tenu, s’il en est requis par le ministre de la
Défense nationale, de céder à celui-ci, pour le compte de
Sa Majesté, le plein bénéfice de l’invention et de tout bre-
vet obtenu ou à obtenir pour celle-ci.
Idem
Idem
(2) Any person other than a person described in subsec-
tion (1) who invents an invention described in that sub-
section may assign to the Minister of National Defence
on behalf of Her Majesty all the benefits of the invention
and of any patent obtained or to be obtained for the in-
vention.
(2) Toute autre personne qui est l’auteur d’une telle in-
vention peut céder au ministre de la Défense nationale,
pour le compte de Sa Majesté, le plein bénéfice de l’in-
vention et de tout brevet obtenu ou à obtenir pour celle-
ci.
Inventor entitled to compensation
L’inventeur a droit à une indemnité
(3) An inventor described in subsection (2) is entitled to
compensation for an assignment to the Minister of Na-
tional Defence under this Act and in the event that the
consideration to be paid for the assignment is not agreed
on, it is the duty of the Commissioner to determine the
amount of the consideration, which decision is subject to
appeal to the Federal Court.
(3) L’inventeur visé au paragraphe (2) a droit à une in-
demnité pour une cession au ministre de la Défense na-
tionale prévue dans la présente loi. S’il n’a pas été conve-
nu de la considération à verser pour une telle cession, le
commissaire en détermine le montant, mais il peut être
interjeté appel de sa décision à la Cour fédérale.
Proceedings before Federal Court
Procédures devant la Cour fédérale
(4) Proceedings before the Federal Court under subsec-
tion (3) shall be held in camera on request made to the
court by any party to the proceedings.
(4) Les procédures intentées devant la Cour fédérale
sous le régime du paragraphe (3) ont lieu à huis clos, sur
demande formulée au tribunal par une des parties.
Vesting on assignment
La cession attribue les avantages
(5) An assignment to the Minister of National Defence
under this Act effectually vests the benefits of the inven-
tion and patent in the Minister of National Defence on
behalf of Her Majesty, and all covenants and agreements
therein contained for keeping the invention secret and
otherwise are valid and effectual, notwithstanding any
want of valuable consideration, and may be enforced ac-
cordingly by the Minister of National Defence.
(5) La cession attribue efficacement au ministre de la
Défense nationale, pour le compte de Sa Majesté, le bé-
néfice de l’invention et du brevet, et tous les engagements
et conventions y contenus aux fins de garder, notam-
ment, l’invention secrète sont valables et efficaces, non-
obstant toute absence de contrepartie, et peuvent être
exécutés en conséquence par le ministre de la Défense
nationale.
Person making assignment and person having
knowledge thereof
Cédant et personne ayant connaissance de la cession
(6) Any person who has made an assignment to the Min-
ister of National Defence under this section, in respect of
any covenants and agreements contained in such assign-
ment for keeping the invention secret and otherwise in
respect of all matters relating to that invention, and any
(6) Toute personne qui a fait au ministre de la Défense
nationale une cession prévue au présent article, en ce qui
concerne les engagements et conventions contenus dans
cette cession aux fins de garder, notamment, l’invention
secrète et en ce qui concerne toutes matières relatives à


Patent
Brevets
Government Owned Patents
Brevets appartenant au gouvernement
Section 20
Article 20
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
17
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
other person who has knowledge of such assignment and
of such covenants and agreements, shall be, for the pur-
poses of the Security of Information Act, deemed to be
persons having in their possession or control information
respecting those matters that has been entrusted to them
in confidence by any person holding office under Her
Majesty, and the communication of any of that informa-
tion by the first mentioned persons to any person other
than one to whom they are authorized to communicate
with, by or on behalf of the Minister of National Defence,
is an offence under section 4 of the Security of Informa-
tion Act.
l’invention en question, et toute autre personne qui est
au courant d’une telle cession et de ces engagements et
conventions sont, pour l’application de la Loi sur la pro-
tection de l’information, réputées des personnes ayant en
leur possession ou sous leur contrôle des renseignements
sur ces matières qui leur ont été commis en toute
confiance par une personne détenant un poste qui relève
de Sa Majesté. La communication de l’un de ces rensei-
gnements par les personnes mentionnées en premier lieu
à une personne autre que celle avec laquelle elles sont au-
torisées à communiquer par le ministre de la Défense na-
tionale ou en son nom, constitue une infraction à l’article
4 de la Loi sur la protection de l’information.
Minister may submit application for patent
Le ministre peut présenter une demande de brevet
(7) Where any agreement for an assignment to the Min-
ister of National Defence under this Act has been made,
the Minister of National Defence may submit an applica-
tion for patent for the invention to the Commissioner,
with the request that it be examined for patentability,
and if the application is found allowable may, before the
grant of any patent thereon, certify to the Commissioner
that, in the public interest, the particulars of the inven-
tion and of the manner in which it is to be worked are to
be kept secret.
(7) Lorsqu’une convention a été conclue pour une telle
cession, le ministre de la Défense nationale peut présen-
ter au commissaire une demande de brevet pour l’inven-
tion, accompagnée d’une requête pour étude en vue de
déterminer si elle est brevetable, et si cette demande est
jugée recevable, il peut, avant que soit accordé tout bre-
vet en l’espèce, certifier au commissaire que, dans l’inté-
rêt public, les détails de l’invention et de la manière dont
elle sera exploitée doivent être tenus secrets.
Secret application
Demande secrète
(8) If the Minister of National Defence so certifies, the
application and specification, with the drawing, if any,
and any amendment of the application, and any copies of
those documents and the drawing and the patent granted
thereon shall be placed in a packet sealed by the Com-
missioner under authority of the Minister of National De-
fence.
(8) Si le ministre de la Défense nationale le certifie, la
demande et le mémoire descriptif, avec le dessin, le cas
échéant, ainsi que toute modification de la demande et
toutes copies de ces documents et dessin, de même que le
brevet accordé en l’espèce, sont placés dans un paquet
scellé par le commissaire sous l’autorité du ministre de la
Défense nationale.
Custody of secret application
Garde de la demande secrète
(9) The packet described in subsection (8) shall, until the
expiration of the term during which a patent for the in-
vention may be in force, be kept sealed by the Commis-
sioner, and shall not be opened except under the authori-
ty of an order of the Minister of National Defence.
(9) Jusqu’à l’expiration de la période durant laquelle un
brevet pour l’invention peut être en vigueur, le paquet est
gardé scellé par le commissaire, et il ne peut être ouvert
que sous l’autorité d’un arrêté du ministre de la Défense
nationale.
Delivery of secret application
Transmission de la demande secrète
(10) The packet described in subsection (8) shall be de-
livered at any time during the continuance of the patent
to any person authorized by the Minister of National De-
fence to receive it, and shall, if returned to the Commis-
sioner, be kept sealed by him.
(10) Le paquet est remis pendant la durée du brevet à
toute personne autorisée par le ministre de la Défense
nationale à le recevoir, et, s’il est retourné au commis-
saire, ce dernier le garde scellé.
Delivery to Minister
Transmission au ministre
(11) On the expiration of the term of the patent, the
packet described in subsection (8) shall be delivered to
the Minister of National Defence.
(11) À l’expiration de la durée du brevet, le paquet est
transmis au ministre de la Défense nationale.


Patent
Brevets
Government Owned Patents
Brevets appartenant au gouvernement
Section 20
Article 20
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
18
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Revocation
Révocation
(12) No proceeding by petition or otherwise lies to have
declared invalid or void a patent granted for an invention
in relation to which a certificate has been given by the
Minister of National Defence under subsection (7), ex-
cept by permission of the Minister.
(12) Nulle procédure par voie de pétition ou autrement
n’est recevable en vue de faire déclarer invalide ou nul un
brevet concédé pour une invention à l’égard de laquelle le
ministre de la Défense nationale a donné un certificat
aux termes du paragraphe (7), sauf sur permission de ce
dernier.
Prohibition of publication and inspection
Interdiction relative à la publication et l’inspection
(13) No copy of any specification or other document or
drawing in respect of an invention and patent, by this
section required to be placed in a sealed packet, shall in
any manner whatever be published or open to the inspec-
tion of the public, but, except as otherwise provided in
this section, this Act shall apply in respect of the inven-
tion and patent.
(13) Aucune copie d’un mémoire descriptif ou autre do-
cument ou dessin à placer dans un paquet scellé, aux
termes du présent article, ne peut de quelque manière
que ce soit être publiée ni être accessible à l’inspection du
public. Toutefois, sauf prescriptions contraires du pré-
sent article, la présente loi s’applique à l’égard d’une in-
vention et d’un brevet qui y sont visés.
Waiver by Minister
Renonciation par le ministre
(14) The Minister of National Defence may at any time
waive the benefit of this section with respect to any par-
ticular invention, and the specification, documents and
drawing relating thereto shall thereafter be kept and
dealt with in the regular way.
(14) Le ministre de la Défense nationale peut renoncer
aux avantages du présent article en ce qui concerne une
invention particulière et, dès lors, le mémoire descriptif,
les documents et le dessin sont gardés et traités de la ma-
nière régulière.
Rights protected
Droits sauvegardés
(15) No claim shall be allowed in respect of any infringe-
ment of a patent that occurred in good faith during the
time that the patent was kept secret under this section,
and any person who, before the publication of the patent,
had in good faith done any act that, but for this subsec-
tion would have given rise to a claim, is entitled, after the
publication, to obtain a licence to manufacture, use and
sell the patented invention on such terms as may, in the
absence of agreement between the parties, be settled by
the Commissioner or by the Federal Court on appeal
from the Commissioner.
(15) Il ne peut être fait droit à une réclamation concer-
nant une contrefaçon de brevet qui s’est produite de
bonne foi pendant la période où le brevet a été tenu se-
cret sous le régime du présent article. Quiconque, avant
la publication de ce brevet, avait accompli de bonne foi
un acte qui, sans le présent paragraphe, aurait donné lieu
à une telle réclamation, a droit, après la publication en
question, d’obtenir une licence pour fabriquer, utiliser et
vendre l’invention brevetée aux termes qui, en l’absence
de convention entre les parties, peuvent être arrêtés par
le commissaire ou par la Cour fédérale sur appel de la dé-
cision du commissaire.
Communication to Minister
Communication au ministre
(16) The communication of any invention for any im-
provement in munitions of war to the Minister of Nation-
al Defence, or to any person or persons authorized by the
Minister of National Defence to investigate the invention
or the merits thereof, shall not, nor shall anything done
for the purposes of the investigation, be deemed use or
publication of the invention so as to prejudice the grant
or validity of any patent for the invention.
(16) La communication au ministre de la Défense natio-
nale, ou à toute personne autorisée par ce dernier à en
faire l’examen ou à en étudier les mérites, de toute inven-
tion destinée à un perfectionnement de munitions de
guerre, n’est pas réputée, non plus qu’une chose faite aux
fins de l’enquête, constituer un usage ou une publication
de cette invention qui puisse nuire à l’octroi ou à la vali-
dité d’un brevet à cet égard.
Order to keep non-assigned application secret
Décret pour tenir secrète la demande non cédée
(17) The Governor in Council, if satisfied that an inven-
tion relating to any instrument or munition of war, de-
scribed in any specified application for patent not as-
signed to the Minister of National Defence, is vital to the
defence of Canada and that the publication of a patent
(17) Si le gouverneur en conseil est convaincu qu’une in-
vention relative à tout instrument ou munition de guerre,
décrite dans une demande spécifiée de brevet non cédée
au ministre de la Défense nationale, est essentielle à la
défense du Canada et que la publication d’un brevet en


Patent
Brevets
Government Owned Patents
Brevets appartenant au gouvernement
Sections 20-21.02
Articles 20-21.02
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
19
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
therefor should be prevented in order to preserve the
safety of the State, may order that the invention and ap-
plication and all the documents relating thereto shall be
treated for all purposes of this section as if the invention
had been assigned or agreed to be assigned to the Minis-
ter of National Defence.
l’espèce devrait être empêchée afin de maintenir la sécu-
rité de l’État, il peut ordonner que ces invention et de-
mande ainsi que tous les documents s’y rattachant soient
traités, pour l’application du présent article, comme si
l’invention avait été cédée, ou comme s’il avait été conve-
nu de céder l’invention, au ministre de la Défense natio-
nale.
Rules
Règles
(18) The Governor in Council may make rules for the
purpose of ensuring secrecy with respect to applications
and patents to which this section applies and generally to
give effect to the purpose and intent thereof.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 20; 2001, c. 41, s. 36.
(18) Le gouverneur en conseil peut établir des règles
pour assurer le secret en ce qui concerne les demandes et
les brevets visés par le présent article et, d’une façon gé-
nérale, pour son application.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 20; 2001, ch. 41, art. 36.
Agreement between Canada and other government
Accord entre le Canada et un autre gouvernement
21 Where by any agreement between the Government of
Canada and any other government it is provided that the
Government of Canada will apply section 20 to inven-
tions disclosed in any application for a patent assigned or
agreed to be assigned by the inventor to that other gov-
ernment, and the Commissioner is notified by any minis-
ter of the Crown that the agreement extends to an inven-
tion in a specified application, the application and all the
documents relating thereto shall be dealt with as provid-
ed in section 20, except subsections (3) and (4), as if the
invention had been assigned or agreed to be assigned to
the Minister of National Defence.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 21.
21 Si, aux termes d’un accord entre le gouvernement du
Canada et tout autre gouvernement, il est prévu que le
gouvernement du Canada appliquera l’article 20 aux in-
ventions décrites dans une demande de brevet cédé par
l’inventeur, ou que celui-ci convient de céder, à cet autre
gouvernement, et si un ministre avise le commissaire que
cet accord s’étend à l’invention dans une demande spéci-
fiée, cette demande et tous les documents s’y rattachant
sont traités de la manière prévue à l’article 20, sauf les
paragraphes (3) et (4), comme si l’invention avait été cé-
dée, ou qu’il avait été convenu de céder l’invention, au
ministre de la Défense nationale.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 21.
Use of Patents for International
Humanitarian Purposes to
Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins
humanitaires internationales en
vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Purpose
Objet
21.01 The purpose of sections 21.02 to 21.2 is to give ef-
fect to Canada’s and Jean Chrétien’s pledge to Africa by
facilitating access to pharmaceutical products to address
public health problems afflicting many developing and
least-developed countries, especially those resulting from
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other epidemics.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
21.01 Les articles 21.02 à 21.2 ont pour objet de donner
effet à l’engagement du Canada et de Jean Chrétien en-
vers l’Afrique en facilitant l’accès aux produits pharma-
ceutiques nécessaires pour remédier aux problèmes de
santé publique touchant de nombreux pays en voie de dé-
veloppement et pays les moins avancés, en particulier
ceux résultant du VIH/SIDA, de la tuberculose, du palu-
disme et d’autres épidémies.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Definitions
Définitions
21.02 The definitions in this section apply in this sec-
tion and in sections 21.03 to 21.19.
21.02 Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent au pré-
sent article et aux articles 21.03 à 21.19.
Accord sur les ADPIC L’Accord sur les aspects des
droits de propriété intellectuelle qui touchent au


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Sections 21.02-21.03
Articles 21.02-21.03
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
20
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
authorization means an authorization granted under
subsection 21.04(1), and includes an authorization
renewed under subsection 21.12(1). (autorisation)
General Council means the General Council of the WTO
established by paragraph 2 of Article IV of the Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organization, signed at
Marrakesh on April 15, 1994. (Conseil général)
General Council Decision means the decision of the
General Council of August 30, 2003 respecting Article 31
of the TRIPS Agreement, including the interpretation of
that decision in the General Council Chairperson’s state-
ment of that date. (décision du Conseil général)
patented product means a product the making, con-
structing, using or selling of which in Canada would in-
fringe a patent in the absence of the consent of the paten-
tee. (produit breveté)
pharmaceutical product means any patented product
listed in Schedule 1 in, if applicable, the dosage form, the
strength and the route of administration specified in that
Schedule in relation to the product. (produit pharma-
ceutique)
TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Re-
lated Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, being An-
nex 1C of the Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization, signed at Marrakesh on April 15, 1994.
(Accord sur les ADPIC)
TRIPS Council means the council referred to in the
TRIPS Agreement. (Conseil des ADPIC)
WTO means the World Trade Organization established
by Article I of the Agreement Establishing the World
Trade Organization, signed at Marrakesh on April 15,
1994. (OMC)
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
commerce, figurant à l’annexe 1C de l’Accord instituant
l’Organisation mondiale du commerce signé à Marrakech
le 15 avril 1994. (TRIPS Agreement)
autorisation Autorisation accordée en vertu du para-
graphe 21.04(1) ou renouvelée en vertu du paragraphe
21.12(1). (authorization)
Conseil des ADPIC Le conseil visé dans l’Accord sur les
ADPIC. (TRIPS Council)
Conseil général Le Conseil général de l’OMC créé par le
paragraphe 2 de l’article IV de l’Accord instituant l’Orga-
nisation mondiale du commerce, signé à Marrakech le 15
avril 1994. (General Council)
décision du Conseil général La décision rendue le 30
août 2003 par le Conseil général à l’égard de l’article 31 de
l’Accord sur les ADPIC, y compris l’interprétation donnée
de celle-ci dans la déclaration de son président faite le
même jour. (General Council Decision)
OMC L’Organisation mondiale du commerce constituée
par l’article I de l’Accord instituant l’Organisation mon-
diale du commerce, signé à Marrakech le 15 avril 1994.
(WTO)
produit breveté Produit dont la fabrication, la construc-
tion, l’exploitation ou la vente au Canada sans le consen-
tement du breveté constituerait une contrefaçon.
(patented product)
produit pharmaceutique Produit breveté figurant à
l’annexe 1, dans la forme posologique et selon la concen-
tration et la voie d’administration indiquées, le cas
échéant. (pharmaceutical product)
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Amending Schedules
Modification des annexes
21.03 (1) The Governor in Council may, by order,
(a) on the recommendation of the Minister and the
Minister of Health, amend Schedule 1
(i) by adding the name of any patented product
that may be used to address public health problems
afflicting many developing and least-developed
countries, especially those resulting from HIV/
AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other epidemics
and, if the Governor in Council considers it appro-
priate to do so, by adding one or more of the follow-
ing in respect of the patented product, namely, a
21.03 (1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par décret :
a) sur recommandation du ministre et du ministre de
la Santé, modifier l’annexe 1 :
(i) par adjonction du nom d’un produit breveté
pouvant être utilisé pour remédier à des problèmes
de santé publique touchant de nombreux pays en
voie de développement et pays les moins avancés,
en particulier ceux résultant du VIH/SIDA, de la
tuberculose, du paludisme et d’autres épidémies, et
de la mention de la forme posologique, de la
concentration ou de la voie d’administration du
produit, s’il le juge indiqué,


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Section 21.03
Article 21.03
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
21
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
dosage form, a strength and a route of administra-
tion, and
(ii) by removing any entry listed in it;
(b) on the recommendation of the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, the Minister for International Trade and the
Minister for International Development, amend
Schedule 2 by adding the name of any country recog-
nized by the United Nations as being a least-developed
country that has,
(i) if it is a WTO Member, provided the TRIPS
Council with a notice in writing stating that the
country intends to import, in accordance with the
General Council Decision, pharmaceutical prod-
ucts, as defined in paragraph 1(a) of that decision,
and
(ii) if it is not a WTO Member, provided the Gov-
ernment of Canada with a notice in writing through
diplomatic channels stating that the country in-
tends to import pharmaceutical products, as de-
fined in paragraph 1(a) of the General Council De-
cision, that it agrees that those products will not be
used for commercial purposes and that it under-
takes to adopt the measures referred to in Article 4
of that decision;
(c) on the recommendation of the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, the Minister for International Trade and the
Minister for International Development, amend
Schedule 3 by adding the name of any WTO Member
not listed in Schedule 2 that has provided the TRIPS
Council with a notice in writing stating that the WTO
Member intends to import, in accordance with the
General Council Decision, pharmaceutical products,
as defined in paragraph 1(a) of that decision; and
(d) on the recommendation of the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, the Minister for International Trade and the
Minister for International Development, amend
Schedule 4 by adding the name of
(i) any WTO Member not listed in Schedule 2 or 3
that has provided the TRIPS Council with a notice
in writing stating that the WTO Member intends to
import, in accordance with the General Council De-
cision, pharmaceutical products, as defined in para-
graph 1(a) of that decision, or
(ii) any country that is not a WTO Member and
that is named on the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development’s list of countries
that are eligible for official development assistance
and that has provided the Government of Canada
(ii) par suppression du nom d’un produit breveté
ou d’une mention y figurant;
b) sur recommandation du ministre des Affaires
étrangères, du ministre du Commerce international et
du ministre du Développement international, modifier
l’annexe 2, par adjonction du nom de tout pays qui,
étant un pays moins avancé selon les Nations Unies, a
transmis :
(i) s’il est membre de l’OMC, au Conseil des ADPIC
un avis écrit de son intention d’importer, conformé-
ment à la décision du Conseil général, des produits
pharmaceutiques au sens de l’alinéa 1a) de cette dé-
cision,
(ii) s’il n’est pas membre de l’OMC, au gouverne-
ment du Canada, par la voie diplomatique, un avis
écrit de son intention d’importer des produits phar-
maceutiques au sens de l’alinéa 1a) de la décision
du Conseil général, dans lequel il s’engage à ne pas
utiliser les produits à des fins commerciales et à
prendre les mesures visées à l’article 4 de cette déci-
sion;
c) sur recommandation du ministre des Affaires
étrangères, du ministre du Commerce international et
du ministre du Développement international, modifier
l’annexe 3, par adjonction du nom de tout membre de
l’OMC ne figurant pas à l’annexe 2 qui a transmis au
Conseil des ADPIC un avis écrit de son intention d’im-
porter, conformément à la décision du Conseil géné-
ral, des produits pharmaceutiques au sens de l’alinéa
1a) de cette décision;
d) sur recommandation du ministre des Affaires
étrangères, du ministre du Commerce international et
du ministre du Développement international, modifier
l’annexe 4, par adjonction :
(i) du nom de tout membre de l’OMC ne figurant
pas à l’annexe 2 ou 3 qui a transmis au Conseil des
ADPIC un avis écrit de son intention d’importer,
conformément à la décision du Conseil général, des
produits pharmaceutiques au sens de l’alinéa 1a) de
cette décision,
(ii) du nom de tout pays non-membre de l’OMC qui
figure sur la liste des pays admissibles à l’aide pu-
blique au développement établie par l’Organisation
de coopération et de développement économiques,
à la condition qu’il ait transmis au gouvernement
du Canada, par la voie diplomatique, un avis écrit
dans lequel il :


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Section 21.03
Article 21.03
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
22
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
with a notice in writing through diplomatic chan-
nels
(A) stating that it is faced with a national emer-
gency or other circumstances of extreme urgen-
cy,
(B) specifying the name of the pharmaceutical
product, as defined in paragraph 1(a) of the Gen-
eral Council Decision, and the quantity of that
product, needed by the country to deal with the
emergency or other urgency,
(C) stating that it has no, or insufficient, phar-
maceutical capacity to manufacture that prod-
uct, and
(D) stating that it agrees that that product will
not be used for commercial purposes and that it
undertakes to adopt the measures referred to in
Article 4 of the General Council Decision.
(A) confirme qu’il fait face à une situation d’ur-
gence nationale ou à d’autres circonstances d’ex-
trême urgence,
(B) précise le nom et la quantité du produit
pharmaceutique, au sens de l’alinéa 1a) de la dé-
cision du Conseil général, dont il a besoin pour y
faire face,
(C) confirme qu’il n’a pas la capacité de fabrica-
tion du produit pharmaceutique ou que cette ca-
pacité est insuffisante,
(D) s’engage à ne pas utiliser le produit à des
fins commerciales et à prendre les mesures vi-
sées à l’article 4 de cette décision.
Restriction - Schedule 3
Réserve - annexe 3
(2) The Governor in Council may not add to Schedule 3
the name of any WTO Member that has notified the
TRIPS Council that it will import, in accordance with the
General Council Decision, pharmaceutical products, as
defined in paragraph 1(a) of that decision, only if faced
with a national emergency or other circumstances of ex-
treme urgency.
(2) Le gouverneur en conseil ne peut ajouter à l’annexe 3
le nom d’un membre de l’OMC qui a avisé le Conseil des
ADPIC de son intention de n’importer, conformément à
la décision du Conseil général, des produits pharmaceu-
tiques, au sens de l’alinéa 1a) de cette décision, que s’il
fait face à une situation d’urgence nationale ou à d’autres
circonstances d’extrême urgence.
Removal from Schedules 2 to 4
Suppression - annexes 2, 3 et 4
(3) The Governor in Council may, by order, on the rec-
ommendation of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Min-
ister for International Trade and the Minister for Inter-
national Development, amend any of Schedules 2 to 4 to
remove the name of any country or WTO Member if
(a) in the case of a country or WTO Member listed in
Schedule 2, the country or WTO Member has ceased to
be recognized by the United Nations as being a least-
developed country or, in the case of a country that is
not a WTO Member, the country has permitted any
product imported into that country under an autho-
rization to be used for commercial purposes or has
failed to adopt the measures referred to in Article 4 of
the General Council Decision;
(b) in the case of a WTO Member listed in Schedule 3,
the WTO Member has notified the TRIPS Council that
it will import, in accordance with the General Council
Decision, pharmaceutical products, as defined in para-
graph 1(a) of that decision, only if faced with a nation-
al emergency or other circumstances of extreme ur-
gency;
(3) Sur recommandation du ministre des Affaires étran-
gères, du ministre du Commerce international et du mi-
nistre du Développement international, le gouverneur en
conseil peut, par décret, supprimer de l’annexe 2, 3 ou 4
le nom d’un pays ou d’un membre de l’OMC si :
a) dans le cas de l’annexe 2, le pays ou le membre de
l’OMC n’est plus, selon les Nations Unies, un pays
moins avancé ou, s’il n’est pas membre de l’OMC, le
pays a permis que tout produit importé au titre d’une
autorisation soit utilisé à des fins commerciales ou n’a
pas pris les mesures visées à l’article 4 de la décision
du Conseil général;
b) dans le cas de l’annexe 3, le membre de l’OMC a
avisé le Conseil des ADPIC de son intention de n’im-
porter des produits pharmaceutiques, au sens de l’ali-
néa 1a) de la décision du Conseil général et conformé-
ment à celle-ci, que s’il fait face à une situation
d’urgence nationale ou à d’autres circonstances d’ex-
trême urgence;
c) dans le cas de l’annexe 4, le membre de l’OMC a ré-
voqué l’avis donné au Conseil des ADPIC, selon lequel


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Sections 21.03-21.04
Articles 21.03-21.04
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
23
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(c) in the case of a WTO Member listed in Schedule 4,
the WTO Member has revoked any notification it has
given to the TRIPS Council that it will import pharma-
ceutical products, as defined in paragraph 1(a) of the
General Council Decision, only if faced with a national
emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgen-
cy;
(d) in the case of a country listed in Schedule 4 that is
not a WTO Member,
(i) the name of the country is no longer on the Or-
ganization for Economic Co-operation and Devel-
opment’s list of countries that are eligible for offi-
cial development assistance,
(ii) the country no longer faces a national emergen-
cy or other circumstances of extreme urgency,
(iii) the country has permitted any product import-
ed into that country under an authorization to be
used for commercial purposes, or
(iv) the country has failed to adopt the measures
referred to in Article 4 of the General Council Deci-
sion;
(e) in the case of any country or WTO Member listed
in Schedule 3 or 4, the country or WTO Member has
become recognized by the United Nations as a least-
developed country; and
(f) in the case of any country or WTO Member listed
in any of Schedules 2 to 4, the country has notified the
Government of Canada, or the WTO Member has noti-
fied the TRIPS Council, that it will not import phar-
maceutical products, as defined in paragraph 1(a) of
the General Council Decision.
il a l’intention de n’importer des produits pharmaceu-
tiques au sens de l’alinéa 1a) de la décision du Conseil
général que s’il fait face à une situation d’urgence na-
tionale ou à d’autres circonstances d’extrême urgence;
d) dans le cas de l’annexe 4, le pays non-membre de
l’OMC, selon le cas :
(i) ne figure plus sur la liste des pays admissibles à
l’aide publique au développement établie par l’Or-
ganisation de coopération et de développement
économiques,
(ii) ne fait plus face à une situation d’urgence natio-
nale ou à d’autres circonstances d’extrême urgence,
(iii) a permis que tout produit importé au titre
d’une autorisation soit utilisé à des fins commer-
ciales,
(iv) n’a pas pris les mesures visées à l’article 4 de la
décision du Conseil général;
e) dans le cas de l’annexe 3 ou 4, le pays ou le membre
de l’OMC est devenu un pays moins avancé selon les
Nations Unies;
f) dans le cas de l’annexe 2, 3 ou 4, le pays a avisé le
gouvernement du Canada, ou le membre de l’OMC a
avisé le Conseil des ADPIC, de son intention de ne pas
importer de produits pharmaceutiques au sens de l’ali-
néa 1a) de la décision du Conseil général.
Timeliness of orders
Célérité
(4) An order under this section shall be made in a timely
manner.
2004, c. 23, s. 1; 2013, c. 33, s. 196.
(4) Tout décret visé au présent article doit être pris au
moment opportun.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1; 2013, ch. 33, art. 196.
Authorization
Autorisation
21.04 (1) Subject to subsection (3), the Commissioner
shall, on the application of any person and on the pay-
ment of the prescribed fee, authorize the person to make,
construct and use a patented invention solely for purpos-
es directly related to the manufacture of the pharmaceu-
tical product named in the application and to sell it for
export to a country or WTO Member that is listed in any
of Schedules 2 to 4 and that is named in the application.
21.04 (1) Sous réserve du paragraphe (3) et du paie-
ment des taxes réglementaires, le commissaire autorise
quiconque en fait la demande à utiliser, fabriquer et
construire l’invention brevetée, pourvu que ce soit dans
un but directement lié à la fabrication du produit phar-
maceutique mentionné dans la demande, et à vendre ce-
lui-ci aux fins d’exportation vers le pays ou le membre de
l’OMC mentionné dans celle-ci dont le nom figure à l’une
des annexes 2, 3 ou 4.


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Section 21.04
Article 21.04
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
24
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Contents of application
Demande
(2) The application must be in the prescribed form and
set out
(a) the name of the pharmaceutical product to be
manufactured and sold for export under the autho-
rization;
(b) prescribed information in respect of the version of
the pharmaceutical product to be manufactured and
sold for export under the authorization;
(c) the maximum quantity of the pharmaceutical
product to be manufactured and sold for export under
the authorization;
(d) for each patented invention to which the applica-
tion relates, the name of the patentee of the invention
and the number, as recorded in the Patent Office, of
the patent issued in respect of that invention;
(e) the name of the country or WTO Member to which
the pharmaceutical product is to be exported;
(f) the name of the governmental person or entity, or
the person or entity permitted by the government of
the importing country, to which the product is to be
sold, and prescribed information, if any, concerning
that person or entity; and
(g) any other information that may be prescribed.
(2) La demande doit être en la forme réglementaire et
contenir les renseignements suivants :
a) le nom du produit pharmaceutique qui sera fabri-
qué et vendu aux fins d’exportation au titre de l’autori-
sation;
b) les renseignements réglementaires concernant la
version du produit pharmaceutique en cause;
c) la quantité maximale prévue;
d) en ce qui touche toute invention brevetée visée par
la demande, le nom du breveté et le numéro d’enregis-
trement du brevet au Bureau des brevets;
e) le nom du pays ou du membre de l’OMC vers lequel
le produit sera exporté;
f) le nom du représentant du gouvernement ou de
l’entité gouvernementale, ou de la personne ou de l’en-
tité permise par le gouvernement du pays importa-
teur, à qui le produit sera vendu et tout autre rensei-
gnement éventuellement prévu par règlement à son
égard;
g) tout autre renseignement éventuellement prévu
par règlement.
Conditions for granting of authorization
Conditions d’octroi de l’autorisation
(3) The Commissioner shall authorize the use of the
patented invention only if
(a) the applicant has complied with the prescribed re-
quirements, if any;
(b) the Minister of Health has notified the Commis-
sioner that the version of the pharmaceutical product
that is named in the application meets the require-
ments of the Food and Drugs Act and its regulations,
including the requirements under those regulations
relating to the marking, embossing, labelling and
packaging that identify that version of the product as
having been manufactured
(i) in Canada as permitted by the General Council
Decision, and
(ii) in a manner that distinguishes it from the ver-
sion of the pharmaceutical product sold in Canada
by, or with the consent of, the patentee or paten-
tees, as the case may be;
(3) L’usage de l’invention brevetée ne peut être autorisé
par le commissaire que si les conditions suivantes sont
remplies :
a) le demandeur s’est conformé aux éventuelles exi-
gences réglementaires;
b) le ministre de la Santé a notifié au commissaire le
fait que la version du produit pharmaceutique men-
tionnée dans la demande satisfait aux exigences de la
Loi sur les aliments et drogues et de ses règlements,
notamment aux exigences réglementaires en matière
de marquage, d’estampage, d’étiquetage et d’embal-
lage qui indiquent que cette version du produit :
(i) est fabriquée au Canada au titre de la décision
du Conseil général,
(ii) est différente de la version du produit pharma-
ceutique vendue au Canada par tout breveté ou
avec son accord;


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Section 21.04
Article 21.04
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
25
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(c) the applicant provides the Commissioner with a
solemn or statutory declaration in the prescribed form
stating that the applicant had, at least thirty days be-
fore filing the application,
(i) sought from the patentee or, if there is more
than one, from each of the patentees, by certified or
registered mail, a licence to manufacture and sell
the pharmaceutical product for export to the coun-
try or WTO Member named in the application on
reasonable terms and conditions and that such ef-
forts have not been successful, and
(ii) provided the patentee, or each of the patentees,
as the case may be, by certified or registered mail,
in the written request for a licence, with the infor-
mation that is in all material respects identical to
the information referred to in paragraphs (2)(a) to
(g); and
(d) the applicant also provides the Commissioner with
(i) if the application relates to a WTO Member list-
ed in Schedule 2, a certified copy of the notice in
writing that the WTO Member has provided to the
TRIPS Council specifying the name of the pharma-
ceutical product, as defined in paragraph 1(a) of the
General Council Decision, and the quantity of that
product, needed by the WTO Member, and
(A) a solemn or statutory declaration in the pre-
scribed form by the person filing the application
stating that the product to which the application
relates is the product specified in the notice and
that the product is not patented in that WTO
Member, or
(B) a solemn or statutory declaration in the pre-
scribed form by the person filing the application
stating that the product to which the application
relates is the product specified in the notice and
a certified copy of the notice in writing that the
WTO Member has provided to the TRIPS Coun-
cil confirming that the WTO Member has, in ac-
cordance with Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement
and the provisions of the General Council Deci-
sion, granted or intends to grant a compulsory li-
cence to use the invention pertaining to the
product,
(ii) if the application relates to a country listed in
Schedule 2 that is not a WTO Member, a certified
copy of the notice in writing that the country has
provided to the Government of Canada through
diplomatic channels specifying the name of the
pharmaceutical product, as defined in paragraph
c) le demandeur a fourni au commissaire une déclara-
tion solennelle, en la forme réglementaire, selon la-
quelle, au moins trente jours avant le dépôt de la de-
mande, il a :
(i) tenté d’obtenir une licence du breveté - ou de
chacun des brevetés - par courrier certifié ou re-
commandé en vue de fabriquer et de vendre aux
fins d’exportation le produit au pays ou au membre
de l’OMC mentionné dans la demande, et ce à des
conditions raisonnables et sans succès,
(ii) fourni au breveté - ou à chacun des brevetés -
par courrier certifié ou recommandé, dans cette de-
mande de licence, des renseignements qui sont, à
tous égards importants, identiques à ceux énumé-
rés aux alinéas (2)a) à g);
d) le demandeur a également fourni au commissaire :
(i) dans le cas d’une demande concernant un
membre de l’OMC visé à l’annexe 2, d’une part, une
copie certifiée de l’avis écrit transmis au Conseil des
ADPIC dans lequel le membre précise le nom et la
quantité du produit pharmaceutique, au sens de
l’alinéa 1a) de la décision du Conseil général, dont il
a besoin et, d’autre part :
(A) soit une déclaration solennelle, en la forme
réglementaire, dans laquelle lui-même affirme
que le produit mentionné dans sa demande est le
produit précisé dans l’avis et n’est pas un produit
breveté sur le territoire du membre,
(B) soit, d’une part, une déclaration solennelle,
en la forme réglementaire, dans laquelle lui-
même affirme que le produit mentionné dans sa
demande est le produit précisé dans l’avis et,
d’autre part, une copie certifiée de l’avis écrit
transmis au Conseil des ADPIC dans lequel le
membre confirme qu’il a accordé ou accordera,
conformément à l’article 31 de l’Accord sur les
ADPIC et aux dispositions de la décision du
Conseil général, la licence obligatoire nécessaire
à l’utilisation de l’invention relative au produit,
(ii) dans le cas d’une demande concernant un pays
visé à l’annexe 2 qui n’est pas membre de l’OMC,
d’une part, une copie certifiée de l’avis écrit trans-
mis au gouvernement du Canada, par la voie diplo-
matique, dans lequel le pays précise le nom et la
quantité du produit pharmaceutique, au sens de
l’alinéa 1a) de la décision du Conseil général, dont il
a besoin, et, d’autre part :
(A) soit une déclaration solennelle, en la forme
réglementaire, dans laquelle lui-même affirme


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Section 21.04
Article 21.04
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
26
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
1(a) of the General Council Decision, and the quan-
tity of that product, needed by the country, and
(A) a solemn or statutory declaration in the pre-
scribed form by the person filing the application
stating that the product to which the application
relates is the product specified in the notice and
that the product is not patented in that country,
or
(B) a solemn or statutory declaration in the pre-
scribed form by the person filing the application
stating that the product to which the application
relates is the product specified in the notice and
a certified copy of the notice in writing that the
country has provided to the Government of
Canada through diplomatic channels confirming
that the country has granted or intends to grant
a compulsory licence to use the invention per-
taining to the product,
(iii) if the application relates to a WTO Member
listed in Schedule 3, a certified copy of the notice in
writing that the WTO Member has provided to the
TRIPS Council specifying the name of the pharma-
ceutical product, as defined in paragraph 1(a) of the
General Council Decision, and the quantity of that
product, needed by the WTO Member, and stating
that the WTO Member has insufficient or no phar-
maceutical manufacturing capacity for the produc-
tion of the product to which the application relates,
and
(A) a solemn or statutory declaration in the pre-
scribed form by the person filing the application
stating that the product to which the application
relates is not patented in that WTO Member, or
(B) a certified copy of the notice in writing that
the WTO Member has provided to the TRIPS
Council confirming that the WTO Member has,
in accordance with Article 31 of the TRIPS
Agreement and the provisions of the General
Council Decision, granted or intends to grant a
compulsory licence to use the invention pertain-
ing to the product,
(iv) if the application relates to a WTO Member
listed in Schedule 4, a certified copy of the notice in
writing that the WTO Member has provided to the
TRIPS Council specifying the name of the pharma-
ceutical product, as defined in paragraph 1(a) of the
General Council Decision, and the quantity of that
product, needed by the WTO Member, and stating
that the WTO Member is faced with a national
emergency or other circumstances of extreme
que le produit mentionné dans sa demande est le
produit précisé dans l’avis et n’est pas un produit
breveté sur le territoire du pays,
(B) soit, d’une part, une déclaration solennelle,
en la forme réglementaire, dans laquelle lui-
même affirme que le produit mentionné dans sa
demande est le produit précisé dans l’avis et,
d’autre part, une copie certifiée de l’avis écrit
transmis au gouvernement du Canada, par la
voie diplomatique, dans lequel le pays confirme
qu’il a accordé ou accordera la licence obligatoire
nécessaire à l’utilisation de l’invention relative
au produit,
(iii) dans le cas d’une demande concernant un
membre de l’OMC visé à l’annexe 3, d’une part, une
copie certifiée de l’avis écrit transmis au Conseil des
ADPIC dans lequel le membre précise le nom et la
quantité du produit pharmaceutique, au sens de
l’alinéa 1a) de la décision du Conseil général, dont il
a besoin et confirme qu’il n’a pas la capacité de fa-
brication du produit visé par la demande ou que
cette capacité est insuffisante, et, d’autre part :
(A) soit une déclaration solennelle, en la forme
réglementaire, dans laquelle lui-même affirme
que le produit mentionné dans sa demande n’est
pas un produit breveté sur le territoire du
membre,
(B) soit une copie certifiée de l’avis écrit trans-
mis au Conseil des ADPIC dans lequel le
membre confirme qu’il a accordé ou accordera,
conformément à l’article 31 de l’Accord sur les
ADPIC et aux dispositions de la décision du
Conseil général, la licence obligatoire nécessaire
à l’utilisation de l’invention relative au produit,
(iv) dans le cas d’une demande concernant un
membre de l’OMC visé à l’annexe 4, d’une part, une
copie certifiée de l’avis écrit transmis au Conseil des
ADPIC dans lequel le membre précise le nom et la
quantité du produit pharmaceutique, au sens de
l’alinéa 1a) de la décision du Conseil général, dont il
a besoin et confirme qu’il fait face à une situation
d’urgence nationale ou à d’autres circonstances
d’extrême urgence et qu’il n’a pas la capacité de fa-
brication du produit visé par la demande ou que
cette capacité est insuffisante, et, d’autre part :
(A) soit une déclaration solennelle, en la forme
réglementaire, dans laquelle lui-même affirme
que le produit mentionné dans sa demande n’est
pas un produit breveté sur le territoire du
membre,


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Sections 21.04-21.05
Articles 21.04-21.05
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
27
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
urgency and that it has insufficient or no pharma-
ceutical manufacturing capacity for the production
of the product to which the application relates, and
(A) a solemn or statutory declaration in the pre-
scribed form by the person filing the application
stating that the product to which the application
relates is not patented in that WTO Member, or
(B) a certified copy of the notice in writing that
the WTO Member has provided to the TRIPS
Council confirming that the WTO Member has,
in accordance with Article 31 of the TRIPS
Agreement and the provisions of the General
Council Decision, granted or intends to grant a
compulsory licence to use the invention pertain-
ing to the product, or
(v) if the application relates to a country listed in
Schedule 4 that is not a WTO Member, a certified
copy of the notice in writing that the country has
provided to the Government of Canada through
diplomatic channels specifying the name of the
pharmaceutical product, as defined in paragraph
1(a) of the General Council Decision, and the quan-
tity of that product, needed by the country, and
stating that it is faced with a national emergency or
other circumstances of extreme urgency, that it has
insufficient or no pharmaceutical manufacturing
capacity for the production of the product to which
the application relates, that it agrees that product
will not be used for commercial purposes and that
it undertakes to adopt the measures referred to in
Article 4 of the General Council Decision, and
(A) a solemn or statutory declaration in the pre-
scribed form by the person filing the application
stating that the product to which the application
relates is not patented in that country, or
(B) a certified copy of the notice in writing that
the country has provided to the Government of
Canada through diplomatic channels confirming
that the country has granted or intends to grant
a compulsory licence to use the invention per-
taining to the product.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
(B) soit une copie certifiée de l’avis écrit trans-
mis au Conseil des ADPIC dans lequel le
membre confirme qu’il a accordé ou accordera,
conformément à l’article 31 de l’Accord sur les
ADPIC et aux dispositions de la décision du
Conseil général, la licence obligatoire nécessaire
à l’utilisation de l’invention relative au produit,
(v) dans le cas d’une demande concernant un pays
visé à l’annexe 4 qui n’est pas membre de l’OMC,
d’une part, une copie certifiée de l’avis écrit trans-
mis au gouvernement du Canada, par la voie diplo-
matique, dans lequel le pays précise le nom et la
quantité du produit pharmaceutique, au sens de
l’alinéa 1a) de la décision du Conseil général, dont il
a besoin, confirme qu’il fait face à une situation
d’urgence nationale ou à d’autres circonstances
d’extrême urgence et qu’il n’a pas la capacité de fa-
brication du produit visé par la demande ou que
cette capacité est insuffisante et s’engage à ne pas
utiliser le produit à des fins commerciales et à
prendre les mesures visées à l’article 4 de cette déci-
sion et, d’autre part :
(A) soit une déclaration solennelle, en la forme
réglementaire, dans laquelle lui-même affirme
que le produit mentionné dans sa demande n’est
pas un produit breveté sur le territoire du pays,
(B) soit une copie certifiée de l’avis écrit trans-
mis au gouvernement du Canada, par la voie di-
plomatique, dans lequel le pays confirme qu’il a
accordé ou accordera la licence obligatoire né-
cessaire à l’utilisation de l’invention relative au
produit.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Form and content of authorization
Forme et contenu de l’autorisation
21.05 (1) The authorization must be in the prescribed
form and, subject to subsection (2), contain the pre-
scribed information.
21.05 (1) L’autorisation doit être en la forme réglemen-
taire et, sous réserve du paragraphe (2), contenir les ren-
seignements prévus par règlement.


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Sections 21.05-21.07
Articles 21.05-21.07
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
28
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Quantity
Quantité
(2) The quantity of the product authorized to be manu-
factured by an authorization may not be more than the
lesser of
(a) the maximum quantity set out in the application
for the authorization, and
(b) the quantity set out in the notice referred to in any
of subparagraphs 21.04(3)(d)(i) to (v), whichever is ap-
plicable.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
(2) La quantité de produit dont la fabrication est autori-
sée ne peut être supérieure à la plus petite des quantités
suivantes :
a) la quantité maximale mentionnée dans la demande
d’autorisation;
b) la quantité mentionnée dans l’avis prévu à l’un des
sous-alinéas 21.04(3)d)(i) à (v), selon le cas.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Disclosure of information on website
Affichage sur site Internet
21.06 (1) Before exporting a product manufactured un-
der an authorization, the holder of the authorization
must establish a website on which is disclosed the pre-
scribed information respecting the name of the product,
the name of the country or WTO Member to which it is to
be exported, the quantity that is authorized to be manu-
factured and sold for export and the distinguishing fea-
tures of the product, and of its label and packaging, as re-
quired by regulations made under the Food and Drugs
Act, as well as information identifying every known party
that will be handling the product while it is in transit
from Canada to the country or WTO Member to which it
is to be exported.
21.06 (1) Avant d’exporter le produit fabriqué au titre
de l’autorisation, le titulaire doit créer un site Internet et
y afficher les renseignements réglementaires concernant
le nom du produit, le nom du pays ou du membre de
l’OMC vers lequel le produit sera exporté, la quantité
qu’il est autorisé à fabriquer et à vendre aux fins d’expor-
tation ainsi que les caractères distinctifs du produit et de
son étiquetage et emballage, exigés par les règlements
pris en vertu de la Loi sur les aliments et drogues, de
même que le nom de tous les intervenants connus qui
manutentionneront le produit dans le cadre de son tran-
sit entre le Canada et le pays ou le membre en question.
Obligation to maintain
Obligation
(2) The holder must maintain the website during the en-
tire period during which the authorization is valid.
(2) Le titulaire est tenu de conserver le site pendant
toute la durée de l’autorisation.
Links to other websites
Liens Internet
(3) The Commissioner shall post and maintain on the
website of the Canadian Intellectual Property Office a
link to each website required to be maintained by the
holder of an authorization under subsection (1).
(3) Le commissaire affiche et conserve sur le site Inter-
net de l’Office de la propriété intellectuelle du Canada un
lien vers chaque site Internet devant être conservé par le
titulaire d’une autorisation en vertu du paragraphe (1).
Posting on the website
Affichage sur le site Internet
(4) The Commissioner shall, within seven days of re-
ceipt, post on the website of the Canadian Intellectual
Property Office each application for authorization filed
under subsection 21.04(1).
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
(4) Dans les sept jours de la réception de la demande dé-
posée au titre du paragraphe 21.04(1), le commissaire af-
fiche copie de celle-ci sur le site Internet de l’Office de la
propriété intellectuelle du Canada.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Export notice
Avis d’exportation
21.07 Before each shipment of any quantity of a product
manufactured under an authorization, the holder of the
authorization must, within fifteen days before the prod-
uct is exported, provide to each of the following a notice,
by certified or registered mail, specifying the quantity to
be exported, as well as every known party that will be
handling the product while it is in transit from Canada to
21.07 Avant chaque expédition d’une quantité du pro-
duit fabriqué au titre de l’autorisation, le titulaire donne
par courrier certifié ou recommandé, dans les quinze
jours précédant l’exportation, avis de la quantité en cause
et du nom de tous les intervenants connus qui manuten-
tionneront le produit dans le cadre de son transit entre le
Canada et le pays ou membre vers lequel il sera exporté :


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Sections 21.07-21.08
Articles 21.07-21.08
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
29
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
the country or WTO Member to which it is to be export-
ed:
(a) the patentee or each of the patentees, as the case
may be;
(b) the country or WTO Member named in the autho-
rization; and
(c) the person or entity that purchased the product to
which the authorization relates.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
a) au breveté ou à chacun des brevetés, selon le cas;
b) au pays ou au membre de l’OMC mentionné dans
l’autorisation;
c) à la personne ou à l’entité qui a acheté le produit vi-
sé par celle-ci.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Royalty
Redevances
21.08 (1) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), on the oc-
currence of a prescribed event, the holder of an autho-
rization is required to pay to the patentee or each paten-
tee, as the case may be, a royalty determined in the
prescribed manner.
21.08 (1) Sous réserve des paragraphes (3) et (4), le ti-
tulaire de l’autorisation est tenu de verser, à la surve-
nance de tout événement visé par règlement, au breveté
– ou à chacun des brevetés – la redevance déterminée de
la manière réglementaire.
Factors to consider when making regulations
Critère - règlements
(2) In making regulations for the purposes of subsection
(1), the Governor in Council must consider the humani-
tarian and non-commercial reasons underlying the is-
suance of authorizations under subsection 21.04(1).
(2) Pour la prise de tout règlement au titre du para-
graphe (1), le gouverneur en conseil prend en considéra-
tion le fait que l’octroi d’autorisations au titre du para-
graphe 21.04(1) est fondé sur des motifs humanitaires et
non commerciaux.
Time for payment
Modalités de temps
(3) The royalties payable under this section must be paid
within the prescribed time.
(3) Le titulaire est tenu de verser les redevances dans le
délai réglementaire.
Federal Court may determine royalty
Fixation de la redevance par la Cour fédérale
(4) The Federal Court may, in relation to any authoriza-
tion, make an order providing for the payment of a royal-
ty that is greater than the royalty that would otherwise be
required to be paid under subsection (1).
(4) La Cour fédérale peut, par ordonnance, prévoir le
versement d’une redevance dont le montant dépasse ce-
lui établi au titre du paragraphe (1).
Application and notice
Demande et avis
(5) An order may be made only on the application of the
patentee, or one of the patentees, as the case may be, and
on notice of the application being given by the applicant
to the holder of the authorization.
(5) L’ordonnance ne peut être rendue que sur demande
présentée par le breveté, ou l’un des brevetés, et qu’après
signification de celle-ci au titulaire de l’autorisation.
Contents of order
Contenu de l’ordonnance
(6) An order may provide for a royalty of a fixed amount
or for a royalty to be determined as specified in the order,
and the order may be subject to any terms that the Feder-
al Court considers appropriate.
(6) L’ordonnance peut soit préciser le montant de la re-
devance, soit en prévoir les modalités de détermination,
et être assortie des conditions que le tribunal juge indi-
quées.


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Sections 21.08-21.12
Articles 21.08-21.12
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
30
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Conditions for making of order
Conditions
(7) The Federal Court may make an order only if it is sat-
isfied that the royalty otherwise required to be paid is not
adequate remuneration for the use of the invention or in-
ventions to which the authorization relates, taking into
account
(a) the humanitarian and non-commercial reasons
underlying the issuance of the authorization; and
(b) the economic value of the use of the invention or
inventions to the country or WTO Member.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
(7) Le tribunal ne peut rendre l’ordonnance que s’il est
convaincu que la redevance en question n’est pas une ré-
munération adéquate pour l’usage de toute invention vi-
sée par l’autorisation, compte tenu des éléments sui-
vants :
a) les motifs – humanitaires et non commerciaux –
pour lesquels l’autorisation a été octroyée;
b) la valeur économique de l’usage de l’invention pour
le pays ou le membre de l’OMC.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Duration
Durée de l’autorisation
21.09 An authorization granted under subsection
21.04(1) is valid for a period of two years beginning on
the day on which the authorization is granted.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
21.09 L’autorisation est valide pour une période de
deux ans, à compter de la date de son octroi au titre du
paragraphe 21.04(1).
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Use is non-exclusive
Usage non exclusif
21.1 The use of a patented invention under an autho-
rization is non-exclusive.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
21.1 L’usage de l’invention brevetée au titre d’une auto-
risation ne peut être exclusif.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Authorization is non-transferable
Autorisation incessible
21.11 An authorization is non-transferable, other than
where the authorization is an asset of a corporation or
enterprise and the part of the corporation or enterprise
that enjoys the use of the authorization is sold, assigned
or otherwise transferred.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
21.11 L’autorisation est incessible, sauf si la partie de la
personne morale ou de l’entreprise qui a la jouissance de
cet élément d’actif est vendue, cédée ou transférée.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Renewal
Renouvellement de l’autorisation
21.12 (1) The Commissioner shall, on the application of
the person to whom an authorization was granted and on
the payment of the prescribed fee, renew the authoriza-
tion if the person certifies under oath in the renewal ap-
plication that the quantities of the pharmaceutical prod-
uct authorized to be exported were not exported before
the authorization ceases to be valid and that the person
has complied with the terms of the authorization and the
requirements of sections 21.06 to 21.08.
21.12 (1) Sur demande et paiement des taxes réglemen-
taires, le commissaire renouvelle l’autorisation si le de-
mandeur certifie sous serment dans la demande que la
quantité de produit pharmaceutique visée par l’autorisa-
tion n’a pas été exportée en totalité au moment de la ces-
sation de validité de celle-ci et qu’il en a respecté les
conditions et s’est conformé aux articles 21.06 à 21.08.
One renewal
Un seul renouvellement
(2) An authorization may be renewed only once.
(2) L’autorisation ne peut être renouvelée qu’une seule
fois.
When application must be made
Délai
(3) The application for renewal must be made within the
30 days immediately before the authorization ceases to be
valid.
(3) La demande de renouvellement doit être faite au
cours des trente jours précédant la cessation de validité
de l’autorisation.


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Sections 21.12-21.14
Articles 21.12-21.14
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
31
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Duration
Durée
(4) An authorization that is renewed is valid for a period
of two years beginning on the day immediately following
the day of the expiry of the period referred to in section
21.09 in respect of the authorization.
(4) L’autorisation renouvelée est valide pour une période
de deux ans, à compter du jour suivant celui où expire la
période prévue à l’article 21.09.
Prescribed form
Forme réglementaire
(5) Applications for renewal and renewed authorizations
issued under subsection (1) must be in the prescribed
form.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
(5) La demande de renouvellement et l’autorisation re-
nouvelée doivent être en la forme réglementaire.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Termination
Expiration de l’autorisation
21.13 Subject to section 21.14, an authorization ceases
to be valid on the earliest of
(a) the expiry of the period referred to in section 21.09
in respect of the authorization, or the expiry of the pe-
riod referred to in subsection 21.12(4) if the authoriza-
tion has been renewed, as the case may be,
(b) the day on which the Commissioner sends, by reg-
istered mail, to the holder of the authorization a copy
of a notice sent by the Minister of Health notifying the
Commissioner that the Minister of Health is of the
opinion that the pharmaceutical product referred to in
paragraph 21. 04(3)(b) has ceased to meet the require-
ments of the Food and Drugs Act and its regulations,
(c) the day on which the last of the pharmaceutical
product authorized by the authorization to be export-
ed is actually exported,
(d) thirty days after the day on which
(i) the name of the pharmaceutical product autho-
rized to be exported by the authorization is re-
moved from Schedule 1, or
(ii) the name of the country or WTO Member to
which the pharmaceutical product was, or is to be,
exported is removed from Schedule 2, 3 or 4, as the
case may be, and not added to any other of those
Schedules, and
(e) on any other day that is prescribed.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
21.13 Sous réserve de l’article 21.14, l’autorisation cesse
d’être valide le premier en date des jours suivants :
a) le jour de l’expiration de la période prévue à l’ar-
ticle 21.09 ou, en cas de renouvellement de l’autorisa-
tion, de la période prévue au paragraphe 21.12(4);
b) le jour où le commissaire envoie par courrier re-
commandé au titulaire de l’autorisation copie de l’avis
transmis par le ministre de la Santé selon lequel celui-
ci est d’avis que le produit pharmaceutique visé à l’ali-
néa 21.04(3)b) ne satisfait plus aux exigences de la Loi
sur les aliments et drogues et de ses règlements;
c) le jour où la totalité des produits pharmaceutiques
visés par l’autorisation a été exportée;
d) le trentième jour suivant le jour de la suppression :
(i) à l’annexe 1, du nom du produit pharmaceutique
visé par l’autorisation,
(ii) à l’une des annexes 2, 3 ou 4, du nom du pays
ou du membre de l’OMC visé par l’autorisation, si
son nom n’est pas ajouté à une autre annexe;
e) le jour établi selon les règlements.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Termination by Federal Court
Cour fédérale
21.14 On the application of a patentee, and on notice
given by the patentee to the person to whom an autho-
rization was granted, the Federal Court may make an or-
der, on any terms that it considers appropriate, terminat-
ing the authorization if the patentee establishes that
21.14 Sur demande du breveté et après avis donné par
celui-ci au titulaire de l’autorisation, la Cour fédérale
peut rendre une ordonnance assortie des conditions
qu’elle estime indiquées et mettant fin à l’autorisation si
le breveté établit que, selon le cas :


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Sections 21.14-21.16
Articles 21.14-21.16
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
32
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(a) the application for the authorization or any of the
documents provided to the Commissioner in relation
to the application contained any material information
that is inaccurate;
(b) the holder of the authorization has failed to estab-
lish a website as required by section 21.06, has failed
to disclose on that website the information required to
be disclosed by that section or has failed to maintain
the website as required by that section;
(c) the holder of the authorization has failed to pro-
vide a notice required to be given under section 21.07;
(d) the holder of the authorization has failed to pay,
within the required time, any royalty required to be
paid as a result of the authorization;
(e) the holder of the authorization has failed to com-
ply with subsection 21.16(2);
(f) the product exported to the country or WTO Mem-
ber, as the case may be, under the authorization has
been, with the knowledge of the holder of the autho-
rization, re-exported in a manner that is contrary to
the General Council Decision;
(g) the product was exported, other than in the nor-
mal course of transit, to a country or WTO Member
other than the country or WTO Member named in the
authorization;
(h) the product was exported in a quantity greater
than the quantity authorized to be manufactured; or
(i) if the product was exported to a country that is not
a WTO Member, the country has permitted the prod-
uct to be used for commercial purposes or has failed to
adopt the measures referred to in Article 4 of the Gen-
eral Council Decision.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
a) la demande d’autorisation ou tout document fourni
au commissaire à cet égard contenait des renseigne-
ments inexacts sur des points importants;
b) le titulaire n’a pas établi le site Internet exigé par
l’article 21.06, n’y a pas affiché les renseignements
prescrits ou ne l’a pas conservé tel que l’exige cet ar-
ticle;
c) celui-ci n’a pas donné les avis exigés par l’article
21.07;
d) celui-ci n’a pas acquitté les redevances dans le délai
prescrit;
e) celui-ci ne s’est pas conformé au paragraphe
21.16(2);
f) le produit exporté au titre de l’autorisation vers le
pays ou le membre de l’OMC a été réexporté, en
contravention de la décision du Conseil général et au
su du titulaire;
g) sauf le cas du transit, le produit a été exporté vers
un pays ou un membre de l’OMC autre que celui men-
tionné dans la demande;
h) la quantité exportée du produit est supérieure à
celle dont la fabrication est autorisée;
i) dans le cas où le produit a été exporté vers un pays
non-membre de l’OMC, le pays a permis que le pro-
duit soit utilisé à des fins commerciales ou n’a pas pris
les mesures visées à l’article 4 de la décision du
Conseil général.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Notice to patentee
Avis
21.15 The Commissioner shall, without delay, notify the
patentee, or each of the patentees, as the case may be, in
writing of any authorization granted in respect of the
patentee’s invention.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
21.15 Le commissaire avise sans délai et par écrit le bre-
veté, ou chacun des brevetés, de toute autorisation accor-
dée à l’égard de son invention.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Obligation to provide copy of agreement
Obligation de fournir une copie de l’accord
21.16 (1) Within fifteen days after the later of the day
on which the authorization was granted and the day on
which the agreement for the sale of the product to which
the authorization relates was entered into, the holder of
an authorization must provide by certified or registered
21.16 (1) Dans les quinze jours suivant le jour de l’oc-
troi de l’autorisation ou de la conclusion de l’accord
concernant la vente du produit visé par l’autorisation, le
dernier délai à expirer étant à retenir, le titulaire de l’au-
torisation envoie par courrier certifié ou recommandé au
commissaire et au breveté - ou à chacun des brevetés :


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Sections 21.16-21.17
Articles 21.16-21.17
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
33
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
mail, the Commissioner and the patentee, or each paten-
tee, as the case may be, with
(a) a copy of the agreement it has reached with the
person or entity referred to in paragraph 21.04(2)(f)
for the supply of the product authorized to be manu-
factured and sold, which agreement must incorporate
information that is in all material respects identical to
the information referred to in paragraphs 21.04(2)(a),
(b), (e) and (f); and
(b) a solemn or statutory declaration in the prescribed
form setting out
(i) the total monetary value of the agreement as it
relates to the product authorized to be manufac-
tured and sold, expressed in Canadian currency,
and
(ii) the number of units of the product to be sold
under the terms of the agreement.
a) une copie de l’accord qu’il a conclu avec la per-
sonne ou l’entité visée à l’alinéa 21.04(2)f) pour fournir
le produit dont la fabrication et la vente sont autori-
sées, lequel accord inclut des renseignements qui sont,
à tous égards importants, identiques à ceux énumérés
aux alinéas 21.04(2)a), b), e) et f);
b) une déclaration solennelle, en la forme réglemen-
taire, précisant :
(i) la valeur pécuniaire de l’accord, relativement au
produit dont la fabrication et la vente sont autori-
sées, exprimée en monnaie canadienne,
(ii) le nombre d’unités du produit à vendre aux
termes de l’accord.
Prohibition
Interdiction
(2) The holder of an authorization may not export any
product to which the authorization relates until after the
holder has complied with subsection (1).
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
(2) Le titulaire ne peut exporter le produit visé par l’au-
torisation tant qu’il ne s’est pas conformé au paragraphe
(1).
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Application when agreement is commercial in nature
Demande – accord de nature commerciale
21.17 (1) If the average price of the product to be man-
ufactured under an authorization is equal to or greater
than 25 per cent of the average price in Canada of the
equivalent product sold by or with the consent of the
patentee, the patentee may, on notice given by the paten-
tee to the person to whom an authorization was granted,
apply to the Federal Court for an order under subsection
(3) on the grounds that the essence of the agreement un-
der which the product is to be sold is commercial in na-
ture.
21.17 (1) Dans le cas où le prix moyen du produit à fa-
briquer au titre de l’autorisation est égal ou supérieur à
vingt-cinq pour cent du prix moyen au Canada du pro-
duit équivalent vendu par le breveté ou avec son consen-
tement, celui-ci peut, après avis donné au titulaire de
l’autorisation, demander à la Cour fédérale de rendre une
ordonnance au titre du paragraphe (3) au motif que l’ac-
cord aux termes duquel le produit sera vendu est par es-
sence de nature commerciale.
Factors for determining whether agreement is
commercial in nature
Nature commerciale de l’accord – facteurs
(2) In determining whether the agreement is commercial
in nature, the Federal Court must take into account
(a) the need for the holder of the authorization to
make a reasonable return sufficient to sustain a con-
tinued participation in humanitarian initiatives;
(b) the ordinary levels of profitability, in Canada, of
commercial agreements involving pharmaceutical
products, as defined in paragraph 1(a) of the General
Council Decision; and
(2) Pour décider de la nature commerciale d’un accord,
le tribunal tient compte :
a) du fait que le titulaire de l’autorisation doit obtenir
un juste rendement pour pouvoir continuer à partici-
per aux initiatives humanitaires;
b) des niveaux de rentabilité au Canada des accords
commerciaux relatifs aux produits pharmaceutiques,
au sens de l’alinéa 1a) de la décision du Conseil géné-
ral;


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Section 21.17
Article 21.17
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
34
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(c) international trends in prices as reported by the
United Nations for the supply of such products for
humanitarian purposes.
c) des tendances internationales concernant les prix,
selon les Nations Unies, de tels produits fournis à des
fins humanitaires.
Order
Ordonnance
(3) If the Federal Court determines that the agreement is
commercial in nature, it may make an order, on any
terms that it considers appropriate,
(a) terminating the authorization; or
(b) requiring the holder to pay, in addition to the roy-
alty otherwise required to be paid, an amount that the
Federal Court considers adequate to compensate the
patentee for the commercial use of the patent.
(3) S’il conclut que l’accord est de nature commerciale, le
tribunal peut rendre une ordonnance, assortie des condi-
tions qu’il estime indiquées :
a) mettant fin à l’autorisation;
b) exigeant du titulaire qu’il verse au breveté, outre
les redevances, une indemnité appropriée pour l’utili-
sation commerciale du brevet.
Additional order
Ordonnance additionnelle
(4) If the Federal Court makes an order terminating the
authorization, the Federal Court may also, if it considers
it appropriate to do so, make an order, on any terms that
it considers appropriate,
(a) requiring the holder to deliver to the patentee any
of the product to which the authorization relates re-
maining in the holder’s possession as though the hold-
er had been determined to have been infringing a
patent; or
(b) with the consent of the patentee, requiring the
holder to export any of the product to which the au-
thorization relates remaining in the holder’s posses-
sion to the country or WTO Member named in the au-
thorization.
(4) S’il met fin à l’autorisation, le tribunal peut rendre
une ordonnance, assortie des conditions qu’il estime in-
diquées :
a) exigeant du titulaire qu’il livre au breveté les pro-
duits visés par l’autorisation qui sont en sa possession,
comme s’il avait été statué qu’il avait contrefait un
brevet;
b) exigeant du titulaire, si le breveté y consent, qu’il
exporte, vers le pays ou le membre de l’OMC mention-
né dans la demande, les produits visés par l’autorisa-
tion qui sont en sa possession.
Restriction
Réserve
(5) The Federal Court may not make an order under sub-
section (3) if, under the protection of a confidentiality or-
der made by the Court, the holder of the authorization
submits to a Court-supervised audit and that audit estab-
lishes that the average price of the product manufactured
under the authorization does not exceed an amount
equal to the direct supply cost of the product plus 15 per
cent of that direct supply cost.
(5) Il ne peut être rendu d’ordonnance au titre du para-
graphe (3) si le titulaire de l’autorisation se soumet à une
vérification ordonnée par le tribunal sous le sceau de la
confidentialité et que la vérification établit que le prix
moyen du produit pharmaceutique à fabriquer au titre de
l’autorisation n’excède pas le coût direct de fourniture du
produit, plus quinze pour cent de ce coût.
Definitions
Définitions
(6) The following definitions apply in this section.
average price means
(a) in relation to a product to be manufactured under
an authorization, the total monetary value of the
agreement under which the product is to be sold, ex-
pressed in Canadian currency, divided by the number
of units of the product to be sold under the terms of
the agreement; and
(6) Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent au présent
article.
coût direct de fourniture S’agissant du produit à fabri-
quer au titre de l’autorisation, les coûts des matériaux et
de la main d’œuvre, et les autres coûts de fabrication, di-
rectement liés à la production de la quantité du produit.
(direct supply cost)
prix moyen


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Sections 21.17-21.2
Articles 21.17-21.2
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
35
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(b) in relation to an equivalent product sold by or with
the consent of the patentee, the average of the prices
in Canada of that product as those prices are reported
in prescribed publications on the day on which the ap-
plication for the authorization was filed. (prix
moyen)
direct supply cost, in relation to a product to be manu-
factured under an authorization, means the cost of the
materials and of the labour, and any other manufacturing
costs, directly related to the production of the quantity of
the product that is to be manufactured under the autho-
rization. (coût direct de fourniture)
unit, in relation to any product, means a single tablet,
capsule or other individual dosage form of the product,
and if applicable, in a particular strength. (unité)
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
a) S’agissant du produit à fabriquer au titre de l’auto-
risation, le nombre obtenu par division de la valeur
pécuniaire de l’accord – exprimée en monnaie cana-
dienne – par le nombre d’unités du produit à vendre
aux termes de celui-ci;
b) s’agissant du produit équivalent vendu par le bre-
veté ou avec son consentement, le nombre correspon-
dant à la moyenne des prix au Canada du produit qui
figurent, le jour du dépôt de la demande d’autorisa-
tion, dans les publications visées par règlement. (av-
erage price)
unité Plus petite quantité individuelle d’un produit dans
telle forme posologique – comprimé, gélule ou autre – et,
le cas échéant, dans telle concentration. (unit)
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Advisory committee
Comité consultatif
21.18 (1) The Minister and the Minister of Health shall
establish, within three years after the day this section
comes into force, an advisory committee to advise them
on the recommendations that they may make to the Gov-
ernor in Council respecting the amendment of Schedule
1.
21.18 (1) Le ministre et le ministre de la Santé consti-
tuent, dans les trois ans suivant l’entrée en vigueur du
présent article, un comité consultatif chargé de les
conseiller relativement aux recommandations à faire au
gouverneur en conseil concernant toute modification de
l’annexe 1.
Standing committee
Fonctions du comité permanent
(2) The standing committee of each House of Parliament
that normally considers matters related to industry shall
assess all candidates for appointment to the advisory
committee and make recommendations to the Minister
and the Minister of Health on the eligibility and qualifi-
cations of those candidates.
2004, c. 23, s. 1; 2005, c. 18, s. 1.
(2) Le comité permanent de chaque chambre du Parle-
ment habituellement chargé des questions concernant
l’industrie évalue les candidats en vue de leur nomination
à un poste au comité consultatif et présente au ministre
et au ministre de la Santé des recommandations quant à
leur admissibilité et leur qualification.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1; 2005, ch. 18, art. 1.
Website for notices to Canada
Établissement d’un site Internet
21.19 The person designated by the Governor in Coun-
cil for the purpose of this section must maintain a web-
site on which is set out a copy of every notice referred to
in subparagraphs 21.04(3)(d)(ii) and (v) that is provided
to the Government of Canada through diplomatic chan-
nels by a country that is not a WTO Member. The copy
must be added to the website as soon as possible after the
notice has been provided to the Government of Canada.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
21.19 La personne désignée par le gouverneur en
conseil pour l’application du présent article doit créer un
site Internet et y afficher copie de tout avis écrit mention-
né aux sous-alinéas 21.04(3)d)(ii) et (v) qui a été trans-
mis, par la voie diplomatique, au gouvernement du
Canada par tout pays non-membre de l’OMC. Elle affiche
la copie dans les meilleurs délais après la réception de
l’avis par le gouvernement du Canada.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Review
Examen
21.2 (1) A review of sections 21.01 to 21.19 and their ap-
plication must be completed by the Minister two years af-
ter this section comes into force.
21.2 (1) Le ministre effectue l’examen des articles 21.01
à 21.19 et de leur application dans les deux ans suivant
l’entrée en vigueur du présent article.


Patent
Brevets
Use of Patents for International Humanitarian Purposes to Address Public Health Problems
Usage de brevets à des fins humanitaires internationales en vue de remédier aux problèmes
de santé publique
Sections 21.2-26.1
Articles 21.2-26.1
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
36
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Tabling of report
Dépôt du rapport
(2) The Minister must cause a report of the results of the
review to be laid before each House of Parliament on any
of the first fifteen days on which that House is sitting af-
ter the report has been completed.
2004, c. 23, s. 1.
(2) Le ministre fait déposer le rapport devant chaque
chambre du Parlement dans les quinze jours de séance de
celle-ci suivant l’établissement du rapport.
2004, ch. 23, art. 1.
Patents Relating to Nuclear
Energy
Brevets liés à l’énergie nucléaire
Communication to Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission
Communication à la Commission canadienne de
sûreté nucléaire
22 Any application for a patent for an invention that, in
the opinion of the Commissioner, relates to the produc-
tion, application or use of nuclear energy shall, before it
is dealt with by an examiner appointed pursuant to sec-
tion 6 or is open to inspection by the public under section
10, be communicated by the Commissioner to the Cana-
dian Nuclear Safety Commission.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 22; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 5; 1997, c. 9, s. 111.
22 Le commissaire est tenu de communiquer à la Com-
mission canadienne de sûreté nucléaire toute demande
de brevet qui, selon lui, concerne la production, les appli-
cations ou les usages de l’énergie nucléaire avant que ne
l’étudie un examinateur nommé conformément à l’article
6 ou qu’elle ne soit accessible sous le régime de l’article
10.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 22; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 5; 1997, ch. 9, art. 111..
General
Dispositions générales
Patented invention in vessels, aircraft, etc., of any
country
Usage d’une invention brevetée, sur navires,
aéronefs, etc. d’un pays
23 No patent shall extend to prevent the use of any in-
vention in any ship, vessel, aircraft or land vehicle of any
country entering Canada temporarily or accidentally, if
the invention is employed exclusively for the needs of the
ship, vessel, aircraft or land vehicle, and not so used for
the manufacture of any goods to be sold within or export-
ed from Canada.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 23.
23 Aucun brevet ne peut aller jusqu’à empêcher l’usage
d’une invention sur un vaisseau, navire, aéronef ou véhi-
cule terrestre de tout pays, qui entre temporairement ou
accidentellement au Canada, pourvu que cette invention
serve exclusivement aux besoins du vaisseau, navire, aé-
ronef ou véhicule terrestre, et qu’elle ne soit pas ainsi uti-
lisée à fabriquer des objets destinés à être vendus au
Canada ou à en être exportés.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 23.
24 [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 6]
24 [Abrogé, L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 6]
Cost of proceedings before the court
Frais de procédure devant le tribunal
25 In all proceedings before any court under this Act,
the costs of the Commissioner are in the discretion of the
court, but the Commissioner shall not be ordered to pay
the costs of any other of the parties.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 25.
25 Les frais du commissaire, dans toutes procédures de-
vant un tribunal en vertu de la présente loi, sont à la dis-
crétion du tribunal, mais il ne peut être ordonné au com-
missaire de payer les frais de toute autre partie.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 25.
Annual report
Rapport annuel
26 The Commissioner shall, in each year, cause to be
prepared and laid before each House of Parliament a re-
port of the Commissioner’s activities under this Act.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 26; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 7; 2017, c. 6, s. 35.
26 Le commissaire fait, chaque année, établir et déposer
devant chaque chambre du Parlement un rapport sur les
activités qu’il a exercées sous le régime de la présente loi.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 26; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 7; 2017, ch. 6, art. 35.
26.1 (1) [Repealed, 2015, c. 36, s. 56]
26.1 (1) [Abrogé, 2015, ch. 36, art. 56]


Patent
Brevets
General
Dispositions générales
Sections 26.1-27
Articles 26.1-27
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
37
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Publication and printing of documents
Publication
(2) The Commissioner may publish any document open
to the inspection of the public under section 10 and may
print or cause to be printed, for distribution or sale, any
such document.
R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 7; 2015, c. 36, s. 56.
(2) Le commissaire peut faire publier pour vente ou dis-
tribution tout document accessible pour consultation
sous le régime de l’article 10.
L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 7; 2015, ch. 36, art. 56.
Application for Patents
Demandes de brevets
Commissioner may grant patents
Délivrance de brevet
27 (1) The Commissioner shall grant a patent for an in-
vention to the inventor or the inventor’s legal representa-
tive if an application for the patent in Canada is filed in
accordance with this Act and all other requirements for
the issuance of a patent under this Act are met.
27 (1) Le commissaire accorde un brevet d’invention à
l’inventeur ou à son représentant légal si la demande de
brevet est déposée conformément à la présente loi et si
les autres conditions de celle-ci sont remplies.
Application requirements
Dépôt de la demande
(2) The prescribed application fee must be paid and the
application must be filed in accordance with the regula-
tions by the inventor or the inventor’s legal representa-
tive and the application must contain a petition and a
specification of the invention.
(2) L’inventeur ou son représentant légal doit, conformé-
ment aux règlements, déposer une demande qui com-
prend une pétition et un mémoire descriptif de l’inven-
tion et payer la taxe réglementaire.
Specification
Mémoire descriptif
(3) The specification of an invention must
(a) correctly and fully describe the invention and its
operation or use as contemplated by the inventor;
(b) set out clearly the various steps in a process, or the
method of constructing, making, compounding or us-
ing a machine, manufacture or composition of matter,
in such full, clear, concise and exact terms as to enable
any person skilled in the art or science to which it per-
tains, or with which it is most closely connected, to
make, construct, compound or use it;
(c) in the case of a machine, explain the principle of
the machine and the best mode in which the inventor
has contemplated the application of that principle;
and
(d) in the case of a process, explain the necessary se-
quence, if any, of the various steps, so as to distinguish
the invention from other inventions.
(3) Le mémoire descriptif doit :
a) décrire d’une façon exacte et complète l’invention
et son application ou exploitation, telles que les a
conçues son inventeur;
b) exposer clairement les diverses phases d’un procé-
dé, ou le mode de construction, de confection, de com-
position ou d’utilisation d’une machine, d’un objet
manufacturé ou d’un composé de matières, dans des
termes complets, clairs, concis et exacts qui per-
mettent à toute personne versée dans l’art ou la
science dont relève l’invention, ou dans l’art ou la
science qui s’en rapproche le plus, de confectionner,
construire, composer ou utiliser l’invention;
c) s’il s’agit d’une machine, en expliquer clairement le
principe et la meilleure manière dont son inventeur en
a conçu l’application;
d) s’il s’agit d’un procédé, expliquer la suite néces-
saire, le cas échéant, des diverses phases du procédé,
de façon à distinguer l’invention en cause d’autres in-
ventions.
Claims
Revendications
(4) The specification must end with a claim or claims
defining distinctly and in explicit terms the subject-mat-
ter of the invention for which an exclusive privilege or
property is claimed.
(4) Le mémoire descriptif se termine par une ou plu-
sieurs revendications définissant distinctement et en des
termes explicites l’objet de l’invention dont le demandeur
revendique la propriété ou le privilège exclusif.


Patent
Brevets
Application for Patents
Demandes de brevets
Sections 27-27.01
Articles 27-27.01
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
38
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Separate claims
Revendications distinctes
(5) For greater certainty, if a claim defines the subject-
matter of an invention in the alternative, each alternative
is a separate claim for the purposes of sections 2, 28.1 to
28.3, 56 and 78.3.
(5) Il est entendu que, pour l’application des articles 2,
28.1 à 28.3, 56 et 78.3, si une revendication définit, par va-
riantes, l’objet de l’invention, chacune d’elles constitue
une revendication distincte.
Drawings
Dessins
(5.1) In the case of a machine, or in any other case in
which an invention admits of illustration by means of
drawings, the applicant shall, as part of the application,
furnish drawings of the invention that clearly show all
parts of the invention.
(5.1) Dans le cas d’une machine ou dans tout autre cas
où, pour l’intelligence de l’invention, il peut être fait
usage de dessins, le demandeur fournit, dans sa de-
mande, des dessins représentant clairement toutes les
parties de l’invention.
Particulars
Précisions
(5.2) Each drawing is to include references correspond-
ing with the specification. The Commissioner may, as the
Commissioner sees fit, require further drawings or dis-
pense with the requirement to furnish any drawing.
(5.2) Chaque dessin comporte les renvois correspondant
au mémoire descriptif. Le commissaire peut, à son appré-
ciation, exiger de nouveaux dessins ou dispenser de l’o-
bligation de fournir tout dessin.
Requirements not met
Conditions non remplies
(6) If, on its filing date, an application does not meet the
requirements of subsection (2), other than the payment
of the application fee, the Commissioner shall, by notice,
require the applicant to meet those requirements on or
before the prescribed date.
(6) Si, à la date de dépôt, la demande ne remplit pas les
conditions prévues au paragraphe (2) autres que le paie-
ment de la taxe réglementaire, le commissaire doit, par
avis, requérir le demandeur de les remplir au plus tard à
la date réglementaire.
Application fee not paid
Non-paiement de la taxe réglementaire
(7) If, on the filing date of the application, the applica-
tion fee is not paid, the Commissioner shall, by notice,
require the applicant to pay the application fee and the
prescribed late fee on or before the prescribed date.
(7) Si, à la date de dépôt, la taxe réglementaire visée au
paragraphe (2) n’a pas été payée, le commissaire doit, par
avis, requérir le demandeur de la payer et de payer la sur-
taxe réglementaire au plus tard à la date réglementaire.
What may not be patented
Ce qui n’est pas brevetable
(8) No patent shall be granted for any mere scientific
principle or abstract theorem.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 27; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 8; 1993, c. 15, s. 31, c. 44, s. 192;
2014, c. 39, s. 120; 2018, c. 27, s. 188.
(8) Il ne peut être octroyé de brevet pour de simples
principes scientifiques ou conceptions théoriques.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 27; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 8; 1993, ch. 15, art. 31, ch.
44, art. 192; 2014, ch. 39, art. 120; 2018, ch. 27, art. 188.
Reference to previously filed application
Renvoi à une demande déposée antérieurement
27.01 (1) Subject to the prescribed requirements and
within the prescribed period, an applicant may submit to
the Commissioner a statement to the effect that a refer-
ence to a specified previously filed application for a
patent is being submitted instead of all or part of the
specification contained in or a drawing that is required to
be contained in the application. The prescribed period
shall not end later than six months after the earliest date
on which the Commissioner receives any document or in-
formation under subsection 28(1).
27.01 (1) Sous réserve des exigences réglementaires, le
demandeur peut, dans le délai réglementaire, fournir au
commissaire une déclaration énonçant que le renvoi à la
demande de brevet antérieurement déposée qu’il précise
tient lieu de tout ou partie des dessins ou du mémoire
descriptif qui doivent être compris dans sa demande de
brevet. Le délai réglementaire se termine au plus tard six
mois après la première date où le commissaire reçoit des
documents ou renseignements visés au paragraphe 28(1).


Patent
Brevets
Application for Patents
Demandes de brevets
Sections 27.01-28
Articles 27.01-28
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
39
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Specification or drawing deemed in application
Dessins et mémoire descriptif réputés faire partie de
la demande
(2) If the applicant submits the statement within the pre-
scribed period and meets the prescribed requirements,
the specification or drawing in the previously filed appli-
cation is deemed to have been contained in the applica-
tion on the date on which the Commissioner receives the
statement.
2014, c. 39, s. 121.
(2) Si le demandeur fournit la déclaration dans le délai
imparti et satisfait aux exigences réglementaires, les des-
sins et le mémoire descriptif qui sont compris dans la de-
mande antérieurement déposée sont réputés faire partie
de la demande de brevet du demandeur à la date où le
commissaire reçoit la déclaration.
2014, ch. 39, art. 121.
Maintenance fees
Taxes pour maintenir une demande en état
27.1 (1) To maintain an application for a patent in ef-
fect, the prescribed fees shall be paid on or before the
prescribed dates.
27.1 (1) Afin de maintenir une demande de brevet en
état, les taxes réglementaires doivent être payées au plus
tard aux dates réglementaires.
Late fee and notice
Surtaxe et avis
(2) If a prescribed fee is not paid on or before the appli-
cable prescribed date,
(a) the prescribed late fee shall be paid, in addition to
the prescribed fee; and
(b) the Commissioner shall send a notice to the appli-
cant stating that the application will be deemed to be
abandoned if the prescribed fee and late fee are not
paid before the later of the end of six months after the
applicable prescribed date and the end of two months
after the date of the notice.
(2) Si une taxe réglementaire n’est pas payée au plus tard
à la date réglementaire applicable :
a) la surtaxe réglementaire doit être payée en plus de
la taxe réglementaire;
b) le commissaire envoie au demandeur un avis l’in-
formant que sa demande sera réputée abandonnée si
la taxe et la surtaxe ne sont pas payées dans les six
mois qui suivent la date réglementaire applicable ou,
s’ils se terminent plus tard, dans les deux mois qui
suivent la date de l’avis.
Prescribed fee deemed paid on prescribed date
Taxe réglementaire réputée payée à la date
réglementaire
(3) If the prescribed fee and late fee are paid before a no-
tice is sent or, if a notice is sent, the prescribed fee and
late fee are paid before the later of the end of six months
after the applicable prescribed date and the end of two
months after the date of the notice, the prescribed fee
shall be deemed to have been paid on the applicable pre-
scribed date.
(3) Si la taxe et la surtaxe sont payées soit avant l’envoi
de l’avis, soit, dans le cas où celui-ci a été envoyé, dans
les six mois qui suivent la date réglementaire applicable
ou, s’ils se terminent plus tard, dans les deux mois qui
suivent la date de l’avis, la taxe réglementaire est réputée
avoir été payée à la date réglementaire applicable.
Patent not invalid
Brevet non invalide
(4) A patent shall not be declared invalid by reason only
that the application on the basis of which the patent was
granted was not maintained in effect.
R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 9; 1993, c. 15, s. 32; 2014, c. 39, s. 121.
(4) Un brevet ne peut être déclaré invalide du seul fait
qu’il a été accordé au titre d’une demande qui n’a pas été
maintenue en état.
L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 9; 1993, ch. 15, art. 32; 2014, ch. 39, art. 121.
Filing date
Date de dépôt
28 (1) Subject to subsections 28.01(2) and 36(4), the fil-
ing date of an application for a patent in Canada is the
date on which the Commissioner receives the prescribed
documents and information or, if they are received on
different dates, the latest of those dates.
28 (1) Sous réserve des paragraphes 28.01(2) et 36(4), la
date de dépôt d’une demande de brevet déposée au
Canada est la date à laquelle le commissaire reçoit les do-
cuments et renseignements réglementaires ou, s’il les re-
çoit à des dates différentes, la dernière d’entre elles.


Patent
Brevets
Application for Patents
Demandes de brevets
Sections 28-28.01
Articles 28-28.01
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
40
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Outstanding documents and information
Documents et renseignements manquants
(2) The Commissioner shall notify an applicant whose
application does not contain all of the documents and in-
formation referred to in subsection (1) of the documents
and information that are outstanding and require that
the applicant submit them within two months after the
date of the notice.
(2) Le commissaire avise le demandeur dont la demande
ne contient pas tous ces documents et renseignements
des documents et renseignements manquants et exige
qu’il les soumette dans les deux mois suivant la date de
l’avis.
Application deemed never filed
Demande réputée n’avoir jamais été déposée
(3) If the Commissioner does not receive the outstanding
documents and information within that two-month peri-
od, the application is deemed never to have been filed.
However, any fees paid in respect of the application shall
not be refunded to the applicant.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 28; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 10; 1993, c. 15, s. 33; 2014, c. 39,
s. 121.
(3) Si le commissaire ne les reçoit pas dans ce délai, la
demande est réputée n’avoir jamais été déposée. Les
taxes payées dans le cadre de la demande ne sont toute-
fois pas remboursables.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 28; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 10; 1993, ch. 15, art. 33;
2014, ch. 39, art. 121.
Addition to specification or addition of drawing to
application
Ajout d’éléments au mémoire descriptif ou d’un
dessin
28.01 (1) Subject to the regulations, an applicant may,
within the prescribed period, add to the specification that
is contained in their application or add a drawing to their
application for a patent by submitting the addition to the
Commissioner along with a statement by the applicant
indicating that the addition is being made under this sec-
tion. The prescribed period shall not end later than six
months after the earliest date on which the Commission-
er receives any document or information under subsec-
tion 28(1).
28.01 (1) Sous réserve des règlements, le demandeur
peut, dans le délai réglementaire qui se termine au plus
tard six mois après la première date où le commissaire
reçoit des documents ou renseignements visés au para-
graphe 28(1), ajouter des éléments au mémoire descriptif
compris dans sa demande de brevet ou ajouter un dessin
à celle-ci en les fournissant au commissaire et en y joi-
gnant une déclaration précisant que l’ajout est fait en
vertu du présent article.
Filing date
Date de dépôt
(2) If an applicant submits an addition to the Commis-
sioner under subsection (1) and the addition is not with-
drawn within the prescribed period, the filing date of the
application is the later of the date on which the Commis-
sioner receives the addition and the filing date referred to
in subsection 28(1), unless
(a) the applicant has, on the earliest date on which the
Commissioner receives any document or information
under subsection 28(1), made a request for priority in
respect of the application under section 28.4;
(b) the addition is completely contained in a previous-
ly regularly filed application on which the request for
priority is based;
(c) the applicant requests, in accordance with the reg-
ulations, that the filing date be the filing date referred
to in subsection 28(1); and
(d) the applicant complies with any prescribed re-
quirements.
(2) Le cas échéant et si les éléments ou le dessin ne sont
pas retirés dans le délai réglementaire, la date de dépôt
de la demande est la date où le commissaire reçoit les
éléments ou le dessin ou, si elle est postérieure, la date de
dépôt visée au paragraphe 28(1), sauf si les conditions ci-
après sont réunies :
a) à la première date où le commissaire reçoit des do-
cuments ou renseignements visés au paragraphe 28(1),
le demandeur a présenté, à l’égard de sa demande, une
demande de priorité en vertu de l’article 28.4;
b) les éléments ou le dessin sont entièrement compris
dans la demande de brevet antérieurement déposée de
façon régulière sur laquelle la demande de priorité est
fondée;
c) le demandeur demande, conformément aux règle-
ments, que la date de dépôt soit celle visée au para-
graphe 28(1);
d) le demandeur satisfait aux exigences réglemen-
taires.


Patent
Brevets
Application for Patents
Demandes de brevets
Sections 28.01-28.2
Articles 28.01-28.2
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
41
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Addition deemed in application
Éléments ou dessin réputés avoir été compris dans la
demande
(3) In the circumstances set out in paragraphs (2)(a) to
(d), the addition is deemed to have been contained in the
application on its filing date for the purposes of subsec-
tions 38.2(2) and (3).
2014, c. 39, s. 121.
(3) Dans les cas où les alinéas (2)a) à d) s’appliquent,
pour l’application des paragraphes 38.2(2) et (3), les élé-
ments ou le dessin sont réputés avoir été compris dans la
demande à sa date de dépôt.
2014, ch. 39, art. 121.
Claim date
Date de la revendication
28.1 (1) The date of a claim in an application for a
patent in Canada (the “pending application”) is the filing
date of the application, unless
(a) the pending application is filed by
(i) a person who has, or whose agent, legal repre-
sentative or predecessor in title has, previously reg-
ularly filed in or for Canada an application for a
patent disclosing the subject-matter defined by the
claim, or
(ii) a person who is entitled to protection under the
terms of any treaty or convention relating to
patents to which Canada is a party and who has, or
whose agent, legal representative or predecessor in
title has, previously regularly filed in or for any oth-
er country that by treaty, convention or law affords
similar protection to citizens of Canada an applica-
tion for a patent disclosing the subject-matter de-
fined by the claim;
(b) the filing date of the pending application is within
twelve months after the filing date of the previously
regularly filed application; and
(c) the applicant has made a request for priority on
the basis of the previously regularly filed application.
28.1 (1) La date de la revendication d’une demande de
brevet est la date de dépôt de celle-ci, sauf si :
a) la demande est déposée, selon le cas :
(i) par une personne qui a antérieurement déposé
de façon régulière, au Canada ou pour le Canada,
ou dont l’agent, le représentant légal ou le prédé-
cesseur en droit l’a fait, une demande de brevet di-
vulguant l’objet que définit la revendication,
(ii) par une personne qui a antérieurement déposé
de façon régulière, dans un autre pays ou pour un
autre pays, ou dont l’agent, le représentant légal ou
le prédécesseur en droit l’a fait, une demande de
brevet divulguant l’objet que définit la revendica-
tion, dans le cas où ce pays protège les droits de
cette personne par traité ou convention, relatif aux
brevets, auquel le Canada est partie, et accorde par
traité, convention ou loi une protection similaire
aux citoyens du Canada;
b) à cette date, il s’est écoulé, depuis la date de dépôt
de la demande déposée antérieurement, au plus douze
mois;
c) le demandeur a présenté, à l’égard de sa demande,
une demande de priorité fondée sur la demande dépo-
sée antérieurement.
Claims based on previously regularly filed
applications
Date de dépôt de la demande antérieure
(2) In the circumstances described in paragraphs (1)(a)
to (c), the claim date is the filing date of the previously
regularly filed application.
1993, c. 15, s. 33; 2014, c. 39, s. 122(F).
(2) Dans le cas où les alinéas (1)a) à c) s’appliquent, la
date de la revendication est la date de dépôt de la de-
mande antérieurement déposée de façon régulière.
1993, ch. 15, art. 33; 2014, ch. 39, art. 122(F).
Subject-matter of claim must not be previously
disclosed
Objet non divulgué
28.2 (1) The subject-matter defined by a claim in an ap-
plication for a patent in Canada (the “pending applica-
tion”) must not have been disclosed
(a) before the one-year period immediately preceding
the filing date or, if the claim date is before that peri-
od, before the claim date by the applicant, or by a
28.2 (1) L’objet que définit la revendication d’une de-
mande de brevet ne doit pas :
a) soit plus d’un an avant la date de dépôt de celle-ci,
soit, si la date de la revendication est antérieure au dé-
but de cet an, avant la date de la revendication, avoir
fait, de la part du demandeur ou d’un tiers ayant


Patent
Brevets
Application for Patents
Demandes de brevets
Section 28.2
Article 28.2
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
42
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
person who obtained knowledge, directly or indirectly,
from the applicant, in such a manner that the subject-
matter became available to the public in Canada or
elsewhere;
(b) before the claim date by a person not mentioned
in paragraph (a) in such a manner that the subject-
matter became available to the public in Canada or
elsewhere;
(c) in an application for a patent that is filed in
Canada by a person other than the applicant, and has
a filing date that is before the claim date; or
(d) in an application (the “co-pending application”)
for a patent that is filed in Canada by a person other
than the applicant and has a filing date that is on or
after the claim date if
(i) the co-pending application is filed by
(A) a person who has, or whose agent, legal rep-
resentative or predecessor in title has, previously
regularly filed in or for Canada an application for
a patent disclosing the subject-matter defined by
the claim, or
(B) a person who is entitled to protection under
the terms of any treaty or convention relating to
patents to which Canada is a party and who has,
or whose agent, legal representative or predeces-
sor in title has, previously regularly filed in or for
any other country that by treaty, convention or
law affords similar protection to citizens of
Canada an application for a patent disclosing the
subject-matter defined by the claim,
(ii) the filing date of the previously regularly filed
application is before the claim date of the pending
application,
(iii) the filing date of the co-pending application is
within twelve months after the filing date of the
previously regularly filed application, and
(iv) the applicant has, in respect of the co-pending
application, made a request for priority on the basis
of the previously regularly filed application.
obtenu de lui l’information à cet égard de façon directe
ou autrement, l’objet d’une communication qui l’a ren-
du accessible au public au Canada ou ailleurs;
b) avant la date de la revendication, avoir fait, de la
part d’une autre personne, l’objet d’une communica-
tion qui l’a rendu accessible au public au Canada ou
ailleurs;
c) avoir été divulgué dans une demande de brevet qui
a été déposée au Canada par une personne autre que
le demandeur et dont la date de dépôt est antérieure à
la date de la revendication de la demande visée à l’ali-
néa (1)a);
d) avoir été divulgué dans une demande de brevet qui
a été déposée au Canada par une personne autre que
le demandeur et dont la date de dépôt correspond ou
est postérieure à la date de la revendication de la de-
mande visée à l’alinéa (1)a) si :
(i) cette personne, son agent, son représentant lé-
gal ou son prédécesseur en droit, selon le cas :
(A) a antérieurement déposé de façon régulière,
au Canada ou pour le Canada, une demande de
brevet divulguant l’objet que définit la revendi-
cation de la demande visée à l’alinéa (1)a),
(B) a antérieurement déposé de façon régulière,
dans un autre pays ou pour un autre pays, une
demande de brevet divulguant l’objet que définit
la revendication de la demande visée à l’alinéa
(1)a), dans le cas où ce pays protège les droits de
cette personne par traité ou convention, relatif
aux brevets, auquel le Canada est partie, et ac-
corde par traité, convention ou loi une protec-
tion similaire aux citoyens du Canada,
(ii) la date de dépôt de la demande déposée anté-
rieurement est antérieure à la date de la revendica-
tion de la demande visée à l’alinéa a),
(iii) à la date de dépôt de la demande, il s’est écou-
lé, depuis la date de dépôt de la demande déposée
antérieurement, au plus douze mois,
(iv) cette personne a présenté, à l’égard de sa de-
mande, une demande de priorité fondée sur la de-
mande déposée antérieurement.


Patent
Brevets
Application for Patents
Demandes de brevets
Sections 28.2-28.4
Articles 28.2-28.4
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
43
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Withdrawal of application
Retrait de la demande
(2) An application mentioned in paragraph (1)(c) or a
co-pending application mentioned in paragraph (1)(d)
that is withdrawn before it is open to public inspection
shall, for the purposes of this section, be considered
never to have been filed.
1993, c. 15, s. 33; 2014, c. 39, s. 123.
(2) Si la demande de brevet visée à l’alinéa (1)c) ou celle
visée à l’alinéa (1)d) a été retirée avant d’être devenue ac-
cessible au public, elle est réputée, pour l’application des
paragraphes (1) ou (2), n’avoir jamais été déposée.
1993, ch. 15, art. 33; 2014, ch. 39, art. 123.
Invention must not be obvious
Objet non évident
28.3 The subject-matter defined by a claim in an appli-
cation for a patent in Canada must be subject-matter that
would not have been obvious on the claim date to a per-
son skilled in the art or science to which it pertains, hav-
ing regard to
(a) information disclosed before the one-year period
immediately preceding the filing date or, if the claim
date is before that period, before the claim date by the
applicant, or by a person who obtained knowledge, di-
rectly or indirectly, from the applicant in such a man-
ner that the information became available to the pub-
lic in Canada or elsewhere; and
(b) information disclosed before the claim date by a
person not mentioned in paragraph (a) in such a man-
ner that the information became available to the pub-
lic in Canada or elsewhere.
1993, c. 15, s. 33; 2014, c. 39, s. 124.
28.3 L’objet que définit la revendication d’une demande
de brevet ne doit pas, à la date de la revendication, être
évident pour une personne versée dans l’art ou la science
dont relève l’objet, eu égard à toute communication :
a) qui a été faite, soit plus d’un an avant la date de dé-
pôt de la demande, soit, si la date de la revendication
est antérieure au début de cet an, avant la date de la
revendication, par le demandeur ou un tiers ayant ob-
tenu de lui l’information à cet égard de façon directe
ou autrement, de manière telle qu’elle est devenue ac-
cessible au public au Canada ou ailleurs;
b) qui a été faite par toute autre personne avant la
date de la revendication de manière telle qu’elle est
devenue accessible au public au Canada ou ailleurs.
1993, ch. 15, art. 33; 2014, ch. 39, art. 124.
Request for priority
Demande de priorité
28.4 (1) For the purposes of sections 28.1, 28.2 and 78.3,
an applicant for a patent in Canada may request priority
in respect of the application on the basis of one or more
previously regularly filed applications.
28.4 (1) Pour l’application des articles 28.1, 28.2 et 78.3,
le demandeur de brevet peut présenter une demande de
priorité fondée sur une ou plusieurs demandes de brevet
antérieurement déposées de façon régulière.
Requirements for request
Conditions
(2) The request for priority shall be made in accordance
with the regulations and the applicant shall submit to the
Commissioner the filing date, the name of the country or
office of filing and the number of each previously regular-
ly filed application on which the request is based.
(2) Le demandeur la présente selon les modalités régle-
mentaires; il doit aussi fournir au commissaire le nom du
pays ou du bureau où a été déposée toute demande de
brevet sur laquelle la demande de priorité est fondée,
ainsi que la date de dépôt et le numéro de cette demande
de brevet.
Request deemed never filed
Demande réputée n’avoir jamais été présentée
(2.1) Except for the purposes of subsection 10(3), a re-
quest for priority is deemed never to have been made if
the request is not made in accordance with the regula-
tions or if the applicant does not submit the information,
other than the number of each previously regularly filed
application, required under subsection (2).
(2.1) Sauf pour l’application du paragraphe 10(3), la de-
mande de priorité est réputée n’avoir jamais été présen-
tée si le demandeur ne la présente pas selon les modalités
réglementaires ou ne fournit pas les renseignements —
autres que le numéro — exigés au paragraphe (2).
Withdrawal of request
Retrait de la demande
(3) An applicant may, in accordance with the regula-
tions, withdraw a request for priority, either entirely or
(3) Le demandeur peut, selon les modalités réglemen-
taires, retirer la demande de priorité à l’égard de la


Patent
Brevets
Application for Patents
Demandes de brevets
Section 28.4
Article 28.4
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
44
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
with respect to one or more previously regularly filed ap-
plications.
demande déposée antérieurement; si elle est fondée sur
plusieurs demandes, il peut la retirer à l’égard de toutes
celles-ci ou d’une ou de plusieurs d’entre elles.
Multiple previously regularly filed applications
Plusieurs demandes
(4) If two or more applications have been previously reg-
ularly filed as described in paragraph 28.1(1)(a), subpara-
graph 28.2(1)(d)(i) or paragraph 78.3(1)(a) or (2)(a), ei-
ther in or for the same country or in or for different
countries,
(a) paragraph 28.1(1)(b), subparagraph 28.2(1)(d)(iii)
or paragraph 78.3(1)(b) or (2)(b), as the case may be,
shall be applied using the earliest filing date of the
previously regularly filed applications; and
(b) subsection 28.1(2), subparagraph 28.2(1)(d)(ii) or
paragraph 78.3(1)(d) or (2)(d), as the case may be,
shall be applied using the earliest filing date of the
previously regularly filed applications on the basis of
which a request for priority is made.
(4) Dans le cas où plusieurs demandes de brevet ont été
déposées antérieurement dans le même pays ou non ou
pour le même pays ou non :
a) la date de dépôt de la première demande est rete-
nue pour l’application de l’alinéa 28.1(1)b), du sous-
alinéa 28.2(1)d)(iii) et des alinéas 78.3(1)b) et (2)b), se-
lon le cas;
b) la date de dépôt de la première des demandes sur
lesquelles la demande de priorité est fondée est rete-
nue pour l’application du paragraphe 28.1(2), du sous-
alinéa 28.2(1)d)(ii) et des alinéas 78.3(1)d) et (2)d), se-
lon le cas.
Withdrawal, etc., of previously regularly filed
applications
Retrait de demandes déposées antérieurement
(5) A previously regularly filed application mentioned in
section 28.1 or 28.2 or subsection 78.3(1) or (2) shall, for
the purposes of that section or subsection, be considered
never to have been filed if
(a) on the filing date of one of the following applica-
tions, as the case may be, more than 12 months have
elapsed since the filing date of the previously regularly
filed application:
(i) the pending application, in the case of section
28.1,
(ii) the co-pending application, in the case of sec-
tion 28.2,
(iii) the later application, in the case of subsection
78.3(1), or
(iv) the earlier application, in the case of subsec-
tion 78.3(2);
(b) before the filing date of the application referred to
in one of subparagraphs (a)(i) to (iv), as the case may
be, another application
(i) is filed by the person who filed the previously
regularly filed application or by the agent, legal rep-
resentative or predecessor in title of that person,
(ii) is filed in or for the country where the previous-
ly regularly filed application was filed, and
(5) Pour l’application des articles 28.1 et 28.2 et des para-
graphes 78.3(1) et (2), une demande de brevet déposée
antérieurement est réputée ne pas l’avoir été si les condi-
tions suivantes sont réunies :
a) à la date de dépôt de la demande à l’égard de la-
quelle une demande de priorité a été présentée, il s’est
écoulé, depuis la date de dépôt de la demande anté-
rieurement déposée, plus de douze mois;
b) avant la date de dépôt de la demande à l’égard de
laquelle une demande de priorité a été présentée, une
autre demande de brevet divulguant l’objet que définit
la revendication de celle-ci a été déposée :
(i) par la personne qui a déposé la demande anté-
rieurement déposée, ou par l’agent, le représentant
légal ou le prédécesseur en droit de celle-ci,
(ii) dans le pays ou pour le pays où l’a été la de-
mande antérieurement déposée;
c) à la date de dépôt de cette autre demande — ou s’il
y en a plusieurs, à la date de dépôt de la première de-
mande —, la demande antérieurement déposée a été
retirée, abandonnée ou refusée, sans avoir été acces-
sible pour consultation et sans laisser subsister de
droits, et n’a pas été invoquée pour réclamer une prio-
rité au Canada ou ailleurs.


Patent
Brevets
Application for Patents
Demandes de brevets
Sections 28.4-30
Articles 28.4-30
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
45
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(iii) discloses the subject-matter defined by the
claim in the application mentioned in paragraph
(a); and
(c) on the filing date of the other application men-
tioned in paragraph (b) or, if there is more than one
such application, on the earliest of their filing dates,
the previously regularly filed application
(i) has been withdrawn, abandoned or refused
without having been opened to public inspection
and without leaving any rights outstanding, and
(ii) has not served as a basis for a request for prior-
ity in any country, including Canada.
Filing date deemed to be within 12 months
Délai d’au plus douze mois réputé écoulé
(6) Subject to the regulations, for the purposes of para-
graph 28.1(1)(b) and subparagraphs 28.2(1)(d)(iii) and
28.4(5)(a)(i) and (ii), the filing date of the pending appli-
cation or the co-pending application, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to be within 12 months after the filing
date of the previously regularly filed application if
(a) the filing date of the pending application or the co-
pending application, as the case may be, is more than
12 months after the filing date of the previously regu-
larly filed application but within two months after the
end of those 12 months; and
(b) the applicant, within the prescribed time,
(i) makes a request to the Commissioner for this
subsection to apply,
(ii) states, in the request, that the failure to file the
pending application or the co-pending application,
as the case may be, within 12 months after the filing
date of the previously regularly filed application
was unintentional, and
(iii) complies with any prescribed requirements.
(6) Sous réserve des règlements, pour l’application de
l’alinéa 28.1(1)b), du sous-alinéa 28.2(1)d)(iii) et, dans la
mesure où il s’applique aux articles 28.1 et 28.2, de l’ali-
néa 28.4(5)a), il est réputé, à la date de dépôt de la de-
mande à l’égard de laquelle une demande de priorité a
été présentée ou pourrait l’être, s’être écoulé au plus
douze mois depuis la date de dépôt de la demande dépo-
sée antérieurement, si :
a) à cette première date de dépôt, il s’est écoulé plus
de douze mois depuis cette deuxième date de dépôt
mais au plus deux mois depuis l’expiration de ce délai
de douze mois;
b) le demandeur, dans le délai réglementaire :
(i) présente au commissaire une requête pour obte-
nir l’application du présent paragraphe,
(ii) expose dans la requête le fait que son omission
de déposer sa demande dans les douze mois de la
date de dépôt de la demande déposée antérieure-
ment n’était pas intentionnelle,
(iii) satisfait à toute exigence réglementaire.
Powers of the Federal Court
Pouvoir de la Cour fédérale
(7) If subsection (6) applies, the Federal Court may, by
order, declare that subsection never to have produced its
effects if the Federal Court determines that the failure re-
ferred to in subparagraph (6)(b)(ii) was intentional.
1993, c. 15, s. 33; 2001, c. 34, s. 63; 2014, c. 39, s. 125; 2015, c. 36, s. 57; 2018, c. 27, s.
206.
(7) En cas d’application du paragraphe (6), la Cour fédé-
rale peut, par ordonnance, déclarer que ce paragraphe
n’a jamais produit ses effets si elle conclut que l’omission
visée au sous-alinéa (6)b)(ii) était intentionnelle.
1993, ch. 15, art. 33; 2001, ch. 34, art. 63; 2014, ch. 39, art. 125; 2015, ch. 36, art. 57;
2018, c. 27, s. 206.
29 [Repealed, 2017, c. 6, s. 36]
29 [Abrogé, 2017, ch. 6, art. 36]
30 [Repealed, 1993, c. 15, s. 35]
30 [Abrogé, 1993, ch. 15, art. 35]


Patent
Brevets
Joint Applications
Demandes collectives
Section 31
Article 31
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
46
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Joint Applications
Demandes collectives
Effect of refusal of a joint inventor to proceed
Effet du refus par un inventeur conjoint de poursuivre
la demande
31 (1) Where an invention is made by two or more in-
ventors and one of them refuses to make application for a
patent or his whereabouts cannot be ascertained after
diligent inquiry, the other inventors or their legal repre-
sentatives may make application, and a patent may be
granted in the name of the inventors who make the appli-
cation, on satisfying the Commissioner that the joint in-
ventor has refused to make application or that his where-
abouts cannot be ascertained after diligent inquiry.
31 (1) Lorsqu’une invention est faite par plusieurs in-
venteurs et que l’un d’eux refuse de soumettre une de-
mande de brevet ou que le lieu où il se trouve ne peut
être déterminé après une enquête diligente, les autres in-
venteurs ou leur représentant légal peuvent soumettre
une demande, et un brevet peut être accordé au nom des
inventeurs qui font la demande, si le commissaire est
convaincu que l’inventeur conjoint a refusé de soumettre
une demande ou que le lieu où il se trouve ne peut être
déterminé après une enquête diligente.
Powers of Commissioner
Pouvoirs du commissaire
(2) In any case where
(a) an applicant has agreed in writing to transfer a
patent, when granted, to another person or to a joint
applicant and refuses to proceed with the application,
or
(b) disputes arise between joint applicants with re-
spect to proceeding with an application,
the Commissioner, on proof of the agreement to his satis-
faction, or if satisfied that one or more of the joint appli-
cants ought to be allowed to proceed alone, may allow
that other person or joint applicant to proceed with the
application, and may grant a patent to him in such man-
ner that all persons interested are entitled to be heard be-
fore the Commissioner after such notice as he may deem
requisite and sufficient.
(2) Lorsque, selon le cas :
a) un demandeur a consenti par écrit à transférer un
brevet, une fois concédé, à une autre personne ou à un
codemandeur, et refuse de poursuivre la demande;
b) un différend survient entre des codemandeurs
quant à la poursuite d’une demande,
le commissaire peut, si cette convention est établie à sa
satisfaction, ou s’il est convaincu qu’il devrait être permis
à un ou plusieurs de ces codemandeurs de procéder isolé-
ment, permettre à cette autre personne ou à ce codeman-
deur de poursuivre la demande, et il peut lui accorder un
brevet, de telle manière cependant que toutes les per-
sonnes intéressées aient droit d’être entendues devant le
commissaire, après l’avis qu’il juge nécessaire et suffi-
sant.
Procedure when one joint applicant retires
Procédure quand un codemandeur se retire
(3) Where an application is filed by joint applicants and
it subsequently appears that one or more of them has had
no part in the invention, the prosecution of the applica-
tion may be carried on by the remaining applicant or ap-
plicants on satisfying the Commissioner by affidavit that
the remaining applicant or applicants is or are the sole
inventor or inventors.
(3) Lorsqu’une demande est déposée par des codeman-
deurs et qu’il apparaît par la suite que l’un ou plusieurs
d’entre eux n’ont pas participé à l’invention, la poursuite
de cette demande peut être conduite par le ou les deman-
deurs qui restent, à la condition de démontrer par affida-
vit au commissaire que le ou les derniers demandeurs
sont les seuls inventeurs.
Joining applicants
Codemandeurs
(4) Where an application is filed by one or more appli-
cants and it subsequently appears that one or more fur-
ther applicants should have been joined, the further ap-
plicant or applicants may be joined on satisfying the
Commissioner that he or they should be so joined, and
that the omission of the further applicant or applicants
had been by inadvertence or mistake and was not for the
purpose of delay.
(4) Lorsque la demande est déposée par un ou plusieurs
demandeurs et qu’il apparaît par la suite qu’un autre ou
plusieurs autres demandeurs auraient dû se joindre à la
demande, cet autre ou ces autres demandeurs peuvent se
joindre à la demande, à la condition de démontrer au
commissaire qu’ils doivent y être joints, et que leur omis-
sion s’est produite par inadvertance ou par erreur, et non
pas dans le dessein de causer un délai.


Patent
Brevets
Joint Applications
Demandes collectives
Sections 31-35
Articles 31-35
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
47
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
To whom granted
Brevet accordé à tous
(5) Subject to this section, in cases of joint applications,
the patent shall be granted in the names of all the appli-
cants.
(5) Sous réserve des autres dispositions du présent ar-
ticle, dans le cas de demandes collectives, le brevet est ac-
cordé nommément à tous les demandeurs.
Appeal
Appel
(6) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from the decision
of the Commissioner under this section.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 31; 2014, c. 39, s. 127.
(6) Appel de la décision rendue par le commissaire en
vertu du présent article peut être interjeté à la Cour fédé-
rale.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 31; 2014, ch. 39, art. 127.
Improvements
Perfectionnement
Improvements
Perfectionnement
32 Any person who has invented any improvement on
any patented invention may obtain a patent for the im-
provement, but he does not thereby obtain the right of
making, vending or using the original invention, nor does
the patent for the original invention confer the right of
making, vending or using the patented improvement.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 34.
32 Quiconque est l’auteur d’un perfectionnement à une
invention brevetée peut obtenir un brevet pour ce perfec-
tionnement. Il n’obtient pas de ce fait le droit de fabri-
quer, de vendre ou d’exploiter l’objet de l’invention origi-
nale, et le brevet couvrant l’invention originale ne confère
pas non plus le droit de fabriquer, de vendre ou d’exploi-
ter l’objet du perfectionnement breveté.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 34.
33 and 34 [Repealed, 1993, c. 15, s. 36]
33 et 34 [Abrogés, 1993, ch. 15, art. 36]
Filing of Prior Art
Dossier d’antériorité
Filing
Dépôt
34.1 (1) Any person may file with the Commissioner
prior art, consisting of patents, applications for patents
open to public inspection and printed publications, that
the person believes has a bearing on the patentability of
any claim in an application for a patent.
34.1 (1) Une personne peut déposer auprès du commis-
saire un dossier d’antériorité constitué de brevets, de de-
mandes de brevet accessibles au public et d’imprimés
qu’elle croit avoir effet sur la brevetabilité de toute reven-
dication contenue dans une demande de brevet.
Pertinency
Pertinence
(2) A person who files prior art with the Commissioner
under subsection (1) shall explain the pertinency of the
prior art.
R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 11; 1993, c. 15, s. 37.
(2) La personne qui dépose le dossier doit en exposer la
pertinence.
L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 11; 1993, ch. 15, art. 37.
Examination
Examen
Request for examination
Requête d’examen
35 (1) The Commissioner shall, on the request of any
person made in such manner as may be prescribed and
on payment of a prescribed fee, cause an application for a
patent to be examined by competent examiners to be em-
ployed in the Patent Office for that purpose.
35 (1) Sur requête à lui faite en la forme réglementaire
et sur paiement de la taxe réglementaire, le commissaire
fait examiner la demande de brevet par tel examinateur
compétent recruté par le Bureau des brevets.


Patent
Brevets
Examination
Examen
Sections 35-36
Articles 35-36
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
48
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Prescribed time
Délai réglementaire
(2) The request shall be made within the prescribed time
and the prescribed fee shall be paid within that time.
(2) La requête doit être faite et la taxe réglementaire
payée dans le délai réglementaire.
Late fee and notice
Surtaxe et avis
(3) If the request is not made or the prescribed fee is not
paid within the prescribed time,
(a) the prescribed late fee shall be paid, in addition to
the prescribed fee; and
(b) the Commissioner shall send a notice to the appli-
cant stating that the application will be deemed to be
abandoned if the request is not made and the pre-
scribed fee and late fee are not paid before the end of
two months after the date of the notice.
(3) Si la requête n’est pas faite ou la taxe réglementaire
n’est pas payée dans le délai réglementaire :
a) la surtaxe réglementaire doit être payée en plus de
la taxe réglementaire;
b) le commissaire envoie au demandeur un avis l’in-
formant que sa demande sera réputée abandonnée si
la requête n’est pas faite et la taxe et la surtaxe ne sont
pas payées dans les deux mois qui suivent la date de
l’avis.
Request deemed made and prescribed fee deemed
paid within prescribed time
Requête réputée faite et taxe réglementaire réputée
payée dans le délai réglementaire
(4) If the request is made and the prescribed fee and late
fee are paid before a notice is sent or, if a notice has been
sent, the request is made and the prescribed fee and late
fee are paid before the end of two months after the date
of the notice, the request shall be deemed to have been
made and the prescribed fee shall be deemed to have
been paid within the prescribed time.
(4) Si la requête est faite et la taxe et la surtaxe sont
payées soit avant l’envoi de l’avis, soit, dans le cas où ce-
lui-ci a été envoyé, dans les deux mois qui suivent la date
de l’avis, la requête est réputée avoir été faite et la taxe
réglementaire payée dans le délai réglementaire.
Required examination
Examen requis
(5) The Commissioner may by a notice sent to the appli-
cant, require that the request be made and the prescribed
fee be paid within the prescribed time. However, the
Commissioner is not authorized to send the notice if the
prescribed time would end after the prescribed time re-
ferred to in subsection (2).
(5) Le commissaire peut, par avis envoyé au demandeur,
exiger que la requête soit faite et la taxe réglementaire
payée dans le délai réglementaire; il ne peut toutefois
exercer ce pouvoir à partir du moment où ce délai expire-
rait après le délai réglementaire visé au paragraphe (2).
Non-application
Non-application
(6) If a notice is sent under subsection (5), subsections
(2) to (4) do not apply.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 35; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 12; 1993, c. 15, s. 38; 2014, c. 39,
s. 128.
(6) Tout avis envoyé au titre du paragraphe (5) rend in-
applicables les paragraphes (2) à (4).
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 35; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 12; 1993, ch. 15, art. 38;
2014, ch. 39, art. 128.
Divisional Applications
Demandes divisionnaires
Patent for one invention only
Brevet pour une seule invention
36 (1) A patent shall be granted for one invention only
but in an action or other proceeding a patent shall not be
deemed to be invalid by reason only that it has been
granted for more than one invention.
36 (1) Un brevet ne peut être accordé que pour une
seule invention, mais dans une instance ou autre procé-
dure, un brevet ne peut être tenu pour invalide du seul
fait qu’il a été accordé pour plus d’une invention.
Limitation of claims by applicant
Demandes divisionnaires
(2) Where an application (the “original application”) de-
scribes more than one invention, the applicant may limit
the claims to one invention only, and any other invention
(2) Si une demande décrit plus d’une invention, le de-
mandeur peut restreindre ses revendications à une seule
invention, toute autre invention divulguée pouvant faire


Patent
Brevets
Divisional Applications
Demandes divisionnaires
Sections 36-38.1
Articles 36-38.1
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
49
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
disclosed may be made the subject of a divisional appli-
cation, if the divisional application is filed before the is-
sue of a patent on the original application.
l’objet d’une demande divisionnaire, si celle-ci est dépo-
sée avant la délivrance d’un brevet sur la demande origi-
nale.
Limitation of claims on direction of Commissioner
Idem
(2.1) Where an application (the “original application”)
describes and claims more than one invention, the appli-
cant shall, on the direction of the Commissioner, limit
the claims to one invention only, and any other invention
disclosed may be made the subject of a divisional appli-
cation, if the divisional application is filed before the is-
sue of a patent on the original application.
(2.1) Si une demande décrit et revendique plus d’une in-
vention, le demandeur doit, selon les instructions du
commissaire, restreindre ses revendications à une seule
invention, toute autre invention divulguée pouvant faire
l’objet d’une demande divisionnaire, si celle-ci est dépo-
sée avant la délivrance d’un brevet sur la demande origi-
nale.
Original application abandoned
Abandon de la demande originale
(3) If an original application mentioned in subsection (2)
or (2.1) is deemed to be abandoned and is not reinstated,
the time for filing a divisional application ends on the lat-
er of the day on which the original application is deemed
to be abandoned and the end of the prescribed time re-
ferred to in subsection 73(3).
(3) Si la demande originale est réputée abandonnée et
n’est pas rétablie, le délai pour le dépôt d’une demande
divisionnaire se termine à la date où la demande origi-
nale est réputée abandonnée ou, si elle est postérieure, à
la date d’expiration du délai réglementaire visé au para-
graphe 73(3).
Separate applications
Demandes distinctes
(4) A divisional application shall be deemed to be a sepa-
rate and distinct application under this Act, to which its
provisions apply as fully as may be, and separate fees
shall be paid on the divisional application and, except for
the purposes of subsections 27(6) and (7), it shall have
the same filing date as the original application.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 36; 1993, c. 15, s. 39; 2014, c. 39, s. 129; 2015, c. 36, s. 65(F); 2018,
c. 27, s. 189.
(4) Une demande divisionnaire est considérée comme
une demande distincte à laquelle la présente loi s’ap-
plique aussi complètement que possible. Des taxes dis-
tinctes sont acquittées pour la demande divisionnaire et,
sauf pour l’application des paragraphes 27(6) et (7), sa
date de dépôt est celle de la demande originale.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 36; 1993, ch. 15, art. 39; 2014, ch. 39, art. 129; 2015, ch. 36, art.
65(F); 2018, ch. 27, art. 189.
Biological Materials
Matières biologiques
37 [Repealed, 2014, c. 39, s. 130]
37 [Abrogé, 2014, ch. 39, art. 130]
38 [Repealed, 2014, c. 39, s. 130]
38 [Abrogé, 2014, ch. 39, art. 130]
Biological material may be deposited
Matières biologiques
38.1 (1) Where a specification refers to a deposit of bio-
logical material and the deposit is in accordance with the
regulations, the deposit shall be considered part of the
specification and, to the extent that subsection 27(3) can-
not otherwise reasonably be complied with, the deposit
shall be taken into consideration in determining whether
the specification complies with that subsection.
38.1 (1) Lorsque le mémoire descriptif mentionne le
dépôt d’un échantillon de matières biologiques et que ce
dépôt est fait conformément aux règlements, l’échan-
tillon est réputé faire partie du mémoire, et il en est tenu
compte, dans la mesure où les conditions visées au para-
graphe 27(3) ne peuvent être autrement remplies, pour la
détermination de la conformité du mémoire à ce para-
graphe.
Deposit not required
Absence de présomption
(2) For greater certainty, a reference to a deposit of bio-
logical material in a specification does not create a pre-
sumption that the deposit is required for the purpose of
complying with subsection 27(3).
1993, c. 15, s. 41.
(2) Il est entendu que pareille mention n’a pas pour effet
de faire du dépôt de l’échantillon une condition à remplir
aux termes du paragraphe 27(3).
1993, ch. 15, art. 41.


Patent
Brevets
Amendments to Specifications and Drawings
Modification du mémoire descriptif et des dessins
Section 38.2
Article 38.2
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
50
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Amendments to Specifications
and Drawings
Modification du mémoire
descriptif et des dessins
Amendments to specifications and drawings
Modification du mémoire descriptif et des dessins
38.2 (1) Subject to subsections (2) to (3.1) and the regu-
lations, the specification and drawings contained in an
application for a patent in Canada may be amended be-
fore the patent is issued.
38.2 (1) Sous réserve des paragraphes (2) à (3.1) et des
règlements, les dessins et le mémoire descriptif qui sont
compris dans la demande de brevet peuvent être modi-
fiés avant la délivrance du brevet.
Restriction
Limite
(2) The specification and drawings contained in an appli-
cation, other than a divisional application, may not be
amended to add matter that cannot reasonably be in-
ferred from the specification or drawings contained in
the application on its filing date.
(2) Les dessins et le mémoire descriptif qui sont compris
dans une demande autre qu’une demande divisionnaire
ne peuvent être modifiés pour y ajouter des éléments qui
ne peuvent raisonnablement s’inférer des dessins ou du
mémoire descriptif qui sont compris dans la demande à
sa date de dépôt.
Language other than English or French
Texte dans une langue autre que le français ou
l’anglais
(3) However, if all or part of the text matter of the speci-
fication or drawings contained in the application on its
filing date is in a language other than English or French,
the specification and drawings may not be amended to
add matter not reasonably to be inferred from both
(a) the specification or drawings contained in the ap-
plication on its filing date, and
(b) the specification or drawings contained in the ap-
plication immediately after the text matter is replaced
by an English or French translation, in accordance
with the regulations.
(3) Toutefois, si tout ou partie du texte des dessins ou du
mémoire descriptif qui sont compris dans la demande à
sa date de dépôt est dans une langue autre que le français
ou l’anglais, les dessins et le mémoire descriptif ne
peuvent être modifiés pour y ajouter des éléments qui ne
peuvent raisonnablement s’inférer à la fois :
a) des dessins ou du mémoire descriptif qui sont com-
pris dans la demande à sa date de dépôt;
b) des dessins ou du mémoire descriptif qui sont com-
pris dans la demande immédiatement après que le
texte dans la langue autre que le français ou l’anglais a
été remplacé, conformément aux règlements, par une
traduction en français ou en anglais.
Divisional application
Demande divisionnaire
(3.1) The specification and drawings contained in a divi-
sional application may not be amended to add matter
(a) that may not be or could not have been added, un-
der subsection (2) or (3) or this subsection, to the
specification and drawings contained in the applica-
tion for a patent from which the divisional application
results; or
(b) that cannot reasonably be inferred from the speci-
fication or drawings contained in the divisional appli-
cation on the date on which the Commissioner, in re-
spect of that application, receives the prescribed
documents and information or, if they are received on
different dates, on the latest of those dates.
(3.1) Les dessins et le mémoire descriptif qui sont com-
pris dans une demande divisionnaire ne peuvent être
modifiés pour y ajouter les éléments suivants :
a) ceux qui ne pourraient ou n’auraient pas pu être
ajoutés, en application des paragraphes (2) ou (3) ou
du présent paragraphe, aux dessins et au mémoire
descriptif qui sont compris dans la demande de brevet
dont résulte la demande divisionnaire;
b) ceux qui ne peuvent raisonnablement s’inférer des
dessins ou du mémoire descriptif qui sont compris
dans la demande divisionnaire à la date à laquelle le
commissaire reçoit, relativement à cette demande, les
documents et renseignements réglementaires ou, s’il
les reçoit à des dates différentes, à la dernière d’entre
elles.


Patent
Brevets
Amendments to Specifications and Drawings
Modification du mémoire descriptif et des dessins
Sections 38.2-43
Articles 38.2-43
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
51
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Non-application of subsections (2) to (3.1)
Non-application des paragraphes (2) à (3.1)
(4) Subsections (2) to (3.1) do not apply if it is admitted
in the specification that the matter is prior art with re-
spect to the application.
(4) La mention dans le mémoire descriptif que les élé-
ments en cause sont des inventions ou découvertes anté-
rieures rend inapplicables les paragraphes (2) à (3.1).
Application subject to regulations
Application sous réserve des règlements
(5) Subsections (2) to (3.1) apply subject to any regula-
tions made under paragraph 12(1)(j.81).
1993, c. 15, s. 41; 2014, c. 39, s. 131; 2015, c. 36, s. 58.
(5) Les paragraphes (2) à (3.1) s’appliquent sous réserve
des règlements pris en vertu de l’alinéa 12(1)j.81).
1993, ch. 15, art. 41; 2014, ch. 39, art. 131; 2015, ch. 36, art. 58.
39 to 39.26 [Repealed, 1993, c. 2, s. 3]
39 à 39.26 [Abrogés, 1993, ch. 2, art. 3]
Refusal of Patents
Rejet des demandes de brevets
Refusal by Commissioner
Le commissaire peut refuser le brevet
40 Whenever the Commissioner is satisfied that an ap-
plicant is not by law entitled to be granted a patent, he
shall refuse the application and, by registered letter ad-
dressed to the applicant or his registered agent, notify the
applicant of the refusal and of the ground or reason
therefor.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 42.
40 Chaque fois que le commissaire s’est assuré que le
demandeur n’est pas fondé en droit à obtenir la conces-
sion d’un brevet, il rejette la demande et, par courrier re-
commandé adressé au demandeur ou à son agent enre-
gistré, notifie à ce demandeur le rejet de la demande,
ainsi que les motifs ou raisons du rejet.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 42.
Appeal to Federal Court
Appel à la Cour fédérale
41 Every person who has failed to obtain a patent by
reason of a refusal of the Commissioner to grant it may,
at any time within six months after notice as provided for
in section 40 has been mailed, appeal from the decision
of the Commissioner to the Federal Court and that Court
has exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine the ap-
peal.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 41; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 16.
41 Dans les six mois suivant la mise à la poste de l’avis,
celui qui n’a pas réussi à obtenir un brevet en raison du
refus ou de l’opposition du commissaire peut interjeter
appel de la décision du commissaire à la Cour fédérale
qui, à l’exclusion de toute autre juridiction, peut s’en sai-
sir et en décider.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 41; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 16.
Grant of Patents
Octroi des brevets
Contents of patent
Contenu du brevet
42 Every patent granted under this Act shall contain the
title or name of the invention, with a reference to the
specification, and shall, subject to this Act, grant to the
patentee and the patentee’s legal representatives for the
term of the patent, from the granting of the patent, the
exclusive right, privilege and liberty of making, con-
structing and using the invention and selling it to others
to be used, subject to adjudication in respect thereof be-
fore any court of competent jurisdiction.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 42; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 16.
42 Tout brevet accordé en vertu de la présente loi
contient le titre ou le nom de l’invention avec renvoi au
mémoire descriptif et accorde, sous réserve des autres
dispositions de la présente loi, au breveté et à ses repré-
sentants légaux, pour la durée du brevet à compter de la
date où il a été accordé, le droit, la faculté et le privilège
exclusif de fabriquer, construire, exploiter et vendre à
d’autres, pour qu’ils l’exploitent, l’objet de l’invention,
sauf jugement en l’espèce par un tribunal compétent.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 42; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 16.
Form and Term of Patents
Forme et durée des brevets
Form and duration of patents
Délivrance
43 (1) Subject to section 46, every patent granted under
this Act shall be issued under the seal of the Patent
43 (1) Sous réserve de l’article 46, le brevet accordé sous
le régime de la présente loi est délivré sous le sceau du


Patent
Brevets
Form and Term of Patents
Forme et durée des brevets
Sections 43-46
Articles 43-46
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
52
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Office, and shall bear on its face the filing date of the ap-
plication for the patent, the date on which the application
became open to public inspection under section 10, the
date on which the patent is granted and issued and any
prescribed information.
Bureau des brevets. Il mentionne la date de dépôt de la
demande, celle à laquelle elle est devenue accessible au
public sous le régime de l’article 10, celle à laquelle il a
été accordé et délivré ainsi que tout renseignement régle-
mentaire.
Validity of patent
Validité
(2) After the patent is issued, it shall, in the absence of
any evidence to the contrary, be valid and avail the
patentee and the legal representatives of the patentee for
the term mentioned in section 44 or 45, whichever is ap-
plicable.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 43; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 16; 1993, c. 15, s. 42.
(2) Une fois délivré, le brevet est, sauf preuve contraire,
valide et acquis au breveté ou à ses représentants légaux
pour la période mentionnée aux articles 44 ou 45.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 43; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 16; 1993, ch. 15, art. 42.
Term of patents based on applications filed on or after
October 1, 1989
Durée du brevet
44 Subject to section 46, where an application for a
patent is filed under this Act on or after October 1, 1989,
the term limited for the duration of the patent is twenty
years from the filing date.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 44; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 16; 1993, c. 15, s. 42.
44 Sous réserve de l’article 46, la durée du brevet délivré
sur une demande déposée le 1er octobre 1989 ou par la
suite est limitée à vingt ans à compter de la date de dépôt
de cette demande.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 44; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 16; 1993, ch. 15, art. 42.
Term of patents based on applications filed before
October 1, 1989
Durée de dix-sept ans
45 (1) Subject to section 46, where an application for a
patent is filed under this Act before October 1, 1989, the
term limited for the duration of the patent is seventeen
years from the date on which the patent is issued.
45 (1) Sous réserve de l’article 46, la durée du brevet dé-
livré au titre d’une demande déposée avant le 1er octobre
1989 est limitée à dix-sept ans à compter de la date à la-
quelle il est délivré.
Term from date of issue or filing
La date d’expiration la plus tardive s’applique
(2) Where the term limited for the duration of a patent
referred to in subsection (1) had not expired before the
day on which this section came into force, the term is
seventeen years from the date on which the patent is is-
sued or twenty years from the filing date, whichever term
expires later.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 45; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 16; 1993, c. 15, s. 42; 2001, c. 10,
s. 1.
(2) Si le brevet visé au paragraphe (1) n’est pas périmé à
la date de l’entrée en vigueur du présent article, sa durée
est limitée à dix-sept ans à compter de la date à laquelle il
a été délivré ou à vingt ans à compter de la date de dépôt
de la demande, la date d’expiration la plus tardive préva-
lant.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 45; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 16; 1993, ch. 15, art. 42;
2001, ch. 10, art. 1.
Maintenance fees
Taxes pour maintenir des droits en état
46 (1) To maintain the rights accorded by a patent is-
sued under this Act in effect, the prescribed fees shall be
paid on or before the prescribed dates.
46 (1) Afin de maintenir en état les droits conférés par
un brevet délivré sous le régime de la présente loi, les
taxes réglementaires doivent être payées au plus tard aux
dates réglementaires.
Late fee and notice
Surtaxe et avis
(2) If a prescribed fee is not paid on or before the appli-
cable prescribed date,
(a) the prescribed late fee shall be paid, in addition to
the prescribed fee; and
(b) the Commissioner shall send a notice to the paten-
tee stating that the term limited for the duration of the
(2) Si une taxe réglementaire n’est pas payée au plus tard
à la date réglementaire applicable :
a) la surtaxe réglementaire doit être payée en plus de
la taxe réglementaire;
b) le commissaire envoie au titulaire du brevet un avis
l’informant que son brevet sera réputé périmé si la


Patent
Brevets
Form and Term of Patents
Forme et durée des brevets
Section 46
Article 46
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
53
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
patent will be deemed to have expired if the prescribed
fee and late fee are not paid before the later of the end
of six months after the applicable prescribed date and
the end of two months after the date of the notice.
taxe et la surtaxe ne sont pas payées dans les six mois
qui suivent la date réglementaire applicable ou, s’ils se
terminent plus tard, dans les deux mois qui suivent la
date de l’avis.
Prescribed fee deemed paid on prescribed date
Taxe réglementaire réputée payée à la date
réglementaire
(3) If the prescribed fee and late fee are paid before a no-
tice is sent or, if a notice is sent, the prescribed fee and
late fee are paid before the later of the end of six months
after the applicable prescribed date and the end of two
months after the date of the notice, the prescribed fee
shall be deemed to have been paid on the applicable pre-
scribed date.
(3) Si la taxe et la surtaxe sont payées soit avant l’envoi
de l’avis, soit, dans le cas où celui-ci a été envoyé, dans
les six mois qui suivent la date réglementaire applicable
ou, s’ils se terminent plus tard, dans les deux mois qui
suivent la date de l’avis, la taxe réglementaire est réputée
avoir été payée à la date réglementaire applicable.
Term limited deemed expired on prescribed date
Brevet réputé périmé à la date réglementaire
(4) If the prescribed fee and late fee are not paid before
the later of the end of six months after the applicable pre-
scribed date and the end of two months after the date of
the notice, the term limited for the duration of the patent
shall be deemed to have expired on the applicable pre-
scribed date.
(4) Si la taxe et la surtaxe ne sont pas payées dans les six
mois qui suivent la date réglementaire applicable ou, s’ils
se terminent plus tard, dans les deux mois qui suivent la
date de l’avis, le brevet est réputé périmé à la date régle-
mentaire applicable.
Subsection (4) deemed never to have produced its
effects
Paragraphe (4) réputé n’avoir jamais produit ses effets
(5) Subject to the regulations, if the term limited for the
duration of a patent is deemed to have expired under
subsection (4), that subsection is deemed never to have
produced its effects if
(a) the patentee, within the prescribed time,
(i) makes a request to the Commissioner for the
term limited for the duration of the patent to never
have been deemed to have expired,
(ii) states, in the request, the reasons for the failure
to pay the prescribed fee and late fee before the lat-
er of the end of six months after the applicable pre-
scribed date and the end of two months after the
date of the notice, and
(iii) pays the prescribed fee, the late fee and any
additional prescribed fee; and
(b) the Commissioner determines that the failure oc-
curred in spite of the due care required by the circum-
stances having been taken and informs the patentee of
this determination.
(5) Si le brevet est réputé périmé, sous réserve des règle-
ments, le paragraphe (4) est réputé n’avoir jamais pro-
duit ses effets si :
a) le titulaire du brevet, dans le délai réglementaire :
(i) présente au commissaire une requête pour obte-
nir que le brevet n’ait jamais été réputé périmé,
(ii) expose dans la requête les raisons pour les-
quelles il a omis de payer les taxe et surtaxe régle-
mentaires dans les six mois qui suivent la date ré-
glementaire applicable ou, s’ils se terminent plus
tard, dans les deux mois qui suivent la date de
l’avis,
(iii) paie les taxe et surtaxe réglementaires et toute
taxe réglementaire additionnelle;
b) le commissaire décide que l’omission a été com-
mise bien que la diligence requise en l’espèce ait été
exercée et avise le titulaire du brevet de sa décision.
Powers of the Federal Court
Pouvoir de la Cour fédérale
(6) If subsection (5) applies, the Federal Court may, by
order, declare the term limited for the duration of the
patent to have expired on the applicable prescribed date
if the Federal Court determines either
(6) En cas d’application du paragraphe (5), la Cour fédé-
rale peut, par ordonnance, déclarer le brevet périmé à la
date réglementaire applicable si elle conclut que, selon le
cas :


Patent
Brevets
Form and Term of Patents
Forme et durée des brevets
Sections 46-47
Articles 46-47
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
54
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(a) that the statement of the reasons referred to in
subparagraph (5)(a)(ii) contains a material allegation
that is untrue, or
(b) that, if paragraph (5)(b) applies, the failure re-
ferred to in subparagraph (5)(a)(ii) did not occur in
spite of the due care required by the circumstances
having been taken.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 46; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 16; 1993, c. 15, s. 43; 2014, c. 39,
s. 132.
a) l’exposé des raisons visé au sous-alinéa (5)a)(ii)
comprend quelque allégation importante qui n’est pas
conforme à la vérité;
b) en cas d’application de l’alinéa (5)b), l’omission vi-
sée à ce sous-alinéa n’a pas été commise bien que la
diligence requise en l’espèce ait été exercée.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 46; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 16; 1993, ch. 15, art. 43;
2014, ch. 39, art. 132.
Reissue of Patents
Redélivrance de brevets
Issue of new or amended patents
Délivrance de brevets nouveaux ou rectifiés
47 (1) Whenever any patent is deemed defective or in-
operative by reason of insufficient description and speci-
fication, or by reason of the patentee’s claiming more or
less than he had a right to claim as new, but at the same
time it appears that the error arose from inadvertence,
accident or mistake, without any fraudulent or deceptive
intention, the Commissioner may, on the surrender of
the patent within four years from its date and the pay-
ment of a further prescribed fee, cause a new patent, in
accordance with an amended description and specifica-
tion made by the patentee, to be issued to him for the
same invention for the then unexpired term for which the
original patent was granted.
47 (1) Lorsqu’un brevet est jugé défectueux ou inopé-
rant à cause d’une description et spécification insuffi-
sante, ou parce que le breveté a revendiqué plus ou
moins qu’il n’avait droit de revendiquer à titre d’inven-
tion nouvelle, mais qu’il apparaît en même temps que
l’erreur a été commise par inadvertance, accident ou mé-
prise, sans intention de frauder ou de tromper, le com-
missaire peut, si le breveté abandonne ce brevet dans un
délai de quatre ans à compter de la date du brevet, et
après acquittement d’une taxe réglementaire addition-
nelle, faire délivrer au breveté un nouveau brevet,
conforme à une description et spécification rectifiée par
le breveté, pour la même invention et pour la partie res-
tant alors à courir de la période pour laquelle le brevet
original a été accordé.
Certificate of supplementary protection
Certificat de protection supplémentaire
(1.1) Subsection (1) also applies in the case where the
original patent is set out in a certificate of supplementary
protection and the original patent’s term has expired, ex-
cept that in that case the issuance of the new patent,
whose term remains expired, is for the purpose of estab-
lishing the rights, privileges and liberties granted under
the certificate.
(1.1) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique également dans le cas
où la durée du brevet original mentionné dans un certifi-
cat de protection supplémentaire est expirée, à la diffé-
rence que la délivrance du nouveau brevet, dont la durée
demeure expirée, vise l’établissement des droits, des fa-
cultés et des privilèges conférés par le certificat.
Effect of new patent
Effet du nouveau brevet
(2) The surrender referred to in subsection (1) takes ef-
fect only on the issue of the new patent, and the new
patent and the amended description and specification
have the same effect in law, on the trial of any action
thereafter commenced for any cause subsequently accru-
ing, as if the amended description and specification had
been originally filed in their corrected form before the is-
sue of the original patent, but, in so far as the claims of
the original and reissued patents are identical, the sur-
render does not affect any action pending at the time of
reissue or abate any cause of action then existing, and the
reissued patent to the extent that its claims are identical
with the original patent constitutes a continuation there-
of and has effect continuously from the date of the origi-
nal patent.
(2) L’abandon visé au paragraphe (1) ne prend effet
qu’au moment de la délivrance du nouveau brevet, et ce
nouveau brevet, ainsi que la description et spécification
rectifiée, a le même effet en droit, dans l’instruction de
toute action engagée par la suite pour tout motif survenu
subséquemment, que si cette description et spécification
rectifiée avait été originalement déposée dans sa forme
corrigée, avant la délivrance du brevet original. Dans la
mesure où les revendications du brevet original et du
brevet redélivré sont identiques, un tel abandon n’atteint
aucune instance pendante au moment de la redélivrance,
ni n’annule aucun motif d’instance alors existant, et le
brevet redélivré, dans la mesure où ses revendications
sont identiques à celles du brevet original, constitue une
continuation du brevet original et est maintenu en


Patent
Brevets
Reissue of Patents
Redélivrance de brevets
Sections 47-48
Articles 47-48
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
55
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
vigueur sans interruption depuis la date du brevet origi-
nal.
Separate patents for separate parts
Brevets distincts pour éléments distincts
(3) The Commissioner may entertain separate applica-
tions and cause patents to be issued for distinct and sepa-
rate parts of the invention patented, on payment of the
fee for a reissue for each of the reissued patents.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 47; 2017, c. 6, s. 37.
(3) Le commissaire peut accueillir des demandes dis-
tinctes et faire délivrer des brevets pour des éléments dis-
tincts et séparés de l’invention brevetée, sur versement
de la taxe à payer pour la redélivrance de chacun de ces
brevets redélivrés.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 47; 2017, ch. 6, art. 37.
Disclaimers
Renonciations
Patentee may disclaim anything included in patent by
mistake
Cas de renonciation
48 (1) Whenever, by any mistake, accident or inadver-
tence, and without any wilful intent to defraud or mislead
the public, a patentee has
(a) made a specification too broad, claiming more
than that of which the patentee or the person through
whom the patentee claims was the inventor, or
(b) in the specification, claimed that the patentee or
the person through whom the patentee claims was the
inventor of any material or substantial part of the in-
vention patented of which the patentee was not the in-
ventor, and to which the patentee had no lawful right,
the patentee may, on payment of a prescribed fee, make a
disclaimer of the parts that the patentee does not claim to
hold by virtue of the patent or a transfer of the patent.
48 (1) Le breveté peut, en acquittant la taxe réglemen-
taire, renoncer à tel des éléments qu’il ne prétend pas re-
tenir au titre du brevet, ou d’un transfert de celui-ci, si,
par erreur, accident ou inadvertance, et sans intention de
frauder ou de tromper le public, dans l’un ou l’autre des
cas suivants :
a) il a donné trop d’étendue à son mémoire descriptif,
en revendiquant plus que la chose dont lui-même, ou
son mandataire, est l’inventeur;
b) il s’est représenté dans le mémoire descriptif, ou a
représenté son mandataire, comme étant l’inventeur
d’un élément matériel ou substantiel de l’invention
brevetée, alors qu’il n’en était pas l’inventeur et qu’il
n’y avait aucun droit.
Form and attestation of disclaimer
Forme et attestation de la renonciation
(2) A disclaimer shall be filed in the prescribed form and
manner.
(2) L’acte de renonciation est déposé selon les modalités
réglementaires, notamment de forme.
(3) [Repealed, 1993, c. 15, s. 44]
(3) [Abrogé, 1993, ch. 15, art. 44]
Pending suits not affected
Sans effet sur les actions pendantes
(4) No disclaimer affects any action pending at the time
when it is made, unless there is unreasonable neglect or
delay in making it.
(4) Dans toute action pendante au moment où elle est
faite, aucune renonciation n’a d’effet, sauf à l’égard de la
négligence ou du retard inexcusable à la faire.
(5) [Repealed, 2014, c. 39, s. 133]
(5) [Abrogé, 2014, ch. 39, art. 133]
Effect of disclaimer
Effet de la renonciation
(6) A patent shall, after disclaimer as provided in this
section, be deemed to be valid for such material and sub-
stantial part of the invention, definitely distinguished
from other parts thereof claimed without right, as is not
disclaimed and is truly the invention of the disclaimant,
(6) Après la renonciation, le brevet est considéré comme
valide quant à tel élément matériel et substantiel de l’in-
vention, nettement distinct des autres éléments de l’in-
vention qui avaient été indûment revendiqués, auquel il


Patent
Brevets
Disclaimers
Renonciations
Sections 48-48.2
Articles 48-48.2
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
56
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
and the disclaimant is entitled to maintain an action or
suit in respect of that part accordingly.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 48; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 17; 1993, c. 15, s. 44; 2014, c. 39,
s. 133.
n’a pas été renoncé et qui constitue véritablement l’in-
vention de l’auteur de la renonciation, et celui-ci est ad-
mis à soutenir en conséquence une action ou poursuite à
l’égard de cet élément.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 48; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 17; 1993, ch. 15, art. 44;
2014, ch. 39, art. 133.
Re-examination
Réexamen
Request for re-examination
Demande
48.1 (1) Any person may request a re-examination of
any claim of a patent by filing with the Commissioner
prior art, consisting of patents, applications for patents
open to public inspection and printed publications, and
by paying a prescribed fee.
48.1 (1) Chacun peut demander le réexamen de toute
revendication d’un brevet sur dépôt, auprès du commis-
saire, d’un dossier d’antériorité constitué de brevets, de
demandes de brevet accessibles au public et d’imprimés
et sur paiement des taxes réglementaires.
Pertinency of request
Pertinence
(2) A request for re-examination under subsection (1)
shall set forth the pertinency of the prior art and the
manner of applying the prior art to the claim for which
re-examination is requested.
(2) La demande énonce la pertinence du dossier et sa
correspondance avec les revendications du brevet.
Notice to patentee
Avis
(3) Forthwith after receipt of a request for re-examina-
tion under subsection (1), the Commissioner shall send a
copy of the request to the patentee of the patent in re-
spect of which the request is made, unless the patentee is
the person who made the request.
R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 18; 1993, c. 15, s. 45.
(3) Sur réception de la demande, le commissaire en ex-
pédie un double au titulaire du brevet attaqué, sauf si ce-
lui-ci est également le demandeur.
L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 18; 1993, ch. 15, art. 45.
Establishment of re-examination board
Constitution d’un conseil de réexamen
48.2 (1) Forthwith after receipt of a request for re-ex-
amination under subsection 48.1(1), the Commissioner
shall establish a re-examination board consisting of not
fewer than three persons, at least two of whom shall be
employees of the Patent Office, to which the request shall
be referred for determination.
48.2 (1) Sur dépôt de la demande, le commissaire
constitue un conseil de réexamen formé d’au moins trois
conseillers, dont deux au moins sont rattachés au Bureau
des brevets, qui se saisissent de la demande.
Determination to be made by board
Décision
(2) A re-examination board shall, within three months
following its establishment, determine whether a sub-
stantial new question of patentability affecting any claim
of the patent concerned is raised by the request for re-ex-
amination.
(2) Dans les trois mois suivant sa constitution, le conseil
décide si la demande soulève un nouveau point de fond
vis-à-vis de la brevetabilité des revendications du brevet
en cause.
Notice
Avis
(3) Where a re-examination board has determined that a
request for re-examination does not raise a substantial
new question affecting the patentability of a claim of the
patent concerned, the board shall so notify the person
who filed the request and the decision of the board is fi-
nal for all purposes and is not subject to appeal or to re-
view by any court.
(3) Le conseil avise le demandeur de toute décision néga-
tive, celle-ci étant finale et ne pouvant faire l’objet d’un
appel ou d’une révision judiciaire.


Patent
Brevets
Re-examination
Réexamen
Sections 48.2-48.4
Articles 48.2-48.4
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
57
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Idem
Idem
(4) Where a re-examination board has determined that a
request for re-examination raises a substantial new ques-
tion affecting the patentability of a claim of the patent
concerned, the board shall notify the patentee of the de-
termination and the reasons therefor.
(4) En cas de décision positive, le conseil expédie un avis
motivé de la décision au titulaire du brevet.
Filing of reply
Réponse
(5) A patentee who receives notice under subsection (4)
may, within three months of the date of the notice, sub-
mit to the re-examination board a reply to the notice set-
ting out submissions on the question of the patentability
of the claim of the patent in respect of which the notice
was given.
R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 18; 1993, c. 15, s. 46(F).
(5) Dans les trois mois suivant la date de l’avis, le titu-
laire en cause peut expédier au conseil une réponse expo-
sant ses observations sur la brevetabilité des revendica-
tions du brevet visé par l’avis.
L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 18; 1993, ch. 15, art. 46(F).
Re-examination proceeding
Procédure de réexamen
48.3 (1) On receipt of a reply under subsection 48.2(5)
or in the absence of any reply within three months after
notice is given under subsection 48.2(4), a re-examina-
tion board shall forthwith cause a re-examination to be
made of the claim of the patent in respect of which the
request for re-examination was submitted.
48.3 (1) Sur réception de la réponse ou au plus tard
trois mois après l’avis mentionné au paragraphe 48.2(4),
le conseil se saisit du réexamen des revendications du
brevet en cause.
Patentee may submit amendments
Dépôt de modifications
(2) In any re-examination proceeding under subsection
(1), the patentee may propose any amendment to the
patent or any new claims in relation thereto but no pro-
posed amendment or new claim enlarging the scope of a
claim of the patent shall be permitted.
(2) Le titulaire peut proposer des modifications au bre-
vet ou toute nouvelle revendication à cet égard qui n’ont
pas pour effet d’élargir la portée des revendications du
brevet original.
Time limitation
Durée
(3) A re-examination proceeding in respect of a claim of
a patent shall be completed within twelve months of the
commencement of the proceedings under subsection (1).
R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 18.
(3) Le réexamen doit être terminé dans les douze mois
suivant le début de la procédure.
L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 18.
Certificate of board
Constat
48.4 (1) On conclusion of a re-examination proceeding
in respect of a claim of a patent, the re-examination
board shall issue a certificate
(a) cancelling any claim of the patent determined to
be unpatentable;
(b) confirming any claim of the patent determined to
be patentable; or
(c) incorporating in the patent any proposed amended
or new claim determined to be patentable.
48.4 (1) À l’issue du réexamen, le conseil délivre un
constat portant rejet ou confirmation des revendications
du brevet attaqué ou, le cas échéant, versant au brevet
toute modification ou nouvelle revendication jugée bre-
vetable.


Patent
Brevets
Re-examination
Réexamen
Sections 48.4-49
Articles 48.4-49
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
58
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Certificate attached to patent
Annexe
(2) A certificate issued in respect of a patent under sub-
section (1) shall be attached to the patent and made part
thereof by reference, and a copy of the certificate shall be
sent by registered mail to the patentee.
(2) Le constat est annexé au brevet, dont il fait partie in-
tégrante. Un double en est expédié, par courrier recom-
mandé, au titulaire du brevet.
Effect of certificate
Effet du constat
(3) For the purposes of this Act, where a certificate is-
sued in respect of a patent under subsection (1)
(a) cancels any claim but not all claims of the patent,
the patent shall be deemed to have been issued, from
the date of grant, in the corrected form;
(b) cancels all claims of the patent, the patent shall be
deemed never to have been issued; or
(c) amends any claim of the patent or incorporates a
new claim in the patent, the amended claim or new
claim shall be effective, from the date of the certificate,
for the unexpired term of the patent.
(3) Pour l’application de la présente loi, lorsqu’un
constat :
a) rejette une revendication du brevet sans en rejeter
la totalité, celui-ci est réputé, à compter de la date de
sa délivrance, délivré en la forme modifiée;
b) rejette la totalité de ces revendications, le brevet
est réputé n’avoir jamais été délivré;
c) modifie une telle revendication ou en inclut une
nouvelle, l’une ou l’autre prend effet à compter de la
date du constat jusqu’à l’expiration de la durée du bre-
vet.
Appeals
Appel
(4) Subsection (3) does not apply until the time for tak-
ing an appeal has expired under subsection 48.5(2) and, if
an appeal is taken, subsection (3) applies only to the ex-
tent provided in the final judgment on the appeal.
R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 18; 1993, c. 15, s. 47.
(4) Le paragraphe (3) ne s’applique qu’à compter de l’ex-
piration du délai visé au paragraphe 48.5(2). S’il y a ap-
pel, il ne s’applique que dans la mesure prévue par le ju-
gement définitif rendu en l’espèce.
L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 18; 1993, ch. 15, art. 47.
Appeals
Appel
48.5 (1) Any decision of a re-examination board set out
in a certificate issued under subsection 48.4(1) is subject
to appeal by the patentee to the Federal Court.
48.5 (1) Le titulaire du brevet peut saisir la Cour fédé-
rale d’un appel portant sur le constat de décision visé au
paragraphe 48.4(1).
Limitation
Prescription
(2) No appeal may be taken under subsection (1) after
three months from the date a copy of the certificate is
sent by registered mail to the patentee.
R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 18.
(2) Il ne peut être formé d’appel plus de trois mois après
l’expédition du double du constat au titulaire du brevet.
L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 18.
Transfers
Transferts
Patent, application and right or interest in invention
Droits ou intérêts dans une invention, demandes de
brevets et brevets
49 (1) A patent, an application for a patent, and the
right or interest in an invention are transferable, in whole
or in part.
49 (1) Tout droit ou intérêt dans une invention, toute
demande de brevet et tout brevet est transférable en tout
ou en partie.
Recording of transfer of application
Inscription du transfert — demande de brevet
(2) The Commissioner shall, subject to the regulations,
record the transfer of an application for a patent on the
(2) Sous réserve des règlements, le commissaire inscrit le
transfert de toute demande de brevet sur demande du
demandeur ou, à la réception d’une preuve du transfert
qu’il juge satisfaisante, d’un cessionnaire de la demande.


Patent
Brevets
Transfers
Transferts
Sections 49-52.1
Articles 49-52.1
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
59
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
request of the applicant or, upon receipt of evidence sat-
isfactory to the Commissioner of the transfer, on the re-
quest of a transferee of the application.
Recording of transfer of patent
Inscription du transfert — brevet
(3) The Commissioner shall, subject to the regulations,
record the transfer of a patent on the request of the
patentee or, upon receipt of evidence satisfactory to the
Commissioner of the transfer, on the request of a trans-
feree of the patent.
(3) Sous réserve des règlements, le commissaire inscrit le
transfert de tout brevet sur demande du titulaire du bre-
vet ou, à la réception d’une preuve du transfert qu’il juge
satisfaisante, d’un cessionnaire du brevet.
Transfer void
Nullité du transfert
(4) A transfer of a patent that has not been recorded is
void against a subsequent transferee if the transfer to the
subsequent transferee has been recorded.
(4) Le transfert d’un brevet qui n’a pas été inscrit est nul
à l’égard d’un cessionnaire subséquent si le transfert du
brevet à celui-ci a été inscrit.
Removal of recording
Suppression de l’inscription du transfert
(5) The Commissioner shall remove the recording of the
transfer of an application for a patent or the transfer of a
patent on receipt of evidence satisfactory to the Commis-
sioner that the transfer should not have been recorded.
(5) Le commissaire supprime l’inscription du transfert
d’une demande de brevet ou du transfert d’un brevet à la
réception d’une preuve qu’il juge satisfaisante que le
transfert n’aurait pas dû être inscrit.
Limitation
Restriction
(6) The Commissioner is not authorized to remove the
recording of a transfer of a patent for the reason only that
the transferor had previously transferred the patent to
another person.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 49; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 19; 2014, c. 39, s. 134.
(6) Il ne peut toutefois supprimer l’inscription du trans-
fert d’un brevet pour le seul motif que le cédant avait déjà
transféré le brevet à une autre personne.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 49; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 19; 2014, ch. 39, art. 134.
50 [Repealed, 2014, c. 39, s. 134]
50 [Abrogé, 2014, ch. 39, art. 134]
51 [Repealed, 2014, c. 39, s. 134]
51 [Abrogé, 2014, ch. 39, art. 134]
Jurisdiction of Federal Court
Juridiction de la Cour fédérale
52 The Federal Court has jurisdiction, on the application
of the Commissioner or of any person interested, to order
that any entry in the records of the Patent Office relating
to the title to a patent be varied or expunged.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 54; R.S., c. 10(2nd Supp.), s. 64.
52 La Cour fédérale est compétente, sur la demande du
commissaire ou de toute personne intéressée, pour or-
donner que toute inscription dans les registres du Bureau
des brevets concernant le titre à un brevet soit modifiée
ou radiée.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 54; S.R., ch. 10(2e suppl.), art. 64.
Standard-Essential Patents
Brevets essentiels à une norme
Subsequent patentee or holder bound
Titulaire subséquent lié — brevet ou certificat
52.1 (1) A licensing commitment in respect of a stan-
dard-essential patent that binds the patentee, binds any
subsequent patentee and any holder of any certificate of
supplementary protection that sets out that patent.
52.1 (1) L’engagement d’accorder une licence relative à
un brevet essentiel à une norme qui lie le titulaire du bre-
vet lie également tout titulaire subséquent du brevet et
tout titulaire d’un certificat de protection supplémentaire
qui mentionne le brevet.
Subsequent holder bound
Titulaire subséquent lié
(2) If a certificate of supplementary protection sets out a
standard-essential patent, a licensing commitment that
(2) L’engagement d’accorder une licence qui lie le titu-
laire d’un certificat de protection supplémentaire


Patent
Brevets
Standard-Essential Patents
Brevets essentiels à une norme
Sections 52.1-53.1
Articles 52.1-53.1
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
60
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
binds the holder of that certificate of supplementary pro-
tection, binds any subsequent holder of the certificate of
supplementary protection.
mentionnant un brevet essentiel à une norme lie égale-
ment tout titulaire subséquent du certificat.
Application
Application
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) apply despite any other Act of
Parliament and any decision or order made under such
an Act.
2018, c. 27, s. 190.
(3) Les paragraphes (1) et (2) s’appliquent malgré toute
autre loi fédérale et toute décision ou ordonnance rendue
en vertu d’une telle loi.
2018, ch. 27, art. 190.
Regulations
Règlements
52.2 The Governor in Council may make regulations, for
the purposes of section 52.1, respecting what constitutes,
or does not constitute, a licensing commitment or a stan-
dard-essential patent.
2018, c. 27, s. 190.
52.2 Le gouverneur en conseil peut prendre des règle-
ments, pour l’application de l’article 52.1, concernant ce
qui constitue, ou ce qui ne constitue pas, un engagement
d’accorder une licence ou un brevet essentiel à une
norme.
2018, ch. 27, art. 190.
Legal Proceedings in Respect of
Patents
Procédures judiciaires relatives
aux brevets
Void in certain cases, or valid only for parts
Nul en certains cas, ou valide en partie seulement
53 (1) A patent is void if any material allegation in the
petition of the applicant in respect of the patent is un-
true, or if the specification and drawings contain more or
less than is necessary for obtaining the end for which
they purport to be made, and the omission or addition is
wilfully made for the purpose of misleading.
53 (1) Le brevet est nul si la pétition du demandeur, re-
lative à ce brevet, contient quelque allégation importante
qui n’est pas conforme à la vérité, ou si le mémoire des-
criptif et les dessins contiennent plus ou moins qu’il n’est
nécessaire pour démontrer ce qu’ils sont censés démon-
trer, et si l’omission ou l’addition est volontairement faite
pour induire en erreur.
Exception
Exception
(2) Where it appears to a court that the omission or ad-
dition referred to in subsection (1) was an involuntary er-
ror and it is proved that the patentee is entitled to the re-
mainder of his patent, the court shall render a judgment
in accordance with the facts, and shall determine the
costs, and the patent shall be held valid for that part of
the invention described to which the patentee is so found
to be entitled.
(2) S’il apparaît au tribunal que pareille omission ou ad-
dition est le résultat d’une erreur involontaire, et s’il est
prouvé que le breveté a droit au reste de son brevet, le
tribunal rend jugement selon les faits et statue sur les
frais. Le brevet est réputé valide quant à la partie de l’in-
vention décrite à laquelle le breveté est reconnu avoir
droit.
(3) [Repealed, 2017, c. 6, s. 38]
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 53; 2017, c. 6, s. 38.
(3) [Abrogé, 2017, ch. 6, art. 38]
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 53; 2017, ch. 6, art. 38.
Admissible in evidence
Admissibilité en preuve
53.1 (1) In any action or proceeding respecting a
patent, a written communication, or any part of such a
communication, may be admitted into evidence to rebut
any representation made by the patentee in the action or
proceeding as to the construction of a claim in the patent
if
(a) it is prepared in respect of
53.1 (1) Dans toute action ou procédure relative à un
brevet, toute communication écrite ou partie de celle-ci
peut être admise en preuve pour réfuter une déclaration
faite, dans le cadre de l’action ou de la procédure, par le
titulaire du brevet relativement à l’interprétation des re-
vendications se rapportant au brevet si les conditions sui-
vantes sont réunies :


Patent
Brevets
Legal Proceedings in Respect of Patents
Procédures judiciaires relatives aux brevets
Sections 53.1-54
Articles 53.1-54
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
61
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(i) the prosecution of the application for the patent,
(ii) a disclaimer made in respect of the patent, or
(iii) a request for re-examination, or a re-examina-
tion proceeding, in respect of the patent; and
(b) it is between
(i) the applicant for the patent or the patentee; and
(ii) the Commissioner, an officer or employee of
the Patent Office or a member of a re-examination
board.
a) elle est produite dans le cadre de la poursuite de la
demande du brevet ou, à l’égard de ce brevet, d’une re-
nonciation ou d’une demande ou procédure de réexa-
men;
b) elle est faite entre, d’une part, le demandeur ou le
titulaire du brevet, et d’autre part, le commissaire, un
membre du personnel du Bureau des brevets ou un
conseiller du conseil de réexamen.
Divisional application
Demande divisionnaire
(2) For the purposes of this section, the prosecution of a
divisional application is deemed to include the prosecu-
tion of the original application before that divisional ap-
plication is filed.
(2) Pour l’application du présent article, la poursuite de
toute demande divisionnaire est réputée comprendre la
poursuite de la demande originale avant le dépôt de cette
demande divisionnaire.
Reissued patent
Brevet redélivré
(3) For the purposes of this section, a written communi-
cation is deemed to be prepared in respect of the prose-
cution of the application for a reissued patent if it is pre-
pared in respect of
(a) the prosecution of the application for the patent
that was surrendered and from which the reissued
patent results; or
(b) the application for reissuance.
2018, c. 27, s. 191; 2018, c. 27, s. 211(F).
(3) Pour l’application du présent article, les communica-
tions écrites ci-après sont réputées être produites dans le
cadre de la poursuite de la demande de brevet redélivré :
a) celles produites dans le cadre de la poursuite de la
demande du brevet qui a été abandonné et qui est à
l’origine du brevet redélivré;
b) celles produites dans le cadre de la demande de re-
délivrance.
2018, ch. 27, art. 191; 2018, ch. 27, art. 211(F).
Infringement
Contrefaçon
Jurisdiction of courts
Juridiction des tribunaux
54 (1) An action for the infringement of a patent may be
brought in that court of record that, in the province in
which the infringement is said to have occurred, has ju-
risdiction, pecuniarily, to the amount of the damages
claimed and that, with relation to the other courts of the
province, holds its sittings nearest to the place of resi-
dence or of business of the defendant, and that court
shall decide the case and determine the costs, and as-
sumption of jurisdiction by the court is of itself sufficient
proof of jurisdiction.
54 (1) Une action en contrefaçon de brevet peut être
portée devant la cour d’archives qui, dans la province où
il est allégué que la contrefaçon s’est produite, a juridic-
tion, pécuniairement, jusqu’à concurrence du montant
des dommages-intérêts réclamés et qui, par rapport aux
autres tribunaux de la province, tient ses audiences dans
l’endroit le plus rapproché du lieu de résidence ou d’af-
faires du défendeur. Ce tribunal juge la cause et statue
sur les frais, et l’appropriation de juridiction par le tribu-
nal est en soi une preuve suffisante de juridiction.
Jurisdiction of Federal Court
Juridiction de la Cour fédérale
(2) Nothing in this section impairs the jurisdiction of the
Federal Court under section 20 of the Federal Courts Act
or otherwise.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 54; 2002, c. 8, s. 182.
(2) Le présent article n’a pas pour effet de restreindre la
juridiction attribuée à la Cour fédérale par l’article 20 de
la Loi sur les Cours fédérales ou autrement.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 54; 2002, ch. 8, art. 182.


Patent
Brevets
Infringement
Contrefaçon
Sections 55-55.11
Articles 55-55.11
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
62
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Liability for patent infringement
Contrefaçon et recours
55 (1) A person who infringes a patent is liable to the
patentee and to all persons claiming under the patentee
for all damage sustained by the patentee or by any such
person, after the grant of the patent, by reason of the in-
fringement.
55 (1) Quiconque contrefait un brevet est responsable
envers le breveté et toute personne se réclamant de celui-
ci du dommage que cette contrefaçon leur a fait subir
après l’octroi du brevet.
Liability damage before patent is granted
Indemnité raisonnable
(2) A person is liable to pay reasonable compensation to
a patentee and to all persons claiming under the patentee
for any damage sustained by the patentee or by any of
those persons by reason of any act on the part of that per-
son, after the specification contained in the application
for the patent became open to public inspection, in En-
glish or French, under section 10 and before the grant of
the patent, that would have constituted an infringement
of the patent if the patent had been granted on the day
the specification became open to public inspection, in
English or French, under that section.
(2) Est responsable envers le breveté et toute personne
se réclamant de celui-ci, à concurrence d’une indemnité
raisonnable, quiconque accomplit un acte leur faisant su-
bir un dommage après la date à laquelle le mémoire des-
criptif compris dans la demande de brevet est devenu ac-
cessible au public, en français ou en anglais, sous le
régime de l’article 10 et avant la date de l’octroi du bre-
vet, dans le cas où cet acte aurait constitué une contrefa-
çon si le brevet avait été octroyé à la date où ce mémoire
descriptif est ainsi devenu accessible.
Patentee to be a party
Partie à l’action
(3) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the patentee
shall be or be made a party to any proceeding under sub-
section (1) or (2).
(3) Sauf disposition expresse contraire, le breveté est, ou
est constitué, partie à tout recours fondé sur les para-
graphes (1) ou (2).
Deemed action for infringement
Assimilation à une action en contrefaçon
(4) For the purposes of this section and sections 54 and
55.01 to 59, any proceeding under subsection (2) is
deemed to be an action for the infringement of a patent
and the act on which that proceeding is based is deemed
to be an act of infringement of the patent.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 55; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 21; 1993, c. 15, s. 48; 2014, c. 39,
s. 135.
(4) Pour l’application des autres dispositions du présent
article et des articles 54 et 55.01 à 59, le recours visé au
paragraphe (2) est réputé être une action en contrefaçon
et l’acte sur lequel il se fonde est réputé être un acte de
contrefaçon.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 55; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 21; 1993, ch. 15, art. 48;
2014, ch. 39, art. 135.
Limitation
Prescription
55.01 No remedy may be awarded for an act of infringe-
ment committed more than six years before the com-
mencement of the action for infringement.
1993, c. 15, s. 48.
55.01 Tout recours visant un acte de contrefaçon se
prescrit à compter de six ans de la commission de celui-
ci.
1993, ch. 15, art. 48.
Burden of proof for patented process
Nouveau produit
55.1 In an action for infringement of a patent granted
for a process for obtaining a new product, any product
that is the same as the new product shall, in the absence
of proof to the contrary, be considered to have been pro-
duced by the patented process.
1993, c. 2, s. 4, c. 44, s. 193.
55.1 Dans une action en contrefaçon d’un brevet accor-
dé pour un procédé relatif à un nouveau produit, tout
produit qui est identique au nouveau produit est, en l’ab-
sence de preuve contraire, réputé avoir été produit par le
procédé breveté.
1993, ch. 2, art. 4, ch. 44, art. 193.
Exception — third party rights
Exception — droits des tiers
55.11 (1) This section applies only in respect of the fol-
lowing patents and certificates of supplementary protec-
tion that set out the following patents:
55.11 (1) Le présent article ne s’applique qu’aux bre-
vets ci-après ou aux certificats de protection supplémen-
taires qui mentionnent ces brevets :


Patent
Brevets
Infringement
Contrefaçon
Section 55.11
Article 55.11
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
63
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(a) a patent that was granted on the basis of an appli-
cation
(i) in respect of which the prescribed fee referred to
in subsection 27.1(2) was not paid on or before the
applicable prescribed date referred to in that sub-
section, without taking into account subsection
27.1(3),
(ii) in respect of which a request referred to in sub-
section 35(2) was not made and the prescribed fee
referred to in that subsection was not paid within
the prescribed time referred to in that subsection,
without taking into account subsection 35(4), or
(iii) that was deemed abandoned under paragraph
73(1)(a), (b) or (e), under paragraph 73(1)(f) as it
read at any time before the coming into force of this
subparagraph or under subsection 73(2);
(b) a patent that was granted on the basis of a divi-
sional application that
(i) results, under subsection 36(2) or (2.1), from the
division of an original application that is an appli-
cation referred to in this paragraph or paragraph
(a), and
(ii) was filed after the beginning of the period re-
ferred to in subsection (2) or, if it is earlier, the pe-
riod referred to in subsection (3), that applies to the
patent granted on the basis of the original applica-
tion or that would apply to that patent if it were
granted; and
(c) a patent in respect of which the prescribed fee re-
ferred to in subsection 46(2) was not paid on or before
the applicable prescribed date referred to in that sub-
section, without taking into account subsection 46(3).
a) le brevet qui a été accordé au titre d’une demande,
selon le cas :
(i) pour laquelle la taxe réglementaire visée au pa-
ragraphe 27.1(2) n’a pas été payée au plus tard à la
date réglementaire applicable visée à ce para-
graphe, compte non tenu du paragraphe 27.1(3),
(ii) pour laquelle la requête visée au paragraphe
35(2) n’a pas été faite — et la taxe réglementaire vi-
sée à celui-ci n’a pas été payée — dans le délai régle-
mentaire visé à ce paragraphe, compte non tenu du
paragraphe 35(4),
(iii) qui a été réputée abandonnée par application
des alinéas 73(1)a), b) ou e), de l’alinéa 73(1)f), dans
ses versions antérieures à la date d’entrée en vi-
gueur du présent sous-alinéa, ou du paragraphe
73(2);
b) le brevet qui a été accordé au titre d’une demande
divisionnaire qui, à la fois :
(i) résulte, au titre des paragraphes 36(2) ou (2.1),
de la division d’une demande originale qui est une
demande visée au présent alinéa ou à l’alinéa a),
(ii) a été déposée après le début d’une période —
celle visée au paragraphe (2) ou, si elle est anté-
rieure, celle visée au paragraphe (3) — qui s’ap-
plique au brevet accordé au titre de la demande ori-
ginale ou qui s’appliquerait à un tel brevet s’il était
accordé;
c) le brevet à l’égard duquel la taxe réglementaire vi-
sée au paragraphe 46(2) n’a pas été payée au plus tard
à la date réglementaire applicable visée à ce para-
graphe, compte non tenu du paragraphe 46(3).
Act committed during period
Actes commis pendant la période
(2) If, during a period that is established by regulations
made under paragraph 12(1)(j.74) that relates to a patent,
a person, in good faith, committed an act that would oth-
erwise constitute an infringement of that patent, that act
is not an infringement of the patent.
(2) Si, pendant une période prévue par règlement pris en
vertu de l’alinéa 12(1)j.74) qui se rapporte à un brevet,
une personne a commis de bonne foi un acte qui par
ailleurs constituerait un acte de contrefaçon du brevet,
cet acte ne constitue pas une contrefaçon de ce brevet.
Act committed after period
Actes commis après la période
(3) Subject to subsection (4), if — during a period estab-
lished by regulations made under paragraph 12(1)(j.75)
that relates to a patent — a person, in good faith, com-
mitted an act that would otherwise constitute an in-
fringement of that patent or made serious and effective
preparations to commit that act, it is not an infringement
(3) Sous réserve du paragraphe (4), si, pendant une pé-
riode prévue par règlement pris en vertu de l’alinéa
12(1)j.75) qui se rapporte à un brevet, une personne a
commis de bonne foi un acte qui par ailleurs constitue-
rait un acte de contrefaçon du brevet, ou a fait de bonne
foi des préparatifs effectifs et sérieux en vue de com-
mettre un tel acte, l’acte ne constitue pas une contrefaçon
de ce brevet, ou de tout certificat de protection


Patent
Brevets
Infringement
Contrefaçon
Section 55.11
Article 55.11
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
64
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
of the patent or any certificate of supplementary protec-
tion that sets out the patent if the person commits the act
after that period.
supplémentaire qui mentionne le brevet, si cette per-
sonne le commet après cette période.
Transfer
Transfert
(4) If the act referred to in subsection (3) is committed or
the preparations to commit it are made in the course of a
business and that business, or the part of that business in
the course of which the act was committed or the prepa-
rations were made, is subsequently transferred,
(a) subsection (3) or paragraph (b), as the case may
be, does not apply in respect of an act committed by
the transferor after the transfer; and
(b) it is not an infringement of the patent or any cer-
tificate of supplementary protection that sets out the
patent if the transferee commits the act after the
transfer.
(4) Si l’acte visé au paragraphe (3) a été commis, ou si les
préparatifs en vue de la commission de l’acte ont été
faits, dans le cadre d’une entreprise et que celle-ci, ou la
partie de celle-ci dans le cadre de laquelle l’acte a été
commis ou les préparatifs ont été faits, est ensuite trans-
férée, les règles suivantes s’appliquent :
a) le paragraphe (3) ou l’alinéa b), selon le cas, ne
s’applique pas à l’acte commis par le cédant après le
transfert;
b) l’acte ne constitue pas une contrefaçon du brevet,
ou de tout certificat de protection supplémentaire qui
mentionne le brevet, si le cessionnaire le commet
après le transfert.
Use or sale of article
Utilisation ou vente d’un article
(5) The use or sale of an article is not an infringement of
a patent or any certificate of supplementary protection
that sets out the patent if that article was acquired, di-
rectly or indirectly, from a person who, at the time they
disposed of it, could, under subsection (2) or (3) or para-
graph (4)(b), sell the article without infringing the patent
or the certificate.
(5) L’utilisation ou la vente d’un article ne constitue pas
une contrefaçon de brevet, ou de tout certificat de protec-
tion supplémentaire qui mentionne le brevet, si l’article
est acquis, de façon directe ou autrement, d’une personne
qui, au moment où elle s’en est départie, pouvait, aux
termes des paragraphes (2) ou (3) ou de l’alinéa (4)b), le
vendre sans contrefaire le brevet ou le certificat.
Use of service
Utilisation d’un service
(6) The use of a service is not an infringement of a patent
if the service is provided by a person who, under subsec-
tion (2) or (3) or paragraph (4)(b), is able to provide it
without infringing the patent.
(6) L’utilisation d’un service ne constitue pas une contre-
façon de brevet si le service est fourni par une personne
qui peut, aux termes des paragraphes (2) ou (3) ou de
l’alinéa (4)b), le faire sans contrefaire le brevet.
Use of article
Utilisation d’un article
(7) Subject to subsection (8), the use of an article is not
an infringement of a patent or any certificate of supple-
mentary protection that sets out the patent if the article
was acquired, directly or indirectly, from a person who,
during a period that is established by regulations made
under paragraph 12(1)(j.75) that relates to that patent, in
good faith, made or sold, or made serious and effective
preparations to make or sell, an article that is substan-
tially the same as the one used, for that use.
(7) Sous réserve du paragraphe (8), l’utilisation d’un ar-
ticle ne constitue pas une contrefaçon de brevet, ou de
tout certificat de protection supplémentaire qui men-
tionne le brevet, si l’article est acquis, directement ou au-
trement, d’une personne qui, pendant une période pré-
vue par règlement pris en vertu de l’alinéa 12(1)j.75) qui
se rapporte au brevet, a de bonne foi fabriqué ou vendu
— ou a fait de bonne foi des préparatifs effectifs et sé-
rieux en vue de fabriquer ou de vendre — un article, qui
est sensiblement le même que celui utilisé, pour cette uti-
lisation.
Transfer
Transfert
(8) If the making or selling referred to in subsection (7)
was done or the preparations to do so were made in the
course of a business and that business, or the part of that
business in the course of which the making or selling was
(8) Si la fabrication ou la vente visée au paragraphe (7),
ou les préparatifs en vue de la fabrication ou de la vente,
ont été faits dans le cadre d’une entreprise et que celle-ci,
ou la partie de celle-ci dans le cadre de laquelle la


Patent
Brevets
Infringement
Contrefaçon
Sections 55.11-55.2
Articles 55.11-55.2
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
65
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
done or the preparations were made, is subsequently
transferred, then
(a) subsection (7) or paragraph (b), as the case may
be, does not apply in respect of an article that is made
or sold by the transferor after the transfer; and
(b) it is not an infringement of a patent or a certificate
of supplemental protection referred to in subsection
(7) to use an article for the use referred to in that sub-
section if it was made or sold for that use by the trans-
feree after the transfer.
fabrication, la vente ou les préparatifs ont été faits, est
ensuite transférée, les règles suivantes s’appliquent :
a) le paragraphe (7) ou l’alinéa b), selon le cas, ne
s’applique pas à l’égard de l’article qui, après le trans-
fert, est fabriqué ou vendu par le cédant;
b) l’utilisation de l’article ne constitue pas une contre-
façon du brevet, ou de tout certificat de protection
supplémentaire, visé au paragraphe (7) si l’utilisateur
en fait la même utilisation que celle prévue à ce para-
graphe et que l’article est fabriqué ou vendu par le ces-
sionnaire, après le transfert, pour cette utilisation.
Use of service
Utilisation d’un service
(9) Subject to subsection (10), the use of a service is not
an infringement of a patent if the service is provided by a
person who, during a period that is established by regula-
tions made under paragraph 12(1)(j.75) that relates to
that patent, provided, or made serious and effective
preparations to provide, a service that is substantially the
same as the one used, for that use.
(9) Sous réserve du paragraphe (10), l’utilisation d’un
service ne constitue pas une contrefaçon de brevet si le
service a été fourni par une personne qui, pendant une
période prévue par règlement pris en vertu de l’alinéa
12(1)j.75) qui se rapporte au brevet, a de bonne foi fourni
— ou a fait de bonne foi des préparatifs effectifs et sé-
rieux en vue de fournir — un service, qui est sensible-
ment le même que celui utilisé, pour cette utilisation.
Transfer
Transfert
(10) If, during the period referred to in subsection (9),
the service was provided or the preparations to provide it
were made in the course of a business and that business,
or the part of that business in the course of which the ser-
vice was provided or the preparations to do so were
made, is subsequently transferred, then, after the trans-
fer
(a) the transferor is deemed to no longer be the per-
son referred to in subsection (9) for the purposes of
that subsection; and
(b) the transferee is deemed to be the person who pro-
vided the service for the purposes of subsection (9).
2014, c. 39, s. 136; 2015, c. 36, ss. 59, 65(F); 2018, c. 27, s. 207.
(10) Si, pendant la période visée au paragraphe (9), le
service a été fourni ou si les préparatifs en vue de la four-
niture du service ont été faits dans le cadre d’une entre-
prise et que celle-ci, ou la partie de celle-ci dans le cadre
de laquelle le service a été fourni ou les préparatifs ont
été faits, est ensuite transférée, les règles ci-après s’ap-
pliquent après le transfert :
a) le cédant est réputé ne plus être la personne visée
au paragraphe (9) pour l’application de ce paragraphe;
b) le cessionnaire est réputé être la personne qui a
fourni le service pour l’application du paragraphe (9).
2014, ch. 39, art. 136; 2015, ch. 36, art. 59 et 65(F); 2018, ch. 27, art. 207.
Exception
Exception
55.2 (1) It is not an infringement of a patent for any
person to make, construct, use or sell the patented inven-
tion solely for uses reasonably related to the development
and submission of information required under any law of
Canada, a province or a country other than Canada that
regulates the manufacture, construction, use or sale of
any product.
55.2 (1) Il n’y a pas contrefaçon de brevet lorsque l’uti-
lisation, la fabrication, la construction ou la vente d’une
invention brevetée se justifie dans la seule mesure néces-
saire à la préparation et à la production du dossier d’in-
formation qu’oblige à fournir une loi fédérale, provinciale
ou étrangère réglementant la fabrication, la construction,
l’utilisation ou la vente d’un produit.
(2) and (3) [Repealed, 2001, c. 10, s. 2]
(2) et (3) [Abrogés, 2001, ch. 10, art. 2]
Regulations
Règlements
(4) The Governor in Council may make regulations re-
specting the infringement of any patent that, directly or
(4) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par règlement, régir la
contrefaçon de tout brevet qui résulte ou pourrait


Patent
Brevets
Infringement
Contrefaçon
Section 55.2
Article 55.2
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
66
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
indirectly, could result or results from the making, con-
struction, use or sale of a patented invention in accor-
dance with subsection (1), including regulations
(a) respecting the conditions that must be fulfilled be-
fore a document — including a notice, certificate or
permit — concerning any product to which a patent
may relate may be issued to any person under any Act
of Parliament that regulates the manufacture, con-
struction, use or sale of that product, in addition to
any conditions provided for by or under that Act;
(b) respecting the earliest day on which such a docu-
ment may be issued to a person and the earliest day on
which it may take effect, and respecting the manner in
which each day is to be determined;
(c) respecting the issuance, suspension or revocation
of such a document in circumstances where, directly
or indirectly, the document’s issuance could result or
results in the infringement of a patent;
(d) respecting the prevention and resolution of dis-
putes with respect to the day on which such a docu-
ment may be issued or take effect;
(e) respecting the prevention and resolution of dis-
putes with respect to the infringement of a patent that
could result directly or indirectly from the manufac-
ture, construction, use or sale of a product referred to
in paragraph (a);
(f) respecting the resolution of disputes with respect
to the infringement of a patent that results directly or
indirectly from the manufacture, construction, use or
sale of such a product;
(g) conferring rights of action with respect to disputes
referred to in any of paragraphs (d) to (f);
(h) restricting or excluding the application of other
rights of action under this Act or another Act of Parlia-
ment to disputes referred to in any of paragraphs (d)
to (f);
(i) designating the court of competent jurisdiction in
which a proceeding with respect to rights of action re-
ferred to in paragraph (g) is to be heard;
(j) respecting such proceedings, including the proce-
dure of the court in the matter, the defences that may
be pleaded, the remedies that may be sought, the join-
der of parties and of rights of action and the consoli-
dation of other proceedings, the decisions and orders
the court may make and any appeals from those deci-
sions and orders; and
résulter, de façon directe ou autrement, de la fabrication,
de la construction, de l’utilisation ou de la vente, au titre
du paragraphe (1), d’une invention brevetée, et notam-
ment :
a) régir les conditions complémentaires nécessaires à
la délivrance à quiconque, relativement à un produit
auquel peut se rapporter un brevet, de tout titre —
avis, certificat, permis ou autre — en vertu de lois fé-
dérales régissant la fabrication, la construction, l’utili-
sation ou la vente d’un tel produit;
b) régir la première date à laquelle un tel titre peut
être délivré et celle à laquelle il peut prendre effet, ain-
si que la manière de fixer chacune de ces dates;
c) régir la délivrance, la suspension ou la révocation
d’un tel titre lorsque la délivrance de celui-ci entraîne
ou pourrait entraîner, de façon directe ou autrement,
la contrefaçon d’un brevet;
d) régir la prévention et le règlement de différends
portant sur la date à laquelle un tel titre peut être déli-
vré ou prendre effet;
e) régir la prévention et le règlement de différends
portant sur la contrefaçon d’un brevet qui pourrait ré-
sulter, de façon directe ou autrement, de la fabrica-
tion, de la construction, de l’utilisation ou de la vente
d’un produit visé à l’alinéa a);
f) régir le règlement de différends portant sur la
contrefaçon d’un brevet qui résulte, de façon directe
ou autrement, de la fabrication, de la construction, de
l’utilisation ou de la vente d’un tel produit;
g) conférer des droits d’action concernant les diffé-
rends visés à l’un ou l’autre des alinéas d) à f);
h) limiter ou interdire le recours à d’autres droits
d’action prévus par toute loi fédérale concernant les
différends visés à l’un ou l’autre des alinéas d) à f);
i) désigner le tribunal compétent à l’égard des procé-
dures résultant de l’exercice des droits d’action visés à
l’alinéa g);
j) régir ces procédures, notamment la procédure de-
vant ce tribunal, les moyens de défense qui peuvent
être invoqués, les conclusions qui peuvent être recher-
chées, la jonction de parties, la réunion de droits d’ac-
tion ou d’autres procédures, les décisions et ordon-
nances qui peuvent être rendues ainsi que les appels
de ces décisions et ordonnances;


Patent
Brevets
Infringement
Contrefaçon
Sections 55.2-56
Articles 55.2-56
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
67
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(k) specifying who may be an interested person for
the purposes of subsection 60(1) with respect to dis-
putes referred to in paragraph (e).
k) préciser qui peut être un intéressé pour l’applica-
tion du paragraphe 60(1) dans le cadre des différends
visés à l’alinéa e).
Inconsistency or conflict
Divergences
(5) In the event of any inconsistency or conflict between
(a) this section or any regulations made under this
section, and
(b) any Act of Parliament or any regulations made
thereunder,
this section or the regulations made under this section
shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict.
(5) Une disposition réglementaire prise sous le régime
du présent article prévaut sur toute disposition législative
ou réglementaire fédérale divergente.
For greater certainty
Précision
(6) For greater certainty, subsection (1) does not affect
any exception to the exclusive property or privilege
granted by a patent that exists at law in respect of acts
done privately and on a non-commercial scale or for a
non-commercial purpose.
1993, c. 2, s. 4; 2001, c. 10, s. 2; 2017, c. 6, s. 39; 2018, c. 27, s. 192.
(6) Il est entendu que le paragraphe (1) n’a pas pour effet
de porter atteinte au régime légal des exceptions au droit
de propriété ou au privilège exclusif que confère un bre-
vet en ce qui touche l’usage privé et sur une échelle ou
dans un but non commercial.
1993, ch. 2, art. 4; 2001, ch. 10, art. 2; 2017, ch. 6, art. 39; 2018, ch. 27, art. 192.
Exception — experimentation
Exception — expérimentation
55.3 (1) An act committed for the purpose of experi-
mentation relating to the subject-matter of a patent is not
an infringement of the patent.
55.3 (1) L’acte commis dans un but d’expérimentation à
l’égard de l’objet d’un brevet ne constitue pas une contre-
façon du brevet.
Regulations
Règlements
(2) The Governor in Council may make regulations re-
specting
(a) factors that the court may consider, must consider
or is not permitted to consider in determining whether
an act is, or is not, committed for the purpose set out
in subsection (1); and
(b) circumstances in which an act is, or is not, com-
mitted for the purpose set out in subsection (1).
2018, c. 27, s. 193.
(2) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par règlement, régir :
a) les facteurs dont le tribunal peut ou doit tenir
compte — et ceux dont il ne peut tenir compte — afin
de décider si l’acte est commis ou non dans le but visé
au paragraphe (1);
b) les circonstances dans lesquelles l’acte est commis,
ou non, dans un tel but.
2018, ch. 27, art. 193.
Exception — prior use
Exception — utilisation antérieure
56 (1) Subject to subsection (2), if — before the claim
date of a claim in a patent — a person, in good faith, com-
mitted an act that would otherwise constitute an in-
fringement of the patent in respect of that claim, or made
serious and effective preparations to commit such an act,
it is not an infringement of the patent or any certificate of
supplementary protection that sets out the patent, in re-
spect of that claim, if the person commits the same act on
or after that claim date.
56 (1) Sous réserve du paragraphe (2), si une personne,
avant la date d’une revendication se rapportant à un bre-
vet et de bonne foi, a commis un acte qui par ailleurs
constituerait une contrefaçon du brevet relativement à la
revendication, ou a fait de bonne foi des préparatifs effec-
tifs et sérieux en vue de commettre un tel acte, l’acte ne
constitue pas une contrefaçon du brevet ou de tout certi-
ficat de protection supplémentaire qui mentionne le bre-
vet, relativement à cette revendication, si cette personne
commet le même acte à compter de cette date.


Patent
Brevets
Infringement
Contrefaçon
Section 56
Article 56
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
68
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Transfer
Transfert
(2) If the act referred to in subsection (1) is committed or
the preparations to commit it are made in the course of a
business and that business, or the part of that business in
the course of which the act was committed or the prepa-
rations were made, is subsequently transferred,
(a) subsection (1) or paragraph (b), as the case may
be, does not apply to an act committed by the transfer-
or after the transfer; and
(b) it is not an infringement of the patent or any cer-
tificate of supplementary protection that sets out the
patent, in respect of the claim, if the transferee com-
mits the act after the transfer.
(2) Si l’acte visé au paragraphe (1) a été commis, ou si les
préparatifs en vue de la commission de l’acte ont été
faits, dans le cadre d’une entreprise et que celle-ci, ou la
partie de celle-ci dans le cadre de laquelle l’acte a été
commis ou les préparatifs ont été faits, est ensuite trans-
férée, les règles suivantes s’appliquent :
a) le paragraphe (1) ou l’alinéa b), selon le cas, ne
s’applique pas à l’acte commis par le cédant après le
transfert;
b) l’acte ne constitue pas une contrefaçon du brevet
ou de tout certificat de protection supplémentaire qui
mentionne le brevet, relativement à la revendication,
si le cessionnaire le commet après le transfert.
Exception — use or sale of article
Exception — utilisation ou vente d’un article
(3) The use or sale of an article is not an infringement of
a patent or any certificate of supplementary protection
that sets out the patent if that article was acquired, di-
rectly or indirectly, from a person who, at the time they
disposed of it, could sell it without infringing the patent
or the certificate
(a) because the person, before the claim date of a
claim in the patent, in good faith, committed an act
that would otherwise constitute an infringement of the
patent in respect of that claim and they disposed of the
article before that claim date; or
(b) under subsection (1) or paragraph (2)(b).
(3) L’utilisation ou la vente d’un article ne constitue pas
une contrefaçon de brevet, ou de tout certificat de protec-
tion supplémentaire qui mentionne le brevet, si l’article
est acquis, de façon directe ou autrement, d’une personne
qui, au moment où elle s’en est départie, pouvait le
vendre sans contrefaire le brevet ou le certificat :
a) parce que la personne, avant la date d’une revendi-
cation se rapportant au brevet et de bonne foi, a com-
mis un acte qui par ailleurs constituerait une contrefa-
çon du brevet relativement à la revendication et qu’elle
s’en est départie avant cette date;
b) aux termes du paragraphe (1) ou de l’alinéa (2)b).
Exception — use of service
Exception — utilisation d’un service
(4) The use of a service is not an infringement of a patent
if the service is provided by a person who, under subsec-
tion (1) or paragraph (2)(b), is able to provide it without
infringing the patent.
(4) L’utilisation d’un service ne constitue pas une contre-
façon de brevet si le service est fourni par une personne
qui peut, aux termes du paragraphe (1) ou de l’alinéa
(2)b), le faire sans contrefaire le brevet.
Non-application
Non-application
(5) Subsection (1) or paragraph (3)(a) does not apply if
the person referred to in that subsection or that para-
graph was able, as the case may be, to commit the act or
make the preparations to commit the act only because
they obtained knowledge of the subject-matter defined by
the claim, directly or indirectly, from the applicant of the
application on the basis of which the patent was granted
and they knew that the applicant was the source of the
knowledge.
(5) Le paragraphe (1) ou l’alinéa (3)a) ne s’applique pas
si la personne visée à ce paragraphe ou à cet alinéa a pu,
selon le cas, commettre l’acte ou faire les préparatifs en
vue de le commettre uniquement parce qu’elle a obtenu,
de façon directe ou autrement, l’information à l’égard de
l’objet que définit la revendication de la part du deman-
deur de la demande au titre de laquelle le brevet a été ac-
cordé et qu’elle savait que cette information provenait du
demandeur.
Exception — use of article
Exception — utilisation d’un article
(6) Subject to subsection (7), the use of an article is not
an infringement of a patent or any certificate of supple-
mentary protection that sets out the patent, in respect of
(6) Sous réserve du paragraphe (7), l’utilisation d’un ar-
ticle ne constitue pas une contrefaçon de brevet ou de
tout 
certificat 
de 
protection 
supplémentaire 
qui


Patent
Brevets
Infringement
Contrefaçon
Section 56
Article 56
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
69
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
a claim, if the article was acquired, directly or indirectly,
from a person who, before the claim date of that claim, in
good faith, made or sold, or made serious and effective
preparations to make or sell, an article that is substan-
tially the same as the one used, for that use.
mentionne le brevet, relativement à une revendication, si
l’article est acquis, directement ou autrement, d’une per-
sonne qui, avant la date de la revendication, a de bonne
foi fabriqué ou vendu — ou a fait de bonne foi des prépa-
ratifs effectifs et sérieux en vue de fabriquer ou de vendre
— un article, qui est sensiblement le même que celui uti-
lisé, pour cette utilisation.
Transfer
Transfert
(7) If the making or selling referred to in subsection (6)
was done or the preparations to do so were made in the
course of a business and that business, or the part of that
business in the course of which the making or selling was
done or the preparations were made, is subsequently
transferred, then
(a) subsection (6) or paragraph (b), as the case may
be, does not apply in respect of an article that is made
or sold by the transferor after the transfer; and
(b) it is not an infringement of the patent or any cer-
tificate of supplementary protection that sets out the
patent, in respect of a claim referred to in subsection
(6), to use an article for the use referred to in that sub-
section if it was made or sold for that use by the trans-
feree after the transfer.
(7) Si la fabrication ou la vente visée au paragraphe (6),
ou les préparatifs en vue de la fabrication ou de la vente,
ont été faits dans le cadre d’une entreprise et que celle-ci,
ou la partie de celle-ci dans le cadre de laquelle la fabri-
cation, la vente ou les préparatifs ont été faits, est ensuite
transférée, les règles suivantes s’appliquent :
a) le paragraphe (6) ou l’alinéa b), selon le cas, ne
s’applique pas à l’égard de l’article qui, après le trans-
fert, est fabriqué ou vendu par le cédant;
b) l’utilisation de l’article ne constitue pas une contre-
façon du brevet ou de tout certificat de protection sup-
plémentaire qui mentionne le brevet, à l’égard de la
revendication visée au paragraphe (6), si l’utilisateur
en fait la même utilisation que celle prévue à ce para-
graphe et que l’article est fabriqué ou vendu par le ces-
sionnaire, après le transfert, pour cette utilisation.
Non-application
Non-application
(8) Subsection (6) does not apply if the person referred
to in that subsection was able to make or sell, or to make
the preparations to make or sell, the article only because
they obtained knowledge of the use defined by the claim,
directly or indirectly, from the applicant of the applica-
tion on the basis of which the patent was granted and
they knew that the applicant was the source of the knowl-
edge.
(8) Le paragraphe (6) ne s’applique pas si la personne vi-
sée à ce paragraphe a pu fabriquer ou vendre l’article, ou
faire les préparatifs en vue de le fabriquer ou de le
vendre, uniquement parce qu’elle a obtenu, de façon di-
recte ou autrement, l’information à l’égard de l’utilisation
que définit la revendication de la part du demandeur de
la demande au titre de laquelle le brevet a été accordé et
qu’elle savait que cette information provenait du deman-
deur.
Exception — use of service
Exception — utilisation d’un service
(9) Subject to subsection (10), the use of a service is not
an infringement of a patent in respect of a claim if the
service is provided by a person who, before the claim
date of that claim, in good faith, provided, or made seri-
ous and effective preparations to provide, a service that is
substantially the same as the one used, for that use.
(9) Sous réserve du paragraphe (10), l’utilisation d’un
service ne constitue pas une contrefaçon de brevet relati-
vement à une revendication si le service a été fourni par
une personne qui, avant la date de la revendication, a de
bonne foi fourni — ou a fait de bonne foi des préparatifs
effectifs et sérieux en vue de fournir — un service, qui est
sensiblement le même que celui utilisé, pour cette utilisa-
tion.
Transfer
Transfert
(10) If the service referred to in subsection (9) was pro-
vided or the preparations to provide it were made in the
course of a business and that business, or the part of that
business in the course of which the service was provided
(10) Si le service visé au paragraphe (9) a été fourni, ou
si les préparatifs en vue de la fourniture du service ont
été faits, dans le cadre d’une entreprise et que celle-ci, ou
la partie de celle-ci dans le cadre de laquelle le service a
été fourni ou les préparatifs ont été faits, est ensuite


Patent
Brevets
Infringement
Contrefaçon
Sections 56-58
Articles 56-58
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
70
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
or the preparations to do so were made, is subsequently
transferred, then, after the transfer
(a) the transferor is deemed to no longer be the per-
son referred to in subsection (9) for the purposes of
that subsection; and
(b) the transferee is deemed to be the person who pro-
vided the service for the purposes of subsection (9).
transférée, les règles ci-après s’appliquent après le trans-
fert :
a) le cédant est réputé ne plus être la personne visée
au paragraphe (9) pour l’application de ce paragraphe;
b) le cessionnaire est réputé être la personne qui a
fourni le service pour l’application du paragraphe (9).
Non-application
Non-application
(11) Subsection (9) does not apply if the person referred
to in that subsection was able to provide the service or
make the preparations to provide it only because they ob-
tained knowledge of the use defined by the claim, directly
or indirectly, from the applicant of the application on the
basis of which the patent was granted and they knew that
the applicant was the source of the knowledge.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 56; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 22; 1993, c. 44, ss. 194, 199;
2018, c. 27, s. 194.
(11) Le paragraphe (9) ne s’applique pas si la personne
visée à ce paragraphe a pu fournir le service ou faire les
préparatifs en vue de le fournir uniquement parce qu’elle
a obtenu, de façon directe ou autrement, l’information à
l’égard de l’utilisation que définit la revendication de la
part du demandeur de la demande au titre de laquelle le
brevet a été accordé et qu’elle savait que cette informa-
tion provenait du demandeur.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 56; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 22; 1993, ch. 44, art. 194 et
199; 2018, ch. 27, art. 194.
Injunction may issue
Interdiction
57 (1) In any action for infringement of a patent, the
court, or any judge thereof, may, on the application of the
plaintiff or defendant, make such order as the court or
judge sees fit,
(a) restraining or enjoining the opposite party from
further use, manufacture or sale of the subject-matter
of the patent, and for his punishment in the event of
disobedience of that order, or
(b) for and respecting inspection or account,
and generally, respecting the proceedings in the action.
57 (1) Dans toute action en contrefaçon de brevet, le tri-
bunal, ou l’un de ses juges, peut, sur requête du plaignant
ou du défendeur, rendre l’ordonnance qu’il juge à propos
de rendre :
a) pour interdire ou défendre à la partie adverse de
continuer à exploiter, fabriquer ou vendre l’article qui
fait l’objet du brevet, et pour prescrire la peine à subir
dans le cas de désobéissance à cette ordonnance;
b) pour les fins et à l’égard de l’inspection ou du règle-
ment de comptes,
et d’une façon générale, quant aux procédures de l’action.
Appeal
Appel
(2) An appeal lies from any order made under subsection
(1) in the same circumstances and to the same court as
from other judgments or orders of the court in which the
order is made.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 59.
(2) Appel peut être interjeté de cette ordonnance dans
les mêmes circonstances et au même tribunal qu’appel
peut être interjeté des autres jugements ou ordonnances
du tribunal qui a rendu l’ordonnance.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 59.
Invalid claims not to affect valid claims
Revendications invalides
58 When, in any action or proceeding respecting a
patent that contains two or more claims, one or more of
those claims is or are held to be valid but another or oth-
ers is or are held to be invalid or void, effect shall be giv-
en to the patent as if it contained only the valid claim or
claims.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 60.
58 Lorsque, dans une action ou procédure relative à un
brevet qui renferme deux ou plusieurs revendications,
une ou plusieurs de ces revendications sont tenues pour
valides, mais qu’une autre ou d’autres sont tenues pour
invalides ou nulles, il est donné effet au brevet tout
comme s’il ne renfermait que la ou les revendications va-
lides.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 60.


Patent
Brevets
Infringement
Contrefaçon
Sections 59-62
Articles 59-62
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
71
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Defence
Défense
59 The defendant, in any action for infringement of a
patent may plead as matter of defence any fact or default
which by this Act or by law renders the patent void, and
the court shall take cognizance of that pleading and of
the relevant facts and decide accordingly.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 61.
59 Dans toute action en contrefaçon de brevet, le défen-
deur peut invoquer comme moyen de défense tout fait ou
manquement qui, d’après la présente loi ou en droit, en-
traîne la nullité du brevet; le tribunal prend connaissance
de cette défense et des faits pertinents et statue en consé-
quence.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 61.
Impeachment
Invalidation
Impeachment of patents or claims
Invalidation de brevets ou de revendications
60 (1) A patent or any claim in a patent may be declared
invalid or void by the Federal Court at the instance of the
Attorney General of Canada or at the instance of any in-
terested person.
60 (1) Un brevet ou une revendication se rapportant à
un brevet peut être déclaré invalide ou nul par la Cour fé-
dérale, à la diligence du procureur général du Canada ou
à la diligence d’un intéressé.
Declaration as to infringement
Déclaration relative à la violation
(2) Where any person has reasonable cause to believe
that any process used or proposed to be used or any arti-
cle made, used or sold or proposed to be made, used or
sold by him might be alleged by any patentee to consti-
tute an infringement of an exclusive property or privilege
granted thereby, he may bring an action in the Federal
Court against the patentee for a declaration that the pro-
cess or article does not or would not constitute an in-
fringement of the exclusive property or privilege.
(2) Si une personne a un motif raisonnable de croire
qu’un procédé employé ou dont l’emploi est projeté, ou
qu’un article fabriqué, employé ou vendu ou dont sont
projetés la fabrication, l’emploi ou la vente par elle, pour-
rait, d’après l’allégation d’un breveté, constituer une vio-
lation d’un droit de propriété ou privilège exclusif accor-
dé de ce chef, elle peut intenter une action devant la Cour
fédérale contre le breveté afin d’obtenir une déclaration
que ce procédé ou cet article ne constitue pas ou ne
constituerait pas une violation de ce droit de propriété ou
de ce privilège exclusif.
Security for costs
Cautionnement pour frais
(3) With the exception of the Attorney General of Canada
or the attorney general of a province, the plaintiff in any
action under this section shall, before proceeding there-
in, give security for the costs of the patentee in such sum
as the Federal Court may direct, but a defendant in any
action for the infringement of a patent is entitled to ob-
tain a declaration under this section without being re-
quired to furnish any security.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 62; R.S., c. 10(2nd Supp.), s. 64.
(3) À l’exception du procureur général du Canada ou du
procureur général d’une province, le plaignant dans une
action exercée sous l’autorité du présent article fournit,
avant de s’y engager, un cautionnement pour les frais du
breveté au montant que le tribunal peut déterminer. Tou-
tefois, le défendeur dans toute action en contrefaçon de
brevet a le droit d’obtenir une déclaration en vertu du
présent article sans être tenu de fournir un cautionne-
ment.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 62; S.R., ch. 10(2e suppl.), art. 64.
61 [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 23]
61 [Abrogé, L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 23]
Judgments
Jugements
Judgment voiding patent
Jugement annulant un brevet
62 A patent, or part of a patent, that is voided by a judg-
ment shall be and be held to have been void and of no ef-
fect, unless the judgment is reversed on appeal as provid-
ed in section 63.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 62; 1993, c. 15, s. 49; 2017, c. 6, s. 40.
62 Le brevet ou la partie du brevet qui a été annulé par
un jugement est nul et de nul effet et est tenu pour tel, à
moins que le jugement ne soit infirmé en appel en vertu
de l’article 63.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 62; 1993, ch. 15, art. 49; 2017, ch. 6, art. 40.


Patent
Brevets
Judgments
Jugements
Sections 63-65
Articles 63-65
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
72
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Appeal
Appel
63 Every judgment voiding in whole or in part or refus-
ing to void in whole or in part any patent is subject to ap-
peal to any court having appellate jurisdiction in other
cases decided by the court by which the judgment was
rendered.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 65.
63 Tout jugement annulant totalement ou partiellement
ou refusant d’annuler totalement ou partiellement un
brevet est sujet à appel devant tout tribunal compétent
pour juger des appels des autres décisions du tribunal qui
a rendu ce jugement.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 65.
Conditions
Conditions
64 [Repealed, 1993, c. 44, s. 195]
64 [Abrogé, 1993, ch. 44, art. 195]
Abuse of rights under patents
Abus des droits de brevets
65 (1) The Attorney General of Canada or any person
interested may, at any time after the expiration of three
years from the date of the grant of a patent, apply to the
Commissioner alleging in the case of that patent that
there has been an abuse of the exclusive rights thereun-
der and asking for relief under this Act.
65 (1) Le procureur général du Canada ou tout intéressé
peut, après l’expiration de trois années à compter de la
date de la concession d’un brevet, s’adresser au commis-
saire pour alléguer que, dans le cas de ce brevet, les
droits exclusifs qui en dérivent ont donné lieu à un abus,
et pour demander un recours sous l’autorité de la pré-
sente loi.
What amounts to abuse
En quoi consiste l’abus
(2) The exclusive rights under a patent shall be deemed
to have been abused in any of the following circum-
stances:
(a) and (b) [Repealed, 1993, c. 44, s. 196]
(c) if the demand for the patented article in Canada is
not being met to an adequate extent and on reason-
able terms;
(d) if, by reason of the refusal of the patentee to grant
a licence or licences on reasonable terms, the trade or
industry of Canada or the trade of any person or class
of persons trading in Canada, or the establishment of
any new trade or industry in Canada, is prejudiced,
and it is in the public interest that a licence or licences
should be granted;
(e) if any trade or industry in Canada, or any person
or class of persons engaged therein, is unfairly preju-
diced by the conditions attached by the patentee,
whether before or after the passing of this Act, to the
purchase, hire, licence or use of the patented article or
to the using or working of the patented process; or
(f) if it is shown that the existence of the patent, being
a patent for an invention relating to a process involv-
ing the use of materials not protected by the patent or
for an invention relating to a substance produced by
such a process, has been utilized by the patentee so as
unfairly to prejudice in Canada the manufacture, use
or sale of any materials.
(2) Les droits exclusifs dérivant d’un brevet sont réputés
avoir donné lieu à un abus lorsque l’une ou l’autre des
circonstances suivantes s’est produite :
a) et b) [Abrogés, 1993, ch. 44, art. 196]
c) il n’est pas satisfait à la demande, au Canada, de
l’article breveté, dans une mesure adéquate et à des
conditions équitables;
d) par défaut, de la part du breveté, d’accorder une ou
des licences à des conditions équitables, le commerce
ou l’industrie du Canada, ou le commerce d’une per-
sonne ou d’une classe de personnes exerçant un com-
merce au Canada, ou l’établissement d’un nouveau
commerce ou d’une nouvelle industrie au Canada su-
bissent quelque préjudice, et il est d’intérêt public
qu’une ou des licences soient accordées;
e) les conditions que le breveté, soit avant, soit après
l’adoption de la présente loi, fixe à l’achat, à la location
ou à l’utilisation de l’article breveté, ou à la licence
qu’il pourrait accorder à l’égard de cet article breveté,
ou à l’exploitation ou à la mise en œuvre du procédé
breveté, portent injustement préjudice à quelque com-
merce ou industrie au Canada, ou à quelque personne
ou classe de personnes engagées dans un tel com-
merce ou une telle industrie;
f) il est démontré que l’existence du brevet, dans le
cas d’un brevet pour une invention couvrant un procé-
dé qui comporte l’usage de matières non protégées par
le brevet, ou d’un brevet pour une invention portant


Patent
Brevets
Conditions
Conditions
Sections 65-66
Articles 65-66
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
73
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
sur une substance produite par un tel procédé, a four-
ni au breveté un moyen de porter injustement préju-
dice, au Canada, à la fabrication, à l’utilisation ou à la
vente de l’une de ces matières.
(3) and (4) [Repealed, 1993, c. 44, s. 196]
(3) et (4) [Abrogés, 1993, ch. 44, art. 196]
Definition of patented article
Définition de article breveté
(5) For the purposes of this section, the expression
patented article includes articles made by a patented
process.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 65; 1993, c. 2, s. 5, c. 15, s. 51, c. 44, s. 196.
(5) Pour l’application du présent article, article breveté
s’entend notamment des articles fabriqués au moyen
d’un procédé breveté.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 65; 1993, ch. 2, art. 5, ch. 15, art. 51, ch. 44, art. 196.
Powers of Commissioner in cases of abuse
Pouvoirs du commissaire en cas d’abus
66 (1) On being satisfied that a case of abuse of the ex-
clusive rights under a patent has been established, the
Commissioner may exercise any of the following powers
as he may deem expedient in the circumstances:
(a) he may order the grant to the applicant of a licence
on such terms as the Commissioner may think expedi-
ent, including a term precluding the licensee from im-
porting into Canada any goods the importation of
which, if made by persons other than the patentee or
persons claiming under him, would be an infringe-
ment of the patent, and in that case the patentee and
all licensees for the time being shall be deemed to have
mutually covenanted against that importation;
(b) [Repealed, 1993, c. 44, s. 197]
(c) if the Commissioner is satisfied that the exclusive
rights have been abused in the circumstances specified
in paragraph 65(2)(f), he may order the grant of li-
cences to the applicant and to such of his customers,
and containing such terms, as the Commissioner may
think expedient;
(d) if the Commissioner is satisfied that the objects of
this section and section 65 cannot be attained by the
exercise of any of the foregoing powers, the Commis-
sioner shall order the patent to be revoked, either
forthwith or after such reasonable interval as may be
specified in the order, unless in the meantime such
conditions as may be specified in the order with a view
to attaining the objects of this section and section 65
are fulfilled, and the Commissioner may, on reason-
able cause shown in any case, by subsequent order ex-
tend the interval so specified, but the Commissioner
shall not make an order for revocation which is at vari-
ance with any treaty, convention, arrangement, or en-
gagement with any other country to which Canada is a
party; or
(e) if the Commissioner is of opinion that the objects
of this section and section 65 will be best attained by
66 (1) Lorsque le commissaire est convaincu qu’a été
établi un cas d’abus de droits exclusifs à la faveur d’un
brevet, il peut exercer l’un des pouvoirs suivants, selon
qu’il le juge à propos dans les circonstances :
a) il peut ordonner la concession d’une licence à un
demandeur, aux conditions que le commissaire estime
convenables et qui contiennent une clause interdisant
au porteur de licence d’importer au Canada des mar-
chandises dont l’importation, si elle était pratiquée par
d’autres personnes que le breveté ou des personnes se
réclamant de lui, constituerait une violation du brevet;
en pareil cas, le breveté et toutes les personnes déte-
nant alors une licence sont réputés être mutuellement
convenus d’empêcher une telle importation;
b) [Abrogé, 1993, ch. 44, art. 197]
c) s’il est convaincu que les droits exclusifs ont donné
lieu à des abus dans les circonstances spécifiées à l’ali-
néa 65(2)f), il peut ordonner la concession de licences
au demandeur et à tels de ses clients, à telles condi-
tions, que le commissaire juge convenables;
d) s’il est convaincu que l’exercice de l’un des pou-
voirs prévus au présent article ne peut en réaliser les
objets et ceux de l’article 65, il ordonne la déchéance
du brevet, soit immédiatement, soit à l’expiration d’un
délai raisonnable que spécifie l’ordonnance, à moins
que dans l’intervalle n’aient été remplies les condi-
tions que fixe l’ordonnance en vue de réaliser les ob-
jets du présent article et de l’article 65; il peut, pour
des motifs raisonnables et démontrés en chaque cas,
prolonger par ordonnance subséquente le délai ainsi
spécifié, mais il ne peut rendre aucune ordonnance de
déchéance qui contrarie un traité, une convention, un
accord ou un engagement avec un autre pays, auquel
le Canada est partie;
e) s’il est d’avis que les objets du présent article et de
l’article 65 seront plus efficacement réalisés en ne ren-
dant aucune ordonnance aux termes des dispositions


Patent
Brevets
Conditions
Conditions
Sections 66-68
Articles 66-68
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
74
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
not making an order under the provisions of this sec-
tion, he may make an order refusing the application
and dispose of any question as to costs thereon as he
thinks just.
du présent article, il peut rendre une ordonnance qui
rejette la requête, et décider comme il l’estime juste
toute question de frais.
Proceedings to prevent infringement
Procédures en vue de prévenir la violation du brevet
(2) A licensee under paragraph (1)(a) is entitled to call
on the patentee to take proceedings to prevent infringe-
ment of the patent, and if the patentee refuses or neglects
to do so within two months after being so called on, the
licensee may institute proceedings for infringement in
his own name as though he were the patentee, making
the patentee a defendant, but a patentee added as defen-
dant is not liable for any costs unless he enters an ap-
pearance and takes part in the proceedings.
(2) Un porteur de licence aux termes de l’alinéa (1)a) a le
droit d’exiger du breveté qu’il intente des procédures en
vue de prévenir la violation du brevet; si le breveté refuse
ou néglige d’intenter des procédures dans un délai de
deux mois après en avoir été ainsi requis, le porteur de li-
cence peut, en son propre nom, comme s’il était lui-
même le breveté, intenter une action en contrefaçon et
mettre le breveté en cause comme défendeur. Un breveté
ainsi mis en cause comme défendeur n’encourt aucuns
frais, à moins qu’il ne produise une comparution et ne
prenne part à l’instance.
(3) [Repealed, 2017, c. 6, s. 41]
(3) [Abrogé, 2017, ch. 6, art. 41]
Considerations by which Commissioner to be guided
Considérations pertinentes
(4) In settling the terms of a licence under paragraph
(1)(a), the Commissioner shall be guided as far as possi-
ble by the following considerations:
(a) he shall endeavour to secure the widest possible
use of the invention in Canada consistent with the
patentee deriving a reasonable advantage from his
patent rights;
(b) he shall endeavour to secure to the patentee the
maximum advantage consistent with the invention be-
ing worked by the licensee at a reasonable profit in
Canada; and
(c) he shall endeavour to secure equality of advantage
among the several licensees, and for this purpose may,
on due cause being shown, reduce the royalties or oth-
er payments accruing to the patentee under any li-
cence previously granted.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 66; R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 24; 1993, c. 44, s. 197; 2017, c. 6,
s. 41.
(4) En arrêtant les conditions d’une licence conformé-
ment à l’alinéa (1)a), le commissaire s’efforce autant que
possible :
a) d’obtenir l’usage le plus répandu de l’invention au
Canada, qui soit compatible avec le bénéfice raison-
nable que le breveté tirera de ses droits de brevet;
b) d’obtenir au breveté le bénéfice maximal qui soit
compatible avec une exploitation, au Canada, raison-
nablement rémunératrice de l’invention par le porteur
de licence;
c) d’assurer des avantages égaux aux divers porteurs
de licences, pouvant, à cette fin et pour motifs valables
démontrés, réduire les redevances ou autres verse-
ments revenant au breveté en vertu de toute licence
antérieurement accordée.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 66; L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 24; 1993, ch. 44, art. 197;
2017, ch. 6, art. 41.
67 [Repealed, 1993, c. 44, s. 198]
67 [Abrogé, 1993, ch. 44, art. 198]
Contents of applications
Teneur des requêtes
68 (1) Every application presented to the Commissioner
under section 65 shall
(a) set out fully the nature of the applicant’s interest,
the facts on which the applicant bases his case and the
relief that he seeks; and
(b) be accompanied by statutory declarations verify-
ing the applicant’s interest and the facts set out in the
application.
68 (1) Toute requête présentée au commissaire en vertu
de l’article 65 :
a) expose complètement la nature de l’intérêt du de-
mandeur, les faits sur lesquels le demandeur fonde sa
requête, ainsi que le recours qu’il recherche;
b) est accompagnée de déclarations solennelles attes-
tant l’intérêt du demandeur, ainsi que les faits exposés
dans la requête.


Patent
Brevets
Conditions
Conditions
Sections 68-69
Articles 68-69
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
75
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Service
Avis
(2) The Commissioner shall consider the matters alleged
in the application and declarations referred to in subsec-
tion (1) and, if satisfied that the applicant has a bona fide
interest and that a case for relief has been made, the
Commissioner shall direct the applicant to serve copies of
the application and declarations on the patentee and on
any other persons appearing from the records of the
Patent Office to be interested in the patent, and the ap-
plicant shall advertise the application both
(a) in the Canada Gazette; and
(b) on the website of the Canadian Intellectual Prop-
erty Office or in any other prescribed location.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 68; 2015, c. 36, s. 61; 2017, c. 6, s. 42.
(2) Le commissaire prend en considération les faits allé-
gués dans la requête et dans les déclarations et, s’il est
convaincu que le demandeur possède un intérêt légitime
et que, de prime abord, la preuve a été établie pour obte-
nir un recours, il enjoint au demandeur de signifier des
copies de la requête et des déclarations au breveté ainsi
qu’à toutes autres personnes qui, d’après les registres du
Bureau des brevets, sont intéressées dans le brevet, et le
demandeur annonce la requête à la fois :
a) dans la Gazette du Canada;
b) sur le site Web de l’Office de la propriété intellec-
tuelle du Canada ou dans tout autre lieu réglemen-
taire.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 68; 2015, ch. 36, art. 61; 2017, ch. 6, art. 42.
Opposition and counter statement
Opposition et contre-mémoire
69 (1) If the patentee or any person is desirous of op-
posing the granting of any relief under sections 65 to 70,
he shall, within such time as may be prescribed or within
such extended time as the Commissioner may on applica-
tion further allow, deliver to the Commissioner a counter
statement verified by a statutory declaration fully setting
out the grounds on which the application is to be op-
posed.
69 (1) Si le breveté ou un tiers désire s’opposer à la
concession d’un recours en vertu des articles 65 à 70, il
remet au commissaire, dans le délai prescrit ou dans le
délai prolongé que celui-ci accorde sur pétition, un
contre-mémoire attesté par une déclaration solennelle et
exposant complètement les motifs pour lesquels opposi-
tion sera faite à la requête.
Attendance for cross-examination
Comparution pour contre-interrogatoire
(2) The Commissioner shall consider the counter state-
ment and declaration referred to in subsection (1) and
may thereupon dismiss the application if satisfied that
the allegations in the application have been adequately
answered, unless any of the parties demands a hearing or
unless the Commissioner himself appoints a hearing, and
in any case the Commissioner may require the atten-
dance before him of any of the declarants to be cross-ex-
amined or further examined on matters relevant to the
issues raised in the application and counter statement,
and he may, subject to due precautions against disclosure
of information to rivals in trade, require the production
before him of books and documents relating to the mat-
ter in issue.
(2) Le commissaire prend en considération le contre-mé-
moire et la déclaration à l’appui, et il peut dès lors rejeter
la requête, s’il est convaincu qu’il a été suffisamment ré-
pondu aux allégations de la requête, à moins que l’une
des parties ne demande à être entendue ou que le com-
missaire lui-même ne fixe une audition. En tout cas, le
commissaire peut requérir la comparution devant lui de
l’un des déclarants pour être contre-interrogé ou exami-
né de nouveau sur les matières se rapportant aux points
soulevés dans la requête et dans le contre-mémoire, et il
peut, à condition de prendre les précautions voulues afin
d’empêcher la divulgation de renseignements à des
concurrents commerciaux, exiger la production, devant
lui, des livres et documents se rapportant à l’affaire en li-
tige.
Reference to Federal Court
Renvoi à la Cour fédérale
(3) In any case where the Commissioner does not dis-
miss an application as provided in subsection (2), and
(a) if the parties interested consent, or
(b) if the proceedings require any prolonged examina-
tion of documents or any scientific or local investiga-
tion that cannot in the opinion of the Commissioner
conveniently be made before him,
(3) Lorsque le commissaire ne rejette pas une requête,
ainsi qu’il est prévu au paragraphe (2), et si, selon le cas :
a) les parties intéressées y consentent;
b) les procédures exigent un examen prolongé de do-
cuments, ou des recherches scientifiques ou locales
qui, à son avis, ne peuvent convenablement avoir lieu
devant lui,


Patent
Brevets
Conditions
Conditions
Sections 69-73
Articles 69-73
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
76
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
the Commissioner, with the approval in writing of the
Minister, may order the whole proceedings or any issue
of fact arising thereunder to be referred to the Federal
Court, which has jurisdiction in the premises.
il peut, avec l’approbation par écrit du ministre, ordon-
ner que l’ensemble des procédures ou que toute question
de fait en découlant soit déférée à la Cour fédérale, la-
quelle a juridiction en l’espèce.
Idem
Idem
(4) Where the whole proceedings are referred under sub-
section (1), the judgment, decision or order of the Feder-
al Court is final, and where a question or issue of fact is
referred under that subsection, the Court shall report its
findings to the Commissioner.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 71; R.S., c. 10(2nd Supp.), s. 64.
(4) Lorsque l’ensemble des procédures a ainsi été déféré,
le jugement, la décision ou l’ordonnance du tribunal est
définitive. Lorsqu’une question ou un point de fait a ainsi
été déféré, le tribunal fait rapport de ses conclusions au
commissaire.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 71; S.R., ch. 10(2e suppl.), art. 64.
Licence deemed to be by deed
La licence considérée comme un acte
70 Any order for the grant of a licence under this Act,
without prejudice to any other method of enforcement,
operates as if it were embodied in a deed granting a li-
cence executed by the patentee and all other necessary
parties.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 72.
70 Toute ordonnance rendue pour concéder une licence
sous l’autorité de la présente loi a, sans préjudice de tout
autre mode de contrainte, le même effet que si elle était
incorporée dans un acte de concession d’une licence
souscrit par le breveté et par les autres parties néces-
saires.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 72.
Appeal to Federal Court
Appel à la Cour fédérale
71 All orders and decisions of the Commissioner under
sections 65 to 70 are subject to appeal to the Federal
Court, and on any such appeal the Attorney General of
Canada or such counsel as he may appoint is entitled to
appear and be heard.
R.S., c. P-4, s. 73; R.S., c. 10(2nd Supp.), s. 64.
71 Toutes les ordonnances et décisions rendues par le
commissaire sous l’autorité des articles 65 à 70 sont su-
jettes à appel à la Cour fédérale, et en tel cas, le procureur
général du Canada ou un avocat qu’il peut désigner a le
droit de comparaître et d’être entendu.
S.R., ch. P-4, art. 73; S.R., ch. 10(2e suppl.), art. 64.
72 [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 25]
72 [Abrogé, L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 25]
Abandonment and
Reinstatement of Applications
Abandon et rétablissement des
demandes
Deemed abandonment of applications
Abandon
73 (1) An application for a patent in Canada shall be
deemed to be abandoned if
(a) the applicant does not reply in good faith, within
the prescribed time, to any requisition made by an ex-
aminer in connection with an examination;
(b) the applicant does not comply with a notice given
under subsection 27(6);
(c) the prescribed fee and late fee referred to in a no-
tice sent under paragraph 27.1(2)(b) are not paid be-
fore the later of the end of six months after the appli-
cable prescribed date and the end of two months after
the date of the notice;
(d) the request referred to in a notice sent under para-
graph 35(3)(b) is not made and the prescribed fee and
73 (1) La demande de brevet est réputée abandonnée si,
selon le cas :
a) le demandeur omet de répondre de bonne foi, dans
le cadre d’un examen, à toute demande de l’examina-
teur, dans le délai réglementaire;
b) il omet de se conformer à l’avis mentionné au para-
graphe 27(6);
c) les taxe et surtaxe réglementaires mentionnées
dans l’avis envoyé au titre de l’alinéa 27.1(2)b) ne sont
pas payées dans les six mois qui suivent la date régle-
mentaire applicable ou, s’ils se terminent plus tard,
dans les deux mois qui suivent la date de l’avis;
d) la requête mentionnée dans l’avis envoyé au titre
de l’alinéa 35(3)b) n’est pas faite et la taxe et surtaxe


Patent
Brevets
Abandonment and Reinstatement of Applications
Abandon et rétablissement des demandes
Section 73
Article 73
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
77
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
late fee referred to in that notice are not paid before
the end of two months after the date of the notice; or
(e) the request referred to in a notice sent under sub-
section 35(5) is not made and the prescribed fee re-
ferred to in that notice is not paid within the pre-
scribed time.
(f) [Repealed, 2015, c. 36, s. 62]
réglementaires qui y sont mentionnées ne sont pas
payées dans les deux mois qui suivent la date de l’avis;
e) la requête mentionnée dans l’avis envoyé au titre
du paragraphe 35(5) n’est pas faite et la taxe réglemen-
taire qui y est mentionnée n’est pas payée dans le délai
réglementaire.
f) [Abrogé, 2015, ch. 36, art. 62]
Deemed abandonment in prescribed circumstances
Abandon
(2) An application shall also be deemed to be abandoned
in any other circumstances that are prescribed.
(2) Elle est aussi réputée abandonnée dans les circons-
tances réglementaires.
Reinstatement
Rétablissement
(3) Subject to the regulations, an application that is
deemed to be abandoned is reinstated if
(a) the applicant, within the prescribed time,
(i) makes a request for reinstatement to the Com-
missioner,
(ii) states, in the request, the reasons for the failure
to take the action that should have been taken in
order to avoid the abandonment,
(iii) takes the action that should have been taken in
order to avoid the abandonment, and
(iv) pays the prescribed fee; and
(b) the Commissioner determines that the failure oc-
curred in spite of the due care required by the circum-
stances having been taken and informs the applicant
of this determination.
(3) Sous réserve des règlements, la demande de brevet
est rétablie si :
a) le demandeur, dans le délai réglementaire :
(i) présente au commissaire une requête à cet effet,
(ii) expose dans la requête les raisons pour les-
quelles il a omis de prendre les mesures qui s’impo-
saient pour éviter l’abandon,
(iii) prend ces mesures,
(iv) paie la taxe réglementaire;
b) le commissaire décide que l’omission a été com-
mise bien que la diligence requise en l’espèce ait été
exercée et avise le demandeur de sa décision.
Powers of the Federal Court
Pouvoir de la Cour fédérale
(3.1) The Federal Court may, by order, declare an appli-
cation that is reinstated under subsection (3) to never
have been reinstated if the Federal Court determines ei-
ther
(a) that the statement of the reasons referred to in
subparagraph (3)(a)(ii) contains a material allegation
that is untrue, or
(b) that, if paragraph (3)(b) applies, the failure re-
ferred to in subparagraph (3)(a)(ii) did not occur in
spite of the due care required by the circumstances
having been taken.
(3.1) La Cour fédérale peut, par ordonnance, déclarer
que la demande de brevet rétablie au titre du paragraphe
(3) n’a jamais été ainsi rétablie si elle conclut que, selon
le cas :
a) l’exposé des raisons visé au sous-alinéa (3)a)(ii)
comprend quelque allégation importante qui n’est pas
conforme à la vérité;
b) en cas d’application de l’alinéa (3)b), l’omission vi-
sée à ce sous-alinéa n’a pas été commise bien que la
diligence requise en l’espèce ait été exercée.
(4) [Repealed, 2015, c. 36, s. 62]
(4) [Abrogé, 2015, ch. 36, art. 62]


Patent
Brevets
Abandonment and Reinstatement of Applications
Abandon et rétablissement des demandes
Sections 73-75
Articles 73-75
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
78
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Filing date
Date de dépôt
(5) An application that is reinstated retains its filing
date.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 73; 1993, c. 15, s. 52; 2014, c. 39, s. 137; 2015, c. 3, s. 138(F); 2015,
c. 36, s. 62.
(5) La demande rétablie conserve sa date de dépôt.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 73; 1993, ch. 15, art. 52; 2014, ch. 39, art. 137; 2015, ch. 3, art.
138(F); 2015, ch. 36, art. 62.
Patent not invalid
Brevet non invalide
73.1 (1) A patent shall not be declared invalid by reason
only that the application on the basis of which the patent
was granted was deemed to be abandoned and was not
reinstated.
73.1 (1) Un brevet ne peut être déclaré invalide du seul
fait qu’il a été accordé au titre d’une demande qui a été
réputée abandonnée mais qui n’a pas été rétablie.
Exception
Exception
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the Federal Court
makes an order under subsection 73(3.1) in respect of the
application on the basis of which the patent was granted.
2014, c. 39, s. 138.
(2) Le paragraphe (1) ne s’applique pas si la Cour fédé-
rale rend une ordonnance en vertu du paragraphe 73(3.1)
relativement à la demande au titre de laquelle le brevet a
été accordé.
2014, ch. 39, art. 138.
Offences and Punishment
Infractions et peines
74 [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.), s. 26]
74 [Abrogé, L.R. (1985), ch. 33 (3e suppl.), art. 26]
Offences
Infractions et peines
75 (1) Every person is guilty of an indictable offence
and is liable to a fine of not more than $200 or to impris-
onment for a term of not more than three months, or to
both, who
(a) without the consent of the patentee, marks in any
way on anything made or sold by the person, and for
the sole making or selling of which they are not the
patentee, the name or any imitation of the name of
any patentee for the sole making or selling of that
thing;
(b) without the consent of the patentee, marks in any
way on anything not purchased from the patentee, the
words “Patent”, “Letters Patent”, “Queen’s (or King’s)
Patent”, “Patented” or any word or words with a simi-
lar meaning, with the intent of counterfeiting or imi-
tating the stamp, mark or device of the patentee, or of
deceiving the public and inducing them to believe that
the thing in question was made or sold by or with the
patentee’s consent; or
(c) with intent to deceive the public, offers for sale as
patented in Canada any article that is neither patented
in Canada nor protected by a certificate of supplemen-
tary protection in Canada.
75 (1) Commet un acte criminel et encourt une amende
maximale de deux cents dollars et un emprisonnement
maximal de trois mois, ou l’une de ces peines, quiconque,
selon le cas :
a) sans le consentement du breveté, marque de
quelque manière que ce soit, sur un objet fabriqué ou
vendu par lui et pour la fabrication ou la vente exclu-
sive duquel il n’est pas le breveté, le nom ou une imita-
tion du nom d’un breveté qui détient le droit exclusif
de fabriquer ou de vendre cet objet;
b) sans le consentement du breveté, marque de
quelque manière que ce soit, sur un objet qui n’a pas
été acheté du breveté, les mots « Brevet », « Lettres
patentes », « Patente de la Reine (ou du Roi) », « Bre-
veté », ou toute autre expression de signification simi-
laire, avec l’intention de contrefaire ou d’imiter la
marque, l’estampille ou la devise du breveté, ou de
tromper le public et de le porter à croire que l’objet en
question a été fabriqué ou vendu par le breveté ou
avec son consentement;
c) dans le dessein de tromper le public, expose en
vente comme breveté au Canada un article qui n’est ni
breveté au Canada ni protégé par un certificat de pro-
tection supplémentaire au Canada.


Patent
Brevets
Offences and Punishment
Infractions et peines
Sections 75-76
Articles 75-76
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
79
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Certificate of supplementary protection
Certificat de protection supplémentaire
(2) Every person is guilty of an indictable offence and is
liable to a fine of not more than $200 or to imprisonment
for a term of not more than three months, or to both,
who
(a) during the term of a certificate of supplementary
protection, without the consent of the certificate’s
holder, marks in any way on anything made or sold by
the person, and for the sole making or selling of which
they are not the holder of a certificate of supplemen-
tary protection, the name or any imitation of the name
of any holder of a certificate of supplementary protec-
tion for the sole making or selling of that thing;
(b) after a certificate of supplementary protection has
been issued and before the end of its term, without the
consent of the certificate’s holder, marks in any way
on anything not purchased from that holder the words
“Certificate of Supplementary Protection”, “Protected
by a Certificate of Supplementary Protection” or any
words with a similar meaning, with the intent of coun-
terfeiting or imitating that holder’s stamp, mark or de-
vice, or of deceiving the public and inducing them to
believe that the thing in question was made or sold by
or with that holder’s consent; or
(c) with the intent to deceive the public, offers for sale
as protected by a certificate of supplementary protec-
tion in Canada any article that
(i) is neither patented in Canada nor protected by a
certificate of supplementary protection in Canada,
or
(ii) is patented in Canada but for which no certifi-
cate of supplementary protection has been issued.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 75; 2017, c. 6, s. 43.
(2) Commet un acte criminel et encourt une amende
maximale de deux cents dollars et un emprisonnement
maximal de trois mois, ou l’une de ces peines, quiconque,
selon le cas :
a) sans le consentement du titulaire de certificat de
protection supplémentaire, pendant la durée du certi-
ficat, marque de quelque manière que ce soit, sur un
objet fabriqué ou vendu par lui et pour la fabrication
ou la vente exclusive duquel il n’est pas le titulaire
d’un certificat de protection supplémentaire, le nom
ou une imitation du nom de tout titulaire d’un tel cer-
tificat qui détient le droit exclusif de fabriquer ou de
vendre l’objet;
b) sans le consentement du titulaire de certificat de
protection supplémentaire, après la délivrance du cer-
tificat, mais avant l’expiration de sa durée, marque de
quelque manière que ce soit, sur un objet qui n’a pas
été acheté du titulaire, les mots « certificat de protec-
tion supplémentaire », « protégé par un certificat de
protection supplémentaire » ou toute autre expression
de signification similaire, avec l’intention de contre-
faire ou d’imiter la marque, l’estampille ou la devise
du titulaire, ou de tromper le public et de le porter à
croire que l’objet en question a été fabriqué ou vendu
par le titulaire ou avec son consentement;
c) dans le dessein de tromper le public, expose en
vente comme protégé par un certificat de protection
supplémentaire au Canada un article qui, selon le cas :
(i) n’est ni breveté au Canada ni protégé par un cer-
tificat de protection supplémentaire au Canada,
(ii) est breveté au Canada mais à l’égard duquel au-
cun certificat de protection supplémentaire n’y a été
délivré.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 75; 2017, ch. 6, art. 43.
False representations, false entries, etc.
Exposé faux, fausses inscriptions, etc.
76 Every person who, in relation to the purposes of this
Act and knowing it to be false,
(a) makes any false representation,
(b) makes or causes to be made any false entry in any
register or book,
(b.1) submits or causes to be submitted, in an elec-
tronic form, any false document, false information or
document containing false information,
(c) makes or causes to be made any false document or
alters the form of a copy of any document, or
76 Quiconque, relativement aux fins de la présente loi et
en connaissance de cause, selon le cas :
a) fait un exposé faux;
b) effectue ou fait effectuer une fausse inscription
dans un registre ou livre;
b.1) remet ou fait remettre, sous forme électronique,
de faux documents ou renseignements ou des docu-
ments renfermant des renseignements faux;
c) fait ou fait faire un faux document ou altère la
forme d’une copie de document;


Patent
Brevets
Offences and Punishment
Infractions et peines
Sections 76-76.2
Articles 76-76.2
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
80
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(d) produces or tenders any document containing
false information,
is guilty of an indictable offence and liable on conviction
to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or to impris-
onment for a term not exceeding six months or to both.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 76; 1993, c. 15, s. 53.
d) produit ou présente un document renfermant des
renseignements faux,
commet un acte criminel et encourt, sur déclaration de
culpabilité, une amende maximale de cinq cents dollars
et un emprisonnement maximal de six mois, ou l’une de
ces peines.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 76; 1993, ch. 15, art. 53.
Offence respecting patented medicines
Infractions relatives aux médicaments brevetés
76.1 (1) Every person who contravenes or fails to com-
ply with section 80, 81, 82 or 88 or any order made there-
under is guilty of an offence punishable on summary con-
viction and liable
(a) in the case of an individual, to a fine not exceeding
five thousand dollars or to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or to both; and
(b) in the case of a corporation, to a fine not exceeding
twenty-five thousand dollars.
76.1 (1) Quiconque contrevient aux articles 80, 81, 82
ou 88 ou à une ordonnance prise sous le régime de l’un
ou l’autre de ces articles commet une infraction et en-
court, sur déclaration de culpabilité par procédure som-
maire :
a) une amende maximale de cinq mille dollars et un
emprisonnement maximal de six mois, ou l’une de ces
peines, s’il s’agit d’une personne physique;
b) une amende maximale de vingt-cinq mille dollars,
s’il s’agit d’une personne morale.
Idem
Idem
(2) Every person who contravenes or fails to comply with
section 84 or any order made under section 83 is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction and liable
(a) in the case of an individual, to a fine not exceeding
twenty-five thousand dollars or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding one year or to both; and
(b) in the case of a corporation, to a fine not exceeding
one hundred thousand dollars.
(2) Quiconque contrevient à l’article 84 ou à une ordon-
nance prise sous le régime de l’article 83 commet une in-
fraction et encourt, sur déclaration de culpabilité par
procédure sommaire :
a) une amende maximale de vingt-cinq mille dollars
et un emprisonnement maximal d’un an, ou l’une de
ces peines, s’il s’agit d’une personne physique;
b) une amende maximale de cent mille dollars, s’il
s’agit d’une personne morale.
Limitation period
Prescription
(3) Proceedings for an offence under subsection (1) or
(2) may be commenced within, but not later than, two
years after the time when the subject-matter of the pro-
ceedings arose.
(3) La poursuite d’une infraction visée aux paragraphes
(1) ou (2) se prescrit par deux ans à compter de sa perpé-
tration.
Continuing offence
Infractions continues
(4) Where an offence under subsection (1) or (2) is com-
mitted or continued on more than one day, the person
who committed the offence is liable to be convicted for a
separate offence for each day on which the offence is
committed or continued.
1993, c. 2, s. 6.
(4) Il est compté une infraction distincte pour chacun
des jours au cours desquels se commet ou se continue
l’infraction visée aux paragraphes (1) ou (2).
1993, ch. 2, art. 6.
Written Demands
Demandes écrites
Requirements
Exigences
76.2 (1) Any written demand received by a person in
Canada, that relates to an invention that is patented in
76.2 (1) Toute demande écrite reçue par quiconque au
Canada, relativement à une invention brevetée au


Patent
Brevets
Written Demands
Demandes écrites
Sections 76.2-76.3
Articles 76.2-76.3
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
81
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Canada or elsewhere or that is protected by a certificate
of supplementary protection in Canada or by analogous
rights granted elsewhere, must comply with the pre-
scribed requirements.
Canada ou ailleurs ou protégée par un certificat de pro-
tection supplémentaire au Canada ou par des droits ana-
logues accordés ailleurs, doit être conforme aux exi-
gences réglementaires.
Federal Court
Cour fédérale
(2) Any person who receives a written demand that does
not comply with the prescribed requirements, and any
person who is aggrieved as a result of the receipt by an-
other person of such a written demand, may bring a pro-
ceeding in the Federal Court.
(2) Toute personne qui reçoit une demande écrite non
conforme aux exigences réglementaires ou qui a subi un
préjudice en raison de la réception par une autre per-
sonne d’une telle demande peut intenter une procédure
devant la Cour fédérale.
Relief
Réparation
(3) If the Federal Court is satisfied that the written de-
mand does not comply with the prescribed requirements,
it may grant any relief that it considers appropriate, in-
cluding by way of recovery of damages, punitive dam-
ages, an injunction, a declaration or an award of costs.
(3) Si elle est convaincue que la demande écrite n’est pas
conforme aux exigences réglementaires, la Cour fédérale
peut accorder toute réparation qu’elle estime indiquée,
notamment par voie de dommages-intérêts, de dom-
mages-intérêts punitifs, d’injonction, de jugement décla-
ratoire ou des dépens.
Liability — special case
Responsabilité — cas spécial
(4) If a corporation sends a written demand that does
not comply with the prescribed requirements, is notified
of those requirements and of the demand’s defects in re-
spect of those requirements and does not, within a rea-
sonable time after receiving the notice of those defects,
remedy them, the corporation’s officers, directors, agents
or mandataries are jointly and severally, or solidarily, li-
able with the corporation if they directed, authorized, as-
sented to, acquiesced in or participated in the sending of
the demand.
(4) Si une personne morale envoie une demande écrite
non conforme aux exigences réglementaires et qu’elle
omet, après avoir été avisée de ces exigences et de ses
manquements à l’égard de ces exigences, de remédier,
dans un délai raisonnable après la réception de l’avis, aux
manquements qui y sont précisés, le dirigeant, l’adminis-
trateur ou le mandataire de la personne morale est soli-
dairement responsable avec celle-ci, dans le cas où il a
ordonné ou autorisé l’envoi, ou y a consenti ou participé.
Due diligence
Précautions voulues
(5) A person is not to be found liable under subsection
(4) if they establish that they exercised due diligence to
ensure that the written demand complies with the pre-
scribed requirements.
2018, c. 27, s. 195.
(5) La responsabilité prévue au paragraphe (4) n’est pas
engagée si le dirigeant, l’administrateur ou le mandataire
prouve qu’il a pris toutes les précautions voulues pour
s’assurer que les exigences réglementaires sont respec-
tées.
2018, ch. 27, art. 195.
Regulations
Règlements
76.3 The Governor in Council may make regulations for
the purposes of section 76.2, including regulations
(a) respecting what constitutes a written demand or
an aggrievement;
(b) respecting the requirements with which a written
demand must comply;
(c) respecting factors that the Federal Court may con-
sider, must consider or is not permitted to consider in
making an order under subsection 76.2(3); and
76.3 Le gouverneur en conseil peut prendre des règle-
ments pour l’application de l’article 76.2, notamment des
règlements concernant :
a) ce qui constitue une demande écrite ou un préju-
dice;
b) les exigences auxquelles les demandes écrites
doivent être conformes;
c) les facteurs dont la Cour fédérale peut ou doit tenir
compte — et ceux dont elle ne peut tenir compte —


Patent
Brevets
Written Demands
Demandes écrites
Sections 76.3-78.2
Articles 76.3-78.2
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
82
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(d) respecting the circumstances in which a defendant
is not to be found liable in a proceeding brought under
subsection 76.2(2).
2018, c. 27, s. 195.
pour accorder une réparation en vertu du paragraphe
76.2(3);
d) les circonstances dans lesquelles la responsabilité
du défendeur ne peut être engagée dans le cadre d’une
procédure intentée en vertu du paragraphe 76.2(2).
2018, ch. 27, art. 195.
Miscellaneous Matters
Dispositions diverses
77 [Repealed, 1993, c. 15, s. 54]
77 [Abrogé, 1993, ch. 15, art. 54]
Time period extended
Délai prorogé
78 (1) If a time period fixed under this Act, in respect of
any business before the Patent Office, for doing anything
ends on a prescribed day or a day that is designated by
the Commissioner, that time period is extended to the
next day that is not a prescribed day or a designated day.
78 (1) Le délai fixé sous le régime de la présente loi, re-
lativement à toute affaire devant le Bureau des brevets,
pour l’accomplissement d’un acte qui expire un jour ré-
glementaire ou un jour désigné par le commissaire est
prorogé jusqu’au premier jour suivant qui n’est ni régle-
mentaire ni désigné par le commissaire.
Power to designate day
Pouvoir de désigner un jour
(2) The Commissioner may, on account of unforeseen
circumstances and if the Commissioner is satisfied that it
is in the public interest to do so, designate any day for the
purposes of subsection (1). If a day is designated, the
Commissioner shall inform the public of that fact on the
website of the Canadian Intellectual Property Office.
R.S., 1985, c. P-4, s. 78; 2015, c. 36, s. 63; 2017, c. 6, ss. 44, 136.
(2) Le commissaire peut, en raison de circonstances im-
prévues et s’il est convaincu qu’il est dans l’intérêt public
de le faire, désigner un jour pour l’application du para-
graphe (1) et, le cas échéant, il en informe le public sur le
site Web de l’Office de la propriété intellectuelle du
Canada.
L.R. (1985), ch. P-4, art. 78; 2015, ch. 36, art. 63; 2017, ch. 6, art. 44 et 136.
Transitional Provisions
Dispositions transitoires
Definition of coming-into-force date
Définition de date d’entrée en vigueur
78.1 (1) In sections 78.2, 78.21 and 78.5 to 78.56, com-
ing-into-force date means the day on which section 121
of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 2 comes into
force.
78.1 (1) Aux articles 78.2, 78.21 et 78.5 à 78.56, date
d’entrée en vigueur s’entend de la date d’entrée en vi-
gueur de l’article 121 de la Loi no 2 sur le plan d’action
économique de 2014.
Definition of filing date
Définition de date de dépôt
(2) In sections 78.21, 78.22, 78.4, 78.5, 78.53 and 78.54, fil-
ing date means the date on which an application for a
patent in Canada is filed, as determined in accordance
with section 78.2.
1993, c. 15, s. 55; 2001, c. 10, s. 3; 2014, c. 39, s. 139.
(2) Aux articles 78.21, 78.22, 78.4, 78.5, 78.53 et 78.54,
date de dépôt s’entend de la date du dépôt d’une de-
mande de brevet déposée au Canada, déterminée confor-
mément à l’article 78.2.
1993, ch. 15, art. 55; 2001, ch. 10, art. 3; 2014, ch. 39, art. 139.
Filing date
Date de dépôt
78.2 The filing date of an application for a patent is
(a) with respect to an original application,
(i) if all of the following elements were received by
the Commissioner before October 1, 1989, the date
78.2 La date de dépôt d’une demande de brevet est la
suivante :
a) s’agissant d’une demande originale :


Patent
Brevets
Transitional Provisions
Dispositions transitoires
Section 78.2
Article 78.2
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
83
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
on which they were received or, if they were re-
ceived on different dates, the latest of those differ-
ent dates:
(A) a statement that the granting of a patent is
sought, executed by the applicant or by a patent
agent on the applicant’s behalf,
(B) a specification, including claims,
(C) any drawing referred to in the specification,
(D) an abstract of the part of the specification
other than the claims,
(E) the fee set out in item 1 of Schedule II to the
Patent Rules as that item read on the day on
which the fee was received,
(ii) if subparagraph (i) does not apply, one or more
of the following elements were received by the
Commissioner on or after October 1, 1989 and all of
the following elements were received by the Com-
missioner before October 1, 1996, the date on which
they were received or, if they were received on dif-
ferent dates, the latest of those different dates:
(A) a petition executed by the applicant or by a
patent agent on the applicant’s behalf,
(B) a specification, including claims,
(C) any drawing referred to in the specification,
(D) an abstract of the part of the specification
other than the claims,
(E) the fee set out in item 1 of Schedule II to the
Patent Rules as that item read on the day on
which the fee was received,
(iii) if subparagraphs (i) and (ii) do not apply, one
or more of the following elements were received by
the Commissioner on or after October 1, 1996 and
all of the following elements were received by the
Commissioner before June 2, 2007, the date on
which they were received or, if they were received
on different dates, the latest of those different
dates:
(A) an indication, in English or French, that the
granting of a Canadian patent is sought,
(B) the applicant’s name,
(C) the address of the applicant or of their
patent agent,
(i) si le commissaire a reçu tous les éléments ci-
après avant le 1er octobre 1989, la date où il les a re-
çus ou, s’il les a reçus à des dates différentes, la
dernière d’entre elles :
(A) une attestation portant que l’octroi d’un bre-
vet est demandé, signée par le demandeur ou par
un agent de brevets en son nom,
(B) un mémoire descriptif, comprenant les re-
vendications,
(C) tout dessin auquel renvoie le mémoire des-
criptif,
(D) un abrégé de la partie du mémoire descriptif
distincte des revendications,
(E) la taxe prévue à l’article 1 de l’annexe II des
Règles sur les brevets, dans la version de cet ar-
ticle à la date de la réception de la taxe,
(ii) si le sous-alinéa (i) ne s’applique pas, si le com-
missaire a reçu au moins un des éléments ci-après
le 1er octobre 1989 ou après cette date et s’il les a
tous reçus avant le 1er octobre 1996, la date où il les
a reçus ou, s’il les a reçus à des dates différentes, la
dernière d’entre elles :
(A) une pétition signée par le demandeur ou par
un agent de brevets en son nom,
(B) un mémoire descriptif, comprenant les re-
vendications,
(C) tout dessin auquel renvoie le mémoire des-
criptif,
(D) un abrégé de la partie du mémoire descriptif
distincte des revendications,
(E) la taxe prévue à l’article 1 de l’annexe II des
Règles sur les brevets, dans la version de cet ar-
ticle à la date de la réception de la taxe,
(iii) si les sous-alinéas (i) et (ii) ne s’appliquent pas,
si le commissaire a reçu au moins un des éléments
ci-après le 1er octobre 1996 ou après cette date et s’il
les a tous reçus avant le 2 juin 2007, la date où il les
a reçus ou, s’il les a reçus à des dates différentes, la
dernière d’entre elles :
(A) une indication en français ou en anglais se-
lon laquelle l’octroi d’un brevet canadien est de-
mandé,
(B) le nom du demandeur,


Patent
Brevets
Transitional Provisions
Dispositions transitoires
Sections 78.2-78.21
Articles 78.2-78.21
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
84
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(D) a document, in English or French, that on its
face appears to describe an invention,
(E) the fee set out in item 1 of Schedule II to the
Patent Rules as that item read on the day on
which the fee was received, and
(iv) if subparagraphs (i) to (iii) do not apply, one or
more of the following elements were received by the
Commissioner on or after June 2, 2007 and all of
the following elements were received by the Com-
missioner before the coming-into-force date, the
date on which they were received or, if they were
received on different dates, the latest of those dif-
ferent dates:
(A) an indication, in English or French, that the
granting of a Canadian patent is sought,
(B) the applicant’s name,
(C) the address of the applicant or of their
patent agent,
(D) a document, in English or French, that on its
face appears to describe an invention,
(E) either a small entity declaration, in accor-
dance with section 3.01 of the Patent Rules as it
read on the day on which the declaration was re-
ceived, and the small entity fee set out in item 1
of Schedule II to those Rules as that item read on
the day on which that fee was received or the
standard fee set out in item 1 of that Schedule, as
that item read on the day on which that standard
fee was received; or
(b) with respect to a divisional application, the filing
date of the original application from which the divi-
sional application results, determined in accordance
with this section.
1993, c. 15, s. 55; 2001, c. 10, s. 3; 2014, c. 39, s. 139; 2015, c. 36, s. 65(F); 2018, c. 27, s.
196.
(C) l’adresse du demandeur ou de son agent de
brevets,
(D) un document rédigé en français ou en an-
glais qui, à première vue, semble décrire une in-
vention,
(E) la taxe prévue à l’article 1 de l’annexe II des
Règles sur les brevets, dans la version de cet ar-
ticle à la date de la réception de la taxe,
(iv) si les sous-alinéas (i) à (iii) ne s’appliquent pas,
si le commissaire a reçu au moins un des éléments
ci-après le 2 juin 2007 ou après cette date et s’il les a
tous reçus avant la date d’entrée en vigueur, la date
où il les a reçus ou, s’il les a reçus à des dates diffé-
rentes, la dernière d’entre elles :
(A) une indication en français ou en anglais se-
lon laquelle l’octroi d’un brevet canadien est de-
mandé,
(B) le nom du demandeur,
(C) l’adresse du demandeur ou de son agent de
brevets,
(D) un document rédigé en français ou en an-
glais qui, à première vue, semble décrire une in-
vention,
(E) soit la déclaration du statut de petite entité
conforme à l’article 3.01 des Règles sur les bre-
vets, dans sa version à la date de réception de la
déclaration, et la taxe applicable aux petites enti-
tés prévue à l’article 1 de l’annexe II de ces
Règles, dans la version de cet article à la date de
la réception de la taxe, soit la taxe générale pré-
vue à cet article;
b) s’agissant d’une demande divisionnaire, la date de
dépôt de la demande originale dont résulte la de-
mande divisionnaire déterminée conformément au
présent article.
1993, ch. 15, art. 55; 2001, ch. 10, art. 3; 2014, ch. 39, art. 139; 2015, ch. 36, art. 65(F);
2018, ch. 27, art. 196.
Applications — no filing date
Demandes — aucune date de dépôt
78.21 An application for a patent that is filed before the
coming-into-force date and that does not have a filing
date on the coming-into-force date shall be deemed never
to have been filed.
2014, c. 39, s. 139.
78.21 La demande de brevet déposée avant la date d’en-
trée en vigueur qui, à cette date, n’a pas de date de dépôt
est réputée ne pas avoir été déposée.
2014, ch. 39, art. 139.


Patent
Brevets
Transitional Provisions
Dispositions transitoires
Sections 78.22-78.3
Articles 78.22-78.3
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
85
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Applications — filing date before October 1, 1989
Demandes — date de dépôt antérieure au 1er octobre
1989
78.22 An application for a patent whose filing date is
before October 1, 1989 shall be dealt with and disposed of
in accordance with
(a) the provisions of this Act as they read immediately
before October 1, 1989, other than the definition legal
representatives in section 2, subsections 4(2), 5(2)
and 7(1), sections 8, 15 and 29, paragraph 31(2)(a) and
sections 49 to 51 and 78; and
(b) the definition legal representatives in section 2,
subsections 4(2), 5(2) and 7(1), section 8.1, paragraph
31(2)(a) and sections 38.1, 49, 78 and 78.2.
2014, c. 39, s. 139; 2015, c. 36, s. 64; 2018, c. 27, s. 260.
78.22 La demande de brevet dont la date de dépôt est
antérieure au 1er octobre 1989 est régie à la fois :
a) par les dispositions de la présente loi, dans leur
version antérieure au 1er octobre 1989, à l’exception de
la définition de représentants légaux à l’article 2, des
paragraphes 4(2), 5(2) et 7(1), des articles 8, 15 et 29,
de l’alinéa 31(2)a) et des articles 49 à 51 et 78;
b) par la définition de représentants légaux à l’ar-
ticle 2, les paragraphes 4(2), 5(2) et 7(1), l’article 8.1,
l’alinéa 31(2)a) et les articles 38.1, 49, 78 et 78.2.
2014, ch. 39, art. 139; 2015, ch. 36, art. 64; 2018, ch. 27, art. 260.
Previous version of section 43 applies
Version antérieure de l’article 43
78.3 (1) Where a conflict, as defined in section 43 as it
read immediately before October 1, 1989, exists between
an application for a patent in Canada filed before October
1, 1989 (the “earlier application”) and an application for a
patent in Canada filed on or after that date (the “later ap-
plication”) and
(a) the later application is filed by a person who is en-
titled to protection under the terms of any treaty or
convention relating to patents to which Canada is a
party and who has previously regularly filed in or for
any other country that by treaty, convention or law af-
fords similar protection to citizens of Canada an appli-
cation for a patent describing the same invention,
(b) the later application is filed within twelve months
after the filing of the previously regularly filed applica-
tion,
(c) the applicant in the later application has made a
request for priority in respect of that application on
the basis of the previously regularly filed application,
and
(d) the earlier application is filed after the filing of the
previously regularly filed application,
the applicant having the earlier date of invention shall be
entitled to a patent and the applications shall be dealt
with and disposed of in accordance with section 43, as it
read immediately before October 1, 1989.
78.3 (1) En cas de conflit, au sens de l’article 43 dans sa
version antérieure au 1er octobre 1989, entre une de-
mande de brevet déposée avant cette date et une de-
mande déposée à compter de celle-ci, les demandes sont
régies par cet article dans sa version antérieure à cette
date, et le demandeur dont l’invention est antérieure a
droit au brevet si les conditions suivantes sont réunies :
a) la seconde demande est déposée par une personne
dont les droits sont protégés par traité ou convention,
relatif aux brevets, auquel le Canada est partie, et qui a
antérieurement déposé selon les règles, dans un autre
pays ou pour un autre pays qui accorde par traité,
convention ou loi une protection similaire aux ci-
toyens du Canada, une demande de brevet décrivant la
même invention;
b) la seconde demande est déposée dans les douze
mois du dépôt de la demande déposée antérieure-
ment;
c) la personne qui a déposé la seconde demande a
présenté, à l’égard de celle-ci, une demande de priorité
fondée sur la demande déposée antérieurement;
d) la demande déposée antérieurement l’a été avant le
dépôt de la première demande.
Exception
Exception
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if
(a) the earlier application is filed by a person who is
entitled to protection under the terms of any treaty or
convention relating to patents to which Canada is a
(2) Le paragraphe (1) ne s’applique pas si les conditions
suivantes sont réunies :


Patent
Brevets
Transitional Provisions
Dispositions transitoires
Sections 78.3-78.51
Articles 78.3-78.51
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
86
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
party and who has previously regularly filed in or for
any other country that by treaty, convention or law af-
fords similar protection to citizens of Canada an appli-
cation for a patent describing the same invention;
(b) the earlier application is filed within twelve
months after the filing of the previously regularly filed
application mentioned in paragraph (a);
(c) the applicant in the earlier application has made a
request for priority in respect of that application on
the basis of the previously regularly filed application
mentioned in paragraph (a); and
(d) the previously regularly filed application men-
tioned in paragraph (a) was filed before the filing of
the previously regularly filed application mentioned in
subsection (1).
1993, c. 15, s. 55.
a) la première demande est déposée par une personne
qui a déposé antérieurement une demande de brevet
dans les circonstances visées à l’alinéa (1)a);
b) la première demande est déposée dans les douze
mois du dépôt de la demande déposée antérieure-
ment;
c) la personne qui a déposée la première demande a
présenté, à l’égard de celle-ci, une demande de priorité
fondée sur la demande déposée antérieurement;
d) la demande déposée antérieurement l’a été avant
celle déposée antérieurement par la personne visée à
l’alinéa (1)a).
1993, ch. 15, art. 55.
Applications — filing date October 1, 1989 to before
October 1, 1996
Demandes — date de dépôt le 1er octobre 1989 ou
après cette date mais avant le 1er octobre 1996
78.4 Subject to sections 78.51 and 78.52, an application
for a patent whose filing date is on or after October 1,
1989 but before October 1, 1996 shall be dealt with and
disposed of in accordance with
(a) the provisions of this Act, other than the definition
filing date in section 2, subsection 27(7), sections
27.01, 28 and 28.01 and subsection 28.4(6); and
(b) subsection 27(2) as it read immediately before Oc-
tober 1, 1996.
1993, c. 15, s. 55; 2001, c. 10, s. 4; 2014, c. 39, s. 140.
78.4 Sous réserve des articles 78.51 et 78.52, la demande
de brevet dont la date de dépôt est le 1er octobre 1989 ou
est postérieure à cette date mais antérieure au 1er octobre
1996 est régie à la fois :
a) par les dispositions de la présente loi, à l’exception
de la définition de date de dépôt à l’article 2, du para-
graphe 27(7), des articles 27.01, 28 et 28.01 et du para-
graphe 28.4(6);
b) par le paragraphe 27(2), dans sa version antérieure
au 1er octobre 1996.
1993, ch. 15, art. 55; 2001, ch. 10, art. 4; 2014, ch. 39, art. 140.
Applications — filing date October 1, 1996 to before
coming-into-force date
Demandes — date de dépôt le 1er octobre 1996 ou
après cette date mais avant la date d’entrée en
vigueur
78.5 Subject to sections 78.51 and 78.52, an application
for a patent whose filing date is on or after October 1,
1996 but before the coming-into-force date shall be dealt
with and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
this Act, other than the definition filing date in section 2,
subsection 27(7), sections 27.01, 28 and 28.01 and subsec-
tion 28.4(6).
1993, c. 15, s. 55; 2001, c. 10, s. 4; 2014, c. 39, s. 140.
78.5 Sous réserve des articles 78.51 et 78.52, la demande
de brevet dont la date de dépôt est le 1er octobre 1996 ou
est postérieure à cette date mais antérieure à la date d’en-
trée en vigueur est régie par les dispositions de la pré-
sente loi, à l’exception de la définition de date de dépôt
à l’article 2, du paragraphe 27(7), des articles 27.01, 28 et
28.01 et du paragraphe 28.4(6).
1993, ch. 15, art. 55; 2001, ch. 10, art. 4; 2014, ch. 39, art. 140.
Abandonment before coming-into-force date
Abandon avant la date d’entrée en vigueur
78.51 If an application for a patent was deemed to be
abandoned under section 73 as it read immediately be-
fore the coming-into-force date, that section 73 applies in
respect of that abandonment.
2014, c. 39, s. 140.
78.51 Si une demande de brevet est réputée abandon-
née au titre de l’article 73, dans sa version antérieure à la
date d’entrée en vigueur, cet article s’applique à l’aban-
don.
2014, ch. 39, art. 140.


Patent
Brevets
Transitional Provisions
Dispositions transitoires
Sections 78.52-78.54
Articles 78.52-78.54
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
87
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Abandonment — requisition or notice before coming-
into-force date
Abandon — demande de l’examinateur faite ou avis
envoyé avant la date d’entrée en vigueur
78.52 (1) If, on or after the coming-into-force date, an
applicant fails to do any act described in paragraph
73(1)(a), (b), (e) or (f), as those paragraphs read immedi-
ately before that date, in respect of a requisition made or
notice given, as the case may be, before that date, section
73 as it read immediately before that date applies in re-
spect of any abandonment resulting from the failure.
78.52 (1) Si, à la date d’entrée en vigueur ou après cette
date, le demandeur omet d’accomplir l’un des actes men-
tionnés aux alinéas 73(1)a), b), e) ou f), dans leur version
antérieure à cette date, à l’égard d’une demande de l’exa-
minateur faite ou d’un avis envoyé, selon le cas, avant
cette date, l’article 73, dans sa version antérieure à cette
date, s’applique à l’abandon qui résulte de l’omission.
Abandonment — section 97 of the Patent Rules
Abandon — article 97 des Règles sur les brevets
(2) If, on or after the coming-into-force date, an appli-
cant fails to do any act described in section 97 of the
Patent Rules, as that section read immediately before
that date, in respect of a requisition of the Commissioner
that was given before that date, section 73 as it read im-
mediately before that date applies in respect of any aban-
donment resulting from the failure.
2014, c. 39, s. 140.
(2) Si, à la date d’entrée en vigueur ou après cette date, le
demandeur omet d’accomplir l’acte mentionné à l’article
97 des Règles sur les brevets, dans sa version antérieure
à cette date, à l’égard d’une demande du commissaire
faite avant cette date, l’article 73, dans sa version anté-
rieure à cette date, s’applique à l’abandon qui résulte de
l’omission.
2014, ch. 39, art. 140.
Patents — filing date before October 1, 1989
Brevets — date de dépôt antérieure au 1er octobre
1989
78.53 (1) Subject to subsection 78.55(2), any matter
arising on or after the coming-into-force date, in respect
of a patent granted on the basis of an application whose
filing date is before October 1, 1989, shall be dealt with
and disposed of in accordance with
(a) the provisions of this Act, other than the defini-
tions claim date, filing date and request for priority
in section 2, sections 10, 27 to 28.4, 34.1 to 36, 38.2 and
55, paragraphs 55.11(1)(a) and (b) and section 56; and
(b) sections 10 and 55 and subsections 61(1) and (3),
as they read immediately before October 1, 1989.
78.53 (1) Sous réserve du paragraphe 78.55(2), toute
question soulevée à compter de la date d’entrée en vi-
gueur relativement à un brevet accordé au titre d’une de-
mande dont la date de dépôt est antérieure au 1er octobre
1989 est régie, à la fois :
a) par les dispositions de la présente loi, à l’exception
des définitions de date de dépôt et demande de
priorité à l’article 2, des articles 10, 27 à 28.4, 34.1 à 36,
38.2 et 55, des alinéas 55.11(1)a) et b) et de l’article 56;
b) par les articles 10 et 55 et les paragraphes 61(1) et
(3), dans leur version antérieure au 1er octobre 1989.
Special case
Cas spéciaux
(2) Section 56 of the Patent Act, as it read immediately
before October 1, 1989, applies in respect of a purchase,
construction or acquisition made before October 1, 1996
of an invention for which a patent is issued on the basis
of an application filed before October 1, 1989.
2014, c. 39, s. 140; 2018, c. 27, s. 208.
(2) L’article 56 de la Loi sur les brevets, dans sa version
antérieure au 1er octobre 1989, s’applique à l’achat, l’exé-
cution ou l’acquisition, antérieurs au 1er octobre 1996,
d’une invention pour laquelle un brevet est délivré relati-
vement à une demande déposée avant le 1er octobre 1989.
2014, ch. 39, art. 140; 2018, ch. 27, art. 208.
Patents — filing date October 1, 1989 to before
coming-into-force date
Brevets — date de dépôt le  1er octobre 1989 ou après
cette date mais avant la date d’entrée en vigueur
78.54 Subject to subsection 78.55(1) and section 78.56,
any matter arising on or after the coming-into-force date
in respect of a patent granted on the basis of an applica-
tion whose filing date is on or after October 1, 1989 but
before the coming-into-force date shall be dealt with and
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Act,
78.54 Sous réserve du paragraphe 78.55(1) et de l’article
78.56, toute question soulevée à compter de la date d’en-
trée en vigueur relativement à un brevet accordé au titre
d’une demande dont la date de dépôt est le 1er octobre


Patent
Brevets
Transitional Provisions
Dispositions transitoires
Sections 78.54-78.6
Articles 78.54-78.6
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
88
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
other than the definition filing date in section 2 and sec-
tion 28.
2014, c. 39, s. 140.
1989 ou est postérieure à cette dernière date mais anté-
rieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur est régie par les dis-
positions de la présente loi, à l’exception de la définition
de date de dépôt, à l’article 2, et de l’article 28.
2014, ch. 39, art. 140.
Application of section 46 — item 31 of Schedule II to
Patent Rules
Application de l’article 46 — article 31 de l’annexe II
des Règles sur les brevets
78.55 (1) If the time, not including a period of grace, set
out in item 31 of Schedule II to the Patent Rules to pay
the applicable fee to maintain the rights accorded by a
patent in effect ends before the coming-into-force date,
section 46 as it read immediately before the coming-into-
force date applies in respect of that fee.
78.55 (1) Si le délai — compte non tenu du délai de
grâce — prévu à l’article 31 de l’annexe II des Règles sur
les brevets pour payer la taxe applicable pour le maintien
en état des droits conférés par un brevet a expiré avant la
date d’entrée en vigueur, l’article 46, dans sa version an-
térieure à cette date, s’applique à cette taxe.
Application of section 46 — item 32 of Schedule II to
Patent Rules
Application de l’article 46 — article 32 de l’annexe II
des Règles sur les brevets
(2) If the time, not including a period of grace, set out in
item 32 of Schedule II to the Patent Rules to pay the ap-
plicable fee to maintain the rights accorded by a patent in
effect ends before the coming-into-force date, section 46
as it read immediately before the coming-into-force date
applies in respect of that fee.
2014, c. 39, s. 140.
(2) Si le délai — compte non tenu du délai de grâce —
prévu à l’article 32 de l’annexe II des Règles sur les bre-
vets pour payer la taxe applicable pour le maintien en
état des droits conférés par un brevet a expiré avant la
date d’entrée en vigueur, l’article 46, dans sa version an-
térieure à cette date, s’applique à cette taxe.
2014, ch. 39, art. 140.
Non-application of subsection 27.1(4) and section 73.1
Non-application du paragraphe 27.1(4) et de l’article
73.1
78.56 Subsection 27.1(4) and section 73.1 do not apply
to a patent that was granted before the coming-into-force
date or to a reissued patent if the original patent was
granted before that date.
2014, c. 39, s. 140.
78.56 Le paragraphe 27.1(4) et l’article 73.1 ne s’ap-
pliquent pas au brevet accordé avant la date d’entrée en
vigueur ni au brevet redélivré si le brevet original avait
été accordé avant cette date.
2014, ch. 39, art. 140.
Reissued patents
Brevets redélivrés
78.57 For greater certainty, for the purposes of sections
78.53 and 78.54, a reissued patent is considered to be is-
sued on the basis of the original application.
2014, c. 39, s. 140.
78.57 Il est entendu que, pour l’application des articles
78.53 et 78.54, les brevets redélivrés sont considérés
comme délivrés au titre des demandes originales.
2014, ch. 39, art. 140.
Regulations
Règlements
78.58 For greater certainty, a regulation made under
subsection 12(1) applies to an application for a patent re-
ferred to in section 78.22, unless the regulation provides
otherwise.
2014, c. 39, s. 140.
78.58 Il est entendu que tout règlement pris en vertu du
paragraphe 12(1) s’applique à la demande de brevet visée
à l’article 78.22, sauf indication contraire prévue par ce
règlement.
2014, ch. 39, art. 140.
Payment of prescribed fees
Paiement de taxes réglementaires
78.6 (1) If, before the day on which this section comes
into force, a person has paid a prescribed fee applicable
to a small entity, within the meaning of the Patent Rules
as they read at the time of payment, but should have paid
the prescribed fee applicable to an entity other than a
small entity and a payment equivalent to the difference
between the two amounts is submitted to the
78.6 (1) Si, avant l’entrée en vigueur du présent article,
une personne a payé la taxe réglementaire relative à une
petite entité, au sens des Règles sur les brevets dans leur
version applicable à la date du paiement, alors qu’elle au-
rait dû payer celle relative à une entité autre qu’une pe-
tite entité, et qu’elle verse la différence au commissaire
aux brevets en conformité avec le paragraphe (2), avant


Patent
Brevets
Transitional Provisions
Dispositions transitoires
Sections 78.6-79
Articles 78.6-79
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
89
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Commissioner in accordance with subsection (2) either
before or no later than twelve months after that day, the
payment is deemed to have been paid on the day on
which the prescribed fee was paid, regardless of whether
an action or other proceeding relating to the patent or
patent application in respect of which the fee was payable
has been commenced or decided.
la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent article ou au plus
tard douze mois après cette date, le versement est réputé
avoir été fait à la date du paiement de la taxe réglemen-
taire, indépendamment de toute instance ou autre procé-
dure engagée à l’égard du brevet ou de la demande de
brevet qui fait l’objet de la taxe ou de toute décision en
découlant.
Information to be provided
Renseignements
(2) Any person who submits a payment to the Commis-
sioner in accordance with subsection (1) is required to
provide information with respect to the service or pro-
ceeding in respect of which the fee was paid and the
patent or application in respect of which the fee was paid.
(2) La personne qui verse au commissaire aux brevets la
différence visée au paragraphe (1) doit fournir avec ce
paiement les renseignements suivants : le service ou la
formalité visés par ce paiement et le brevet ou la de-
mande pour lesquels il a été fait.
No refund
Somme non remboursable
(3) A payment submitted in accordance with subsection
(1) shall not be refunded.
(3) La différence versée aux termes du paragraphe (1)
n’est pas remboursable.
Action and proceedings barred
Aucune action en recouvrement
(4) No action or proceeding for any compensation or
damages lies against Her Majesty in right of Canada in
respect of any direct or indirect consequence resulting
from the application of this section.
(4) Il ne peut être intenté d’action en recouvrement
contre Sa Majesté du chef du Canada à l’égard de toutes
répercussions — directes ou indirectes — résultant de
l’application du présent article.
Application
Application
(5) For greater certainty, this section also applies to ap-
plications for patents mentioned in section 78.22.
2005, c. 18, s. 2; 2014, c. 39, s. 141.
(5) Il est entendu que le présent article s’applique aussi
aux demandes de brevet visées à l’article 78.22.
2005, ch. 18, art. 2; 2014, ch. 39, art. 141.
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou
protégés
Interpretation
Définitions
Definitions
Définitions
79 (1) In this section and in sections 80 to 103,
Board means the Patented Medicine Prices Review
Board continued by section 91; (Conseil)
Consumer Price Index means the Consumer Price In-
dex published by Statistics Canada under the authority of
the Statistics Act; (indice des prix à la consommation)
medicine includes a drug, as defined in section 104, and
a medicinal ingredient; (médicament)
Minister means the Minister of Health or such other
Member of the Queen’s Privy Council for Canada as is
designated by the Governor in Council as the Minister for
79 (1) Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent au pré-
sent article et aux articles 80 à 103.
breveté ou titulaire d’un brevet La personne ayant
pour le moment droit à l’avantage d’un brevet pour une
invention liée à un médicament, ainsi que quiconque
peut exercer tout droit d’un titulaire dans un cadre autre
qu’une licence prorogée en vertu du paragraphe 11(1) de
la Loi de 1992 modifiant la Loi sur les brevets. (paten-
tee)
Conseil Le Conseil d’examen du prix des médicaments
brevetés prorogé au titre de l’article 91. (Board)
indice des prix à la consommation Indice des prix à la
consommation publié par Statistique Canada sous le


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Interpretation
Définitions
Sections 79-80
Articles 79-80
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
90
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
the purposes of this section and sections 80 to 103;
(ministre)
patentee, in respect of an invention pertaining to a
medicine, means the person for the time being entitled to
the benefit of the patent for that invention and includes,
where any other person is entitled to exercise any rights
in relation to that patent other than under a licence con-
tinued by subsection 11(1) of the Patent Act Amendment
Act, 1992, that other person in respect of those rights;
(breveté ou titulaire d’un brevet)
regulations means regulations made under section 101;
(règlement)
rights holder means, in respect of an invention pertain-
ing to a medicine, a patentee and the person for the time
being entitled to the benefit of a certificate of supplemen-
tary protection for that invention, and includes, if any
other person is entitled to exercise rights in relation to
the certificate, that other person in respect of those
rights. (titulaire de droits)
régime de la Loi sur la statistique. (Consumer Price In-
dex)
médicament S’entend notamment d’une drogue au
sens de l’article 104 et d’un ingrédient médicinal.
(medicine)
ministre Le ministre de la Santé ou tel autre membre du
Conseil privé de la Reine pour le Canada chargé par le
gouverneur en conseil de l’application du présent article
et des articles 80 à 103. (Minister)
règlement Les règlements pris au titre de l’article 101.
(regulations)
titulaire de droits Le titulaire d’un brevet et la personne
ayant pour le moment droit à l’avantage d’un certificat de
protection supplémentaire délivré à l’égard du brevet,
ainsi que quiconque peut exercer tout droit d’un titulaire
relativement à ce certificat. (rights holder)
Invention pertaining to a medicine
Définition de invention liée à un médicament
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) and sections 80 to
101, an invention pertains to a medicine if the invention
is intended or capable of being used for medicine or for
the preparation or production of medicine.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 1996, c. 8, s. 32; 2017, c. 6, s. 46.
(2) Pour l’application du paragraphe (1) et des articles 80
à 101, une invention est liée à un médicament si elle est
destinée à des médicaments ou à la préparation ou la
production de médicaments, ou susceptible d’être utilisée
à de telles fins.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 1996, ch. 8, art. 32; 2017, ch. 6, art. 46.
Pricing Information
Renseignements sur les prix
Pricing information, etc., required by regulations
Renseignements réglementaires à fournir sur les prix
80 (1) A rights holder for an invention pertaining to a
medicine shall, as required by and in accordance with the
regulations, provide the Board with the information and
documents that the regulations may specify respecting
(a) the identity of the medicine;
(b) the price at which the medicine is being or has
been sold in any market in Canada and elsewhere;
(c) the costs of making and marketing the medicine, if
that information is available to the rights holder in
Canada or is within the knowledge or control of the
rights holder;
(d) the factors referred to in section 85; and
(e) any other related matters.
80 (1) Le titulaire de droits est tenu de fournir au
Conseil, conformément aux règlements, les renseigne-
ments et documents sur les points suivants :
a) l’identification du médicament en cause;
b) le prix de vente — antérieur ou actuel — du médi-
cament sur les marchés canadien et étranger;
c) les coûts de réalisation et de mise en marché du
médicament s’il dispose de ces derniers renseigne-
ments au Canada ou s’il en a connaissance ou le
contrôle;
d) les facteurs énumérés à l’article 85;
e) tout autre point afférent précisé par règlement.


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Pricing Information
Renseignements sur les prix
Sections 80-81
Articles 80-81
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
91
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Former rights holder
Ancien titulaire de droits
(2) Subject to subsection (3), a person who is a former
rights holder for an invention pertaining to a medicine
shall, as required by and in accordance with the regula-
tions, provide the Board with the information and docu-
ments that the regulations may specify respecting
(a) the identity of the medicine;
(b) the price at which the medicine was sold in any
market in Canada and elsewhere during the period in
which the person was a rights holder for the invention;
(c) the costs of making and marketing the medicine
produced during that period, whether incurred before
or after the patent was issued or the certificate of sup-
plementary protection took effect, if that information
is available to the person in Canada or is within the
knowledge or control of the person;
(d) the factors referred to in section 85; and
(e) any other related matters.
(2) Sous réserve du paragraphe (3), l’ancien titulaire de
droits est tenu de fournir au Conseil, conformément aux
règlements, les renseignements et les documents sur les
points suivants :
a) l’identification du médicament en cause;
b) le prix de vente du médicament sur les marchés ca-
nadien et étranger pendant la période où il était titu-
laire de droits;
c) les coûts de réalisation et de mise en marché du
médicament pendant cette période, qu’ils aient été as-
sumés avant ou après la délivrance du brevet ou la
prise d’effet du certificat de protection supplémen-
taire, s’il dispose de ces derniers renseignements au
Canada ou s’il en a connaissance ou le contrôle;
d) les facteurs énumérés à l’article 85;
e) tout autre point afférent précisé par règlement.
Limitation
Prescription
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply to a person who has
not, for a period of three or more years, been entitled to
the benefit of the patent or certificate of supplementary
protection, as the case may be, or to exercise any rights in
relation to the patent or certificate.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 2017, c. 6, s. 47.
(3) Le paragraphe (2) ne vise pas celui qui, pendant une
période d’au moins trois ans, a cessé d’avoir droit aux
avantages du brevet ou, le cas échéant, du certificat de
protection supplémentaire, ou d’exercer les droits du ti-
tulaire.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 2017, ch. 6, art. 47.
Pricing information, etc. required by Board
Renseignements sur les prix exigés par le Conseil
81 (1) The Board may, by order, require a rights holder
or former rights holder for an invention pertaining to a
medicine to provide the Board with information and doc-
uments respecting
(a) in the case of a rights holder, any of the matters re-
ferred to in paragraphs 80(1)(a) to (e);
(b) in the case of a former rights holder, any of the
matters referred to in paragraphs 80(2)(a) to (e); and
(c) any other related matters that the Board may re-
quire.
81 (1) Le Conseil peut, par ordonnance, enjoindre au ti-
tulaire de droits ou à l’ancien titulaire de droits de lui
fournir les renseignements et les documents relatifs aux
points visés aux alinéas 80(1)a) à e), dans le cas du titu-
laire de droits, ou aux alinéas 80(2)a) à e), dans le cas de
l’ancien titulaire de droits, ainsi que ceux relatifs à tout
autre point qu’il précise.
Compliance with order
Respect
(2) A rights holder or former rights holder in respect of
whom an order is made under subsection (1) shall com-
ply with the order within the time that is specified in the
order or as the Board may allow.
(2) L’ordonnance est à exécuter dans le délai précisé ou
que peut fixer le Conseil.


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Pricing Information
Renseignements sur les prix
Sections 81-83
Articles 81-83
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
92
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Limitation
Prescription
(3) No order may be made under subsection (1) in re-
spect of a former rights holder who, more than three
years before the day on which the order is proposed to be
made, ceased to be entitled to the benefit of the patent or
certificate of supplementary protection, as the case may
be, or to exercise any rights in relation to the patent or
certificate.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 2017, c. 6, s. 48.
(3) Il ne peut être pris d’ordonnances en vertu du para-
graphe (1) plus de trois ans après qu’une personne a ces-
sé d’avoir droit aux avantages du brevet ou, le cas
échéant, du certificat de protection supplémentaire ou
d’exercer les droits du titulaire.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 2017, ch. 6, art. 48.
Notice of introductory price
Avis du prix de lancement
82 (1) A rights holder for an invention pertaining to a
medicine who intends to sell the medicine in a market in
Canada in which it has not previously been sold shall, as
soon as practicable after determining the date on which
the medicine will be first offered for sale in that market,
notify the Board of its intention and of that date.
82 (1) Tout titulaire de droits doit, dès que possible
après avoir fixé la date à laquelle il compte mettre en
vente sur un marché canadien un médicament qui n’y a
jamais été vendu, notifier le Conseil de son intention et
de la date à laquelle il compte le faire.
Pricing information and documents
Renseignements sur les prix
(2) If the Board receives a notice under subsection (1)
from a rights holder or otherwise has reason to believe
that a rights holder for an invention pertaining to a
medicine intends to sell the medicine in a market in
Canada in which the medicine has not previously been
sold, the Board may, by order, require the rights holder
to provide the Board with information and documents re-
specting the price at which the medicine is intended to be
sold in that market.
(2) Sur réception de l’avis visé au paragraphe (1) ou lors-
qu’il a des motifs de croire qu’un titulaire de droits se
propose de vendre sur un marché canadien un médica-
ment qui n’y a jamais été vendu, le Conseil peut, par or-
donnance, demander au titulaire de droits de lui fournir
les renseignements et les documents concernant le prix
proposé sur ce marché.
Compliance with order
Respect
(3) Subject to subsection (4), a rights holder in respect of
whom an order is made under subsection (2) shall com-
ply with the order within the time that is specified in the
order or as the Board may allow.
(3) Sous réserve du paragraphe (4), l’ordonnance est à
exécuter dans le délai précisé ou que peut fixer le Conseil.
Limitation
Prescription
(4) No rights holder shall be required to comply with an
order made under subsection (2) prior to the 60th day
preceding the date on which the rights holder intends to
first offer the medicine for sale in the relevant market.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 2017, c. 6, s. 49.
(4) Une ordonnance prise en vertu du paragraphe (2)
n’oblige pas le titulaire de droits avant le soixantième
jour de la date prévue pour la mise en vente du médica-
ment sur le marché proposé.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 2017, ch. 6, art. 49.
Excessive Prices
Prix excessifs
Order re excessive prices
Ordonnance relative aux prix excessifs
83 (1) If the Board finds that a rights holder for an in-
vention pertaining to a medicine is selling the medicine
in any market in Canada at a price that, in the Board’s
opinion, is excessive, the Board may, by order, direct the
rights holder to cause the maximum price at which the
rights holder sells the medicine in that market to be re-
duced to the level that the Board considers not to be ex-
cessive and that is specified in the order.
83 (1) Lorsqu’il estime que le titulaire de droits vend
sur un marché canadien le médicament à un prix qu’il
juge être excessif, le Conseil peut, par ordonnance, lui en-
joindre de baisser le prix de vente maximal du médica-
ment dans ce marché au niveau précisé dans l’ordon-
nance et de façon qu’il ne puisse pas être excessif.


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Excessive Prices
Prix excessifs
Section 83
Article 83
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
93
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Order re excessive prices
Ordonnance relative aux prix excessifs
(2) Subject to subsection (4), if the Board finds that a
rights holder for an invention pertaining to a medicine
has, while a rights holder, sold the medicine in any mar-
ket in Canada at a price that, in the Board’s opinion, was
excessive, the Board may, by order, direct the rights
holder to do any one or more of the following things that
will, in the Board’s opinion, offset the amount of the ex-
cess revenues estimated by it to have been derived by the
rights holder from the sale of the medicine at an exces-
sive price:
(a) reduce the price at which the rights holder sells
the medicine in any market in Canada, to the extent
and for the period that are specified in the order;
(b) to the extent and for the period that are specified
in the order, reduce the price at which the rights hold-
er sells, in any market in Canada, any other medicine
to which a patented invention, or invention protected
by a certificate of supplementary protection, of the
rights holder pertains;
(c) pay to Her Majesty in right of Canada an amount
that is specified in the order.
(2) Sous réserve du paragraphe (4), lorsqu’il estime que
le titulaire de droits a vendu, alors qu’il était titulaire des
droits, le médicament sur un marché canadien à un prix
qu’il juge avoir été excessif, le Conseil peut, par ordon-
nance, lui enjoindre de prendre l’une ou plusieurs des
mesures suivantes pour compenser, selon lui, l’excédent
qu’aurait procuré au titulaire de droits la vente du médi-
cament au prix excessif :
a) baisser, dans un marché canadien, le prix de vente
du médicament dans la mesure et pour la période pré-
vue par l’ordonnance;
b) baisser, dans un marché canadien, le prix de vente
de tout autre médicament lié à une invention brevetée
du titulaire ou protégée par un certificat de protection
supplémentaire du titulaire dans la mesure et pour la
période prévue par l’ordonnance;
c) payer à Sa Majesté du chef du Canada la somme
précisée dans l’ordonnance.
Order re excessive prices
Ordonnance relative aux prix excessifs
(3) Subject to subsection (4), if the Board finds that a
former rights holder for an invention pertaining to a
medicine had, while a rights holder, sold the medicine in
any market in Canada at a price that, in the Board’s opin-
ion, was excessive, the Board may, by order, direct the
former rights holder to do any one or more of the follow-
ing things that will, in the Board’s opinion, offset the
amount of the excess revenues estimated by it to have
been derived by the former rights holder from the sale of
the medicine at an excessive price:
(a) to the extent and for the period that are specified
in the order, reduce the price at which the former
rights holder sells, in any market in Canada, a
medicine to which a patented invention, or invention
protected by a certificate of supplementary protection,
of the former rights holder pertains; or
(b) pay to Her Majesty in right of Canada an amount
that is specified in the order.
(3) Sous réserve du paragraphe (4), lorsqu’il estime que
l’ancien titulaire de droits a vendu, alors qu’il était titu-
laire des droits, le médicament à un prix qu’il juge avoir
été excessif, le Conseil peut, par ordonnance, lui en-
joindre de prendre l’une ou plusieurs des mesures sui-
vantes pour compenser, selon lui, l’excédent qu’aurait
procuré à l’ancien titulaire de droits la vente du médica-
ment au prix excessif :
a) baisser, dans un marché canadien, le prix de vente
de tout autre médicament lié à une invention brevetée
de l’ancien titulaire ou protégée par un certificat de
protection supplémentaire de l’ancien titulaire dans la
mesure et pour la période prévue par l’ordonnance;
b) payer à Sa Majesté du chef du Canada la somme
précisée dans l’ordonnance.
If policy to sell at excessive price
Cas de politique de vente à prix excessif
(4) If the Board, having regard to the extent and dura-
tion of the sales of the medicine at an excessive price, is
of the opinion that the rights holder or former rights
holder has engaged in a policy of selling the medicine at
an excessive price, the Board may, by order, in lieu of any
order it may make under subsection (2) or (3), as the case
(4) S’il estime que le titulaire de droits ou l’ancien titu-
laire de droits s’est livré à une politique de vente du mé-
dicament à un prix excessif, compte tenu de l’envergure
et de la durée des ventes à un tel prix, le Conseil peut, par
ordonnance, au lieu de celles qu’il peut prendre en appli-
cation, selon le cas, des paragraphes (2) ou (3), lui


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Excessive Prices
Prix excessifs
Sections 83-84
Articles 83-84
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
94
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
may be, direct the rights holder or former rights holder to
do any one or more of the things referred to in that sub-
section that will, in the Board’s opinion, offset not more
than twice the amount of the excess revenues estimated
by it to have been derived by the rights holder or former
rights holder from the sale of the medicine at an exces-
sive price.
enjoindre de prendre l’une ou plusieurs des mesures vi-
sées par ce paragraphe de façon à réduire suffisamment
les recettes pour compenser, selon lui, au plus le double
de l’excédent procuré par la vente au prix excessif.
Excess revenues
Excédent
(5) In estimating the amount of excess revenues under
subsection (2), (3) or (4), the Board shall not consider
any revenues derived by a rights holder or former rights
holder before December 20, 1991 or any revenues derived
by a former rights holder after they ceased to be entitled
to the benefit of the patent or certificate of supplemen-
tary protection, as the case may be, or to exercise any
rights in relation to the patent or certificate.
(5) Aux fins des paragraphes (2), (3) ou (4), il n’est pas
tenu compte, dans le calcul de l’excédent, des recettes an-
térieures au 20 décembre 1991 ni, dans le cas de l’ancien
titulaire de droits, des recettes faites après qu’il a cessé
d’avoir droit aux avantages du brevet ou, le cas échéant,
du certificat de protection supplémentaire ou d’exercer
les droits du titulaire.
Right to hearing
Droit à l’audition
(6) Before the Board makes an order under this section,
it shall provide the rights holder or former rights holder
with a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
(6) Avant de prendre une ordonnance en vertu du pré-
sent article, le Conseil doit donner au titulaire de droits
ou à l’ancien titulaire de droits la possibilité de présenter
ses observations.
Limitation period
Prescription
(7) No order may be made under this section in respect
of a former rights holder who, more than three years be-
fore the day on which the proceedings in the matter com-
menced, ceased to be entitled to the benefit of the patent
or certificate of supplementary protection, as the case
may be, or to exercise any rights in relation to the patent
or certificate.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 1994, c. 26, s. 54(F); 2017, c. 6, s. 50.
(7) Le présent article ne permet pas la prise d’une ordon-
nance à l’encontre des anciens titulaires de droits qui,
plus de trois ans avant le début des procédures, ont cessé
d’avoir droit aux avantages du brevet ou, le cas échéant,
du certificat de protection supplémentaire ou d’exercer
les droits du titulaire.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 1994, ch. 26, art. 54(F); 2017, ch. 6, art. 50.
Compliance
Exécution
84 (1) A rights holder or former rights holder who is re-
quired by any order made under section 83 to reduce the
price of a medicine shall commence compliance with the
order within one month after the date of the order or
within a greater period after that date that the Board de-
termines is practical and reasonable, having regard to the
circumstances of the rights holder or former rights hold-
er.
84 (1) Le titulaire de droits ou l’ancien titulaire de
droits est tenu de commencer l’exécution de l’ordon-
nance de réduction des prix dans le mois suivant sa prise
ou dans le délai supérieur que le Conseil estime pratique
et raisonnable compte tenu de sa situation.
Compliance
Exécution
(2) A rights holder or former rights holder who is direct-
ed by any order made under section 83 to pay an amount
to Her Majesty shall pay that amount within one month
after the date of the order or within a greater period after
that date that the Board determines is practical and rea-
sonable, having regard to the circumstances of the rights
holder or former rights holder.
(2) Le titulaire de droits ou l’ancien titulaire de droits est
tenu d’exécuter l’ordonnance de paiement à Sa Majesté
dans le mois suivant sa prise ou dans le délai supérieur
que le Conseil estime pratique et raisonnable, compte te-
nu de sa situation.


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Excessive Prices
Prix excessifs
Sections 84-85
Articles 84-85
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
95
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Debt due to Her Majesty
Recouvrement des créances
(3) An amount payable by a rights holder or former
rights holder to Her Majesty under any order made un-
der section 83 constitutes a debt due to Her Majesty and
may be recovered in any court of competent jurisdiction.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 2017, c. 6, s. 51.
(3) Les sommes payables en application d’une ordon-
nance prise en vertu du présent article constituent des
créances de Sa Majesté, dont le recouvrement peut être
poursuivi à ce titre devant toute juridiction compétente.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 2017, ch. 6, art. 51.
Factors to be considered
Facteurs de fixation du prix
85 (1) In determining under section 83 whether a
medicine is being or has been sold at an excessive price
in any market in Canada, the Board shall take into con-
sideration the following factors, to the extent that infor-
mation on the factors is available to the Board:
(a) the prices at which the medicine has been sold in
the relevant market;
(b) the prices at which other medicines in the same
therapeutic class have been sold in the relevant mar-
ket;
(c) the prices at which the medicine and other
medicines in the same therapeutic class have been
sold in countries other than Canada;
(d) changes in the Consumer Price Index; and
(e) such other factors as may be specified in any regu-
lations made for the purposes of this subsection.
85 (1) Pour décider si le prix d’un médicament vendu
sur un marché canadien est excessif, le Conseil tient
compte des facteurs suivants, dans la mesure où des ren-
seignements sur ces facteurs lui sont disponibles :
a) le prix de vente du médicament sur un tel marché;
b) le prix de vente de médicaments de la même caté-
gorie thérapeutique sur un tel marché;
c) le prix de vente du médicament et d’autres médica-
ments de la même catégorie thérapeutique à l’étran-
ger;
d) les variations de l’indice des prix à la consomma-
tion;
e) tous les autres facteurs précisés par les règlements
d’application du présent paragraphe.
Additional factors
Facteurs complémentaires
(2) Where, after taking into consideration the factors re-
ferred to in subsection (1), the Board is unable to deter-
mine whether the medicine is being or has been sold in
any market in Canada at an excessive price, the Board
may take into consideration the following factors:
(a) the costs of making and marketing the medicine;
and
(b) such other factors as may be specified in any regu-
lations made for the purposes of this subsection or as
are, in the opinion of the Board, relevant in the cir-
cumstances.
(2) Si, après avoir tenu compte de ces facteurs, il est in-
capable de décider si le prix d’un médicament vendu sur
un marché canadien est excessif, le Conseil peut tenir
compte des facteurs suivants :
a) les coûts de réalisation et de mise en marché;
b) tous les autres facteurs précisés par les règlements
d’application du présent paragraphe ou qu’il estime
pertinents.
Research costs
Coûts de recherche
(3) In determining under section 83 whether a medicine
is being or has been sold in any market in Canada at an
excessive price, the Board shall not take into considera-
tion research costs other than the Canadian portion of
the world costs related to the research that led to the in-
vention pertaining to that medicine or to the develop-
ment and commercialization of that invention, calculated
(3) Pour l’application de l’article 83, le Conseil ne tient
compte, dans les coûts de recherche, que de la part cana-
dienne des coûts mondiaux directement liée à la re-
cherche qui a abouti soit à l’invention du médicament,
soit à sa mise au point et à sa mise en marché, calculée
proportionnellement au rapport entre les ventes cana-
diennes du médicament par le titulaire de droits et le to-
tal des ventes mondiales.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 2017, ch. 6, art. 52.


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Excessive Prices
Prix excessifs
Sections 85-87
Articles 85-87
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
96
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
in proportion to the ratio of sales by the rights holder in
Canada of that medicine to total world sales.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 2017, c. 6, s. 52.
Hearings to be public
Audiences publiques
86 (1) A hearing under section 83 shall be held in public
unless the Board is satisfied on representations made by
the person to whom the hearing relates that specific, di-
rect and substantial harm would be caused to the person
by the disclosure of information or documents at a public
hearing, in which case the hearing or any part thereof
may, at the discretion of the Board, be held in private.
86 (1) Les audiences tenues dans le cadre de l’article 83
sont publiques, sauf si le Conseil est convaincu, à la suite
d’observations faites par l’intéressé, que la divulgation
des renseignements ou documents en cause causerait di-
rectement à celui-ci un préjudice réel et sérieux; le cas
échéant, l’audience peut, selon ce que décide le Conseil,
se tenir à huis clos en tout ou en partie.
Notice of hearing to certain persons
Avis
(2) The Board shall give notice to the Minister of Indus-
try or such other Minister as may be designated by the
regulations and to provincial ministers of the Crown re-
sponsible for health of any hearing under section 83, and
each of them is entitled to appear and make representa-
tions to the Board with respect to the matter being heard.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 1995, c. 1, s. 62.
(2) Le Conseil avise le ministre de l’Industrie, ou tout
autre ministre désigné par règlement, et les ministres
provinciaux responsables de la santé de toute audience
tenue aux termes de l’article 83 et leur donne la possibili-
té de présenter leurs observations.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 1995, ch. 1, art. 62.
Information, etc., privileged
Protection des renseignements
87 (1) Subject to subsection (2), any information or doc-
ument provided to the Board under section 80, 81 or 82
or in any proceeding under section 83 is privileged, and
no person who has obtained the information or docu-
ment pursuant to this Act shall, without the authoriza-
tion of the person who provided the information or docu-
ment, knowingly disclose the information or document
or allow it to be disclosed unless it has been disclosed at a
public hearing under section 83.
87 (1) Sous réserve du paragraphe (2), les renseigne-
ments ou documents fournis au Conseil en application
des articles 80, 81, 82 ou 83 sont protégés; nul ne peut,
après les avoir obtenus en conformité avec la présente
loi, sciemment les communiquer ou en permettre la com-
munication sans l’autorisation de la personne qui les a
fournis, sauf s’ils ont été divulgués dans le cadre d’une
audience publique tenue en vertu de l’article 83.
Disclosure, etc.
Communication
(2) Any information or document referred to in subsec-
tion (1)
(a) may be disclosed by the Board to any person en-
gaged in the administration of this Act under the di-
rection of the Board, to the Minister of Industry or
such other Minister as may be designated by the regu-
lations and to the provincial ministers of the Crown
responsible for health and their officials for use only
for the purpose of making representations referred to
in subsection 86(2); and
(b) may be used by the Board for the purpose of the
report referred to in section 100.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 1995, c. 1, s. 62.
(2) Le Conseil peut communiquer les renseignements ou
documents qui lui sont confiés à quiconque est chargé,
sous sa responsabilité, de l’application de la présente loi,
ainsi qu’au ministre de l’Industrie, ou tout autre ministre
désigné par règlement, ou à un ministre provincial res-
ponsable de la santé, ou à tel de leurs fonctionnaires, à
seule fin de leur permettre de présenter leurs observa-
tions au titre du paragraphe 86(2); il peut aussi s’en ser-
vir pour établir le rapport visé à l’article 100.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 1995, ch. 1, art. 62.


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Sales and Expense Information
Renseignements sur les recettes et dépenses
Sections 88-89
Articles 88-89
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
97
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Sales and Expense Information
Renseignements sur les recettes et
dépenses
Sales and expense information, etc., to be provided
Obligations des titulaires de droits relatifs à un
médicament
88 (1) A rights holder for an invention pertaining to a
medicine shall, as required by and in accordance with the
regulations, or as the Board may, by order, require, pro-
vide the Board with the information and documents that
the regulations or the order may specify respecting
(a) the identity of the licensees in Canada of the rights
holder;
(b) the revenue of the rights holder, and details of the
source of the revenue, whether direct or indirect, from
sales of medicine in Canada; and
(c) the expenditures made by the rights holder in
Canada on research and development relating to
medicine.
88 (1) Le titulaire de droits est tenu, conformément aux
règlements ou aux ordonnances du Conseil, de fournir à
celui-ci des renseignements et documents relatifs :
a) à l’identité des titulaires des licences découlant du
brevet ou du certificat de protection supplémentaire
au Canada;
b) aux recettes directes ou indirectes qu’il a tirées de
la vente au Canada du médicament, ainsi que la source
de ces recettes;
c) aux dépenses de recherche et développement qu’il
a faites au Canada relativement au médicament.
Additional information
Renseignements complémentaires
(2) If the Board believes on reasonable grounds that any
person has information or documents pertaining to the
value of sales of medicine in Canada by a rights holder or
the expenditures made by a rights holder in Canada on
research and development relating to medicine, the
Board may, by order, require the person to provide the
Board with any of the information or documents that are
specified in the order, or with copies of them.
(2) S’il estime pour des motifs raisonnables qu’une per-
sonne a des renseignements ou documents sur le mon-
tant des ventes au Canada de tout médicament ou sur les
dépenses de recherche et développement supportées à
cet égard au Canada par un titulaire de droits, le Conseil
peut, par ordonnance, l’obliger à les lui fournir — ou une
copie de ceux-ci — selon ce que précise l’ordonnance.
Compliance with order
Délai
(3) A person in respect of whom an order is made under
subsection (1) or (2) shall comply with the order within
such time as is specified in the order or as the Board may
allow.
(3) L’ordonnance est à exécuter dans le délai précisé ou
que peut fixer le Conseil.
Information, etc., privileged
Protection des renseignements
(4) Subject to section 89, any information or document
provided to the Board under subsection (1) or (2) is privi-
leged, and no person who has obtained the information
or document pursuant to this Act shall, without the au-
thorization of the person who provided the information
or document, knowingly disclose the information or al-
low it to be disclosed, except for the purposes of the ad-
ministration of this Act.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 2017, c. 6, s. 53.
(4) Sous réserve de l’article 89, les renseignements ou
documents fournis au Conseil sont protégés; nul ne peut,
après les avoir obtenus en conformité avec la présente
loi, sciemment les communiquer ou en permettre la com-
munication sans l’autorisation de celui qui les a fournis,
sauf quant à l’application de la présente loi.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 2017, ch. 6, art. 53.
Report
Rapport
89 (1) The Board shall in each year submit to the Minis-
ter a report setting out
89 (1) Le Conseil remet au ministre un rapport annuel
exposant son estimation de la proportion, exprimée en
pourcentage, 
que 
les 
dépenses 
de 
recherche 
et


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Sales and Expense Information
Renseignements sur les recettes et dépenses
Sections 89-90
Articles 89-90
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
98
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(a) the Board’s estimate of the proportion, as a per-
centage, that the expenditures of each rights holder in
Canada in the preceding year on research and devel-
opment relating to medicine is of the revenues of
those rights holders from sales of medicine in Canada
in that year; and
(b) the Board’s estimate of the proportion, as a per-
centage, that the total of the expenditures of rights
holders in Canada in the preceding year on research
and development relating to medicine is of the total of
the revenues of those rights holders from sales of
medicine in Canada in that year.
développement en matière de médicaments, faites au
Canada dans l’année précédente, représentent par rap-
port aux recettes tirées de la vente au Canada de médica-
ments pendant la même période, et ce tant pour chaque
titulaire de droits que pour l’ensemble des titulaires de
droits.
Basis of report
Fondement du rapport
(2) The report shall be based on an analysis of informa-
tion and documents provided to the Board under subsec-
tions 88(1) and (2) and of such other information and
documents relating to the revenues and expenditures re-
ferred to in subsection 88(1) as the Board considers rele-
vant but, subject to subsection (3), shall not be set out in
a manner that would make it possible to identify a person
who provided any information or document under sub-
section 88(1) or (2).
(2) Le rapport se fonde sur l’analyse des renseignements
et documents obtenus au titre des paragraphes 88(1) ou
(2) et des renseignements ou documents — que le Conseil
juge pertinents — sur les recettes et dépenses mention-
nées au paragraphe 88(1); par ailleurs, il est établi de ma-
nière à ne pas permettre de connaître l’identité de la per-
sonne qui a fourni ces renseignements ou documents
visés aux paragraphes 88(1) ou (2).
Exception
Exception
(3) The Board shall, in the report, identify the rights
holders in respect of whom an estimate referred to in
subsection (1) is given in the report, and may, in the re-
port, identify any person who has failed to comply with
subsection 88(1) or (2) at any time in the year in respect
of which the report is made.
(3) Dans son rapport, le Conseil identifie toutefois les ti-
tulaires de droits pour lesquels une estimation est don-
née; il peut aussi identifier les contrevenants aux para-
graphes 88(1) ou (2) pour l’année en cause.
Tabling of report
Dépôt au Parlement
(4) The Minister shall cause a copy of the report to be
laid before each House of Parliament on any of the first
thirty days on which that House is sitting after the report
is submitted to the Minister.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 2017, c. 6, s. 54.
(4) Le ministre fait déposer le rapport devant chaque
chambre du Parlement dans les trente premiers jours de
séance de celle-ci suivant sa remise.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 2017, ch. 6, art. 54.
Inquiries
Enquêtes
Inquiries
Enquêtes
90 The Board shall inquire into any matter that the Min-
ister refers to the Board for inquiry and shall report to
the Minister at the time and in accordance with the terms
of reference established by the Minister.
1993, c. 2, s. 7.
90 Le Conseil fait enquête sur toute question que lui dé-
fère le ministre et lui fait rapport dans le délai prescrit et
dans le cadre strict du mandat dont il est investi par le
ministre.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7.


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board
Conseil d’examen du prix des médicaments brevetés
Sections 91-93
Articles 91-93
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
99
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Patented Medicine Prices Review
Board
Conseil d’examen du prix des
médicaments brevetés
Establishment
Constitution
91 (1) The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board is
hereby continued, and shall consist of not more than five
members to be appointed by the Governor in Council.
91 (1) Le Conseil d’examen du prix des médicaments
brevetés est prorogé; il se compose d’au plus cinq
conseillers nommés par le gouverneur en conseil.
Tenure
Mandat
(2) Each member of the Board shall hold office during
good behaviour for a period of five years, but may be re-
moved at any time by the Governor in Council for cause.
(2) Les conseillers sont nommés à titre inamovible pour
un mandat de cinq ans, sous réserve de révocation moti-
vée que prononce le gouverneur en conseil.
Reappointment
Nouveau mandat
(3) A member of the Board, on the expiration of a first
term of office, is eligible to be reappointed for one further
term.
(3) Les mandats des conseillers sont renouvelables une
seule fois.
Acting after expiration of appointment
Prolongation
(4) A person may continue to act as a member of the
Board after the expiration of the person’s term of ap-
pointment in respect of any matter in which the person
became engaged during the term of appointment.
(4) Le conseiller dont le mandat est échu peut terminer
les affaires dont il est saisi.
Remuneration and expenses
Rémunération
(5) The members of the Board shall be paid such remu-
neration as may be fixed by the Governor in Council and
are entitled to be paid reasonable travel and living ex-
penses incurred by them in the course of their duties un-
der this Act while absent from their ordinary place of res-
idence.
1993, c. 2, s. 7.
(5) Les conseillers reçoivent la rémunération fixée par le
gouverneur en conseil et ont droit aux frais de déplace-
ment et autres entraînés par l’accomplissement de leurs
fonctions hors du lieu de leur résidence habituelle.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7.
Advisory panel
Comité consultatif
92 (1) The Minister may establish an advisory panel to
advise the Minister on the appointment of persons to the
Board, which panel shall include representatives of the
provincial ministers of the Crown responsible for health,
representatives of consumer groups, representatives of
the pharmaceutical industry and such other persons as
the Minister considers appropriate to appoint.
92 (1) Le ministre peut constituer un comité consultatif
chargé de le conseiller sur la nomination des conseillers
au Conseil. Le comité est formé de représentants des mi-
nistres provinciaux responsables de la santé, de repré-
sentants des groupes de consommateurs, de représen-
tants de l’industrie pharmaceutique et de toute autre
personne que le ministre estime indiqué d’y nommer.
Consultation
Consultation
(2) The Minister shall consult with an advisory panel es-
tablished under subsection (1) for the purpose of making
a recommendation to the Governor in Council with re-
spect to the appointment of a person to the Board.
1993, c. 2, s. 7.
(2) Le ministre doit consulter le comité avant de faire ses
recommandations au gouverneur en conseil sur la nomi-
nation d’un conseiller au Conseil.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7.
Chairperson and Vice-chairperson
Président et vice-président
93 (1) The Governor in Council shall designate one of
the members of the Board to be Chairperson of the Board
93 (1) Le gouverneur en conseil désigne, parmi les
conseillers, un président et un vice-président.


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board
Conseil d’examen du prix des médicaments brevetés
Sections 93-95
Articles 93-95
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
100
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
and one of the members to be Vice-chairperson of the
Board.
Duties of Chairperson
Attributions du président
(2) The Chairperson is the chief executive officer of the
Board and has supervision over and direction of the work
of the Board, including
(a) the apportionment of the work among the mem-
bers thereof and the assignment of members to deal
with matters before the Board and to sit at hearings of
the Board and to preside at hearings or other proceed-
ings; and
(b) generally, the conduct of the work of the Board,
the management of its internal affairs and the duties
of its staff.
(2) Le président est le premier dirigeant du Conseil et, à
ce titre, il en assure la direction. Il est notamment chargé
de la répartition des affaires entre les conseillers, de la
constitution et de la présidence des audiences et des
autres procédures, ainsi que de la conduite des travaux
du Conseil et de la gestion de son personnel.
Duties of Vice-chairperson
Attributions du vice-président
(3) If the Chairperson is absent or incapacitated or if the
office of Chairperson is vacant, the Vice-chairperson has
all the powers and functions of the Chairperson during
the absence, incapacity or vacancy.
1993, c. 2, s. 7.
(3) En cas d’absence ou d’empêchement du président, ou
de vacance de son poste, la présidence est assumée par le
vice-président.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7.
Staff
Personnel
94 (1) Such officers and employees as are necessary for
the proper conduct of the work of the Board shall be ap-
pointed in accordance with the Public Service Employ-
ment Act.
94 (1) Le personnel nécessaire à l’exercice des activités
du Conseil est nommé conformément à la Loi sur l’em-
ploi dans la fonction publique.
Idem
Idem
(2) Persons appointed under subsection (1) shall be
deemed to be employed in the public service for the pur-
poses of the Public Service Superannuation Act.
(2) Ce personnel est réputé faire partie de la fonction pu-
blique pour l’application de la Loi sur la pension de la
fonction publique.
Technical assistance
Experts
(3) The Board may engage on a temporary basis the ser-
vices of persons having technical or specialized knowl-
edge to advise and assist in the performance of its duties
and, with the approval of the Treasury Board, the Board
may fix and pay the remuneration and expenses of those
persons.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 2003, c. 22, s. 225(E).
(3) Le Conseil peut, à titre temporaire, retenir les ser-
vices d’experts pour l’assister dans l’exercice de ses fonc-
tions et, avec l’agrément du Conseil du Trésor, fixer et
payer leur rémunération et leurs frais.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 2003, ch. 22, art. 225(A).
Principal office
Siège
95 (1) The principal office of the Board shall be in the
National Capital Region described in the schedule to the
National Capital Act.
95 (1) Le siège du Conseil est fixé dans la région de la
capitale nationale définie à l’annexe de la Loi sur la capi-
tale nationale.
Meetings
Réunions
(2) The Board may meet at such times and places in
Canada as the Chairperson deems advisable.
1993, c. 2, s. 7.
(2) Le Conseil tient ses réunions au Canada aux dates,
heures et lieux choisis par le président selon les besoins.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7.


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board
Conseil d’examen du prix des médicaments brevetés
Sections 96-97
Articles 96-97
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
101
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
General powers, etc.
Attributions générales du Conseil
96 (1) The Board has, with respect to the attendance,
swearing and examination of witnesses, the production
and inspection of documents, the enforcement of its or-
ders and other matters necessary or proper for the due
exercise of its jurisdiction, all such powers, rights and
privileges as are vested in a superior court.
96 (1) Pour l’exercice de sa compétence, y compris l’as-
signation et l’interrogatoire des témoins, la prestation
des serments, la production d’éléments de preuve et
l’exécution de ses ordonnances, le Conseil est assimilé à
une cour supérieure.
Rules
Règles
(2) The Board may, with the approval of the Governor in
Council, make general rules
(a) specifying the number of members of the Board
that constitutes a quorum in respect of any matter;
and
(b) for regulating the practice and procedure of the
Board.
(2) Le Conseil peut, avec l’agrément du gouverneur en
conseil, établir des règles régissant le quorum et les pra-
tiques et procédures à suivre dans l’exercice de son acti-
vité.
By-laws
Règlement administratif
(3) The Board may make by-laws for carrying out the
work of the Board, the management of its internal affairs
and the duties of its staff.
(3) Le Conseil peut, par règlement administratif, régir
ses travaux, la gestion de ses affaires et les fonctions de
son personnel.
Guidelines
Directives
(4) Subject to subsection (5), the Board may issue guide-
lines with respect to any matter within its jurisdiction but
such guidelines are not binding on the Board or any
rights holder or former rights holder.
(4) Sous réserve du paragraphe (5), le Conseil peut for-
muler des directives — sans que lui, les titulaires de
droits ou les anciens titulaires de droits ne soient liés par
celles-ci — sur toutes questions relevant de sa compé-
tence.
Consultation
Consultation
(5) Before the Board issues any guidelines, it shall con-
sult with the Minister, the provincial ministers of the
Crown responsible for health and such representatives of
consumer groups and representatives of the pharmaceu-
tical industry as the Minister may designate for the pur-
pose.
(5) Avant de formuler des directives, le Conseil doit
consulter le ministre, les ministres provinciaux respon-
sables de la santé et les représentants des groupes de
consommateurs et de l’industrie pharmaceutique que le
ministre peut désigner à cette fin.
Non-application of Statutory Instruments Act
Non-application de la Loi sur les textes
réglementaires
(6) The Statutory Instruments Act does not apply to
guidelines issued under subsection (4).
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 2017, c. 6, s. 55.
(6) La Loi sur les textes réglementaires ne s’applique pas
à ces directives.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 2017, ch. 6, art. 55.
Proceedings
Procédures
97 (1) All proceedings before the Board shall be dealt
with as informally and expeditiously as the circum-
stances and considerations of fairness permit.
97 (1) Dans la mesure où les circonstances et l’équité le
permettent, le Conseil agit sans formalisme, en procé-
dure expéditive.


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board
Conseil d’examen du prix des médicaments brevetés
Sections 97-99
Articles 97-99
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
102
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Differences of opinion among members
Décisions
(2) In any proceedings before the Board,
(a) in the event of a difference of opinion among the
members determining any question, the opinion of the
majority shall prevail; and
(b) in the event of an equally divided opinion among
the members determining any question, the presiding
member may determine the question.
1993, c. 2, s. 7.
(2) Les décisions sont prises à la majorité des conseillers,
celui qui préside à l’audience disposant d’une voix pré-
pondérante en cas de partage.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7.
Orders
Entrée en vigueur des ordonnances
98 (1) The Board may, in any order, direct
(a) that the order or any portion thereof shall come
into force at a future time, on the happening of a con-
tingency, event or condition specified in the order or
on the performance to the satisfaction of the Board, or
a person named by it, of any terms specified in the or-
der; and
(b) that the whole or any portion of the order shall
have effect for a limited time or until the happening of
a specified event.
98 (1) Le Conseil peut, dans ses ordonnances, fixer une
date pour leur entrée en vigueur, en tout ou en partie, ou
subordonner celle-ci à la survenance d’un événement, à
la réalisation d’une condition ou à la bonne exécution,
appréciée par lui-même ou son délégué, d’obligations im-
posées par l’ordonnance; il peut en outre y fixer une date
pour leur cessation d’effet, en tout ou en partie, ou subor-
donner celle-ci à la survenance d’un événement précis.
Interim orders, etc.
Ordonnances provisoires
(2) The Board may make interim orders or reserve fur-
ther directions for an adjourned hearing of a matter.
(2) Le Conseil peut prendre une ordonnance provisoire
et se réserver le droit de compléter sa décision lors d’une
audience ultérieure.
Rescission and variation
Modification des ordonnances
(3) The Board may vary or rescind any order made by it
and may re-hear any matter.
(3) Le Conseil peut annuler ou modifier ses ordon-
nances, et peut entendre une question de nouveau.
Certificates
Certificat
(4) Where any person satisfies the Board that the Board
would not have sufficient grounds to make an order un-
der section 83 in respect of the person, the Board may, af-
ter the person pays any fees required to be paid by the
regulations, issue to the person a certificate to that effect,
but no certificate is binding on the Board.
1993, c. 2, s. 7.
(4) Lorsqu’il est convaincu par quiconque qu’il n’aura
pas de motifs suffisants pour prendre l’ordonnance pré-
vue à l’article 83, le Conseil peut, à la suite du paiement
des droits réglementaires, délivrer à l’intéressé un certifi-
cat en ce sens, sans toutefois être lié par celui-ci.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7.
Enforcement of orders
Assimilation
99 (1) Any order of the Board may be made an order of
the Federal Court or any superior court of a province and
is enforceable in the same manner as an order of the
court.
99 (1) Les ordonnances du Conseil peuvent être assimi-
lées à des ordonnances de la Cour fédérale ou d’une cour
supérieure; le cas échéant, leur exécution s’effectue selon
les mêmes modalités.
Procedure
Procédure
(2) To make an order of the Board an order of a court,
the usual practice and procedure of the court in such
matters may be followed or, in lieu thereof, the Board
(2) L’assimilation se fait selon la pratique et la procédure
suivies par le tribunal saisi ou par la production au greffe
du 
tribunal 
d’une 
copie 
certifiée 
conforme 
de


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board
Conseil d’examen du prix des médicaments brevetés
Sections 99-100
Articles 99-100
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
103
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
may file with the registrar of the court a certified copy of
the Board’s order, and thereupon the order becomes an
order of the court.
l’ordonnance. L’ordonnance est dès lors une ordonnance
de la cour.
Effect of variation or rescission
Modification ou annulation
(3) Where an order of the Board that has been made an
order of a court is varied or rescinded by a subsequent
order of the Board, the subsequent order of the Board
shall be made an order of the court in the manner de-
scribed in subsection (1), and the order of the court shall
be deemed to have been varied or rescinded accordingly.
(3) Les ordonnances du Conseil qui modifient ou an-
nulent des ordonnances déjà assimilées doivent, selon les
mêmes modalités, faire l’objet d’une assimilation; l’or-
donnance est alors réputée les modifier ou les annuler,
selon le cas.
Option to enforce
Faculté d’exécution
(4) Nothing in this section prevents the Board from exer-
cising any of its powers under this Act.
1993, c. 2, s. 7.
(4) Le présent article n’a pas pour effet de limiter l’exer-
cice par le Conseil des compétences conférées par la pré-
sente loi.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7.
Report of Board
Rapport
100 (1) The Board shall in each year submit to the Min-
ister a report on its activities during the preceding year.
100 (1) Le Conseil remet au ministre un rapport d’acti-
vité pour l’année précédente.
Contents
Contenu
(2) The report shall contain
(a) a summary of pricing trends in the pharmaceutical
industry; and
(b) the name of each rights holder and former rights
holder in respect of whom an order was made under
subsection 81(1) or 82(2) or section 83 during the year
and a statement as to the status of the matter in re-
spect of which the order was made.
(2) Ce rapport comporte, outre un résumé des tendances
des prix dans le secteur pharmaceutique, le nom de tous
les titulaires de droits et anciens titulaires de droits ayant
fait l’objet d’une ordonnance dans le cadre des para-
graphes 81(1) ou 82(2) ou de l’article 83 et l’exposé de la
situation dans chacun de ces cas.
Report summary
Résumé
(3) The summary referred to in paragraph (2)(a) may be
based on information and documents provided to the
Board by any rights holder or former rights holder under
section 80, 81 or 82 or in any proceeding under section
83, but shall not be set out in a manner that would make
it possible to identify that rights holder or former rights
holder.
(3) Le résumé peut se fonder sur les renseignements ou
documents confiés au Conseil en application des articles
80, 81, 82 ou 83, mais sans permettre l’identification du
titulaire de droits ou de l’ancien titulaire de droits.
Tabling of report
Dépôt du rapport
(4) The Minister shall cause a copy of the report to be
laid before each House of Parliament on any of the first
thirty days on which that House is sitting after the report
is submitted to the Minister.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 2017, c. 6, s. 56.
(4) Le ministre fait déposer le rapport devant chaque
chambre du Parlement dans les trente premiers jours de
séance de celle-ci suivant sa remise.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 2017, ch. 6, art. 56.


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Regulations
Règlements
Section 101
Article 101
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
104
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Regulations
Règlements
Regulations
Règlements
101 (1) Subject to subsection (2), the Governor in
Council may make regulations
(a) specifying the information and documents that
shall be provided to the Board under subsection 80(1)
or (2) or 88(1);
(b) respecting the form and manner in which and
times at which such information and documents shall
be provided to the Board and imposing conditions re-
specting the provision of such information and docu-
ments;
(c) specifying a period for the purposes of subsection
80(2);
(d) specifying factors for the purposes of subsection
85(1) or (2), including factors relating to the introduc-
tory price of any medicine to which a patented inven-
tion, or invention protected by a certificate of supple-
mentary protection, pertains;
(e) designating a Minister for the purposes of subsec-
tion 86(2) or paragraph 87(2)(a);
(f) defining, for the purposes of sections 88 and 89, the
expression research and development;
(g) requiring fees to be paid before the issue of any
certificate referred to in subsection 98(4) and specify-
ing those fees or the manner of determining those
fees;
(h) requiring or authorizing the Board to perform the
duties, in addition to those provided for in this Act,
that are specified in the regulations, including duties
to be performed by the Board in relation to the intro-
ductory price of any medicine to which a patented in-
vention, or invention protected by a certificate of sup-
plementary protection, pertains; and
(i) conferring on the Board such powers, in addition
to those provided for in this Act, as will, in the opinion
of the Governor in Council, enable the Board to per-
form any duties required or authorized to be per-
formed by it by any regulations made under paragraph
(h).
101 (1) Sous réserve du paragraphe (2), le gouverneur
en conseil peut, par règlement :
a) préciser les renseignements et les documents à
fournir au Conseil en application des paragraphes
80(1) ou (2) ou 88(1);
b) régir les conditions de forme, de temps et autres en
ce qui touche la production de ces renseignements et
documents;
c) déterminer la période mentionnée au paragraphe
80(2);
d) définir les facteurs d’application des paragraphes
85(1) ou (2), y compris les facteurs relatifs au prix de
lancement d’un médicament;
e) désigner un ministre aux fins du paragraphe 86(2)
ou de l’alinéa 87(2)a);
f) définir, pour l’application des articles 88 et 89, re-
cherche et développement;
g) imposer le paiement de droits préalablement à la
délivrance du certificat visé au paragraphe 98(4) et en
fixer le montant ou le mode de détermination;
h) obliger ou autoriser le Conseil à exercer certaines
fonctions, outre celles prévues par la présente loi, pré-
cisées dans les règlements, y compris les fonctions re-
latives au prix de lancement d’un médicament;
i) conférer au Conseil les pouvoirs, outre ceux prévus
par la présente loi, qui lui permettent, à son avis, de
s’acquitter des fonctions que celui-ci doit exécuter aux
termes des règlements pris au titre de l’alinéa h).
Recommendation
Recommandation
(2) No regulations may be made under paragraph (1)(d),
(f), (h) or (i) except on the recommendation of the Minis-
ter, made after the Minister has consulted with the
(2) Les règlements visés aux alinéas (1)d), f), h) ou i)
sont pris sur recommandation du ministre faite après
consultation par celui-ci des ministres provinciaux


Patent
Brevets
Patented or Protected Medicines
Médicaments brevetés ou protégés
Regulations
Règlements
Sections 101-103
Articles 101-103
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
105
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
provincial ministers of the Crown responsible for health
and with such representatives of consumer groups and
representatives of the pharmaceutical industry as the
Minister considers appropriate.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 2017, c. 6, s. 57(E).
responsables de la santé et des représentants des groupes
de consommateurs et de l’industrie pharmaceutique qu’il
juge utile de consulter.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 2017, ch. 6, art. 57(A).
Meetings with Minister
Réunions ministérielles
Meetings with Minister
Réunions ministérielles
102 (1) The Minister may at any time convene a meet-
ing of the following persons:
(a) the Chairperson and such members of the Board
as the Chairperson may designate;
(b) the provincial ministers of the Crown responsible
for health or such representatives as they may desig-
nate;
(c) such representatives of consumer groups and rep-
resentatives of the pharmaceutical industry as the
Minister may designate; and
(d) such other persons as the Minister considers ap-
propriate.
102 (1) Le ministre peut, à sa discrétion, convoquer une
réunion des personnes suivantes :
a) le président et les conseillers que celui-ci désigne;
b) les ministres provinciaux responsables de la santé
ou leurs représentants;
c) les représentants des groupes de consommateurs et
de l’industrie pharmaceutique que le ministre peut dé-
signer;
d) les autres personnes que le ministre estime indi-
quées.
Agenda
Ordre du jour
(2) The participants at a meeting convened under sub-
section (1) shall consider such matters in relation to the
administration or operation of sections 79 to 101 as the
Minister may determine.
1993, c. 2, s. 7.
(2) Les personnes réunies conformément au paragraphe
(1) ont à examiner les sujets que le ministre peut leur dé-
férer et qui ont trait à l’application des articles 79 à 101.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7.
Agreements with Provinces
Ententes avec les provinces
Agreements with provinces
Ententes avec les provinces
103 The Minister may enter into agreements with any
province respecting the distribution of, and may pay to
that province out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund,
amounts received or collected by the Receiver General
under section 83 or 84 or in respect of an undertaking
given by a rights holder or former rights holder that is ac-
cepted by the Board in lieu of holding a hearing or mak-
ing an order under section 83, less any costs incurred in
relation to the collection and distribution of those
amounts.
1993, c. 2, s. 7; 1994, c. 26, s. 55(F); 1999, c. 26, s. 50; 2017, c. 6, s. 58.
103 Le ministre peut conclure avec toute province des
ententes concernant le partage avec celle-ci de sommes
prélevées ou reçues par le receveur général en vertu des
articles 83 ou 84 ou dans le cadre d’un engagement, pris
par un titulaire de droits ou un ancien titulaire de droits,
que le Conseil accepte au lieu de tenir des audiences ou
de rendre une ordonnance au titre de l’article 83, déduc-
tion faite des frais de perception et de partage; le cas
échéant, les sommes à verser en partage à la province
sont payables sur le Trésor.
1993, ch. 2, art. 7; 1994, ch. 26, art. 55(F); 1999, ch. 26, art. 50; 2017, ch. 6, art. 58.


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Sections 104-105
Articles 104-105
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
106
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Supplementary Protection for
Inventions — Medicinal
Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour
les inventions — ingrédients
médicinaux
Interpretation
Définitions et interprétation
Definitions
Définitions
104 The following definitions apply in this section and
in sections 105 to 134.
authorization for sale has the meaning assigned by reg-
ulations. (autorisation de mise en marché)
drug means a substance or a mixture of substances
manufactured, sold or represented for use in
(a) the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention
of a disease, disorder or abnormal physical state, or its
symptoms, in human beings or animals; or
(b) restoring, correcting or modifying organic func-
tions in human beings or animals. (drogue)
Minister means the Minister of Health. (ministre)
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
104 Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent au présent
article et aux articles 105 à 134.
autorisation de mise en marché S’entend au sens des
règlements. (authorization for sale)
drogue Substance ou mélange de substances qui est fa-
briqué, vendu ou présenté comme pouvant servir à l’une
des fins suivantes :
a) le diagnostic, le traitement, l’atténuation, la pré-
vention d’une maladie, d’un désordre, d’un état phy-
sique anormal ou de leurs symptômes, chez l’être hu-
main ou les animaux;
b) la restauration, la correction ou la modification des
fonctions organiques chez l’être humain ou les ani-
maux. (drug)
ministre Le ministre de la Santé. (Minister)
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Interpretation
Interprétation
105 (1) For the purposes of this section and sections
106 to 134, if a patent is reissued under section 47, it is
deemed to have been granted on the day on which the
original patent was granted and its application filing date
is deemed to be the day on which the application for the
original patent was filed.
105 (1) Pour l’application du présent article et des ar-
ticles 106 à 134, dans le cas où un brevet est redélivré en
vertu de l’article 47, la date de dépôt de la demande de
brevet est réputée être celle de la demande du brevet ori-
ginal et la date d’octroi du nouveau brevet est réputée
être celle du brevet original.
Human and veterinary uses
Usage humain ou vétérinaire
(2) For the purposes of this section and sections 106 to
134, a medicinal ingredient or combination of medicinal
ingredients contained in a drug authorized for human
use and a medicinal ingredient or combination of medici-
nal ingredients contained in a drug authorized for veteri-
nary use are to be treated as different medicinal ingredi-
ents or different combinations of medicinal ingredients,
as the case may be.
(2) Pour l’application du présent article et des articles
106 à 134, l’ingrédient médicinal ou la combinaison d’in-
grédients médicinaux contenu dans une drogue autorisée
pour un usage humain et l’ingrédient médicinal ou la
combinaison d’ingrédients médicinaux contenu dans une
drogue autorisée pour un usage vétérinaire sont considé-
rés comme différents ingrédients médicinaux ou diffé-
rentes combinaisons d’ingrédients médicinaux, selon le
cas.
Same medicinal ingredient — human use
Même ingrédient médicinal — usage humain
(3) If medicinal ingredients contained in drugs autho-
rized for human use differ from each other only with re-
spect to a prescribed variation, they are to be treated as
(3) Pour l’application du présent article et des articles
106 à 134, lorsque des ingrédients médicinaux contenus
dans des drogues autorisées pour un usage humain ne


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Interpretation
Définitions et interprétation
Sections 105-106
Articles 105-106
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
107
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
the same medicinal ingredient for the purposes of this
section and sections 106 to 134.
diffèrent entre eux que par une variation prévue par rè-
glement, ils sont considérés comme le même ingrédient.
Same medicinal ingredient — veterinary use
Même ingrédient médicinal — usage vétérinaire
(4) If medicinal ingredients contained in drugs autho-
rized for veterinary use differ from each other only with
respect to a prescribed variation, they are to be treated as
the same medicinal ingredient for the purposes of this
section and sections 106 to 134.
(4) Pour l’application du présent article et des articles
106 à 134, lorsque des ingrédients médicinaux contenus
dans des drogues autorisées pour un usage vétérinaire ne
diffèrent entre eux que par une variation prévue par rè-
glement, ils sont considérés comme le même ingrédient.
Same combination — human use
Même combinaison — usage humain
(5) If combinations of medicinal ingredients contained
in drugs authorized for human use differ from each other
only with respect to a variation in the ratio between those
ingredients, they are to be treated as the same combina-
tion of medicinal ingredients for the purposes of this sec-
tion and sections 106 to 134.
(5) Pour l’application du présent article et des articles
106 à 134, lorsque des combinaisons d’ingrédients médi-
cinaux contenues dans des drogues autorisées pour un
usage humain ne diffèrent entre elles que par une varia-
tion dans la proportion des ingrédients qu’elles
contiennent, elles sont considérées comme la même com-
binaison.
Same combination — veterinary use
Même combinaison — usage vétérinaire
(6) If combinations of medicinal ingredients contained
in drugs authorized for veterinary use differ from each
other only with respect to a variation in the ratio between
those ingredients, they are to be treated as the same com-
bination of medicinal ingredients for the purposes of this
section and sections 106 to 134.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(6) Pour l’application du présent article et des articles
106 à 134, lorsque des combinaisons d’ingrédients médi-
cinaux contenues dans des drogues autorisées pour un
usage vétérinaire ne diffèrent entre elles que par une va-
riation dans la proportion des ingrédients qu’elles
contiennent, elles sont considérées comme la même com-
binaison.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Application for Certificate of
Supplementary Protection
Demande de certificat de protection
supplémentaire
Application
Demande
106 (1) On the payment of the prescribed fee, a paten-
tee may apply to the Minister for a certificate of supple-
mentary protection for a patented invention if all of the
following conditions are met:
(a) the patent is not void and it meets any prescribed
requirements;
(b) the filing date for the application for the patent is
on or after October 1, 1989;
(c) the patent pertains in the prescribed manner to a
medicinal ingredient, or combination of medicinal in-
gredients, contained in a drug for which an authoriza-
tion for sale of the prescribed kind was issued on or af-
ter the day on which this section comes into force;
(d) the authorization for sale is the first authorization
for sale that has been issued with respect to the medic-
inal ingredient or the combination of medicinal ingre-
dients, as the case may be;
106 (1) Le titulaire d’un brevet peut, sur paiement des
taxes réglementaires, présenter au ministre une demande
de certificat de protection supplémentaire pour l’inven-
tion à laquelle le brevet se rapporte si, à la fois :
a) le brevet n’est pas nul et il satisfait aux exigences
réglementaires;
b) la date de dépôt de la demande de brevet est le 1er
octobre 1989 ou est postérieure à cette date;
c) le brevet est lié, de la manière prévue par règle-
ment, à un ingrédient médicinal ou à une combinaison
d’ingrédients médicinaux contenus dans une drogue
pour laquelle une autorisation de mise en marché pré-
vue par règlement a été délivrée à la date d’entrée en
vigueur du présent article ou après cette date;
d) l’autorisation de mise en marché est la première
autorisation de mise en marché à avoir été délivrée à


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Application for Certificate of Supplementary Protection
Demande de certificat de protection supplémentaire
Section 106
Article 106
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
108
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(e) no other certificate of supplementary protection
has been issued with respect to the medicinal ingredi-
ent or the combination of medicinal ingredients, as
the case may be;
(f) if an application for a marketing approval, equiva-
lent to an authorization for sale, was submitted in a
prescribed country with respect to the medicinal in-
gredient or combination of medicinal ingredients, as
the case may be, before the application for the autho-
rization for sale was filed with the Minister, the appli-
cation for the authorization for sale was filed before
the end of the prescribed period that begins on the day
on which the first such application for a marketing ap-
proval was submitted.
l’égard de l’ingrédient médicinal ou de la combinaison
d’ingrédients médicinaux, selon le cas;
e) aucun autre certificat de protection supplémentaire
n’a été délivré à l’égard de l’ingrédient médicinal ou de
la combinaison d’ingrédients médicinaux, selon le cas;
f) dans le cas où, avant le dépôt auprès du ministre de
la demande d’autorisation de mise en marché, une de-
mande a été présentée auprès d’un pays prévu par rè-
glement relativement à l’ingrédient médicinal ou à la
combinaison d’ingrédients médicinaux, selon le cas,
dans le but d’obtenir une autorisation de vente équiva-
lant à une autorisation de mise en marché, la demande
d’autorisation de mise en marché a été déposée avant
l’expiration du délai réglementaire qui commence à la
date à laquelle une telle demande d’autorisation de
vente a été présentée pour la première fois.
Issuance — paragraph (1)(e)
Délivrance — alinéa (1)e)
(2) Another certificate of supplementary protection is
considered to have been issued for the purposes of para-
graph (1)(e) even if that other certificate is subsequently
held to be invalid or void or it never takes effect or ceases
to have effect.
(2) Pour l’application de l’alinéa (1)e), un autre certificat
de protection supplémentaire est réputé avoir été délivré
indépendamment du fait qu’il soit subséquemment tenu
pour invalide ou nul ou qu’il ne prenne jamais ou cesse
d’avoir effet.
When application to be filed
Moment de la demande
(3) An application for a certificate of supplementary pro-
tection shall be filed with the Minister before the end of
the prescribed period that begins on
(a) the day on which the authorization for sale is is-
sued, if the patent is granted on or before that day; or
(b) the day on which the patent is granted, if the
patent is granted after the day on which the authoriza-
tion for sale is issued.
(3) La demande de certificat de protection supplémen-
taire est déposée auprès du ministre avant l’expiration du
délai réglementaire qui commence à la date de délivrance
de l’autorisation de mise en marché ou, si elle lui est pos-
térieure, à la date d’octroi du brevet.
Exception
Exception
(4) Despite subsection (3), no application shall be filed
within the prescribed period preceding the expiry of the
term of the patent under section 44 without taking into
account section 46.
(4) Malgré le paragraphe (3), aucune demande ne peut
être déposée à l’intérieur du délai réglementaire qui pré-
cède la date à laquelle le brevet est périmé en application
de l’article 44, compte non tenu de l’article 46.
Contents of application
Contenu de la demande
(5) An application for a certificate of supplementary pro-
tection shall
(a) set out the number, as recorded in the Patent Of-
fice, of the patent — as well as the medicinal ingredi-
ent or combination of medicinal ingredients and the
number of the authorization for sale — in relation to
which the certificate is sought;
(5) La demande de certificat de protection supplémen-
taire :
a) mentionne le numéro d’enregistrement du brevet
au Bureau des brevets, l’ingrédient médicinal ou la
combinaison d’ingrédients médicinaux et le numéro
de l’autorisation de mise en marché à l’égard desquels
le certificat est demandé;


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Application for Certificate of Supplementary Protection
Demande de certificat de protection supplémentaire
Sections 106-108
Articles 106-108
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
109
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(b) if paragraph (1)(f) applies with respect to the ap-
plication, specify the day on which the first application
for a marketing approval that is equivalent to an au-
thorization for sale was made and the country in
which that application was made; and
(c) set out any prescribed information.
b) précise, dans le cas où l’alinéa (1)f) s’applique à la
demande, la date à laquelle la demande pour une au-
torisation de vente équivalant à une autorisation de
mise en marché a été présentée pour la première fois
et le pays auprès duquel elle l’a été;
c) contient tout autre renseignement prévu par règle-
ment.
One patent per application
Un brevet par demande
(6) Each application is permitted to set out only one
patent.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(6) La demande ne mentionne qu’un seul brevet.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Information to be provided
Renseignements à fournir
107 (1) An applicant shall provide the Minister with any
additional information that the Minister considers neces-
sary.
107 (1) Le demandeur fournit au ministre les rensei-
gnements supplémentaires que celui-ci estime néces-
saires.
Refusal
Rejet
(2) Whenever the Minister is satisfied that any of the re-
quirements set out in section 106 are not met with re-
spect to an application for a certificate of supplementary
protection, the Minister may refuse the application. The
Minister shall notify the applicant of a refusal and of the
grounds for it.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(2) S’il est convaincu que toute exigence prévue à l’article
106 n’est pas remplie relativement à une demande de cer-
tificat de protection supplémentaire, le ministre peut re-
jeter la demande, auquel cas, il en avise le demandeur,
motifs à l’appui.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Order of priority — same authorization for sale
Ordre de priorité — même autorisation de mise en
marché
108 (1) Subsections (2) to (4) apply in determining the
priority of applications for a certificate of supplementary
protection that set out the same authorization for sale.
108 (1) Les paragraphes (2) à (4) s’appliquent pour éta-
blir l’ordre de priorité entre différentes demandes de cer-
tificat de protection supplémentaire qui mentionnent la
même autorisation de mise en marché.
Patents granted on or before authorization for sale
Brevets accordés au plus tard à la date d’autorisation
de mise en marché
(2) An application setting out a patent that was granted
on or before the day on which the authorization for sale
was issued has the same priority as every other such ap-
plication.
(2) Les demandes jouissent de la même priorité lorsque
le brevet qui y est mentionné a été accordé au plus tard à
la date de délivrance de l’autorisation de mise en marché
mentionnée.
Priority over patents granted after authorization for
sale
Priorité sur les brevets accordés après la date
d’autorisation de mise en marché
(3) An application setting out a patent that was granted
on or before the day on which the authorization for sale
was issued has priority over an application setting out a
patent that is granted after that date.
(3) La demande qui mentionne un brevet accordé au
plus tard à la date de délivrance de l’autorisation de mise
en marché a priorité sur celle qui mentionne un brevet
accordé après cette date.
Patents granted after authorization for sale — priority
Brevets accordés après la date d’autorisation de mise
en marché — ordre de priorité
(4) Priority among applications setting out patents that
were granted after the day on which the authorization for
sale was issued is established according to the date on
(4) L’ordre de priorité des demandes est établi suivant
l’ordre chronologique selon lequel les brevets que celles-
ci mentionnent ont été accordés dans le cas où ils l’ont


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Application for Certificate of Supplementary Protection
Demande de certificat de protection supplémentaire
Sections 108-111
Articles 108-111
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
110
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
which the patent was granted, with an earlier date having
priority over a later date and patents granted on the same
date having the same priority.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
été après la date de la délivrance de l’autorisation de mise
en marché. Les demandes qui mentionnent des brevets
accordés à la même date jouissent de la même priorité.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Applications with same authorization for sale and
priority
Demandes — même autorisation de mise en marché
et même priorité
109 If two or more pending applications set out the
same authorization for sale and have the same priority,
the Minister shall provide each applicant with a written
notice setting out the name and contact information of all
the applicants, as well as the number, as recorded in the
Patent Office, of the patent set out in each application.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
109 Dans le cas où plusieurs demandes pendantes men-
tionnent la même autorisation de mise en marché et
jouissent de la même priorité, le ministre en avise par
écrit tous les demandeurs et indique, dans l’avis, le nom
et les coordonnées de tous les demandeurs ainsi que le
numéro d’enregistrement au Bureau des brevets du bre-
vet mentionné dans chaque demande.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Declaration of non-compliance
Déclaration de non-conformité
110 (1) A pending application for a certificate of supple-
mentary protection may be declared invalid or void by
the Federal Court for non-compliance with section 106 at
the instance of another applicant whose application for a
certificate sets out the same authorization for sale and
the same priority.
110 (1) La Cour fédérale peut déclarer irrecevable ou
nulle une demande de certificat de protection supplé-
mentaire pendante pour non-conformité avec l’article 106
sur requête d’un autre demandeur dont la demande men-
tionne la même autorisation de mise en marché et jouit
de la même priorité.
Limitation
Prescription
(2) A proceeding to obtain a declaration under subsec-
tion (1) shall be commenced before the end of the pre-
scribed period that begins on the day that is specified by
the Minister in the written notice sent under section 109.
(2) Toute procédure visant à obtenir une déclaration
d’irrecevabilité ou de nullité est intentée avant l’expira-
tion de la période prévue par règlement qui commence à
la date précisée par le ministre dans l’avis transmis en
application de l’article 109.
Copy to Minister
Copie au ministre
(3) Anyone who commences such a proceeding, or an ap-
peal or application for leave to appeal with respect to
such a proceeding, shall provide the Minister with a copy
of
(a) any document that commences the proceeding,
appeal or application, immediately after the document
is filed with the court; and
(b) any document that marks the end of the proceed-
ing, appeal or application, immediately after the docu-
ment is issued by or filed with the court.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(3) Quiconque intente une telle procédure — ou inter-
jette appel ou présente une demande d’autorisation d’ap-
pel à l’égard de la procédure — remet au ministre une co-
pie des documents suivants :
a) les documents au moyen desquels la procédure est
intentée, l’appel est interjeté ou la demande est pré-
sentée, et ce, dès qu’ils sont déposés auprès du tribu-
nal;
b) les documents qui marquent la fin de la procédure,
de l’appel ou de la demande, et ce, dès qu’ils sont déli-
vrés par le tribunal ou déposés auprès de celui-ci.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Expiry of pending applications
Expiration des demandes pendantes
111 (1) If two or more applications that set out the
same authorization for sale and have the same priority
are still pending at the end of the prescribed period that
begins on the day specified in the written notice sent un-
der section 109, all of those applications expire at that
end of that period. However, if any proceedings are
brought under section 110 with respect to any of those
111 (1) Dans le cas où plusieurs demandes de certificat
de protection supplémentaire mentionnant la même au-
torisation de mise en marché et jouissant de la même
priorité demeurent pendantes à la fin de la période pré-
vue par règlement qui commence à la date précisée dans
l’avis transmis en application de l’article 109, chacune de
ces demandes expire à la fin de cette période. Toutefois,


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Application for Certificate of Supplementary Protection
Demande de certificat de protection supplémentaire
Sections 111-114
Articles 111-114
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
111
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
applications, all of those applications — if two or more
are still pending — expire at the end of the prescribed pe-
riod that begins on the day on which the last of any of the
proceedings to be completed is finally disposed of.
si au moins une de ces demandes fait l’objet d’une procé-
dure intentée au titre de l’article 110, celles-ci — si plus
d’une demeure pendante — expirent à la fin de la période
prévue par règlement qui commence à la date où la der-
nière procédure engagée est décidée de façon définitive.
Expiry of application with lower priority
Expiration des demandes non prioritaires
(2) A pending application that sets out the same autho-
rization for sale as another application of higher priority
expires on the day on which the Minister issues a certifi-
cate of supplementary protection in respect of that other
application.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(2) Les demandes pendantes qui mentionnent la même
autorisation de mise en marché qu’une demande priori-
taire expirent à la date à laquelle le ministre délivre le
certificat de protection supplémentaire à l’égard de la de-
mande prioritaire.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Withdrawal
Retrait d’une demande
112 An applicant for a certificate of supplementary pro-
tection may withdraw their application in accordance
with the regulations.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
112 Tout demandeur peut retirer sa demande de certifi-
cat de protection supplémentaire conformément aux rè-
glements.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Certificate of Supplementary
Protection
Certificat de protection
supplémentaire
Issue of certificate
Délivrance d’un certificat
113 The Minister shall issue, to the patentee, a certifi-
cate of supplementary protection for the patented inven-
tion set out in the patentee’s application if, on the day of
issuance,
(a) the Minister is satisfied that all requirements set
out in section 106 are met;
(b) the applicable period referred to in subsection
106(3) for filing the application has ended;
(c) there is no other pending application that sets out
the same authorization for sale and that has priority
over, or the same priority as, the application; and
(d) any court proceedings, brought under section 110
with respect to the application or to another pending
application that sets out the same authorization for
sale and that has priority over, or the same priority as,
the application, have been finally disposed of.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
113 Le ministre délivre au titulaire de brevet un certifi-
cat de protection supplémentaire à l’égard de l’invention
mentionnée dans la demande si, à la date de délivrance,
les conditions ci-après sont respectées :
a) il est convaincu que les exigences prévues à l’article
106 sont remplies;
b) le délai applicable au dépôt de la demande et prévu
au paragraphe 106(3) est expiré;
c) aucune autre demande pendante, qu’elle soit prio-
ritaire ou jouisse de la même priorité, ne mentionne
l’autorisation de mise en marché mentionnée dans la
demande;
d) toutes les procédures judiciaires intentées au titre
de l’article 110 relativement à la demande ou à une
autre demande pendante mentionnant la même auto-
risation de mise en marché, que cette autre demande
soit prioritaire ou jouisse de la même priorité, sont dé-
cidées de façon définitive.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Contents of certificate
Contenu du certificat
114 A certificate of supplementary protection shall set
out
(a) the number, as recorded in the Patent Office, of
the patent set out in the application;
114 Le certificat de protection supplémentaire :
a) mentionne le numéro d’enregistrement du brevet
au Bureau des brevets mentionné dans la demande;


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Certificate of Supplementary Protection
Certificat de protection supplémentaire
Sections 114-116
Articles 114-116
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
112
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(b) the medicinal ingredient or combination of medic-
inal ingredients set out in the application;
(c) a statement as to whether the certificate relates to
use in humans or to veterinary use;
(d) the number of the authorization for sale set out in
the application; and
(e) the day on which the certificate’s term begins and
the day on which the term ends, as determined under
section 116.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
b) mentionne l’ingrédient médicinal ou la combinai-
son d’ingrédients médicinaux mentionné dans la de-
mande;
c) indique si le certificat se rapporte à un usage hu-
main ou à un usage vétérinaire;
d) mentionne le numéro de l’autorisation de mise en
marché mentionnée dans la demande;
e) mentionne les dates de prise et de cessation d’effet
du certificat établies aux termes de l’article 116.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Scope of supplementary protection
Portée de la protection supplémentaire
115 (1) The issuance of a certificate of supplementary
protection grants the certificate’s holder and their legal
representatives, during the certificate’s term, the same
rights, privileges and liberties that are granted by the
patent set out in the certificate, but only with respect to
the making, constructing, using and selling of any drug
that contains the medicinal ingredient, or combination of
medicinal ingredients, set out in the certificate, by itself
or in addition to any other medicinal ingredient.
115 (1) La délivrance du certificat de protection supplé-
mentaire confère au titulaire du certificat et à ses repré-
sentants légaux, pendant la durée de celui-ci, les mêmes
droits, facultés et privilèges que ceux conférés par le bre-
vet mentionné dans le certificat. Toutefois ces droits, fa-
cultés et privilèges ne s’appliquent qu’en ce qui a trait à la
fabrication, à la construction, à l’exploitation ou à la
vente d’une drogue contenant l’ingrédient médicinal ou
la combinaison d’ingrédients médicinaux mentionné
dans le certificat, que cette drogue contienne ou non
d’autres ingrédients médicinaux.
No infringement — export
Pas de contrefaçon — exportation
(2) Despite subsection (1), it is not an infringement of
the certificate of supplementary protection for any per-
son to make, construct, use or sell the medicinal ingredi-
ent or combination of medicinal ingredients for the pur-
pose of export from Canada.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(2) Malgré le paragraphe (1), la fabrication, la construc-
tion, l’utilisation ou la vente de l’ingrédient médicinal ou
de la combinaison d’ingrédients médicinaux aux fins
d’exportation ne constitue pas une contrefaçon du certifi-
cat.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Validity
Validité
116 (1) After the certificate is issued, it shall, in the ab-
sence of any evidence to the contrary, be valid and avail
the holder and the holder’s legal representatives for its
term.
116 (1) Une fois délivré, le certificat est, pour sa durée
et sauf preuve contraire, valide et acquis au titulaire ou à
ses représentants légaux.
Taking effect
Prise d’effet
(2) A certificate of supplementary protection takes effect
on the expiry of the term under section 44, without taking
into account section 46, of the patent set out in the cer-
tificate, but the certificate takes effect only if the patent
remains valid until, and not void before, the expiry of
that term.
(2) Le certificat de protection supplémentaire prend effet
dès que le brevet mentionné dans le certificat est périmé
en application de l’article 44, compte non tenu de l’article
46, mais seulement si le brevet demeure valide jusqu’à sa
péremption et n’est pas annulé avant.
Calculation of term
Durée du certificat
(3) The certificate’s term is calculated by subtracting five
years from the period beginning on the filing date of the
application for the patent and ending on the day on
which the authorization for sale set out in the certificate
is issued, but in any event is for a maximum of two years.
(3) La durée du certificat, qui ne peut excéder deux ans,
est établie en soustrayant cinq ans à la période écoulée à
partir de la date de dépôt de la demande de brevet et jus-
qu’à la date de délivrance de l’autorisation de mise en
marché mentionnée dans le certificat.


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Certificate of Supplementary Protection
Certificat de protection supplémentaire
Sections 116-118
Articles 116-118
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
113
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Reduction in period
Réduction de la durée
(4) Despite subsection (3), if the person to whom the au-
thorization for sale set out in the certificate is issued is al-
so the patentee, the Minister may, if he or she is of the
opinion that that person’s failure to act resulted in a peri-
od of unjustified delay in the process of obtaining the au-
thorization for sale, reduce the term of the certificate
when issuing it by the amount of that period.
(4) Malgré le paragraphe (3), dans les cas où l’autorisa-
tion de mise en marché mentionnée dans le certificat est
délivrée au titulaire du brevet, le ministre peut, s’il es-
time que tout défaut d’agir de la part du titulaire a entraî-
né un retard d’une durée injustifiée dans le traitement de
la demande d’autorisation, soustraire la durée du retard
de la durée du certificat lorsqu’il délivre celui-ci.
Never takes effect
Aucune prise d’effet
(5) A certificate of supplementary protection that has
been issued never takes effect if the calculation of its
term, including any reduction under subsection (3), pro-
duces a result of zero or a negative value.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(5) Le certificat de protection supplémentaire qui a été
délivré ne prend pas effet si le calcul de sa durée produit,
notamment par application du paragraphe (3), un résul-
tat égal ou inférieur à zéro.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Revocation of certificate
Révocation du certificat
117 The Minister shall revoke a certificate of supple-
mentary protection in the prescribed circumstances.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
117 Le ministre est tenu de révoquer le certificat de pro-
tection supplémentaire dans les circonstances réglemen-
taires.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Transfer
Transfert
Transfer of patent
Transfert du brevet
118 (1) Despite subsection 49(1), a certificate of supple-
mentary protection, or an application for one, is not
transferable other than by the transfer of the patent, or
part of the patent, that is set out in the certificate or ap-
plication.
118 (1) Malgré le paragraphe 49(1), le certificat de pro-
tection supplémentaire ou la demande de certificat de
protection supplémentaire ne peut être transféré que si le
brevet mentionné dans le certificat ou dans la demande,
ou une partie du brevet, est transféré.
Whole of patent
Totalité du brevet
(2) If the whole of the patent is transferred, the certifi-
cate or application is transferred accordingly.
(2) Le transfert de la totalité du brevet emporte le trans-
fert de la totalité du certificat ou de la demande.
Part of patent
Partie du brevet
(3) If part of the patent is transferred, any part of the
certificate or application — including, as the case may be,
the whole of it — that corresponds to the transferred part
of the patent is transferred accordingly.
(3) Le transfert d’une partie du brevet emporte le trans-
fert de la partie correspondante du certificat ou de la de-
mande, y compris, le cas échéant, de la totalité du certifi-
cat ou de la demande.
For greater certainty
Précision
(4) For greater certainty, the transfer of part of an appli-
cation for a certificate of supplementary protection does
not result in its division into more than one application.
2017, c. 6, ss. 59, 135.
(4) Il est entendu qu’une demande de certificat de pro-
tection supplémentaire transférée en partie n’est pas de
ce fait scindée en plusieurs demandes.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59 et 135.


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Administrative Matters
Administration
Sections 119-122
Articles 119-122
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
114
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Administrative Matters
Administration
Applications, fees and documents
Demandes, taxes et documents
119 Applications, fees and documents relating to certifi-
cates of supplementary protection shall be submitted to
the Minister.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
119 Les demandes, taxes et documents relatifs aux certi-
ficats de protection supplémentaire sont transmis au mi-
nistre.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Inspection by public
Consultation des documents
120 (1) The Minister shall ensure that the prescribed
contents of all certificates of supplementary protection
and applications for a certificate are made available for
public inspection under the conditions that may be pre-
scribed.
120 (1) Le ministre veille à ce que les éléments prévus
par règlement du contenu des certificats de protection
supplémentaire et des demandes de certificat puissent
être consultés aux conditions réglementaires.
Non-application
Non-application
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply with respect to the con-
tents of applications for a certificate that are refused, de-
clared invalid or void, expired or withdrawn.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(2) Le paragraphe (1) ne s’applique pas relativement au
contenu des demandes de certificat qui sont expirées ou
qui ont été refusées, retirées ou déclarées invalides ou
nulles.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Copy in case of loss or destruction
Copie en cas de perte ou de destruction
121 The Minister may issue a certified copy of a certifi-
cate of supplementary protection to replace one that is
lost or destroyed.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
121 En cas de destruction ou de perte du certificat de
protection supplémentaire, le ministre peut en délivrer
une copie certifiée en remplacement.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Issuance of patent under section 47
Redélivrance d’un brevet en vertu de l’article 47
122 (1) If a patent set out in a certificate of supplemen-
tary protection or in a pending application for such a cer-
tificate is surrendered, and a new patent is issued, under
section 47, the holder of the certificate or the applicant
shall, before the end of the prescribed period that begins
on the day on which the new patent is issued, provide the
Minister with written notice of the number, as recorded
in the Patent Office, of the new patent to which the cer-
tificate or application relates.
122 (1) Lorsque le brevet mentionné dans un certificat
de protection supplémentaire ou dans une demande pen-
dante visant un tel certificat est abandonné puis redélivré
en vertu de l’article 47, le titulaire du certificat ou le de-
mandeur est tenu, avant l’expiration du délai réglemen-
taire commençant à la date de la redélivrance, de fournir
par avis écrit au ministre le numéro d’enregistrement au
Bureau des brevets du brevet redélivré auquel se rap-
porte le certificat ou la demande.
One patent
Un seul brevet
(2) If more than one new patent is issued under section
47, the holder of the certificate or the applicant shall pro-
vide the number for only one of the new patents.
(2) Dans le cas où plus d’un brevet est redélivré en vertu
de l’article 47, le titulaire du certificat ou le demandeur
fournit le numéro d’enregistrement d’un seul brevet re-
délivré.
New certificate
Nouveau certificat
(3) If notice is provided under subsection (1) by a holder
of a certificate, the Minister shall issue a new certificate
of supplementary protection, setting out the new patent
number, to replace the original certificate. The new cer-
tificate’s term is the then unexpired term of the original
certificate.
(3) Si le titulaire du certificat fournit un avis au titre du
paragraphe (1), le ministre délivre, en remplacement du
certificat original et pour la partie restant alors à courir
de la période pour laquelle celui-ci a été délivré, un nou-
veau certificat de protection supplémentaire mention-
nant le numéro d’enregistrement du brevet redélivré.


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Administrative Matters
Administration
Sections 122-123
Articles 122-123
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
115
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Effect of new certificate
Effet du nouveau certificat
(4) The new certificate is deemed to have been issued on
the day on which the new patent is issued. The original
certificate and the new certificate have the same effect in
law, in any action commenced after the issuance of the
new certificate for any cause accruing after that issuance,
as if the new patent had been set out in the original cer-
tificate; however, insofar as the claims of the new patent
and the original patent are identical, the issuance of the
new certificate does not affect any action pending at the
time of the issuance of the new certificate or abate any
cause of action that existed at that time and the new cer-
tificate constitutes a continuation of the original certifi-
cate and has effect accordingly.
(4) Le nouveau certificat de protection supplémentaire
est réputé avoir été délivré à la date de la redélivrance et
a le même effet en droit, dans l’instruction de toute ac-
tion engagée par la suite pour tout motif survenu subsé-
quemment, que si le brevet redélivré avait été mentionné
dans le certificat de protection supplémentaire original.
Dans la mesure où les revendications du brevet original
et du brevet redélivré sont identiques, la délivrance du
nouveau certificat n’atteint aucune instance pendante au
moment de la redélivrance, ni n’annule aucun motif
d’instance alors existant, et le nouveau certificat consti-
tue une continuation du certificat original et produit ses
effets en conséquence.
Application
Demande
(5) If notice is provided under subsection (1) by an appli-
cant for a pending application, the Minister shall
(a) amend the application to set out the new patent
number; and
(b) provide written notice of the amendment to any
other applicant referred to in section 109 with respect
to the application.
(5) Si le demandeur fournit un avis au titre du para-
graphe (1), le ministre :
a) modifie la demande pour y indiquer le numéro
d’enregistrement du brevet redélivré;
b) transmet un avis écrit de cette modification à tous
les demandeurs visés à l’article 109 relativement à la
demande.
Effect of amendment to application
Effets de la modification d’une demande
(6) The amended application has the same effect, for the
purposes of sections 106 to 113, as if the pending applica-
tion had been originally filed in its amended form.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(6) Pour l’application des articles 106 à 113, la demande
modifiée de certificat de protection supplémentaire est
réputée avoir le même effet que si elle avait été à l’origine
déposée dans sa forme modifiée.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Use of Certificates of Supplementary
Protection by Government
Usage par le gouvernement de
certificats de protection
supplémentaire
Application
Application
123 Sections 19 to 19.2 apply with respect to certificates
of supplementary protection, with
(a) any reference to “patented invention” to be read,
with any grammatical adaptations, as a reference to
“invention protected by a certificate of supplementary
protection”; and
(b) any reference to “patentee” to be read as a refer-
ence to “holder of the certificate of supplementary
protection”.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
123 Les articles 19 à 19.2 s’appliquent à l’égard des certi-
ficats de protection supplémentaire, toute mention dans
ces articles de « breveté » et de « invention brevetée » va-
lant respectivement mention de « titulaire du certificat
de protection supplémentaire » et de « invention proté-
gée par un certificat de protection supplémentaire ».
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Legal Proceedings in Respect of Certificates of Supplementary Protection
Procédures judiciaires relatives aux certificats de protection supplémentaire
Sections 123.1-124
Articles 123.1-124
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
116
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Legal Proceedings in Respect of
Certificates of Supplementary
Protection
Procédures judiciaires relatives aux
certificats de protection
supplémentaire
Admissible in evidence
Admissibilité en preuve
123.1 A written communication, or any part of such a
communication, that is admissible under section 53.1 in
respect of a patent set out in a certificate of supplemen-
tary protection may be admitted into evidence to any ac-
tion or proceeding respecting the certificate of supple-
mentary protection to rebut any representation made by
the holder of the certificate of supplementary protection
in the action or proceeding as to the construction of a
claim in the patent set out in the certificate of supple-
mentary protection.
2018, c. 27, s. 197.
123.1 Toute communication écrite ou toute partie de
celle-ci admissible au titre de l’article 53.1 à l’égard d’un
brevet mentionné dans un certificat de protection supplé-
mentaire peut être admise en preuve pour réfuter une dé-
claration faite, dans le cadre d’une action ou d’une procé-
dure relative au certificat, par le titulaire du certificat
relativement à l’interprétation des revendications se rap-
portant au brevet mentionné dans le certificat.
2018, ch. 27, art. 197.
Infringement and Impeachment
Contrefaçon et invalidation
Action for infringement
Action en contrefaçon
124 (1) An action for the infringement of a certificate of
supplementary protection may be brought in the same
manner as an action for the infringement of a patent, and
the following provisions apply to the action:
(a) sections 54, 57 and 59, with any reference to
“patent” to be read as a reference to “certificate of sup-
plementary protection”;
(b) subsection 55(1), and subsection 55(3) as it applies
to that subsection (1), with any reference to “patent”
to be read as a reference to “certificate of supplemen-
tary protection”, any reference to “patentee” to be read
as a reference to “holder of the certificate of supple-
mentary protection” and any reference to “grant” to be
read as a reference to “taking of effect”;
(c) section 55.01;
(d) section 55.1, with any reference to “patent” to be
read as a reference to “certificate of supplementary
protection” and any reference to “patented process” to
be read as a reference to “process protected by the cer-
tificate of supplementary protection”;
(e) subsections 55.2(1) and (6), with any reference to
“patent” to be read as a reference to “certificate of sup-
plementary protection” and any reference to “patented
invention” to be read as a reference to “invention pro-
tected by the certificate of supplementary protection”;
124 (1) Une action en contrefaçon de certificat de pro-
tection supplémentaire peut être portée de la même ma-
nière qu’une action en contrefaçon de brevet, les disposi-
tions ci-après s’appliquant en conséquence :
a) les articles 54, 57 et 59, toute mention dans ces ar-
ticles de « brevet » valant mention de « certificat de
protection supplémentaire »;
b) le paragraphe 55(1) et, dans la mesure où il s’ap-
plique à celui-ci, le paragraphe 55(3), toute mention
dans ces paragraphes de « brevet », de « breveté » et
de « l’octroi » valant respectivement mention de « cer-
tificat de protection supplémentaire », de « titulaire du
certificat de protection supplémentaire » et de « la
prise d’effet »;
c) l’article 55.01;
d) l’article 55.1, toute mention dans cet article de
« brevet accordé » et de « procédé breveté » valant res-
pectivement mention de « certificat de protection sup-
plémentaire délivré » et de « procédé protégé par le
certificat de protection supplémentaire »;
e) les paragraphes 55.2(1) et (6), toute mention dans
ces paragraphes de « brevet » et de « invention breve-
tée » valant respectivement mention de « certificat de
protection supplémentaire » et de « invention proté-
gée par le certificat de protection supplémentaire »;


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Infringement and Impeachment
Contrefaçon et invalidation
Section 124
Article 124
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
117
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(f) subsection 55.3(1), with any reference to “patent”
to be read as a reference to “certificate of
supplementary protection”;
(g) section 58, with the reference to “a patent that
contains two or more claims” to be read as a reference
to a “two or more claims in a patent that is set out in a
certificate of supplementary protection” and with the
reference to “the patent as if it” to be read as a refer-
ence to “the certificate as if the patent set out in it”.
f) le paragraphe 55.3(1), toute mention dans ce para-
graphe de « brevet » valant mention de « certificat de
protection supplémentaire »;
g) l’article 58, toute mention dans cet article de « bre-
vet qui renferme », de « au brevet » et de « s’il ne ren-
fermait que la ou les revendications valides » valant
respectivement mention de « certificat de protection
supplémentaire qui mentionne le brevet auquel se
rapporte », de « au certificat » et de « si seules les re-
vendications valides se rapportaient au brevet qu’il
mentionne ».
Regulations — subsection 55.2(4)
Règlements — paragraphe 55.2(4)
(2) The Governor in Council may make regulations re-
specting the infringement of any certificate of supple-
mentary protection that, directly or indirectly, could re-
sult or results from the making, construction, use or sale
of a patented invention or invention protected by a cer-
tificate of supplementary protection in accordance with
subsection 55.2(1), including regulations described in
paragraphs 55.2(4)(a) to (k), with
(a) any reference in those paragraphs to a “patent” to
be read as a reference to a “certificate of supplemen-
tary protection”; and
(b) the reference in paragraph 55.2(4)(k) to “subsec-
tion 60(1)” to be read as a reference to “subsection
125(1)”.
(2) Le gouverneur en conseil peut prendre des règle-
ments concernant la contrefaçon de tout certificat de
protection supplémentaire qui résulte ou pourrait résul-
ter, de façon directe ou autrement, de la fabrication, de la
construction, de l’utilisation ou de la vente, au titre du
paragraphe 55.2(1), d’une invention brevetée ou protégée
par un certificat de protection supplémentaire, notam-
ment des règlements visés aux alinéas 55.2(4)a) à k),
toute mention à ces alinéas de « brevet » valant mention
de « certificat de protection supplémentaire » et la men-
tion à l’alinéa 55.2(4)k) de « paragraphe 60(1) » valant
mention de « paragraphe 125(1) ».
Regulations
Règlements
(2.1) The Governor in Council may make regulations re-
specting
(a) factors that the court may consider, must consider
or is not permitted to consider in determining whether
an act is, or is not, committed for the purpose of ex-
perimentation relating to the subject-matter of the
certificate of supplementary protection; and
(b) circumstances in which an act is, or is not, com-
mitted for the purpose of experimentation relating to
the subject-matter of the certificate of supplementary
protection.
(2.1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par règlement, ré-
gir :
a) les facteurs dont le tribunal peut ou doit tenir
compte, et ceux dont il ne peut tenir compte, afin de
décider si l’acte est ou non commis dans un but d’ex-
périmentation à l’égard de l’objet du certificat de pro-
tection supplémentaire;
b) les circonstances dans lesquelles l’acte est ou non
commis dans un tel but à l’égard de l’objet du certifi-
cat.
Inconsistency or conflict
Divergences
(3) In the event of an inconsistency or conflict between
regulations made under subsection (2) and any Act of
Parliament or regulations made under such an Act, the
regulations made under subsection (2) prevail to the ex-
tent of the inconsistency or conflict.
2017, c. 6, s. 59; 2018, c. 27, s. 198.
(3) Les dispositions réglementaires prises sous le régime
du paragraphe (2) prévalent sur toute disposition législa-
tive ou réglementaire fédérale divergente.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59; 2018, ch. 27, art. 198.


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Infringement and Impeachment
Contrefaçon et invalidation
Sections 125-127
Articles 125-127
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
118
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Impeachment
Invalidation
125 (1) A certificate of supplementary protection, or
any claim in the patent set out in such a certificate, may
be declared invalid or void — including on the basis that
the certificate was issued despite non-compliance with
any of the requirements, as they existed at the time that
the certificate was issued, of subsection 106(1) or that the
patent set out in the certificate no longer complies with
the requirements, as they existed at that time, set out in
paragraph 106(1)(c) — by the Federal Court at the in-
stance of the Attorney General of Canada or any interest-
ed person.
125 (1) Tout certificat de protection supplémentaire ou
toute revendication se rapportant au brevet qu’il men-
tionne peut être déclaré invalide ou nul par la Cour fédé-
rale, à la diligence du procureur général du Canada ou à
la diligence d’un intéressé, notamment au motif que le
certificat a été délivré malgré sa non-conformité avec
l’une ou l’autre des exigences prévues au paragraphe
106(1), telles qu’elles existaient au moment de la déli-
vrance du certificat, ou que le brevet mentionné dans le
certificat n’est plus conforme avec les exigences prévues à
l’alinéa 106(1)c), telles qu’elles existaient à ce moment.
Application
Application
(2) Subsections 60(2) and (3) apply with respect to a cer-
tificate of supplementary protection, with any reference
to “patentee” to be read as a reference to “holder of a cer-
tificate of supplementary protection” and any reference
to “patent” to be read as a reference to “certificate of sup-
plementary protection”.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(2) Les paragraphes 60(2) et (3) s’appliquent à l’égard
des certificats de protection supplémentaire, toute men-
tion dans ces paragraphes de « brevet » et de « breveté »
valant respectivement mention de « certificat de protec-
tion supplémentaire » et de « titulaire du certificat de
protection supplémentaire ».
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Judgment voiding certificate or claim
Jugement annulant le certificat ou la revendication
126 (1) A certificate of supplementary protection, or a
claim in the patent set out in such a certificate, that is
voided by a judgment shall be and be held to have been
void and of no effect, unless the judgment is reversed on
appeal as provided in subsection (2).
126 (1) Le certificat de protection supplémentaire ou la
revendication se rapportant au brevet mentionné dans
un tel certificat qui a été annulé par un jugement est nul
et de nul effet et est tenu pour tel, à moins que le juge-
ment ne soit infirmé en appel en vertu du paragraphe (2).
Appeal
Appel
(2) Every judgment voiding a certificate of supplemen-
tary protection or any claim in the patent set out in such
a certificate, and every judgment refusing to do so, is
subject to appeal to any court having appellate jurisdic-
tion in other cases decided by the court by which the
judgment was rendered.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(2) Tout jugement annulant un certificat de protection
supplémentaire ou une revendication se rapportant au
brevet mentionné dans un tel certificat ou tout jugement
refusant de le faire est sujet à appel devant tout tribunal
compétent pour juger des appels des autres décisions du
tribunal qui a rendu ce jugement.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Abuse of Rights
Abus de droits
Abuse of patent rights
Abus de droits de brevets
127 (1) The Commissioner may, in respect of applica-
tion under section 65, exercise any of the powers under
any of paragraphs 66(1)(a), (d) and (e) with respect to an
issued certificate of supplementary protection if he or she
is satisfied that a case of abuse of the exclusive rights un-
der the patent that is set out in the certificate has been
established.
127 (1) Dans le cadre d’une requête présentée en vertu
de l’article 65, le commissaire peut, s’il est convaincu qu’a
été établi un cas d’abus de droits exclusifs d’un brevet
mentionné dans un certificat de protection supplémen-
taire délivré, exercer les droits prévus à l’un ou l’autre des
alinéas 66(1)a), d) et e) à l’égard du certificat.
Abuse — application to Commissioner
Adresse au commissaire
(2) The Attorney General of Canada or an interested per-
son may, at any time after a certificate of supplementary
protection takes effect and after the expiry of three years
(2) Le procureur général du Canada ou tout intéressé
peut, après la prise d’effet d’un certificat de protection
supplémentaire et l’expiration de trois années à compter


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Abuse of Rights
Abus de droits
Sections 127-128
Articles 127-128
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
119
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
from the date of the grant of the patent set out in the cer-
tificate, apply to the Commissioner alleging that there
has been an abuse of the exclusive rights granted under a
certificate of supplementary protection issued with re-
spect to that patent and asking for relief under this Act.
de la date de la concession du brevet mentionné dans le
certificat, s’adresser au commissaire pour alléguer que
les droits exclusifs qui dérivent d’un certificat de protec-
tion supplémentaire délivré à l’égard du brevet ont donné
lieu à un abus, et pour demander un recours sous l’auto-
rité de la présente loi.
What amounts to abuse
En quoi consiste l’abus
(3) The exclusive rights under a certificate of supplemen-
tary protection are abused in any of the following circum-
stances:
(a) the demand in Canada for a drug that contains the
medicinal ingredient or a combination of the medici-
nal ingredients set out in the certificate is not being
met to an adequate extent and on reasonable terms;
(b) by reason of the refusal of the certificate’s holder
to grant a licence or licences on reasonable terms, the
trade or industry of Canada or the trade of any person
or class of persons trading in Canada, or the establish-
ment of any new trade or industry in Canada, is preju-
diced, and it is in the public interest that a licence or
licences should be granted;
(c) any trade or industry in Canada, or any person or
class of persons engaged in such a trade or industry, is
unfairly prejudiced by the conditions attached by the
certificate’s holder to the purchase, hire, licence, use
or working of the invention protected by the certifi-
cate.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(3) Les droits exclusifs dérivant d’un certificat de protec-
tion supplémentaire ont donné lieu à un abus lorsque
l’une ou l’autre des circonstances suivantes s’est pro-
duite :
a) il n’est pas satisfait à la demande, au Canada, d’une
drogue contenant l’ingrédient médicinal ou la combi-
naison d’ingrédients médicinaux mentionné dans le
certificat, dans une mesure adéquate et à des condi-
tions équitables;
b) par défaut de la part du titulaire du certificat d’ac-
corder une ou des licences à des conditions équitables,
le commerce ou l’industrie du Canada, ou le commerce
d’une personne ou d’une classe de personnes exerçant
un commerce au Canada, ou l’établissement d’un nou-
veau commerce ou d’une nouvelle industrie au Canada
subissent quelque préjudice, et il est d’intérêt public
qu’une ou des licences soient accordées;
c) les conditions que le titulaire du certificat fixe à
l’achat, à la location, à l’utilisation ou à la mise en
œuvre de l’invention protégée par le certificat ou à la
licence qu’il pourrait accorder à l’égard de cette inven-
tion portent injustement préjudice à quelque com-
merce ou industrie au Canada, ou à quelque personne
ou classe de personnes engagées dans un tel com-
merce ou une telle industrie.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Provisions that apply
Application en conséquence
128 Sections 66 to 71, other than paragraph 66(1)(c), ap-
ply for the purposes of section 127, with
(a) any reference to “patent”, other than with respect
to the Patent Office, to be read as a reference to “cer-
tificate of supplementary protection”;
(b) any reference to “patentee” to be read as a refer-
ence to “holder of the certificate of supplementary
protection”;
(c) any reference in paragraphs 66(1)(d) and (e) and
subsection 68(1) to “section 65” to be read as a refer-
ence to “section 127”;
128 Pour l’application de l’article 127, les articles 66 à
71, à l’exception de l’alinéa 66(1)c), s’appliquent avec les
adaptations qui suivent :
a) toute mention dans ces dispositions de « brevet »
vaut mention de « certificat de protection supplémen-
taire »;
b) toute mention dans ces dispositions, à l’exception
du paragraphe 66(2) de « breveté » vaut mention de
« titulaire du certificat de protection supplémentaire »
et toute mention dans le paragraphe 66(2) de « du bre-
veté », de « le breveté » et de « un breveté » valent res-
pectivement mention de « du titulaire du certificat de
protection supplémentaire », de « le titulaire du certi-
ficat de protection supplémentaire » et de « un titu-
laire de certificat de protection supplémentaire »;


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
Abuse of Rights
Abus de droits
Sections 128-131
Articles 128-131
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
120
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(d) any reference in subsection 69(1) or section 71 to
“sections 65 to 70” to be read as a reference to
“sections 66 to 70 and 127”; and
(e) the reference in subsection 69(3) to “the Minister”
to be read as a reference to “the Minister of Industry”.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
c) toute mention dans les alinéas 66(1)d) et e) et dans
le paragraphe 68(1) de « l’article 65 » vaut mention de
« l’article 127 »;
d) toute mention dans le paragraphe 69(1) et dans
l’article 71 de « articles 65 à 70 » vaut mention de « ar-
ticles 66 à 70 et 127 »;
e) toute mention dans le paragraphe 69(3) de « mi-
nistre » vaut mention de « ministre de l’Industrie ».
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
General
Dispositions générales
Electronic form and means
Moyens et forme électroniques
129 (1) Subject to the regulations, any document, infor-
mation or fee that is submitted to the Minister under this
Act may be submitted in any electronic form, and by any
electronic means, that is specified by the Minister.
129 (1) Sous réserve des règlements, les documents,
renseignements ou taxes à transmettre au ministre sous
le régime de la présente loi peuvent lui être transmis sous
la forme électronique — ou par les moyens électroniques
— que le ministre précise.
Collection, storage, etc.
Collecte, mise en mémoire, etc.
(2) Subject to the regulations, the Minister may use elec-
tronic means to create, collect, receive, store, transfer,
distribute, publish, certify or otherwise deal with docu-
ments or information under sections 106 to 134.
(2) Sous réserve des règlements, le ministre peut utiliser
des moyens électroniques pour créer, recueillir, recevoir,
mettre en mémoire, transférer, diffuser, publier, certifier
ou traiter de quelque autre façon des documents ou des
renseignements en vertu des articles 106 à 134.
Definition
Moyens et formes optiques ou magnétiques
(3) In this section, electronic, in reference to a form or
means, includes optical, magnetic and other similar
forms or means.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(3) Au présent article, les moyens ou formes électro-
niques visent aussi, respectivement, les moyens ou
formes optiques ou magnétiques ainsi que les autres
moyens ou formes semblables.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Certified copies as evidence
Copies certifiées admises en preuve
130 In any action or proceeding respecting a certificate
of supplementary protection authorized to be had or tak-
en in Canada under this Act, a copy purporting to be cer-
tified by the Minister of any such certificate, or of any
other document that is made by or filed with the Minister
and is connected to such a certificate, may be produced
before the court or other tribunal, or a judge or member
of the court or tribunal, and the copy purporting to be so
certified may be admitted in evidence without production
of the original and without proof of the Minister’s certifi-
cation.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
130 Dans toute poursuite ou procédure se rapportant à
un certificat de protection supplémentaire autorisée à
être prise ou exercée au Canada en vertu de la présente
loi, une copie de tout certificat de protection supplémen-
taire, ou de tout document qui s’y rapporte établi par le
ministre ou déposé auprès de lui, paraissant certifiée
conforme par celui-ci peut être produite au tribunal, ou à
un juge du tribunal, et la copie paraissant être ainsi certi-
fiée peut être admise en preuve sans production de l’ori-
ginal et sans qu’il soit nécessaire de prouver l’authentici-
té de la certification.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Costs of proceedings
Frais de procédure
131 In all proceedings before any court under this Act,
including, for greater certainty, an application for judicial
review of a decision of the Minister under this Act, the
costs of the Minister are in the discretion of the court, but
131 Les frais du ministre, dans toutes procédures enga-
gées devant un tribunal en vertu de la présente loi, sont à
la discrétion du tribunal, mais il ne peut être ordonné au
ministre de payer les frais de toute autre partie. Il est


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
General
Dispositions générales
Sections 131-134
Articles 131-134
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
121
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
the Minister shall not be ordered to pay the costs of any
other of the parties.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
entendu que les procédures visées au présent article
comprennent les recours en contrôle judiciaire d’une dé-
cision du ministre.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Time limit deemed extended
Prorogation de délais
132 (1) If any time period fixed under any of sections
106 to 134 in respect of dealings with the Minister ends
on a prescribed day or a day that is designated by the
Minister, that time period is extended to the next day
that is not a prescribed day or a designated day.
132 (1) Lorsqu’un délai fixé en vertu de l’un des articles
106 à 134 et relatif à une action devant être accomplie au-
près du ministre expire un jour réglementaire ou un jour
désigné par le ministre, ce délai est prorogé jusqu’au pre-
mier jour suivant qui n’est ni réglementaire ni désigné
par le ministre.
Power to designate day
Pouvoir de désigner un jour
(2) The Minister may, on account of unforeseen circum-
stances and if the Minister is satisfied that it is in the
public interest to do so, designate any day for the purpos-
es of subsection (1). If a day is designated, the Minister
shall inform the public of that fact on the Department of
Health’s website.
2017, c. 6, s. 59.
(2) Le ministre peut, en raison de circonstances impré-
vues et s’il est convaincu qu’il est dans l’intérêt public de
le faire, désigner un jour pour l’application du para-
graphe (1) et, le cas échéant, il en informe le public sur le
site Web du ministère de la Santé.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59.
Service Fees Act
Loi sur les frais de service
133 The Service Fees Act does not apply in respect of
the fees referred to in section 106 or 134.
2017, c. 6, s. 59, c. 20, s. 455.
133 La Loi sur les frais de service ne s’applique pas aux
taxes visées aux articles 106 ou 134.
2017, ch. 6, art. 59, ch. 20, art. 455.
Regulations
Règlements
134 (1) The Governor in Council may make rules or reg-
ulations
(a) defining the term authorization for sale;
(b) respecting the form and contents of applications
for certificates of supplementary protection;
(c) respecting the processing of such applications;
(d) respecting the determination of when, for the pur-
pose of paragraph 106(1)(f), an application for an au-
thorization for sale was filed and, for the purpose of
subsection 106(3), an application for a certificate of
supplementary protection is filed;
(e) prescribing the fees or the manner of determining
the fees that may be charged in respect of the filing of
applications for certificates of supplementary protec-
tion, the issuance of such certificates or the taking of
other proceedings under sections 106 to 133 or under
any rule or regulation made under this section, or in
respect of any services or the use of any facilities pro-
vided by the Minister under those sections or such a
rule or regulation;
134 (1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par règle ou rè-
glement :
a) définir l’expression autorisation de mise en mar-
ché;
b) régir la forme et le contenu des demandes de certi-
ficat de protection supplémentaire;
c) régir le traitement de telles demandes;
d) régir la détermination du moment où, pour l’appli-
cation de l’alinéa 106(1)f), la demande d’autorisation
de mise en marché a été déposée et de celui où, pour
l’application du paragraphe 106(3), la demande de cer-
tificat de protection supplémentaire est déposée;
e) prescrire les taxes qui peuvent être levées pour le
dépôt des demandes de certificat de protection supplé-
mentaire et la délivrance d’un tel certificat, pour les
autres formalités d’application des articles 106 à 133
ou des règles ou règlements pris en vertu du présent
article ou pour des services ou l’utilisation d’installa-
tions prévus par le ministre à ces articles ou dans ces
règles ou règlements, ou prescrire les modalités de la
détermination de ces taxes;


Patent
Brevets
Supplementary Protection for Inventions — Medicinal Ingredients
Protection supplémentaire pour les inventions — ingrédients médicinaux
General
Dispositions générales
Section 134
Article 134
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
122
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(f) respecting the circumstances in which any paten-
tee or holder of a certificate of supplementary protec-
tion may or must be represented by another person in
respect of a certificate of supplementary protection or
an application for such a certificate;
(g) respecting the submission, including in electronic
form and by electronic means, of documents and in-
formation to the Minister, including the time at which
they are deemed to be received by the Minister;
(h) respecting the use of electronic means for the pur-
poses of subsection 129(2), including requiring the use
of those electronic means;
(i) respecting the withdrawal of an application for a
certificate of supplementary protection;
(j) respecting communications between the Minister
and any other person;
(k) respecting the correction of obvious errors in doc-
uments submitted to the Minister, in certificates of
supplementary protection or in other documents is-
sued under sections 106 to 133, including
(i) the determination by the Minister of what con-
stitutes an obvious error, and
(ii) the effect of the correction; and
(l) generally, for carrying into effect the objects and
purposes of sections 104 to 133 or for ensuring their
due administration by the Minister.
f) régir les circonstances dans lesquelles le titulaire
d’un brevet ou le titulaire d’un certificat de protection
supplémentaire peut ou doit être représenté par une
autre personne relativement à une demande de certifi-
cat de protection supplémentaire ou à un tel certificat;
g) régir la fourniture — sous forme électronique ou
autre ou par des moyens électroniques — de docu-
ments ou de renseignements au ministre, notamment
le moment où le ministre est réputé les avoir reçus;
h) régir l’usage de moyens électroniques pour l’appli-
cation du paragraphe 129(2), notamment pour impo-
ser un tel usage;
i) régir le retrait des demandes de certificat de protec-
tion supplémentaire;
j) régir les communications entre le ministre et toute
autre personne;
k) régir la correction d’erreurs évidentes dans les do-
cuments transmis au ministre ou dans les certificats
de protection supplémentaire ou autres documents
délivrés en vertu des articles 106 à 133, notamment en
ce qui a trait :
(i) à ce qui constitue, de l’avis du ministre, une er-
reur évidente,
(ii) aux effets de la correction;
l) prendre toute autre mesure d’application des ar-
ticles 104 à 133 ou pour en assurer la mise en œuvre
par le ministre.
For greater certainty
Précision
(2) For greater certainty, the Governor in Council may
make rules or regulations under paragraphs 12(1)(d), (g),
(h) and (k) for the purposes of this section and sections
104 to 133.
2017, c. 6, s. 59; 2018, c. 27, s. 199(E).
(2) Il est entendu que le gouverneur en conseil peut,
pour l’application du présent article et des articles 104 à
133, prendre toute mesure d’ordre réglementaire visée
aux alinéas 12(1)d), g), h) et k).
2017, ch. 6, art. 59; 2018, ch. 27, art. 199(A).


Patent
Brevets
SCHEDULE 1 
ANNEXE 1 (anglais)
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
123
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
SCHEDULE 1
(Definition “pharmaceutical product” in section 21.02 and paragraph 21.03(1)(a))
abacavir (ABC)
tablet, 300 mg (as sulfate); oral solution, 100 mg (as sulfate)/5 mL
abacavir + lamivudine + zidovudine
tablet, 300 mg (as sulfate) + 150 mg + 300 mg
aciclovir
tablet, 200 mg; powder for injection, 250 mg (as sodium salt) in vial
amphotericin B
powder for injection, 50 mg in vial
amprenavir
tablet, 150 mg; capsule, 50 mg or 150 mg; oral solution, 15 mg/mL
azithromycin
capsule, 250 mg or 500 mg; suspension, 200 mg/5 mL
beclometasone
inhalation (aerosol), 50 micrograms per dose (dipropionate) or 250 micrograms (dipropionate) per
dose
ceftazidime
powder for injection, 250 mg (as pentahydrate) in vial
ceftriaxone
injection, 500 mg (as sodium); powder for injection, 250 mg (as sodium salt) in vial
ciclosporin
capsule, 25 mg; concentrate for injection, 50 mg/mL in 1-mL ampoule (for organ transplantation)
ciprofloxacin
tablet, 250 mg (as hydrochloride)
ciprofloxacin
tablet, 250 mg or 500 mg
daunorubicin
powder for injection, 50 mg (as hydrochloride) in vial
delavirdine
capsule or tablet, 100 mg (as mesylate)
didanosine (ddI)
buffered chewable, dispersible tablet, 25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg, 200 mg; buffered powder
for oral solution, 100 mg, 167 mg, 250 mg, packets; unbuffered enteric coated capsule, 125 mg,
200 mg, 250 mg, 400 mg
diphtheria antitoxin
injection, 10 000 IU or 20 000 IU in vial
diphtheria vaccine
doxorubicin
powder for injection, 10 mg or 50 mg (hydrochloride) in vial
efavirenz (EFV or EFZ)
capsule, 50 mg, 100 mg or 200 mg; oral solution, 150 mg/5 mL
efavirenz + emtricitabine + tenofovir
disoproxil
tablet, 600 mg + 200 mg + 300 mg
eflornithine
injection, 200 mg (hydrochloride)/mL in 100-mL bottles
emtricitabine + tenofovir disoproxil
tablet, 200 mg + 300 mg
enalapril
tablet, 2.5 mg
erythromycin
capsule or tablet, 250 mg (as stearate or ethyl succinate); powder for oral suspension, 125 mg (as
stearate or ethyl succinate); powder for injection, 500 mg (as lactobionate) in vial
etoposide
capsule, 100 mg; injection, 20 mg/mL in 5-mL ampoule
factor IX (complex coagulation
factors II, VII, IX, X) concentrate
dried
hepatitis B vaccine
ibuprofen
tablet, 200 mg or 400 mg
indinavir (IDV)
capsule, 200 mg, 333 mg or 400 mg (as sulfate)
insulin injection (soluble)
injection, 40 IU/mL in 10-mL vial or 100 IU/mL in 10-mL vial
intermediate-acting insulin
injection, 40 IU/mL in 10-mL vial; 100 IU/mL in 10-mL vial (as compound insulin zinc suspension or
isophane insulin)
isoniazid + pyrazinamide + rifampin tablet, 50 mg + 300 mg + 120 mg
ivermectin
scored tablet, 3 mg or 6 mg
lamivudine (3TC)
capsule or tablet, 150 mg; oral solution 50 mg/5 mL
lamivudine + nevirapine +
zidovudine
tablet, 150 mg + 200 mg + 300 mg
lamivudine + zidovudine
tablet, 150 mg + 300 mg
levodopa + carbidopa
tablet, 100 mg + 10 mg or 250 mg + 25 mg
levofloxacin
tablet, 250 mg or 500 mg
lithium carbonate
capsule or tablet, 300 mg
lopinavir + ritonavir (LPV/r)
capsule, 133.3 mg + 33.3 mg; oral solution, 400 mg + 100 mg/5 mL
metoclopramide
tablet, 10 mg (hydrochloride); injection, 5 mg (hydrochloride)/mL in 2-mL ampoule
metronidazole
tablet, 250 mg or 500 mg; injection, 500 mg in 100-mL vial; suppository, 500 mg or 1 g; oral
suspension, 200 mg (as benzoate)/5 mL
morphine
injection, 10 mg in 1-mL ampoule (sulfate or hydrochloride); oral solution, 10 mg (hydrochloride
or sulfate)/5 mL; tablet, 10 mg (sulfate)
nelfinavir (NFV)
tablet, 250 mg (as mesilate); oral powder, 50 mg/g
nevirapine (NVP)
tablet, 200 mg; oral suspension, 50 mg/5 mL


Patent
Brevets
SCHEDULE 1 
ANNEXE 1 (anglais)
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
124
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
nifedipine
sustained release formulations, tablet, 10 mg
nitrofurantoin
tablet, 100 mg
ofloxacin
tablet, 200 mg or 400 mg
oseltamivir phosphate
capsule, 75 mg; powder for oral suspension, 12 mg/mL
potassium chloride
powder for solution
ranitidine
tablet, 150 mg (as hydrochloride); oral solution, 75 mg/5 mL; injection, 25 mg/mL in 2-mL ampoule
ritonavir
capsule, 100 mg; oral solution, 400 mg/5 mL
salbutamol
tablet, 2 mg or 4 mg (as sulfate); inhalation (aerosol), 100 micrograms (as sulfate) per dose; syrup,
2 mg/5 mL; injection, 50 micrograms (as sulfate)/mL in 5-mL ampoule; respirator solution for use
in nebulizers, 5 mg (as sulfate)/mL
saquinavir (SQV)
capsule, 200 mg
stavudine (d4T)
capsule, 15 mg, 20 mg, 30 mg or 40 mg; powder for oral solution, 5 mg/5 mL
tenofovir disoproxil
tablet, 300 mg
testosterone
injection, 200 mg (enantate) in 1-mL ampoule
timolol
solution (eye drops), 0.25% or 0.5% (as maleate)
verapamil
tablet, 40 mg or 80 mg (hydrochloride); injection, 2.5 mg (hydrochloride)/mL in 2-mL ampoule
zalcitabine
capsule or tablet, 0.375 mg or 0.750 mg
zidovudine (ZDV or AZT)
tablet, 300 mg; capsule, 100 mg or 250 mg; oral solution or syrup, 50 mg/5 mL; solution for IV
infusion injection, 10 mg/mL in 20-mL vial
2004, c. 23, Sch. 1; SOR/2005-276; SOR/2006-204; SOR/2015-154.


Patent
Brevets
SCHEDULE 1 (French)
ANNEXE 1 
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
125
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
ANNEXE 1
(définition de « produit pharmaceutique » à l’article 21.02 et alinéa 21.03(1)a))
abacavir (ABC)
comprimé, 300 mg (sous forme de sulfate); solution buvable, 100 mg (sous forme de sulfate)/5 ml
abacavir + lamivudine + zidovudine
comprimé, 300 mg (sous forme de sulfate) + 150 mg + 300 mg
aciclovir
comprimé, 200 mg; poudre pour préparations injectables, 250 mg (sous forme de sel de sodium)
en flacon
amphotéricine B
poudre pour préparations injectables, 50 mg en flacon
amprenavir
comprimé, 150 mg; gélule, 50 mg ou 150 mg; solution buvable, 15 mg/ml
antitoxine diphtérique
solution injectable, 10 000 UI ou 20 000 UI en flacon
azithromycine
gélules, 250 mg ou 500 mg; suspension, 200 mg/5 ml
béclométasone
solution pour inhalation (aérosol), 50 microgrammes par dose (dipropionate) ou 250
microgrammes (dipropionate) par dose
carbonate de lithium
gélule ou comprimé, 300 mg
ceftazidime
poudre pour préparations injectables, 250 mg (sous forme de pentahydrate) en flacon
ceftriaxone
solution injectable, 500 mg (sous forme de sodium); poudre pour préparations injectables, 250 mg
(sous forme de sel de sodium) en flacon
chlorure de potassium
poudre pour solution
ciclosporine
gélule, 25 mg; concentré pour solution injectable, 50 mg/ml en ampoule de 1 ml (pour les
transplantations d’organes)
ciprofloxacine
comprimé, 250 mg (sous forme de chlorhydrate)
ciprofloxacine
comprimé, 250 mg ou 500 mg
complexe de facteur IX (concentré
des facteurs de coagulation II, VII,
IX, X)
desséché
daunorubicine
poudre pour préparations injectables, 50 mg (sous forme de chlorhydrate) en flacon
delavirdine
gélule ou comprimé, 100 mg (sous forme de mésilate)
didanosine (ddl)
comprimé à croquer, dispersible tamponné, 25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg, 200 mg; poudre
tamponnée pour solution buvable, 100 mg, 167 mg, 250 mg en sachets; gélule gastro-résistante
non tamponnée, 125 mg, 200 mg, 250 mg, 400 mg
doxorubicine
poudre pour préparations injectables, 10 mg ou 50 mg (chlorhydrate) en flacon
efavirenz (EFV ou EFZ)
gélule, 50 mg, 100 mg ou 200 mg; solution buvable, 150 mg/5 ml
efavirenz + emtricitabine + ténofovir
disoproxil
comprimé, 600 mg + 200 mg + 300 mg
éflornithine
solution injectable, 200 mg (chlorhydrate)/ml en flacon de 100 ml
emtricitabine + ténofovir disoproxil
comprimé, 200 mg + 300 mg
énalapril
comprimé, 2,5 mg
érythromycine
gélule ou comprimé, 250 mg (sous forme de stéarate ou d’éthylsuccinate); poudre pour
suspension buvable, 125 mg (sous forme de stéarate ou d’éthylsuccinate); poudre pour
préparations injectables, 500 mg (sous forme de lactobionate) en flacon
étoposide
gélule, 100 mg; solution injectable, 20 mg/ml en ampoule de 5 ml
ibuprofène
comprimé, 200 mg ou 400 mg
indinavir (IDV)
gélule, 200 mg, 333 mg ou 400 mg (sous forme de sulfate)
insuline d’action intermédiaire
solution injectable, 40 UI/ml en flacon de 10 ml ou 100 UI/ml en flacon de 10 ml (sous forme d’un
complexe d’insuline zinc en suspension ou d’insuline isophane)
insuline injectable (soluble)
solution injectable, 40 UI/ml en flacon de 10 ml ou 100 UI/ml en flacon de 10 ml
isoniazide + pyrazinamide +
rifampine
comprimé, 50 mg + 300 mg + 120 mg
ivermectine
comprimé sécable, 3 mg ou 6 mg
lamivudine (3TC)
gélule ou comprimé, 150 mg; solution buvable, 50 mg/5 ml
lamivudine + névirapine +
zidovudine
comprimé, 150 mg + 200 mg + 300 mg
lamivudine + zidovudine
comprimé, 150 mg + 300 mg
lévodopa + carbidopa
comprimé, 100 mg + 10 mg ou 250 mg + 25 mg
lévofloxacine
comprimé, 250 mg ou 500 mg
lopinavir + ritonavir (LPV/r)
gélule, 133,3 mg + 33,3 mg; solution buvable, 400 mg + 100 mg/5 ml
métoclopramide
comprimé, 10 mg (chlorhydrate); solution injectable, 5 mg (chlorhydrate)/ml en ampoule de 2 ml
métronidazole
comprimé, 250 mg ou 500 mg; solution injectable, 500 mg en flacon de 100 ml; suppositoire, 500
mg ou 1 g; suspension buvable, 200 mg (sous forme de benzoate)/5 ml


Patent
Brevets
SCHEDULE 1 (French)
ANNEXE 1 
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
126
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
morphine
solution injectable, 10 mg (sulfate ou chlorhydrate) en ampoule de 1 ml; solution buvable, 10 mg
(chlorhydrate ou sulfate)/5 ml; comprimé, 10 mg (sulfate)
nelfinavir (NFV)
comprimé, 250 mg (sous forme de mésilate); poudre pour administration orale, 50 mg/g
névirapine (NVP)
comprimé, 200 mg; suspension buvable, 50 mg/5 ml
nifédipine
formulations à libération prolongée, comprimé à 10 mg
nitrofurantoïne
comprimé, 100 mg
ofloxacine
comprimé, 200 mg ou 400 mg
phosphate d’oseltamivir
gélule, 75 mg; poudre pour suspension buvable, 12 mg/ml
ranitidine
comprimé, 150 mg (sous forme de chlorhydrate); solution buvable, 75 mg/5 ml; solution
injectable, 25 mg/ml en ampoule de 2 ml
ritonavir
gélule, 100 mg; solution buvable, 400 mg/5 ml
salbutamol
comprimé, 2 mg ou 4 mg (sous forme de sulfate); solution pour inhalation (aérosol), 100
microgrammes (sous forme de sulfate) par dose; sirop, 2 mg (sous forme de sulfate)/5 ml;
solution injectable, 50 microgrammes (sous forme de sulfate)/ml en ampoule de 5 ml; solution
pour nébuliseur, 5 mg (sous forme de sulfate)/ml
saquinavir (SQV)
gélule, 200 mg
stavudine (d4T)
gélule, 15 mg, 20 mg, 30 mg ou 40 mg; poudre pour solution buvable, 5 mg/5 ml
ténofovir disoproxil
comprimé, 300 mg
testostérone
solution injectable, 200 mg (énantate) en ampoule de 1 ml
timolol
solution (collyre), 0,25 % ou 0,5 % (sous forme de maléate)
vaccin antidiphtérique
vaccin antihépatite B
vérapamil
comprimé, 40 mg ou 80 mg (chlorhydrate); solution injectable, 2,5 mg (chlorhydrate)/ml en
ampoule de 2 ml
zalcitabine
gélule ou comprimé, 0,375 mg ou 0,750 mg
zidovudine (ZDV ou AZT)
comprimé, 300 mg; gélule, 100 mg ou 250 mg; solution buvable ou sirop, 50 mg/5 ml; solution
pour perfusion intraveineuse, 10 mg/ml en flacon de 20 ml
2004, ch. 23, ann. 1; DORS/2005-276; DORS/2006-204; DORS/2015-154.


Patent
Brevets
SCHEDULE 2 
ANNEXE 2 
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
127
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
SCHEDULE 2
(Paragraph 21.03(1)(b))
ANNEXE 2
(alinéa 21.03(1)b))
Afghanistan
Afghanistan
Angola
Angola
Bangladesh
Bangladesh
Benin
Bénin
Bhutan
Bhoutan
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Burundi
Cambodia
Cambodge
Cape Verde
Cap-Vert
Central African Republic
République centrafricaine
Chad
Tchad
Comoros
Comores
Democratic Republic of the Congo
République démocratique du Congo
Djibouti
Djibouti
Equatorial Guinea
Guinée équatoriale
Eritrea
Érythrée
Ethiopia
Éthiopie
Gambia
Gambie
Guinea
Guinée
Guinea-Bissau
Guinée-Bissau
Haiti
Haïti
Kiribati
Kiribati
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
République démocratique populaire lao
Lesotho
Lesotho
Liberia
Libéria
Madagascar
Madagascar
Afghanistan
Afghanistan
Angola
Angola
Bangladesh
Bangladesh
Bénin
Benin
Bhoutan
Bhutan
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Burundi
Cambodge
Cambodia
Cap-Vert
Cape Verde
Comores
Comoros
Djibouti
Djibouti
Érythrée
Eritrea
Éthiopie
Ethiopia
Gambie
Gambia
Guinée
Guinea
Guinée-Bissau
Guinea-Bissau
Guinée équatoriale
Equatorial Guinea
Haïti
Haiti
Îles Salomon
Solomon Islands
Kiribati
Kiribati
Lesotho
Lesotho
Libéria
Liberia
Madagascar
Madagascar
Malawi
Malawi
Maldives
Maldives
Mali
Mali


Patent
Brevets
SCHEDULE 2 
ANNEXE 2 
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
128
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Malawi
Malawi
Maldives
Maldives
Mali
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritanie
Mozambique
Mozambique
Myanmar
Myanmar
Nepal
Népal
Niger
Niger
Rwanda
Rwanda
Samoa
Samoa
Sao Tome and Principe
Sao Tomé-et-Principe
Senegal
Sénégal
Sierra Leone
Sierra Leone
Solomon Islands
Îles Salomon
Somalia
Somalie
Sudan
Soudan
Timor-Leste
Timor-Leste
Togo
Togo
Tuvalu
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ouganda
United Republic of Tanzania
République-Unie de Tanzanie
Vanuatu
Vanuatu
Yemen
Yémen
Zambia
Zambie
2004, c. 23, Sch. 2.
Mauritanie
Mauritania
Mozambique
Mozambique
Myanmar
Myanmar
Népal
Nepal
Niger
Niger
Ouganda
Uganda
République centrafricaine
Central African Republic
République démocratique du Congo
Democratic Republic of the Congo
République démocratique populaire lao
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
République-Unie de Tanzanie
United Republic of Tanzania
Rwanda
Rwanda
Samoa
Samoa
Sao Tomé-et-Principe
Sao Tome and Principe
Sénégal
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Sierra Leone
Somalie
Somalia
Soudan
Sudan
Tchad
Chad
Timor-Leste
Timor-Leste
Togo
Togo
Tuvalu
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vanuatu
Yémen
Yemen
Zambie
Zambia
2004, ch. 23, ann. 2.


Patent
Brevets
SCHEDULE 3 
ANNEXE 3 
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
129
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
SCHEDULE 3
(Paragraph 21.03(1)(c))
ANNEXE 3
(alinéa 21.03(1)c))
Albania
Albanie
Antigua and Barbuda
Antigua-et-Barbuda
Argentina
Argentine
Armenia
Arménie
Bahrain, Kingdom of
Bahreïn, Royaume de
Barbados
Barbade
Belize
Belize
Bolivia
Bolivie
Botswana
Botswana
Brazil
Brésil
Brunei Darussalam
Brunéi Darussalam
Bulgaria
Bulgarie
Cameroon
Cameroun
Chile
Chili
China
Chine
Colombia
Colombie
Congo
Congo
Costa Rica
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Croatie
Cuba
Cuba
Dominica
Dominique
Dominican Republic
République dominicaine
Ecuador
Équateur
Egypt
Égypte
El Salvador
El Salvador
Afrique du Sud
South Africa
Albanie
Albania
Antigua-et-Barbuda
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentine
Argentina
Arménie
Armenia
Bahreïn, Royaume de
Bahrain, Kingdom of
Barbade
Barbados
Belize
Belize
Bolivie
Bolivia
Botswana
Botswana
Brésil
Brazil
Brunéi Darussalam
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgarie
Bulgaria
Cameroun
Cameroon
Chili
Chile
Chine
China
Colombie
Colombia
Congo
Congo
Costa Rica
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatie
Croatia
Cuba
Cuba
Dominique
Dominica
Égypte
Egypt
El Salvador
El Salvador
Équateur
Ecuador


Patent
Brevets
SCHEDULE 3 
ANNEXE 3 
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
130
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Fiji
Fidji
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Ex-République yougoslave de Macédoine
Gabon
Gabon
Georgia
Géorgie
Ghana
Ghana
Grenada
Grenade
Guatemala
Guatemala
Guyana
Guyana
Honduras
Honduras
India
Inde
Indonesia
Indonésie
Jamaica
Jamaïque
Jordan
Jordanie
Kenya
Kenya
Kyrgyz Republic
République kirghize
Liechtenstein
Liechtenstein
Malaysia
Malaisie
Mauritius
Maurice
Moldova
Moldova
Mongolia
Mongolie
Morocco
Maroc
Namibia
Namibie
Nicaragua
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Nigéria
Oman
Oman
Pakistan
Pakistan
Panama
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Papouasie-Nouvelle-Guinée
Ex-République yougoslave de Macédoine
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Fidji
Fiji
Gabon
Gabon
Géorgie
Georgia
Ghana
Ghana
Grenade
Grenada
Guatemala
Guatemala
Guyana
Guyana
Honduras
Honduras
Inde
India
Indonésie
Indonesia
Jamaïque
Jamaica
Jordanie
Jordan
Kenya
Kenya
Liechtenstein
Liechtenstein
Malaisie
Malaysia
Maroc
Morocco
Maurice
Mauritius
Moldova
Moldova
Mongolie
Mongolia
Namibie
Namibia
Nicaragua
Nicaragua
Nigéria
Nigeria
Oman
Oman
Pakistan
Pakistan
Panama
Panama
Papouasie-Nouvelle-Guinée
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Paraguay


Patent
Brevets
SCHEDULE 3 
ANNEXE 3 
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
131
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Paraguay
Paraguay
Peru
Pérou
Philippines
Philippines
Romania
Roumanie
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint-Kitts-et-Nevis
Saint Lucia
Sainte-Lucie
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Saint-Vincent-et-les-Grenadines
South Africa
Afrique du Sud
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Suriname
Suriname
Swaziland
Swaziland
Thailand
Thaïlande
Trinidad and Tobago
Trinité-et-Tobago
Tunisia
Tunisie
Uruguay
Uruguay
Venezuela
Venezuela
Zimbabwe
Zimbabwe
2004, c. 23, Sch. 3.
Pérou
Peru
Philippines
Philippines
République dominicaine
Dominican Republic
République kirghize
Kyrgyz Republic
Roumanie
Romania
Sainte-Lucie
Saint Lucia
Saint-Kitts-et-Nevis
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint-Vincent-et-les-Grenadines
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Suriname
Suriname
Swaziland
Swaziland
Thaïlande
Thailand
Trinité-et-Tobago
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisie
Tunisia
Uruguay
Uruguay
Venezuela
Venezuela
Zimbabwe
Zimbabwe
2004, ch. 23, ann. 3.


Patent
Brevets
SCHEDULE 4 
ANNEXE 4 
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
132
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
SCHEDULE 4
(Paragraph 21.03(1)(d))
ANNEXE 4
(alinéa 21.03(1)d))
Cyprus
Chypre
Czech Republic
République tchèque
Estonia
Estonie
Hong Kong, China
Hong Kong, Chine
Hungary
Hongrie
Israel
Israël
Korea
Corée
Kuwait
Koweït
Latvia
Lettonie
Lithuania
Lituanie
Macao, China
Macao, Chine
Malta
Malte
Mexico
Mexique
Poland
Pologne
Qatar
Qatar
Singapore
Singapour
Slovak Republic
République slovaque
Slovenia
Slovénie
Chinese Taipei
Taipei chinois
Turkey
Turquie
United Arab Emirates
Émirats arabes unis
2004, c. 23, Sch. 4.
Chypre
Cyprus
Corée
Korea
Émirats arabes unis
United Arab Emirates
Estonie
Estonia
Hong Kong, Chine
Hong Kong, China
Hongrie
Hungary
Israël
Israel
Koweït
Kuwait
Lettonie
Latvia
Lituanie
Lithuania
Macao, Chine
Macao, China
Malte
Malta
Mexique
Mexico
Pologne
Poland
Qatar
Qatar
République slovaque
Slovak Republic
République tchèque
Czech Republic
Singapour
Singapore
Slovénie
Slovenia
Taipei chinois
Chinese Taipei
Turquie
Turkey
2004, ch. 23, ann. 4.


Patent
Brevets
RELATED PROVISIONS
DISPOSITIONS CONNEXES
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
133
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
RELATED PROVISIONS
DISPOSITIONS CONNEXES
— R. S. , 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp. ), s. 31, as
amended by 1992, c. 1, s. 145 (F) (Sch. VIII,
item 22)
— L. R. (1985), ch. 33 (3 e suppl. ), art. 31,
tel que modifié par 1992, ch. 1, art. 145 (F)
(Ann. VIII, n o 22)
Payments to provinces
Paiement aux provinces
31 (1) The Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs
shall pay to each province for each of the fiscal years
commencing in the period April 1, 1987 to March 31,
1991, for the purpose of research and development relat-
ing to medicine, an amount equal to the product ob-
tained by multiplying
(a) the quotient obtained by dividing
(i) twenty-five million dollars
by
(ii) the total population of all provinces for the fis-
cal year in respect of which the payment is made,
by
(b) the population of the province for the fiscal year in
respect of which the payment is made.
31 (1) Le ministre de la Consommation et des Affaires
commerciales versera à chaque province pour chacun des
exercices compris entre le 1er avril 1987 et le 31 mars 1991
pour la recherche et le développement en matière de mé-
dicaments un montant égal au produit obtenu par la mul-
tiplication de l’élément a) par l’élément b) :
a) le quotient obtenu par la division de vingt-cinq mil-
lions de dollars par le chiffre total de la population des
provinces pour l’exercice à l’égard duquel le versement
est effectué;
b) le chiffre de la population de la province pour ce
même exercice.
Time and manner of payment
Modalités
(2) Payment of any amount under this section shall be
made out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund at such
times and in such manner as the Governor in Council
may, by regulation, prescribe.
(2) Tout versement est prélevé sur le Trésor selon ce que
le gouverneur en conseil peut fixer par règlement.
Determination of population
Détermination du chiffre de la population
(3) For the purposes of this section, the population of a
province for a fiscal year shall be the population of that
province on June 1 of that year as determined and pub-
lished by the Chief Statistician of Canada.
(3) Le chiffre de la population d’une province pour un
exercice est celui du 1er juin de l’exercice, déterminé et
publié par le statisticien en chef du Canada.
— R. S. , 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp. ), s. 32, as
amended by 1992, c. 1, s. 145 (F) (Sch. VIII,
item 22)
— L. R. (1985), ch. 33 (3 e suppl. ), art. 32,
tel que modifié par 1992, ch. 1, art. 145 (F)
(Ann. VIII, n o 22)
Prohibition
Interdiction
32 (1) Notwithstanding anything in section 39 of the
Patent Act or in any licence granted under that section,
no person shall, under a licence granted prior to March
28, 1989 under that section in respect of a patent pertain-
ing to the medicine Diltiazem hydrochloride, have or ex-
ercise any right to
(a) import Diltiazem hydrochloride, if it is to be sold
for consumption in Canada; or
32 (1) Par dérogation à l’article 39 de la Loi sur les bre-
vets ou à toute licence délivrée sous son régime, il est in-
terdit de se prévaloir d’une licence accordée sous le ré-
gime de cet article avant le 28 mars 1989 et relativement
au médicament appelé chlorhydrate de diltiazem pour re-
vendiquer ou exercer le droit d’importer ou de réaliser ce
médicament pour vente à la consommation au Canada.


Patent
Brevets
RELATED PROVISIONS
DISPOSITIONS CONNEXES
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
134
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(b) make Diltiazem hydrochloride for sale for con-
sumption in Canada.
Duration of prohibition
Durée de l’interdiction
(2) The prohibition under subsection (1) expires on
March 28, 1989.
(2) L’interdiction est levée le 28 mars 1989.
Actions and proceedings barred
Interdiction des actions
(3) No action or proceedings for any compensation or
damages lie against Her Majesty in right of Canada as a
result of the application of subsection (1) to a licence re-
ferred to in that subsection.
(3) Il ne peut être intenté d’action, ou autre procédure,
en dommages-intérêts contre Sa Majesté du chef du
Canada pour l’application du paragraphe (1) à une li-
cence qui y est visée.
— 1993, c. 2, s. 9
— 1993, ch. 2, art. 9
Definitions
Définitions
9 In this section and sections 10 to 13,
commencement day means the day on which section 3
of this Act comes into force; (date d’entrée en vigueur)
former Act means the Patent Act, as it read immediately
before the commencement day. (loi antérieure)
9 Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent au présent ar-
ticle et aux articles 10 à 13.
date d’entrée en vigueur La date d’entrée en vigueur
de l’article 3 de la présente loi. (commencement day)
loi antérieure La Loi sur les brevets dans sa version à la
date d’entrée en vigueur. (former Act)
— 1993, c. 2, s. 10
— 1993, ch. 2, art. 10
Pending proceedings
Procédures pendantes
10 Any proceeding pending before the Patented
Medicine Prices Review Board immediately before the
commencement day shall be taken up and continued un-
der and in accordance with sections 79 to 101 of the
Patent Act, as enacted by section 7 of this Act, as if the
proceeding had been commenced on or after that day.
10 Toutes les procédures qui, à la date d’entrée en vi-
gueur, sont en cours devant le Conseil d’examen du prix
des médicaments brevetés se poursuivent conformément
aux articles 79 à 101 de la Loi sur les brevets, édictés par
l’article 7 de la présente loi, comme si elles avaient été
entamées à cette date.
— 1993, c. 2, s. 11
— 1993, ch. 2, art. 11
Licences continued
Validité d’une licence au titre de la loi antérieure
11 (1) A licence that has been granted under section 39
of the former Act before December 20, 1991 and that has
not been terminated before the commencement day shall
continue in effect according to its terms and, subject to
subsection (2), sections 39 to 39.14 of the former Act shall
continue to apply in respect of that licence as if they had
not been repealed by section 3 of this Act.
11 (1) Toute licence accordée au titre de l’article 39 de la
loi antérieure avant le 20 décembre 1991 et en cours de
validité à la date d’entrée en vigueur reste valide dans les
limites de ses conditions. Les articles 39 à 39.14 de la loi
antérieure s’appliquent à elle comme s’ils n’avaient pas
été abrogés par l’article 3 de la présente loi.
Exception
Exception
(2) For the purposes of applying sections 39 to 39.14 of
the former Act in respect of a licence continued by sub-
section (1), the prohibitions set out in subsections
39.11(1) and 39.14(1) of the former Act do not apply in re-
spect of any medicine or medicines in respect of which an
order has been made under paragraph 39.15(3)(d) of the
(2) Pour l’application des articles 39 à 39.14 de la loi an-
térieure aux licences prorogées au titre du paragraphe
(1), les interdictions prévues aux paragraphes 39.11(1) et
39.14(1) de la loi antérieure ne s’appliquent pas aux mé-
dicaments visés par une ordonnance prise au titre de
l’alinéa 39.15(3)d) de la loi antérieure si cette ordonnance
est en vigueur avant la date d’entrée en vigueur.


Patent
Brevets
RELATED PROVISIONS
DISPOSITIONS CONNEXES
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
135
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
former Act, if that order is in force immediately before
the commencement day.
— 1993, c. 2, s. 12
— 1993, ch. 2, art. 12
Licences ceasing to have effect
Non-validité d’une licence
12 (1) Every licence granted under section 39 of the for-
mer Act on or after December 20, 1991 shall cease to have
effect on the expiration of the day preceding the com-
mencement day, and all rights or privileges acquired or
accrued under that licence or under the former Act in re-
lation to that licence shall thereupon be extinguished.
12 (1) Toute licence accordée au titre de l’article 39 de la
loi antérieure le 20 décembre 1991 ou après cesse d’être
valide à l’expiration du jour précédant la date d’entrée en
vigueur et les droits et privilèges acquis au titre de cette
licence ou de la loi antérieure relativement à cette licence
s’éteignent.
Actions for infringement barred
Aucune action en contrefaçon
(2) For greater certainty, no action for infringement of a
patent lies under the Patent Act in respect of any act that
is done before the commencement day under a licence
referred to in subsection (1) in accordance with the terms
of that licence and sections 39 to 39.17 of the former Act.
(2) Il ne peut être intenté d’action en contrefaçon d’un
brevet sous le régime de la Loi sur les brevets à l’égard
d’un acte accompli, préalablement à la date d’entrée en
vigueur, au titre d’une licence visée au paragraphe (1) et
conformément aux articles 39 à 39.17 de la loi antérieure
ou à cette licence.
— 1993, c. 2, s. 13
— 1993, ch. 2, art. 13
Actions and proceedings barred
Aucune action en recouvrement
13 No action or proceeding for any compensation or
damages lies against Her Majesty in right of Canada in
respect of any direct or indirect consequence resulting
from the application of section 11 or 12 or the repeal of
sections 39 to 39.17 of the former Act.
13 Il ne peut être intenté d’action en recouvrement
contre Sa Majesté du chef du Canada à l’égard de toutes
répercussions — directes ou indirectes — résultant de
l’application des articles 11 ou 12 ou de l’abrogation des
articles 39 à 39.17 de la loi antérieure.
— 1993, c. 2, s. 14
— 1993, ch. 2, art. 14
Review of certain sections
Examen de certains articles
14 (1) On the expiration of four years after this Act is
assented to, the provisions of the Patent Act enacted by
this Act shall be referred to such committee of the House
of Commons, of the Senate or of both Houses of Parlia-
ment as may be designated or established for the purpose
of the review referred to in subsection (2).
14 (1) À l’expiration de la quatrième année suivant la
sanction de la présente loi, un comité, de la Chambre des
communes, du Sénat ou mixte, désigné ou constitué à
cette fin se saisit des dispositions de la Loi sur les brevets
édictées par la présente loi et procède à l’examen détaillé
de celles-ci et des conséquences de leur application.
Idem
Idem
(2) The committee shall undertake a comprehensive re-
view of the provisions of the Patent Act enacted by this
Act and shall, within one year after the review is under-
taken or within such further time as the House or Houses
that designated or established the committee may autho-
rize, submit a report thereon, including such recommen-
dations as the committee may wish to make pertaining to
those provisions.
(2) Le comité dispose d’un an, ou du délai supérieur au-
torisé par la ou les chambres l’ayant désigné ou constitué,
pour s’en acquitter et présenter son rapport en l’assortis-
sant éventuellement de ses recommandations quant aux
modifications à ces dispositions qu’il juge souhaitables.


Patent
Brevets
RELATED PROVISIONS
DISPOSITIONS CONNEXES
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
136
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
— 1993, c. 44, s. 191 (2)
— 1993, ch. 44, par. 191 (2)
No liability
Absence de responsabilité
191 (2) Her Majesty in right of Canada or a province is
not, by reason only of the enactment of subsection (1), li-
able for any use of a patented invention before the day on
which subsection (1) comes into force.
191 (2) Le paragraphe (1) n’a pas pour effet, par lui-
même, de faire encourir quelque responsabilité à Sa Ma-
jesté du chef du Canada ou d’une province pour les
usages d’une invention brevetée antérieurs à son entrée
en vigueur.
— 2018, c. 27, s. 200
— 2018, ch. 27, art. 200
Section 52.1 of Patent Act
Article 52.1 de la Loi sur les brevets
200 Section 52.1 of the Patent Act applies in respect of
any action or proceeding that has not been finally dis-
posed of on the coming into force of that section.
200 L’article 52.1 de la Loi sur les brevets s’applique à
toute action ou procédure qui n’est pas décidée de façon
définitive à l’entrée en vigueur de cet article.
— 2018, c. 27, s. 201
— 2018, ch. 27, art. 201
Sections 53.1 and 123.1 of Patent Act
Articles 53.1 et 123.1 de la Loi sur les brevets
201 Sections 53.1 and 123.1 of the Patent Act apply in
respect of any action or proceeding that has not been fi-
nally disposed of on the coming into force of that section
53.1.
201 Les articles 53.1 et 123.1 de la Loi sur les brevets
s’appliquent à toute action ou procédure qui n’est pas dé-
cidée de façon définitive à l’entrée en vigueur de cet ar-
ticle 53.1.
— 2018, c. 27, s. 202
— 2018, ch. 27, art. 202
Section 55.3 of Patent Act
Article 55.3 de la Loi sur les brevets
202 Section 55.3 and paragraph 124(1)(f) of the Patent
Act apply in respect of any action or proceeding that has
not been finally disposed of on the coming into force of
that section 55.3.
202 L’article 55.3 et l’alinéa 124(1)f) de la Loi sur les
brevets s’appliquent à toute action ou procédure qui n’est
pas décidée de façon définitive à l’entrée en vigueur de
cet article 55.3.
— 2018, c. 27, s. 203
— 2018, ch. 27, art. 203
Section 56 of Patent Act
Article 56 de la Loi sur les brevets
203 (1) Section 56 of the Patent Act, as enacted by sec-
tion 194 of this Act, applies only in respect of an action or
proceeding in respect of a patent issued on the basis of an
application whose filing date is on or after October 1,
1989 that is commenced on or after October 29, 2018.
203 (1) L’article 56 de la Loi sur les brevets, édicté par
l’article 194 de la présente loi, ne s’applique qu’à l’égard
des actions et procédures relatives aux brevets délivrés
au titre de demandes déposées à compter du 1er octobre
1989 qui sont entamées le 29 octobre 2018 ou après cette
date.
Section 56 — previous version
Article 56 — version antérieure
(2) Section 56 of the Patent Act, as it read immediately
before the coming into force of section 194 of this Act, ap-
plies in respect of any action or proceeding that is in re-
spect of a patent issued on the basis of an application
whose filing date is on or after October 1, 1989 and that is
commenced before October 29, 2018.
(2) L’article 56 de la Loi sur les brevets, dans sa version
antérieure à l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 194 de la pré-
sente loi, s’applique à l’égard des actions et procédures
relatives aux brevets délivrés au titre de demandes dépo-
sées à compter du 1er décembre 1989 qui sont entamées
avant le 29 octobre 2018.


Patent
Brevets
AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE
MODIFICATIONS NON EN VIGUEUR
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
137
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE
MODIFICATIONS NON EN
VIGUEUR
— 2023, c. 26, s. 487
— 2023, ch. 26, art. 487
487 (1) Paragraph 12(1)(g) of the Patent Act is re-
placed by the following:
487 (1) L’alinéa 12(1)g) de la Loi sur les brevets
est remplacé par ce qui suit :
(g) respecting the payment of any prescribed fees, in-
cluding the time when and the manner in which such
fees shall be paid, the time at which such fees are
deemed to be paid, the additional fees that may be
charged for the late payment of such fees and the cir-
cumstances in which any fees previously paid may be
refunded in whole or in part;
g) régir le paiement des taxes réglementaires, y com-
pris le moment et la manière selon laquelle ces taxes
doivent être payées, le moment où elles sont réputées
payées, les surtaxes qui peuvent être levées pour les
paiements en souffrance, ainsi que les circonstances
dans lesquelles les taxes peuvent être remboursées en
tout ou en partie;
(2) Paragraph 12(1)(j.73) of the Act is replaced by
the following:
(2) L’alinéa 12(1)j.73) de la même loi est remplacé
par ce qui suit :
(j.73) respecting the conditions set out in subsections
46(5) and 46.2(5), including the circumstances in
which subparagraph 46(5)(a)(ii), paragraph 46(5)(b),
subparagraph 46.2(5)(a)(ii) and paragraph 46.2(5)(b)
do not apply;
(j.731) respecting the number of days to be subtract-
ed in determining the duration of an additional term
under subsection 46.1(4), including authorizing the
Commissioner to make determinations with respect to
that number;
(j.732) respecting applications under section 46.1 for
an additional term, including their form, contents and
processing;
(j.733) respecting notices to the public in relation to
additional terms granted under section 46.1;
(j.734) respecting reconsiderations under section
46.3, including applications for a reconsideration and
their form, contents and processing;
j.73) régir les conditions prévues aux paragraphes
46(5) et 46.2(5), notamment les circonstances dans les-
quelles le sous-alinéa 46(5)a)(ii), l’alinéa 46(5)b), le
sous-alinéa 46.2(5)a)(ii) et l’alinéa 46.2(5)b) ne s’ap-
pliquent pas;
j.731) régir le nombre de jours à soustraire lors du
calcul de la durée de la période supplémentaire prévu
au paragraphe 46.1(4), notamment autoriser le com-
missaire à prendre des décisions relativement à ce
nombre de jours;
j.732) régir les demandes de période supplémentaire
visées à l’article 46.1, notamment leur forme, leur
contenu et leur traitement;
j.733) régir les avis au public relatifs aux périodes
supplémentaires visées à l’article 46.1;
j.734) régir le réexamen prévu à l’article 46.3, notam-
ment les demandes de réexamen et leur forme, leur
contenu et leur traitement;
— 2023, c. 26, s. 488
— 2023, ch. 26, art. 488
488 (1) Subsection 20(9) of the Act is replaced by
the following:
488 (1) Le paragraphe 20(9) de la même loi est
remplacé par ce qui suit :
Custody of secret application
Garde de la demande secrète
(9) The packet described in subsection (8) shall, until the
expiry of the term — or, if applicable, of the additional
term — during which a patent for the invention may be in
force, be kept sealed by the Commissioner, and shall not
be opened except under the authority of an order of the
Minister of National Defence.
(9) Jusqu’à l’expiration de la période — ou de la période
supplémentaire, s’il y a lieu — durant laquelle un brevet
pour l’invention peut être en vigueur, le paquet est gardé
scellé par le commissaire, et il ne peut être ouvert que
sous l’autorité d’un arrêté du ministre de la Défense na-
tionale.


Patent
Brevets
AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE
MODIFICATIONS NON EN VIGUEUR
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
138
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(2) Subsection 20(11) of the Act is replaced by the
following:
(2) Le paragraphe 20(11) de la même loi est rem-
placé par ce qui suit :
Delivery to Minister
Transmission au ministre
(11) On the expiry of the term — or, if applicable, of the
additional term — of the patent, the packet described in
subsection (8) shall be delivered to the Minister of Na-
tional Defence.
(11) À l’expiration de la période — ou de la période sup-
plémentaire, s’il y a lieu — durant laquelle le brevet est en
vigueur, le paquet est transmis au ministre de la Défense
nationale.
— 2023, c. 26, s. 489
— 2023, ch. 26, art. 489
489 Section 42 of the Act is replaced by the fol-
lowing:
489 L’article 42 de la même loi est remplacé par
ce qui suit :
Contents of patent
Contenu du brevet
42 Every patent granted under this Act shall contain the
title or name of the invention, with a reference to the
specification, and shall, subject to this Act, grant to the
patentee and the patentee’s legal representatives for the
term of the patent referred to in section 44 or 45 and, if
applicable, for the additional term granted under section
46.1, from the granting of the patent, the exclusive right,
privilege and liberty of making, constructing and using
the invention and selling it to others to be used, subject
to adjudication in respect thereof before any court of
competent jurisdiction.
42 Tout brevet accordé en vertu de la présente loi
contient le titre ou le nom de l’invention avec renvoi au
mémoire descriptif et accorde, sous réserve des autres
dispositions de la présente loi, au breveté et à ses repré-
sentants légaux, pour la période prévue aux articles 44 ou
45 et, s’il y a lieu, pour la période supplémentaire accor-
dée au titre de l’article 46.1, à compter de la date où il a
été accordé, le droit, la faculté et le privilège exclusif de
fabriquer, de construire, d’exploiter et de vendre à
d’autres, pour qu’ils l’exploitent, l’objet de l’invention,
sauf jugement en l’espèce par un tribunal compétent.
— 2023, c. 26, s. 490
— 2023, ch. 26, art. 490
490 Subsection 43(2) of the Act is replaced by the
following:
490 Le paragraphe 43(2) de la même loi est rem-
placé par ce qui suit :
Validity of patent
Validité
(2) After the patent is issued, it shall, in the absence of
any evidence to the contrary, be valid and avail the
patentee and the legal representatives of the patentee for
the term referred to in section 44 or 45 and, if applicable,
for the additional term granted under section 46.1.
(2) Une fois délivré, le brevet est, sauf preuve contraire,
valide et acquis au breveté ou à ses représentants légaux
pour la période prévue aux articles 44 ou 45 et, s’il y a
lieu, pour la période supplémentaire accordée au titre de
l’article 46.1.
— 2023, c. 26, s. 491
— 2023, ch. 26, art. 491
491 Sections 44 and 45 of the Act are replaced by
the following:
491 Les articles 44 et 45 de la même loi sont rem-
placés par ce qui suit :
Term of patents based on applications filed on or after
October 1, 1989
Période de validité : demandes déposées le 1er octobre
1989 ou par la suite
44 Subject to section 46, where an application for a
patent is filed under this Act on or after October 1, 1989,
the term of the patent is 20 years from the filing date.
44 Sous réserve de l’article 46, la période pour laquelle le
brevet est délivré au titre d’une demande déposée le 1er
octobre 1989 ou par la suite est de vingt ans à compter de
la date de dépôt de cette demande.


Patent
Brevets
AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE
MODIFICATIONS NON EN VIGUEUR
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
139
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Term of patents based on applications filed before
October 1, 1989
Période de validité : demandes déposées avant le 1er
octobre 1989
45 Subject to section 46, where an application for a
patent is filed under this Act before October 1, 1989, the
term of the patent is 17 years from the date on which the
patent is issued.
45 Sous réserve de l’article 46, la période pour laquelle le
brevet est délivré au titre d’une demande déposée avant
le 1er octobre 1989 est de dix-sept ans à compter de la
date à laquelle il est délivré.
— 2023, c. 26, s. 492
— 2023, ch. 26, art. 492
492 (1) Subsection 46(1) of the Act is replaced by
the following:
492 (1) Le paragraphe 46(1) de la même loi est
remplacé par ce qui suit :
Maintenance fees
Taxes pour maintenir des droits en état
46 (1) To maintain the rights accorded by a patent is-
sued under this Act in effect during the term referred to
in section 44 or 45, the prescribed fees shall be paid on or
before the prescribed dates.
46 (1) Afin de maintenir en état les droits conférés par
un brevet délivré sous le régime de la présente loi pen-
dant la période prévue aux articles 44 ou 45, les taxes ré-
glementaires doivent être payées au plus tard aux dates
réglementaires.
(2) Paragraph 46(2)(b) of the Act is replaced by
the following:
(2) L’alinéa 46(2)b) de la même loi est remplacé
par ce qui suit :
(b) the Commissioner shall send a notice to the paten-
tee stating that the term will be deemed to have ex-
pired if the prescribed fee and late fee are not paid be-
fore the later of the end of six months after the
applicable prescribed date and the end of two months
after the date of the notice.
b) le commissaire envoie au titulaire du brevet un avis
l’informant que la période sera réputée expirée si la
taxe et la surtaxe ne sont pas payées dans les six mois
qui suivent la date réglementaire applicable ou, s’ils se
terminent plus tard, dans les deux mois qui suivent la
date de l’avis.
(3) Subsection 46(4) of the Act is replaced by the
following:
(3) Le paragraphe 46(4) de la même loi est rem-
placé par ce qui suit :
Term deemed expired on prescribed date
Période réputée expirée à la date réglementaire
(4) If the prescribed fee and late fee are not paid before
the later of the end of six months after the applicable pre-
scribed date and the end of two months after the date of
the notice, the term shall be deemed to have expired on
the applicable prescribed date.
(4) Si la taxe et la surtaxe ne sont pas payées dans les six
mois qui suivent la date réglementaire applicable ou, s’ils
se terminent plus tard, dans les deux mois qui suivent la
date de l’avis, la période est réputée expirée à la date ré-
glementaire applicable.
(4) The portion of subsection 46(5) of the Act be-
fore paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:
(4) Le passage du paragraphe 46(5) de la même
loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui
suit :
Subsection (4) deemed never to have produced its
effects
Paragraphe (4) réputé n’avoir jamais produit ses effets
(5) Subject to the regulations, if the term is deemed to
have expired under subsection (4), that subsection is
deemed never to have produced its effects if
(5) Si la période est réputée expirée, sous réserve des rè-
glements, le paragraphe (4) est réputé n’avoir jamais pro-
duit ses effets si :
(5) Subparagraph 46(5)(a)(i) of the Act is re-
placed by the following:
(5) Le sous-alinéa 46(5)a)(i) de la même loi est
remplacé par ce qui suit :
(i) makes a request to the Commissioner for the
term to never have been deemed to have expired,
(i) présente au commissaire une requête pour obte-
nir que la période n’ait jamais été réputée expirée,


Patent
Brevets
AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE
MODIFICATIONS NON EN VIGUEUR
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
140
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(6) The portion of subsection 46(6) of the Act be-
fore paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:
(6) Le passage du paragraphe 46(6) de la même
loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui
suit :
Powers of the Federal Court
Pouvoir de la Cour fédérale
(6) If subsection (5) applies, the Federal Court may, by
order, declare the term to have expired on the applicable
prescribed date if the Federal Court determines either
(6) En cas d’application du paragraphe (5), la Cour fédé-
rale peut, par ordonnance, déclarer la période expirée à
la date réglementaire applicable si elle conclut que, selon
le cas :
— 2023, c. 26, s. 493
— 2023, ch. 26, art. 493
493 The Act is amended by adding the following
after section 46:
493 La même loi est modifiée par adjonction,
après l’article 46, de ce qui suit :
Additional Term
Période supplémentaire
Grant of additional term
Octroi d’une période supplémentaire
46.1 (1) The Commissioner shall grant an additional
term for a patent if
(a) the patent was issued after the later of
(i) the fifth anniversary of the applicable day set
out in subsection (2), and
(ii) the third anniversary of the first day, without
taking subsection 35(4) into account, on which a re-
quest for examination has been made under section
35 in respect of the application for the patent, the
prescribed fee referred to in subsection 35(1) has
been paid and, if applicable, the prescribed late fee
referred to in paragraph 35(3)(a) has been paid;
(b) the filing date for the application for the patent is
on or after December 1, 2020; and
(c) the patentee applies for the additional term in ac-
cordance with the regulations, and pays the prescribed
fee, within three months after the day on which the
patent is issued.
46.1 (1) Le commissaire accorde une période supplé-
mentaire à la durée d’un brevet si, à la fois :
a) le brevet a été délivré après le cinquième anniver-
saire de la date applicable visée au paragraphe (2) ou,
s’il est postérieur, après le troisième anniversaire du
premier jour où, à l’égard de la demande de brevet,
une requête d’examen a été faite au titre de l’article 35,
la taxe réglementaire visée au paragraphe 35(1) a été
payée et, s’il y a lieu, la surtaxe réglementaire visée à
l’alinéa 35(3)a) a été payée, compte non tenu du para-
graphe 35(4);
b) la date de dépôt de la demande de brevet est le 1er
décembre 2020 ou après cette date;
c) le breveté présente, conformément aux règlements,
une demande de période supplémentaire et paie la
taxe réglementaire dans les trois mois suivant la date
de délivrance de son brevet.
Applicable day
Date applicable
(2) For the purposes of subparagraph (1)(a)(i), the appli-
cable day is
(a) in the case of a patent issued on the basis of a divi-
sional application, the prescribed day;
(b) in the case of a patent issued on the basis of a PCT
national phase application, as defined in subsection
1(1) of the Patent Rules, the prescribed day; or
(c) in any other case, the filing date of the application
for the patent.
(2) Pour l’application de l’alinéa (1)a), la date applicable
est :
a) dans le cas d’un brevet délivré au titre d’une de-
mande divisionnaire, la date réglementaire;
b) dans le cas d’un brevet délivré au titre d’une de-
mande PCT à la phase nationale, au sens du para-
graphe 1(1) des Règles sur les brevets, la date régle-
mentaire;


Patent
Brevets
AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE
MODIFICATIONS NON EN VIGUEUR
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
141
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
c) dans tout autre cas, la date de dépôt de la demande
de brevet.
Beginning of additional term
Début de la période supplémentaire
(3) The additional term begins on the expiry of the term
referred to in section 44, without taking into account sec-
tion 46, but only if the patent remains valid until, and is
not void before, the expiry of that term.
(3) La période supplémentaire commence à l’expiration
de la période prévue à l’article 44, compte non tenu de
l’article 46, mais seulement si le brevet demeure valide
jusqu’à l’expiration de cette période et n’est pas annulé
avant.
Duration of additional term
Durée de la période supplémentaire
(4) The Commissioner shall determine the duration of
the additional term, which shall be equal to the number
of days between the later of the anniversaries set out in
paragraph (1)(a) and the day on which the patent is is-
sued minus the number of days that is determined under
the regulations.
(4) Le commissaire calcule la durée de la période supplé-
mentaire, celle-ci devant être égale au nombre de jours
entre celui des anniversaires visés à l’alinéa (1)a) qui est
postérieur à l’autre et le jour de délivrance du brevet,
compte non tenu du nombre de jours prévu sous le ré-
gime des règlements.
Limitation
Restriction
(5) Despite subsection (1), no additional term shall be
granted under this section if the determination of the du-
ration under subsection (4) produces a result of zero or a
negative value.
(5) Malgré le paragraphe (1), aucune période supplé-
mentaire ne peut être accordée au titre du présent article
si le calcul de la durée de cette période au titre du para-
graphe (4) produit un résultat égal ou inférieur à zéro.
Limitation — section 46.2
Restriction : article 46.2
(6) The additional term is subject to section 46.2.
(6) La période supplémentaire est assujettie à l’article
46.2.
Certificate
Certificat
(7) The Commissioner shall issue a certificate of addi-
tional term setting out the number of the patent as
recorded in the Patent Office, the duration of the addi-
tional term and any other prescribed information and
shall send the certificate to the patentee.
(7) Le commissaire délivre un certificat de période sup-
plémentaire indiquant le numéro d’enregistrement du
brevet au Bureau des brevets, la durée de la période sup-
plémentaire ainsi que tout autre renseignement régle-
mentaire et l’envoie au breveté.
Reissued patent
Brevet redélivré
(8) For the purposes of this section and sections 46.3 and
46.4, if a patent is reissued under section 47, the patent is
deemed to have been issued on the day on which the
original patent was issued and the application for the
patent is deemed to be the application for the original
patent.
(8) Pour l’application du présent article et des articles
46.3 et 46.4, dans le cas où un brevet est redélivré en ver-
tu de l’article 47, la date de délivrance du brevet est répu-
tée être celle du brevet original et la demande de brevet
est réputée être celle du brevet original.
Maintenance fees
Taxes pour maintenir des droits en état
46.2 (1) To maintain the rights accorded by a patent
during an additional term granted under section 46.1 in
effect, the prescribed fees shall be paid on or before the
prescribed dates.
46.2 (1) Afin de maintenir en état les droits conférés
par un brevet pendant la période supplémentaire accor-
dée au titre de l’article 46.1, les taxes réglementaires
doivent être payées au plus tard aux dates réglemen-
taires.
Late fee and notice
Surtaxe et avis
(2) If a prescribed fee is not paid on or before the appli-
cable prescribed date,
(2) Si une taxe réglementaire n’est pas payée au plus tard
à la date réglementaire applicable :


Patent
Brevets
AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE
MODIFICATIONS NON EN VIGUEUR
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
142
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(a) the prescribed late fee shall be paid, in addition to
the prescribed fee; and
(b) the Commissioner shall send a notice to the paten-
tee stating that the additional term will be deemed to
have expired if the prescribed fee and late fee are not
paid before the later of the end of six months after the
applicable prescribed date and the end of two months
after the date of the notice.
a) la surtaxe réglementaire doit être payée en plus de
la taxe réglementaire;
b) le commissaire envoie au titulaire du brevet un avis
l’informant que la période supplémentaire sera répu-
tée expirée si la taxe et la surtaxe ne sont pas payées
dans les six mois qui suivent la date réglementaire ap-
plicable ou, s’ils se terminent plus tard, dans les deux
mois qui suivent la date de l’avis.
Prescribed fee deemed paid on prescribed date
Taxe réglementaire réputée payée à la date
réglementaire
(3) If the prescribed fee and late fee are paid before a no-
tice is sent or, if a notice is sent, the prescribed fee and
late fee are paid before the later of the end of six months
after the applicable prescribed date and the end of two
months after the date of the notice, the prescribed fee
shall be deemed to have been paid on the applicable pre-
scribed date.
(3) Si la taxe et la surtaxe sont payées soit avant l’envoi
de l’avis, soit, dans le cas où celui-ci a été envoyé, dans
les six mois qui suivent la date réglementaire applicable
ou, s’ils se terminent plus tard, dans les deux mois qui
suivent la date de l’avis, la taxe réglementaire est réputée
avoir été payée à la date réglementaire applicable.
Additional term deemed expired on prescribed date
Période réputée expirée à la date réglementaire
(4) If the prescribed fee and late fee are not paid before
the later of the end of six months after the applicable pre-
scribed date and the end of two months after the date of
the notice, the additional term shall be deemed to have
expired on the applicable prescribed date.
(4) Si la taxe et la surtaxe ne sont pas payées dans les six
mois qui suivent la date réglementaire applicable ou, s’ils
se terminent plus tard, dans les deux mois qui suivent la
date de l’avis, la période supplémentaire est réputée expi-
rée à la date réglementaire applicable.
Subsection (4) deemed never to have produced its
effects
Paragraphe (4) réputé n’avoir jamais produit ses effets
(5) Subject to the regulations, if the additional term is
deemed to have expired under subsection (4), that sub-
section is deemed never to have produced its effects if
(a) the patentee, within the prescribed time,
(i) makes a request to the Commissioner for the ad-
ditional term to never have been deemed to have
expired,
(ii) states, in the request, the reasons for the failure
to pay the prescribed fee and late fee before the lat-
er of the end of six months after the applicable pre-
scribed date and the end of two months after the
date of the notice, and
(iii) pays the prescribed fee, the late fee and any
additional prescribed fee; and
(b) the Commissioner determines that the failure oc-
curred in spite of the due care required by the circum-
stances having been taken and informs the patentee of
this determination.
(5) Si la période supplémentaire est réputée expirée,
sous réserve des règlements, le paragraphe (4) est réputé
n’avoir jamais produit ses effets si :
a) le titulaire du brevet, dans le délai réglementaire :
(i) présente au commissaire une requête pour obte-
nir que la période supplémentaire n’ait jamais été
réputée expirée,
(ii) expose dans la requête les raisons pour les-
quelles il a omis de payer les taxe et surtaxe régle-
mentaires dans les six mois qui suivent la date ré-
glementaire applicable ou, s’ils se terminent plus
tard, dans les deux mois qui suivent la date de
l’avis,
(iii) paie les taxe et surtaxe réglementaires et toute
taxe réglementaire additionnelle;
b) le commissaire décide que l’omission a été com-
mise bien que la diligence requise en l’espèce ait été
exercée et avise le titulaire du brevet de sa décision.


Patent
Brevets
AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE
MODIFICATIONS NON EN VIGUEUR
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
143
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Powers of the Federal Court
Pouvoir de la Cour fédérale
(6) If subsection (5) applies, the Federal Court may, by
order, declare the additional term to have expired on the
applicable prescribed date if the Federal Court deter-
mines either
(a) that the statement of the reasons referred to in
subparagraph (5)(a)(ii) contains a material allegation
that is untrue; or
(b) that, if paragraph (5)(b) applies, the failure re-
ferred to in subparagraph (5)(a)(ii) did not occur in
spite of the due care required by the circumstances
having been taken.
(6) En cas d’application du paragraphe (5), la Cour fédé-
rale peut, par ordonnance, déclarer la période supplé-
mentaire expirée à la date réglementaire applicable si elle
conclut que, selon le cas :
a) l’exposé des raisons visé au sous-alinéa (5)a)(ii)
comprend quelque allégation importante qui n’est pas
conforme à la vérité;
b) en cas d’application de l’alinéa (5)b), l’omission vi-
sée à ce sous-alinéa n’a pas été commise bien que la
diligence requise en l’espèce ait été exercée.
Reconsideration of duration
Réexamen
46.3 (1) The Commissioner may reconsider the dura-
tion of an additional term granted under section 46.1 on
the Commissioner’s own initiative or on application by
any person.
46.3 (1) Le commissaire peut, de sa propre initiative ou
sur demande de toute personne, réexaminer la durée de
la période supplémentaire accordée au titre de l’article
46.1.
Application
Demande de réexamen
(2) An application for reconsideration shall be made in
accordance with the regulations and accompanied by
payment of the prescribed fee.
(2) La demande de réexamen est présentée conformé-
ment aux règlements et est accompagnée des taxes régle-
mentaires.
Notice to patentee
Avis au breveté
(3) Notice of a reconsideration shall be given to the
patentee in accordance with the regulations.
(3) Il est donné avis du réexamen au breveté conformé-
ment aux règlements.
Shortening of duration
Durée raccourcie
(4) On reconsideration, the Commissioner shall shorten
the duration of the additional term in accordance with
subsection 46.1(4) if the Commissioner is satisfied that
the duration is longer than is authorized under that sub-
section, and shall dismiss the reconsideration in any oth-
er case.
(4) À l’issue du réexamen, le commissaire raccourcit la
durée de la période supplémentaire conformément au
paragraphe 46.1(4) s’il est convaincu qu’elle est supé-
rieure à la durée autorisée au titre de ce paragraphe. Il
rejette le réexamen dans tous les autres cas.
Amended certificate
Certificat rectifié
(5) If the Commissioner shortens the duration of the ad-
ditional term, the Commissioner shall issue an amended
certificate of additional term and send it to the patentee.
(5) S’il raccourcit la durée de la période supplémentaire,
le commissaire délivre un certificat de période supplé-
mentaire rectifié et l’envoie au breveté.
Stay
Suspension
(6) The Commissioner may stay a reconsideration under
this section pending the conclusion of any court proceed-
ing.
(6) Il peut suspendre le réexamen au titre du présent ar-
ticle jusqu’à l’issue de toute procédure judiciaire.
Federal Court
Cour fédérale
46.4 (1) A person may bring an action in the Federal
Court against a patentee for an order to shorten the dura-
tion of an additional term granted under section 46.1.
46.4 (1) Toute personne peut intenter une action de-
vant la Cour fédérale contre un breveté afin d’obtenir une
ordonnance visant la réduction de la durée d’une période
supplémentaire accordée au titre de l’article 46.1.


Patent
Brevets
AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE
MODIFICATIONS NON EN VIGUEUR
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
144
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
Power to shorten duration
Pouvoir de raccourcir la durée
(2) If the Court finds that the duration is longer than is
authorized under subsection 46.1(4), the Court shall, by
order, shorten the duration in accordance with that sub-
section, and in doing so may exercise any power, or per-
form any duty or function, of the Commissioner.
(2) S’il constate que la durée est supérieure à celle auto-
risée au titre du paragraphe 46.1(4), le tribunal raccourcit
par ordonnance cette durée conformément à ce para-
graphe. Ce faisant, il peut exercer les attributions du
commissaire.
Copy to Commissioner and amended certificate
Copie au commissaire et certificat rectifié
(3) If the Court shortens the duration, an officer of the
Court’s registry shall send a certified copy of the Court’s
order to the Commissioner, and the Commissioner shall
issue an amended certificate of additional term and send
it to the patentee.
(3) Si le tribunal raccourcit la durée, un fonctionnaire du
greffe du tribunal transmet une copie certifiée de l’ordon-
nance du tribunal au commissaire. Le commissaire dé-
livre un certificat de période supplémentaire rectifié et
l’envoie au breveté.
— 2023, c. 26, s. 494
— 2023, ch. 26, art. 494
494 Subsections 47(1) and (1.1) of the Act are re-
placed by the following:
494 Les paragraphes 47(1) et (1.1) de la même loi
sont remplacés par ce qui suit :
Issue of new or amended patents
Délivrance de brevets nouveaux ou rectifiés
47 (1) Whenever any patent is deemed defective or in-
operative by reason of insufficient description and speci-
fication, or by reason of the patentee’s claiming more or
less than they had a right to claim as new, but at the same
time it appears that the error arose from inadvertence,
accident or mistake, without any fraudulent or deceptive
intention, the Commissioner may, on the surrender of
the patent within four years from its date and the pay-
ment of a further prescribed fee, cause a new patent, in
accordance with an amended description and specifica-
tion made by the patentee, to be issued to them for the
same invention for the then unexpired term referred to in
section 44 or 45 — and, if applicable, for the then unex-
pired additional term granted under section 46.1 — of the
original patent.
47 (1) Lorsqu’un brevet est jugé défectueux ou inopé-
rant à cause d’une description et spécification insuffi-
sante, ou parce que le breveté a revendiqué plus ou
moins qu’il n’avait droit de revendiquer à titre d’inven-
tion nouvelle, mais qu’il apparaît en même temps que
l’erreur a été commise par inadvertance, accident ou mé-
prise, sans intention de frauder ou de tromper, le com-
missaire peut, si le breveté abandonne ce brevet dans un
délai de quatre ans à compter de la date du brevet, et
après acquittement d’une taxe réglementaire addition-
nelle, faire délivrer au breveté un nouveau brevet,
conforme à une description et spécification rectifiée par
le breveté, pour la même invention et pour la partie res-
tant alors à courir de la période prévue aux articles 44 ou
45 — et, s’il y a lieu, de la période supplémentaire accor-
dée au titre de l’article 46.1 — pour laquelle le brevet ori-
ginal a été accordé.
Certificate of supplementary protection
Certificat de protection supplémentaire
(1.1) Subsection (1) also applies in the case where the
original patent is set out in a certificate of supplementary
protection and the original patent’s term referred to in
section 44 or 45 has expired — or, if applicable, both that
term and the additional term granted under section 46.1
have expired — except that in that case the issuance of
the new patent, whose term or terms remain expired, is
for the purpose of establishing the rights, privileges and
liberties granted under the certificate.
(1.1) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique également en cas
d’expiration de la période prévue aux articles 44 ou 45 —
et, s’il y a lieu, de la période supplémentaire accordée au
titre de l’article 46.1 — relative au brevet original men-
tionné dans un certificat de protection supplémentaire, à
la différence que la délivrance du nouveau brevet, dont la
période ou les périodes demeurent expirées, vise l’éta-
blissement des droits, des facultés et des privilèges confé-
rés par le certificat.
— 2023, c. 26, s. 495
— 2023, ch. 26, art. 495
495 Paragraph 48.4(3)(c) of the Act is replaced by
the following:
495 L’alinéa 48.4(3)c) de la même loi est remplacé
par ce qui suit :


Patent
Brevets
AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE
MODIFICATIONS NON EN VIGUEUR
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
145
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
(c) amends any claim of the patent or incorporates a
new claim in the patent, the amended claim or new
claim shall be effective, from the date of the certificate,
for the unexpired term — and, if applicable, for the un-
expired additional term — of the patent.
c) modifie une telle revendication ou en inclut une
nouvelle, l’une ou l’autre prend effet à compter de la
date du constat jusqu’à l’expiration de la période pour
laquelle le brevet est accordé et, s’il y a lieu, de la pé-
riode supplémentaire.
— 2023, c. 26, s. 496
— 2023, ch. 26, art. 496
496 Subsection 55.11(1) of the Act is amended by
striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (b)
and by adding the following after paragraph (c):
496 Le paragraphe 55.11(1) de la même loi est
modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa c), de ce
qui suit :
(d) a patent in respect of which the prescribed fee re-
ferred to in subsection 46.2(2) was not paid on or be-
fore the applicable prescribed date referred to in that
subsection, without taking into account subsection
46.2(3); and
(e) a patent in respect of which an additional term is
granted under section 46.1 after the expiry of the term
referred to in section 44, without taking into account
section 46.
d) le brevet à l’égard duquel la taxe réglementaire vi-
sée au paragraphe 46.2(2) n’a pas été payée au plus
tard à la date réglementaire applicable visée à ce para-
graphe, compte non tenu du paragraphe 46.2(3);
e) le brevet à l’égard duquel une période supplémen-
taire est accordée au titre de l’article 46.1 après l’expi-
ration de la période prévue à l’article 44, compte non
tenu de l’article 46.
— 2023, c. 26, s. 497
— 2023, ch. 26, art. 497
497 Subsection 106(4) of the Act is replaced by
the following:
497 Le paragraphe 106(4) de la même loi est rem-
placé par ce qui suit :
Exception
Exception
(4) Despite subsection (3), no application shall be filed
within the prescribed period preceding the expiry of the
term of the patent referred to in section 44 without taking
into account section 46.
(4) Malgré le paragraphe (3), aucune demande ne peut
être déposée à l’intérieur du délai réglementaire qui pré-
cède l’expiration de la période prévue à l’article 44,
compte non tenu de l’article 46.
— 2023, c. 26, s. 498
— 2023, ch. 26, art. 498
498 (1) Subsection 116(2) of the Act is replaced by
the following:
498 (1) Le paragraphe 116(2) de la même loi est
remplacé par ce qui suit :
Taking effect
Prise d’effet
(2) A certificate of supplementary protection takes effect
on the expiry of the term referred to in section 44, with-
out taking into account section 46, of the patent set out in
the certificate, but the certificate takes effect only if the
patent remains valid until, and is not void before, the ex-
piry of that term.
(2) Le certificat de protection supplémentaire prend effet
à l’expiration de la période prévue à l’article 44 relative
au brevet mentionné dans le certificat, compte non tenu
de l’article 46, mais seulement si le brevet demeure valide
jusqu’à l’expiration de cette période et n’est pas annulé
avant.
(2) Section 116 of the Act is amended by adding
the following after subsection (5):
(2) L’article 116 de la même loi est modifié par ad-
jonction, après le paragraphe (5), de ce qui suit :
For greater certainty
Précision
(6) For greater certainty, the certificate’s term runs con-
currently with any additional term granted under section
46.1.
(6) Il est entendu que la durée du certificat court en
même temps que toute période supplémentaire accordée
au titre de l’article 46.1.


Patent
Brevets
AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE
MODIFICATIONS NON EN VIGUEUR
Current to June 20, 2024
Last amended on June 30, 2021
146
À jour au 20 juin 2024
Dernière modification le 30 juin 2021
— 2024, c. 16, par. 57 (1) (h)
— 2024, ch. 16, al. 57 (1)h)
Replacement of “Security of Information Act” — Acts
Remplacement de « Loi sur la protection de
l’information » — lois
57 (1) Every reference to the “Security of Infor-
mation Act” is replaced by a reference to the
“Foreign Interference and Security of Informa-
tion Act” in the following provisions:
(h) subsection 20(6) of the Patent Act,
57 (1) Dans les passages ci-après, « Loi sur la
protection de l’information » est remplacé par
« Loi sur l’ingérence étrangère et la protection
de l’information » :
h) le paragraphe 20(6) de la Loi sur les brevets;