Agricultural Policy
Monitoring and Evaluation
2021
ADDRESSING THE CHALLENGES FACING FOOD
SYSTEMS


This document, as well as any data and map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over
any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.
The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities. The use of
such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in
the West Bank under the terms of international law.
Note by Turkey
The information in this document with reference to “Cyprus” relates to the southern part of the Island. There is no single
authority representing both Turkish and Greek Cypriot people on the Island. Turkey recognises the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus (TRNC). Until a lasting and equitable solution is found within the context of the United Nations, Turkey
shall preserve its position concerning the “Cyprus issue”.
Note by all the European Union Member States of the OECD and the European Union
The Republic of Cyprus is recognised by all members of the United Nations with the exception of Turkey. The
information in this document relates to the area under the effective control of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus.


Foreword
This Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2021 report provides up-to-date monitoring and
evaluation of agricultural policies across countries from all six continents, including the 38 OECD countries
and the five non-OECD EU Member States, and eleven emerging and developing economies: Argentina,
Brazil, People’s Republic of China, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, the Russian Federation,
South Africa, Ukraine and Viet Nam. It is the 34th in the series of the OECD Agricultural Policy Monitoring
and Evaluation reports, and the ninth report to include both OECD countries and emerging and developing
economies.
The report provide insights into the increasingly complex nature of agricultural policy and is based on the
OECD’s comprehensive system for measuring and classifying support to agriculture — the Producer and
Consumer Support Estimates (PSE and CSE) and related indicators. These indicators provide country
comparable information on the nature and extent of support and serve as a basis for OECD’s policy
monitoring and evaluation.
The report is structured as follows. The Executive Summary synthesises the key findings. Chapter 1
provides an overview of recent developments in agricultural policies and support, with a specific focus on
policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. It also analyses the implications of current agricultural
support policies for the performance of food systems. Chapter 2 describes the overall trends in agricultural
support and is followed by individual chapters for each of the countries covered (the European Union,
which has a Common Agricultural Policy, is presented as a single chapter). Country chapters begin with
snapshots containing brief summaries of developments in agricultural policies and support as well as
country-specific policy recommendations. This is followed by more comprehensive descriptions of
agricultural policy developments, including in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. A Statistical Annex
containing detailed background tables of the indicators of agricultural support is available as a separate
document on the OECD website (https://doi.org/10.1787/2d810e01-en).
The Executive Summary and Chapter 1 are published under the responsibility of the OECD Committee for
Agriculture. The remainder of the report is published under the responsibility of the Secretary-General of
the OECD.


4 

Acknowledgements
This report was prepared by the Trade and Agriculture Directorate of the OECD with the active participation
of countries included in this report. The following people from the OECD Secretariat contributed to the
preparation of this report: Martin von Lampe (project leader), Václav Vojtech (co-ordinator), Jonathan
Brooks (Head of Division), Jesús Antón, Morvarid Bagherzadeh, Katherine Baldwin, Florence Bossard,
Dalila Cervantes-Godoy, Dimitris Diakosavvas, Lizeth Fuquene, Emily Gray, Guillaume Gruère, Santiago
Guerrero, Jussi Lankoski, Clarisse Legendre, Roger Martini, Jibran Punthakey, Makiko Shigemitsu, Silvia
Sorescu, Noura Takrouri-Jolly, Misun Yoo and Urszula Ziebinska. Administrative and editing services were
provided by Martina Abderrahmane.
The OECD also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of the following experts from emerging
economies to this report: Argentina – Malena Goldring, Gerardo Luis Petri and Virginia Rumbolo (Ministry
of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries), Daniel Lema (INTA and Universidad del CEMA); Brazil – Antônio
Luiz Machado de Moraes (Ministry of Agriculture); the People’s Republic of China – Cheng Guoqiang
(Rural Revitalization Expert Advisory Committee of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs and China
Renmin University), Zhu Mande (Guizhou University), Wu Xiaohong (Tongji University) and Zhuang Jiayu
(Agricultural Information Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences); India – Ashok Gulati,
Shweta Saini and Prerna Terway (Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations);
Indonesia – Tahlim Sudaryanto (Indonesian Center for Agriculture Socio Economic and Policy Studies,
Ministry of Agriculture); Kazakhstan – Yerlan Syzdykov (Analytical Centre for Economic Policy in the
Agricultural Sector); the Philippines – Tisha Pia E. Dela Rosa, Frances Kaye, Anne Adao and Katrin Mares
(Department of Agriculture), Grace del Prado and Carla G. Menguito (Philippine Statistical Authority);
Russian Federation – Olga Shik, Eugenia Serova and Renata Yanbykh (National Research University
Higher School of Economics); South Africa – David Spies (North-West University, Potchefstroom);
Ukraine – Vitaliy Zhygadlo; Viet Nam – Hieu Phan Sy and Nguyen Thi Thu Trang (Center for Informatics
and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development), Tran Cong Thang, Truong Thi Thu Trang,
Vu Huy Phuc and Nguyen Le Hoa (Institute of Policy and Strategy for Agriculture and Rural Development).


20 

Executive Summary
A more central role for innovation systems is the key to delivering sustainable productivity growth and
improved resilience – the main channels through which agricultural policies can address the challenges
faced by food systems.
Agricultural policy changes in 2020 were dominated by responses to the
COVID-19 pandemic
The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic early in 2020 presented the world with a major health crisis, which
led to containment measures that resulted in a profound economic shock affecting all sectors, including
food and agriculture. Agricultural policy developments over the course of the year were dominated by
responses to these twin health and economic shocks. Many governments moved swiftly to keep
agricultural supply chains functioning, including by designating agriculture and food as an essential sector.
As a result, policies were generally successful in maintaining the overall functioning of food supply chains,
albeit within an overall structure of agricultural support programmes that showed little change.
This report identifies nearly 800 policy responses that were introduced in response to the pandemic.1 A
significant number, close to 20% of the total, were urgent measures, adopted in order to contain the
pandemic while keeping food and agriculture supply chains working. Just under 70% of measures took the
form of temporary relief, seeking to contain the impact of the crisis on agriculture and food sector actors,
and should be phased out as the crisis recedes. Most of the remaining measures (10%) were “no regrets”
policies with the potential to improve the long-term resilience of the agro-food sector, and which have the
potential to be scaled up further. At the same time, 11% of measures had the potential to distort markets
or be harmful to the environment. In particular, several countries imposed export restrictions in order to
direct supplies to domestic markets.
Substantial resources – USD 157 billion – were earmarked for COVID-19 sectoral support, including
USD 75 billion in OECD countries and USD 82 billion in emerging economies. The United States
accounted for a majority of the commitments in OECD countries, while India accounted for the majority of
support in emerging economies. Actual disbursements have so far been much lower, partly reflecting the
overall resilience of agriculture to the COVID-19 shock. Indeed average farm incomes increased in 2020
for a majority of countries covered in this report. Consumer support was more often rolled out quickly, to
address the loss of incomes suffered in particular by poorer households.
Consumers and taxpayers provide substantial support to the agricultural sector
across OECD countries and major emerging economies
In 2018-20, agricultural support policies across the 54 countries covered in this report generated
USD 720 billion per year in transfers to agriculture, twice the level observed in 2000-02 in nominal terms,


 21

but nevertheless lower when expressed relative to the size of the sector. Reforms in OECD countries have
stalled in the past ten years, with little change in the level or composition of support. Indeed some countries
have rolled back earlier reform efforts.

Of the total support, more than one-third, USD 272 billion, was paid for by consumers in the form
of market price support, while the remaining USD 447 billion was paid by taxpayers in the form of
budgetary transfers.

About three-quarters of total support, USD 540 billion, was directed to individual producers, either
in the form of higher prices or through direct payments. This accounted for an average of 18% of
producers’ gross farm receipts in OECD countries and 12% of gross farm receipts in the twelve
emerging economies covered in the report.

USD 102 billion of expenditure was paid in the form of general services for the sector (GSSE),
which includes USD 76 billion of public investments in R&D, biosecurity and infrastructure.

Subsidies for consumers (such as food assistance programmes) amounted to USD 78 billion per
year, or 11% of all positive transfers to agriculture

A small number of countries suppressed prices of some or all commodities, resulting in a transfer
of USD 104 billion per year away from producers.
Overall, most current support policies are not serving the wider needs of food
systems
Food systems around the world face a formidable “triple challenge”. First, they are expected to deliver food
security and nutrition for a growing world population. Second, they have an essential role to play in
providing incomes and livelihoods for hundreds of millions of people involved in farming and other
segments of the food chain. And third, they must do so in a sustainable manner, without depleting land,
water and biodiversity resources, while contributing to reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. On
balance, the agricultural policies covered in this report – across developed and emerging economies – do
not address these three dimensions effectively.
Of the USD 540 billion per year of support to producers, over 60%, or USD 338 billion, was provided
through the potentially most distorting instruments, namely market price support (USD 272 billion), and
payments linked to output or the unconstrained use of inputs (USD 66 billion). Both are inefficient at
transferring income to farmers, as a large share of the benefits are capitalised into land values or leak in
the form of higher prices for inputs. They also tend to be inequitable, to the extent that support is linked
directly to production, and not targeted to producers with low incomes. Finally, through direct incentives to
increase production, they contribute to increased resource pressures, including through impacts on water
quality, and can raise GHG emissions. Given also a lack of complementary environmental policies, a
decreasing number of countries have succeeded in combining productivity growth with lower resource
pressures and reduced emissions.
Positive and negative market price support, and the associated use of border measures, both have
negative implications for food security at the global level, because they impede the efficient allocation of
domestic resources and weaken the balancing role of trade in getting food from surplus to deficit regions.
By constraining trade they also contribute to increased price volatility on international food markets.
USD 202 billion of producer support that is less coupled to production decisions creates fewer distortions
at the margin and has less adverse impacts on global food security. This element also has a reduced
tendency to contribute to additional resource pressures and GHG emissions. As income transfers, these
payments still tend to be unequally distributed, as they are seldom made on the basis of an assessed
social need, or evidence that farms would not be viable without support. On the other hand, just


22 

USD 1.5 billion of these payments to producers were linked clearly to the provision of environmental public
goods.
USD 102 billion of expenditure in is in the form of general services for the sector (GSSE), which includes
USD 76 billion of public investments in R&D, biosecurity and infrastructure. These three elements account
for just 6%, 2% and 9% of budgetary support to agriculture respectively, despite evidence of high returns
to R&D and the potential of all three categories to support sustainable productivity growth and improved
resilience – key channels for ensuring food security, viable livelihoods and sustainable resource use.
Three specific actions could enable agricultural policies to better support
sustainable productivity growth and increased resilience, and accelerate
progress in addressing the “triple challenge” faced by food systems
(i) Phase out price interventions and market distorting producer support. The removal of positive
market price support and associated trade protection for producers may need to be offset by transitional
assistance and the extension of social safety nets [see (ii)]. Conversely, the removal of policies that
suppress domestic prices may reduce poorer households’ access to food, calling for targeted income
transfers.
(ii) Target income support to farm households most in need and where possible incorporate into
economy-wide social policies and safety-nets. This would require better information on the incomes
and assets of farm households, with a specific role for agricultural policy that would involve underwriting
those aspects of agricultural risk management that cannot be covered by farmers themselves or by risk
markets.
(iii) Re-orient public expenditures towards investments in public goods – in particular innovation
systems. Investment in innovation systems, covering both knowledge generation and its transfer to the
sector, should be made central to agricultural support policies. The share of payments going to essential
public goods, including ecosystem services, could be almost doubled by a redirection of market distorting
payments, and raised further still by a reallocation of income support to farmers whose incomes from farm
and off-farm sources would be above average even without support.
Global agriculture continues to meet the core challenge of feeding a rising world population. Yet food
systems overall are characterised by rising GHG emissions, declining biodiversity; the persistence of
hunger concomitant with rising rates of obesity; pressures on land and water resources; and an inability to
generate sustainable livelihoods for many poor farmers. Agricultural policy reforms alone cannot solve all
these issues, but more sustainability and innovation-centred policies have an important role to play. More
widely, a “food systems approach” requires that agricultural policymakers take a holistic view of the
performance of policies related to multiple objectives, and co-ordinate to avoid incoherent policies. Three
major events in 2021 can help build international momentum for policy change and accelerate progress
towards the Sustainable Development Goals: the COP-26 UN Climate Change Conference, the COP-15
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, and the UN Food
Systems Summit. Countries should seize the opportunity to translate international awareness into specific
national actions.




 23

Note
1 This report presents recent policy developments and support estimates across all OECD countries, the
European Union and twelve emerging and developing economies. Costa Rica became the 38th Member of
the OECD in May 2021. In the data aggregates used in this report, however, it is included as one of the
12 Emerging Eonomies.




24 

This chapter first provides an overview on recent economic and market
developments that provide the context for the implementation of agricultural
policies. The second section presents main changes and initiatives in
agricultural policies in 2020-21, focusing on policy responses to the
COVID-19 pandemic that target, or strongly affect, agricultural producers,
food consumers and other actors along the food supply chain. The
subsequent analysis of levels and structures of agricultural support informs
an assessment of the extent to which current support contributes to the
food systems’ “triple challenge” of achieving food security and nutrition,
providing livelihoods to those connected to the sector, and reducing the
environmental footprint and greenhouse gas emissions of the sector. The
chapter also explores how current policies perform across productivity,
sustainability and resilience, key channels for contributing to addressing
these challenges. It concludes with an assessment of policy developments,
and with recommendations for concrete actions.


1 Developments in Agricultural Policy
and Support


 25

In 2020, agricultural policies and support to the sector were significantly affected by the outbreak of the
coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, the subsequent spread of the COVID-19 virus, and substantial restrictions to
populations and enterprises aimed at containing the virus. These factors caused economic growth to slow
significantly or even turn strongly negative in all economies, while in many countries unemployment rose
as companies were forced to lay off employees. Commodity markets were affected as well, but the
implications for global agricultural markets remained comparatively limited as, despite some significant
stresses, food systems and supply chains proved relatively robust.
The pandemic caused major dislocations to food markets, in particular with the closure of restaurants, and
the shift in consumption away from food outside the home. But the overall demand for food was fairly
stable, as food supply was generally recognised to be essential and thus exempt from lockdowns, while
consumers prioritised food among their expenditures. However, several advanced economies saw
increased recourse to food banks among low income consumers who had seen a drastic fall in their
incomes. Labour intensive sectors, such as meat processing and sectors requiring seasonal labour for
planting or harvesting, were also deeply affected by the virus and measures to contain it.
As a land based activity, the production of most commodities was generally able to withstand the pandemic,
although those products requiring more labour input – principally fruits and vegetables – or where supply
is destined primarily for the restaurant trade, were more affected. In general, developments on agricultural
markets were driven as much by non-COVID factors as by the impacts of the pandemic. Overall, the
agricultural sector proved remarkably resilient, with farm incomes increasing in 2020 for a majority of
countries covered in this report.
To help people and companies to cope with the economic consequences of both the virus and containment
strategies, governments introduced a wide set of policies as of early 2020. In looking at changes made to
agricultural policies and support, this report therefore begins by discussing policy responses to the
COVID-19 pandemic that focus on, or strongly affect, agricultural producers, other actors along the food
supply chain, and food consumers.
The report then analyses the level and structure of agricultural support, in particular in terms of the extent
to which they help or hinders the performance of food systems, gauged in terms of their contribution to the
“triple challenge” of:
1. Achieving food security and nutrition for a growing world population.
2. Providing livelihoods to farmers and others connected to the sector, either vertically along the value
chain or spatially across rural economies.
3. Reducing the environmental footprint of the sector and contributing to lower greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions.
Drawing on insights from the OECD Framework for Productivity, Sustainability and Resilience, this part of
the report also explores how current policies perform across the three dimensions of productivity,
sustainability and resilience, which are identified as key channels through which agriculture can contribute
to the challenges facing food systems. Lastly, this part of the report concludes with an assessment of the
developments in policies and support, and with recommendations for concrete actions to improve the
performance of agricultural policies in meeting the challenges facing global food systems.
Key economic and market developments
Conditions in agricultural markets are strongly influenced by macro-economic factors, such as economic
growth (measured by gross domestic product, GDP), which generates the income supporting demand for
agricultural and food products, as well as prices for crude oil and other energy sources which affect the
prices of numerous production inputs in agriculture, such as fuel, chemicals and fertiliser. Energy prices


26 

also affect the demand for cereals, sugar crops and oilseeds through the market for biofuels produced
from these feedstocks.
Global economic growth, which slowed to below 3% in 2019, came to an abrupt halt in the wake of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Global output in 2020 is estimated to have been more than 4% below that in 2019,
reflecting policy responses to the pandemic, which included substantial restrictions in both personal and
economic activities (OECD, 2020[1]).1 GDP growth in all OECD economies turned negative. The contraction
was particularly significant in the Euro area, where economic output declined by 7.5% in 2020, after low
growth of 1.3% the year before. Japan was significantly hit as well, with GDP shrinking by 5.3% in 2020,
after some first signs of rebounding growth in 2019 at +0.7%. The contraction was less pronounced in the
United States, where economic output, which grew by more than 2% in 2019, declined by 3.7% in 2020.
The downturn in OECD economies was associated with a decreased demand for labour. Across the OECD
area, unemployment, which had fallen slightly to 5.4% in 2019, increased to 7.2% in 2020. In many
countries, the negative impact on employment was mitigated by substantial public interventions, including
notably the widespread application of publicly supported short-time work.2 Average inflation declined
further to 1.5%, driven in particular by falling energy prices (see below).
Growth in emerging economies also fell substantially, although the extent of the downturn varied strongly.
Argentina’s GDP, which had seen negative growth for the last two years already, shrank by 12.9%, the
first double-digit economic contraction since the currency and debt crisis of 2001-02. India’s GDP
contracted by 9.9%, more than 14 percentage points below 2019 growth, while South Africa’s GDP fell by
8.1%, following stagnation in 2019. On the other hand, the People’s Republic of China (hereafter, “China”)
is the only country covered in this report that maintained positive growth in 2020, at 1.8% compared with
6.1% the year before. The Indonesian economy also fared comparatively well, with a slight contraction of
2.4%, following 5% growth in 2019.
Table 1.1. Key economic indicators

Average 2008-17
2018
2019
2020
Real GDP growth1




World2
3.2
3.4
2.7
-4.2
OECD2
1.4
2.3
1.6
-5.5
United States
1.5
3.0
2.2
-3.7
Euro area
0.6
1.9
1.3
-7.5
Japan
0.5
0.3
0.7
-5.3
Non-OECD2
5.0
4.4
3.6
-3.0
Argentina
1.7
-2.6
-2.1
-12.9
Brazil
1.7
1.2
1.1
-6.0
China
8.3
6.7
6.1
1.8
India
6.7
6.1
4.2
-9.9
Indonesia
5.5
5.2
5.0
-2.4
South Africa
1.8
0.8
0.2
-8.1
OECD area




Unemployment rate3
7.4
5.5
5.4
7.2
Inflation1,4
1.7
2.4
1.9
1.5
World real trade growth1
3.5
4.0
1.0
-10.3
Notes: 1. Percentage changes; last three columns show the increase over a year earlier. 2. Moving nominal GDP weights, using purchasing
power parities. 3. Per cent of labour force. 4. Private consumption deflator.
Source: OECD (2020), OECD Economic Outlook N°108 - December 2020, Last updated November 2020,
http://dotstat.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=EO108_INTERNET.


 27

The consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and of related restrictions are strongly visible in
international trade. In real terms, global trade declined by more than 10% year-on-year, following already
slow growth in 2019.
Lower economic growth and restrictions on personal and economic mobility put significant pressure on
prices for energy and other non-food commodities (IMF, 2021[2]). On average, energy prices in 2020 were
30% lower than in 2019, and more than 40% below their 2018 levels. Crude oil prices, which had fallen to
levels close to (and on certain markets even below) zero in April 2020, averaged 33% lower over the full
year compared to 2019. Lower energy prices also pulled down fertiliser prices, which on average were 9%
lower year-on-year.
In comparison, food prices remained robust. After dropping by 7% in the second quarter of 2020, average
international food prices increased towards the end of the year, and annual averages ended 3% higher
than in 2019, with contrasting movements between crop and livestock markets, as explained below.
Figure 1.1. Commodity world price indices, 2007 to 2020
Index 2014-16=100

Note: The top part of the graph relates to the left scale, while the bottom part of the graph to the right scale.
Source:
IMF
(2021),
Commodity
Market
Review,
for
all
commodities,
food
and
energy
indices
(base
year:
2016),
www.imf.org/external/np/res/commod/index.aspx; FAO (2021), FAO Food Price Index dataset, for meat, dairy and cereal indices (base period: 2014-
16), www.fao.org/worldfoodsituation/foodpricesindex/en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/4n31te
50
100
150
200
250
300
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
All commodities
Food
Energy
Meat
Dairy
Cereals


28 

Global food markets saw prices for crops and livestock products moving in opposite directions. World meat
markets had seen production decline in 2019 primarily due to the impact of African Swine Fever (ASF) on
China’s pig meat sector. While the disease continued to limit production in China and other countries such
as Viet Nam during 2020, herds began to rebuild. In spite of the lower Chinese output, however, global
meat prices were under significant downward pressure in 2020 due to logistical difficulties and reduced
demand following the COVID-19 pandemic, which together dampened meat import demand from several
key importing countries. On average, meat prices in 2020 fell by 4.5% year-on-year.
The pandemic also had significant, though varied, impacts on dairy markets. While away-from-home
consumption in many countries suffered as a result of widespread confinement measures, larger retail
sales for at-home consumption partly offset these losses. Fresh dairy products were particularly vulnerable
to disruptions in supply chains, but many countries were able to adjust their production chains relatively
quickly. As a consequence, while the effects of the pandemic varied across regions, global dairy prices
changed only little year-on-year, with lower prices in the second quarter balanced by rising prices towards
the end of the year.
In contrast to livestock markets, world prices for crop commodities mostly rose in 2020. Following short-
term disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic, oilseeds markets were driven by strong demand notably
for imported soybeans into China as the country began to rebuild pig herds. At the same time, lower supply
growth of palm oil resulted in relatively short supplies on international markets. As a consequence,
international prices rose significantly in 2020, with prices for soybeans and vegetable oils averaging 7%
and almost 20% higher than in 2019.
Increased feed demand from the rebuilding pork sector in China, logistical difficulties in some major
producing countries, and some temporary export restrictions following the COVID-19 pandemic, drove
prices upwards in cereal markets. Pushed by increases notably towards the end of the year, average cereal
prices were almost 7% higher in 2020 than in the preceding year.
Continued shortfalls in sugar production due to unfavourable weather conditions in some of the major
producing countries offset lower import demand for sugar and notably reduced biofuel demand in light of
reduced mobility due to the pandemic, resulting in average sugar prices increasing slightly year-on-year,
but remaining well below levels seen in 2016.
Overall, food supply chains were recognised as essential services in most countries implementing
COVID-19 related restrictions on economic activities, as a result of which the sector was affected by those
restrictions more indirectly than directly. Often, both domestic and international trade in food products were
facilitated through green corridors and other measures notwithstanding disruptions affecting trade overall.
Labour shortages due to restrictions on people’s movement were alleviated through exceptions for
agricultural and food chain workers, and through schemes encouraging workers laid off in other sectors or
students to temporarily work in agriculture and the food industry. However, income losses and economic
uncertainties, together with restrictions for restaurants and other away-from-home food suppliers,
generated changes in food demand which the industry needed to cope with. But the impact of economic
contractions on food expenditure was mitigated through public support partly compensating for income
losses, and reductions in disposable incomes seem to have led to higher shares of income being spent on
food. Partly with the help of government policy responses, food systems have therefore proven remarkably
resilient. Indeed, after short-term disruptions in international food markets in the early phase of the
pandemic, these markets appear to have been impacted more by other factors such as livestock diseases
and climatic conditions than by the pandemic itself.


 29

Responses to COVID-19 and other recent developments in agricultural policies
As governments started implementing containment measures to slow the spread of the COVID-19 virus
early in 2020, they also began introducing measures to limit impacts of the virus and associated
containment measures on the agriculture and agro-food supply chains.3 Most government responses in
the sector were introduced in the first few months of the pandemic, largely in response to the shock to
specific subsectors. Still, as the year went by, as new waves and strands of infection developed,
governments in many countries shifted their attention towards medium-term issues by bolstering early
relief measures and introducing economic recovery packages.
This section presents an overview of government measures introduced in 2020 in the 54 countries covered
in this report, using different categorisations, focusing mainly on the number and type of measures, and
associated budget figures. The dataset used for analysis was compiled based on the information on
domestic and international trade related COVID-19 policy developments provided in country chapters in
this report.4 While the reported set of measures is comprehensive, and covers all the most important policy
responses, it does not claim to capture all measures in place in all countries covered in the study.
Countries implemented a diverse set of responses to COVID-19
Governments of the covered countries and the European Union introduced 776 unique policy measures to
respond to the COVID-19 related crisis during 2020, of which 496 were introduced in the first four months
of 2020 (OECD, 2020[3]; Gruère and Brooks, 2021[4]). The overall number of unique measures for the year
2020 increases to 1 086 applied policy measures if EU-wide measures, applicable to all member states,
are added to unique measures for each of the EU Member States (including for the period covered, the
United Kingdom).
The nature of the government responses varied widely. OECD (2020[3]) distinguished seven categories of
measures: 1) Sector-wide and institutional measures; 2) Information and co-ordination measures;
3) Measures on trade and product flows (enhancing trade or restricting trade); 4) Labour measures
(biosecurity and workforce related measures); 5) Agriculture and food support (or support for agriculture
and food companies); 6) General support (including packages that apply to the sector); and 7) Food
assistance and consumer support (demand side interventions).5 Unique government measures were
distributed across those categories, with 37% of the 776 measures focusing on agriculture and food
support, 5% on institutional measures, and 8% on food assistance measures, with the remaining four
categories covering between 11% and 14% of measures (Figure 1.2).
These proportions changed since the four first months of 2020, from a focus on information and co-
ordination to agriculture and food support measures. The share of agriculture and food support measures
increased by 14 percentage points over the year, while the share of measures on information and co-
ordination and general support declined by 7 and 4 percentage points, respectively. This evolution might
reflect the need for information and communication in the early period, followed by the increased
importance that some governments attached to providing support to agriculture and food companies to
cushion the impact of the first wave of the virus. Shares for other categories of measures remained stable,
indicating a moderate increase in the use of these measures across countries.
A wide range of measures adopted is also observed among the 54 covered countries, underscoring the
comprehensiveness of government responses. Thirty-eight of the covered countries applied measures in
all seven categories, while ten countries applied measures in six of the seven categories. Fifty or more
countries applied trade and product flow measures, information measures or agriculture and food support
measures, while the other categories of measures were each applied by at least 46 countries (Figure 1.3).


30 

Figure 1.2. Categorisation of the COVID-19 policy responses in 2020

Note: Some of the measures belong to two categories.
Source: Information collected from the 54 countries.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/mqai05
Figure 1.3. Number of countries applying different categories of measures in 2020

Note: This allocation accounts for measures that cover two categories.
Source: Information collected from the 54 countries.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/xirs7y
At the same time, differences in the number of measures by category can be seen among regions and
countries. In particular, 54% of measures undertaken by governments in OECD countries focused on the
three categories of support (agriculture and food support, general support and food assistance and
consumer support measures), including the largest proportion on agriculture and food support (35%), while
1.Sector-wide and
institutional measures
5%
2.Information and co-ordination
measures
14%
3. Measures on trade and
product flows
13%
4. Labour measures
11%
5. Agriculture and
food support
37%
6. General  support
12%
7. Food assistance and
consumer support
8%
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
6. General  support
4. Labour measures
7. Food assistance and consumer support
1.Sector-wide and institutional measures
5. Agriculture and food support
2.Information and co-ordination measures
3. Measures on trade and product flows


 31

58% of measures undertaken by emerging economies were in the non-support categories of measures
(sector wide and institutional, information and co-ordination, trade and product flows and labour measures),
including the largest proportion of measures (26%) in the trade and product flow category. This difference
may reflect the existing policies covering the sector in the respective groups of countries, but may also be
due to differences in structures of the sector as well as the type of shocks associated with the COVID-19
pandemic and associated containment measures. A further factor may be differences in budgetary and
fiscal scope to provide additional support. Among OECD countries, Asian and European countries
favoured agriculture and food support measures, South American countries focused on information and
co-ordination measures, Oceanian countries prioritised labour measures, and North American countries
displayed no clear dominance across categories of measures.
Only 11% of the unique measures recorded explicitly built on existing policy measures already in place,
almost all in the agriculture and food support category in the form of flexibility or changes in existing policy
programmes. This suggests that governments often introduced new programmes, funding or approaches
to respond to the crisis, or that they relied on existing policies without making notable changes. Innovative
approaches were used for instance to re-channel food unused by closed schools towards families, to hire
temporarily unemployed workers from cities in fields, or via the use of digital tools to ease market
transactions and custom controls.
Measures varied in their purpose, timing, scope and potential impacts
Government responses also differed in their timing and scope, from the initial imposition of lockdown
measures, to policies aiming to temper the impacts of the crisis on specific supply chains or consumers or
in the medium term. At the same time, several measures taken to facilitate the functioning of production or
supply chains could usefully have been taken before of the COVID-19 crisis. To highlight these distinctions
and better understand the implication of government responses, measures were organised in three
groups:6

Urgent measures to ensure supply: these emergency measures were taken at the onset of the
crisis to ensure supply and keep the sector functioning. Examples include biosafety measures;
declaring agriculture and food as an essential sector; measures to ensure the functioning of
government agencies; co-ordination of responses with the private sector; and national and
international logistic and transport measures, including setting up green lanes to ensure the
continuation of trade. These measures are intrinsically linked to the pandemic, and would either be
lifted or no longer relevant after the COVID-19 crisis. This group includes 150 unique measures
(19% of the total).

No regrets measures: these measures improve market functioning and thereby contribute to
improved resilience. They could have been taken before, and should be maintained or even scaled
up after the COVID-19 crisis. This group includes measures supporting digital innovations that
facilitate e-commerce; exchange of information; agriculture job-matching information centres; and
training or trade facilitation measures. This group includes 75 unique measures (10% of the total).

Temporary relief measures: these measures seek to contain the impact of the crisis on agriculture
and food sector actors, from producers to consumers. Governments considered them necessary
but they should include sunset clauses to avoid outliving their original rationale. These measures
comprise largely temporary trade and markets measures to relieve domestic economic pressure,
agricultural support measures, including those that compensate producers and agro-food chain
actors for damages incurred; consumer and food assistance7 measures and measures that lifted
or limited regulatory requirements for farmers. This group is the largest, with 537 unique measures
(69% of the total).
The remaining 14 measures (2%) could not be attributed to any of the groups.


32 

As expected, measures in the three support categories (5, 6 and 7) are overwhelmingly temporary relief
measures, but measures in other categories, belong to different groups (Figure 1.4). Urgent measures to
ensure supply include institutional and informational measures, but also labour measures and trade and
product flow measures (categories 1 to 4). No regrets measures were mostly information and co-ordination
measures and product and trade flow measures that enhance the functioning of markets (categories 2
and 3).
Figure 1.4. Grouping of unique measures by category

Source: Information collected from the 54 countries.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/qb5dr6
A large majority of countries implemented measures that belong to each of these groups, even if some
differences are observed among countries. All but two countries applied one or more urgent measures to
ensure supply, and the same number of countries applied temporary relief measures; fewer countries (46)
applied at least one no regrets measure. OECD countries applied relatively more temporary relief
measures than emerging economies, who applied relatively more of measures in the other two groups.
An additional distinction was made to identify measures that could at least temporarily be potentially market
and trade distorting or environmentally harmful.8 These mostly temporary relief measures include trade
bans or export restrictions that were temporarily put in place by several countries, but also market price
controls, relaxed environmental regulations, and specific agricultural support measures for different
agricultural commodities. Eighty-five unique measures (11% of the total) introduced by 47 countries were
identified to have potential impact on markets or the environment, belonging to the agriculture and food
support category, the trade and product flow, and the food assistance categories.
Governments allocated at least USD 157 billion to respond to impacts in the agriculture
and food sector
One of the key ways in which governments have addressed the economic impact of the COVID-19
pandemic and associated lockdowns is by offering liquidity, credits, and funding for relief measures.
Governments in many countries have adopted comprehensive economic recovery packages, with
measures that included new lines of credits, subsidised loans, flexibilities in taxes, or subsidies and which
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
1.Sector-wide and
institutional
measures
2.Information and
coordination
measures
3. Measures on
trade and product
flows
4. Labour
measures
5. Agriculture and
food support
6. General
support
7. Food
assistance and
consumer support
Urgent
No regrets
Temporary relief
Other or N/A


 33

included firms in the agriculture and food sector. At the same time, governments in many countries created
specific financial support measures to the agriculture and food sector.
This section provides a preliminary assessment of budgetary allocation in response to the COVID-19
impact based on collected information. It therefore only focuses on the subset of measures for which
financial information was available (in total 119 unique measures in 41 countries).
A review of the reported budgetary figures associated with the collected COVID-19 responses comes with
several important caveats. First, it is impossible to track how much of the general recovery packages were
used on the agricultural sector, so these are largely excluded from the assessment. Second, while these
numbers include some expenditures incurred in 2020, a larger set of programmes that were announced in
2020 has not yet been delivered to the sector. As such, a majority of the numbers presented are not
reflected in the 2020 data in this year’s agriculture support estimate database. Third, funding for sector-
wide and institutional measures (category 1) and information and co-ordination measures (category 2) was
not available. Fourth, some of the measures provide support for targeted or affected individuals on the
basis of unit costs, but there is no estimate of the number of individuals or firms that benefitted from the
support, so these support measures are excluded from the assessment. Fourth, governments may have
used existing policies and measures, potentially with budget adjustments or changes in implementation,
without reporting those as related to COVID-19. All these caveats suggest the reported figures are likely
to represent minimum estimates of financial support measures in the 54 countries.
In total, governments dedicated USD 157 billion in response to impacts to the sector (Table 1.2). Of this
total, USD 116 billion was earmarked in the form of grants, payments or other funding, while USD 41 billion
was offered in in the form of subsidised rates loans, new credit lines, and other mechanisms. At the same
time, USD 5.6 trillion was provisionally identified in general recovery packages that included the food and
agriculture sector (category 6 - general support). This support was not specific to the sector.
Table 1.2. Reported financial support specific to the agriculture and food sector in response to
COVID-19 in the 54 countries
Million USD
Category of measures
5. Agriculture and food
support
7. Food assistance
and consumer
support1

3. Measures on
product and trade
flows2
4. Labour
measures3
TOTAL
Funding (announced)
34 410
55 024
18 909
7 654
115 697
Loan/credit
40 698
0
0
0
40 698
Other mechanisms
133
0
241
0
374
TOTAL
74 941
55 024
19 151
7 654
156 769
Notes: Reported support in this table was promised but not necessarily spent in 2020.
1. Specifically food assistance measures.
2. Measures facilitating market functioning, logistics and infrastructure (general services).
3. Including biosecurity measures.
Source: Information collected from the 54 countries.
Sector specific earmarked funding primarily focused on relief measures for agriculture and food actors,
and food assistance measures (83% as shown in Figure 1.5). Twelve per cent of financial support focused
on general services, such as infrastructure development, e-commerce development and measures easing
trade, which are listed under the category of measures on product and trade flows. The remaining 5% of
support was directed towards addressing labour shortfall, via compensation mechanisms for migrant or
new farm workers, and implementing bio-sanitary measures, including compensation to the culling of minks
potentially infected by the COVID-19 virus as well as equipment support.


34 

Figure 1.5. Overall allocation of reported sector-specific financial support in response to  COVID-19

Notes: This includes promised funding, credits, loans and other support mechanism. Category 3 measures are those facilitating market
functioning, logistics and infrastructure (general services), category 4 measures are labour and biosecurity measures, and category 7 measures
are food assistance measures.
Source: Information collected from the 54 countries.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/dh1xgi
There are significant differences in the reported financial support between OECD countries and emerging
economies (Figure 1.6). OECD countries’ financial support amounted to USD 75 billion, almost entirely
dedicated to relief measures expressed in terms of agriculture and food support (USD 32 billion) and food
assistance (USD 41 billion), with the remaining funding going towards labour and biosafety measures. New
and expanding food assistance programmes were observed in OECD countries (Box 1.1). In contrast,
emerging economies reported USD 82 billion of financial support, with USD 34 billion going to agriculture
and food support and USD 24 billion to food assistance, implying lower shares of overall support in these
categories, with a higher share (23%) dedicated to general services enhancing market and trade.


7. Food assistance and
consumer support, 35%
5. Agriculture and food
support, 48%
4. Labour measures, 5%
3. Measures on trade and
product flows, 12%


 35

Figure 1.6. Overall distribution of reported sector-specific financial support by OECD and emerging
economies

Note: Non OECD EU Member States do not feature in this figure. Category 3 measures are those facilitating market functioning, logistics and
infrastructure (general services), category 4 measures are labour and biosecurity measures, and category 7 measures are food assistance
measures.
Source: Information collected from the 54 countries.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/z91q6x
Box 1.1. Food assistance measures in OECD countries in response to the COVID-19 crisis
Many countries deployed public emergency food assistance measures to prevent rising food insecurity
resulting from the COVID-19 crisis. These complemented other livelihood support measures that aimed
to contain the pandemic’s socio-economic consequences and thus the spread of poverty across OECD
countries (OECD, 2020[5]).
Countries have reinforced existing food assistance programmes1 or deployed new schemes to suit the
needs of their vulnerable populations. Food assistance programmes have targeted low-income
households with a particular focus on infants, children, students, the vulnerable and elderly people.
Some eligibility criteria that had constrained access to pre-existing schemes were eased during the
pandemic. The programmes fall into two categories:

The provision of vouchers that can be used to buy food without restrictions or to buy certain
types of (healthy) food products. Some countries have used digital technologies to issue
benefits electronically to some vulnerable population groups and to provide information on food
assistance packages for which households might be entitled (Baragwanath, 2021[6]).

The provision of free or subsidised meals either in canteens or in other public places when this
is possible, or by home-delivery. Home-delivery of meals required logistical adaptation and often
involved partnerships with private caterers.
Governments also provided additional support for food bank operations to respond to growing
emergency food aid demand. In pre-COVID-19 times, about 25% of food banks’ food supply depended
41%
29%
56%
42%
3%
6%
23%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
OECD
Emerging economies
3. Measures on trade and product flows
4. Labour measures
5. Agriculture and food support
7. Food assistance and consumer support


36 

on public support. The COVID-19 crisis further increased the need for public support (GFN, 2020[7]). To
facilitate continued operation of food banks , OECD governments provided three types of support
measures:

Operational and financial support: Mostly offered by local authorities, such support provided
storage, cooking and distribution facilities, as well as protection materials and staff. Several
governments also provided financial support for food purchases and to cover additional
operating costs related to sanitary protocols.

Flexibility in existing programme implementation: The rules behind food banks’ public support
were relaxed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. For instance, the European Union’s
Coronavirus Response Investment Initiative Plus (CRII+) made it possible to provide food
assistance indirectly via food vouchers for food banks supported by the Fund for European Aid
to the Most Deprived (FEAD).

Food donations: Ministries, mostly those in charge of agriculture, were involved in programmes
recovering food products that were supposed to be served in schools or in restaurants. For
example, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) was involved, via the pre-existing
Emergency Food Assistance Programme (TEFAP) and the new Farmers to Families Food Box
Program, in the purchase of domestically-grown food products to be provided to vulnerable
population. Food donations programmes in the United States (USDA, 2021[8]) and also in the
European Union (FEBA, 2020[9]) are expected to continue in 2021.
Note: 1. Information on existing programmes can be found in (Placzek, 2021[10]).
With regard to agriculture and food support measures, OECD countries favoured funding mechanisms,
such as direct payments, grants or increased allocation to existing support programmes (83%), while
emerging economies supported the sector via preferential loans and credit mechanisms (99%). Large
countries on both sides drive this pattern, with the United States accounting for 69% of total agriculture
and food support via earmarked funding, and India accounting for 90% of loans and credits to be granted
to the sector in response to the COVID-19 crisis.
Sixteen of the 119 measures displaying financial support were identified as potentially market and trade
distorting or environmentally harmful. These agriculture and support measures amounted to
USD 731 million, which is significant but remains marginal compared to the total earmarked funds
dedicated to the agriculture and food support (USD 35 billion) or to the global agriculture support estimates
conveyed in this report.
Other key policy trends and developments in 2020
While policies for agriculture and food have been strongly influenced by the COVID-19 pandemic, other
changes were also made in 2020. Specific information on the developments is summarised below, with
details on adjustments made to policies and programmes within countries available in the country chapters
within this report.
Several countries have revised their agricultural policy frameworks. Colombia introduced the “Together
for the Countryside” (Juntos por el campo) initiative, including a range of new policy programmes and
subsidies for transportation, machinery and equipment, and variable inputs. Indonesia introduced specific
programmes to increase production capacity on about 165 000 hectares of swampy land in Central
Kalimantan, and to expand rice planting areas with 250 000 hectares of rice, maize, shallots and chilies in
deficit areas. Japan revised its “Basic Plan for Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas”, which sets out policy
directions, food self-sufficiency goals and commodity production targets for the next ten years. Mexico
published the Sectoral Programme for Agriculture and Rural Development 2019-2024, focusing on


 37

improving agricultural productivity for food self-sufficiency, reducing poverty rates in rural areas, and
increasing small-scale agricultural producers’ incomes. Viet Nam approved a series of strategies, plans
and programmes to promote agricultural and rural development, including a new Livestock Development
Strategy for 2021-30; a plan to promote investment in the agricultural and rural sector for 2021-25; a Master
Programme on Sustainable Agricultural Development and Adaptation to Climate Change in the Mekong
River Delta for 2030; a Scheme for Developing Organic Agriculture for 2020-30; and an irrigation strategy
for 2030.
The European Union also released a number of major policy initiatives: the European Parliament and the
Council agreed on transitional rules for the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) for 2021-22, while
negotiations continue on CAP reform. In May 2020, the European Commission released more details on
proposed Green Deal initiatives most relevant to the agricultural sector – specifically, the Farm to Fork and
the Biodiversity strategies, which seek to halt biodiversity loss in Europe, transform EU food systems into
global standards for competitive sustainability, protect human and planetary health and safeguard the
livelihoods of all actors in the food value chain.
New support measures and reforms to existing policies were introduced. Argentina shifted to more active
export restrictions, reintroducing taxes that were reduced or eliminated between 2015 and 2018. Brazil
created financial mechanisms to attract funds for rural credit, reducing preferential annual interest rates
provided by Pronaf, the main credit programme for small farmers. Korea established a new direct payment
system, combining the direct payments for rice, upland crops and less favoured areas into a single scheme.
The income compensation scheme for rice, which has been the main payment scheme in Korea, was
converted into a decoupled payment programme and accompanied by environmental cross compliance
regulations. Norway eliminated its last export subsidies on cheese and processed agricultural products as
of the end of 2020. The Philippines established a Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund to support
investments in machinery and equipment, breeding and distribution of high quality rice seeds, credit and
expansion. The Russian Federation (hereafter “Russia”) expanded its railroad tariff subsidies to cover
the transportation of soybean meal, vegetables and mineral fertilisers. Viet Nam extended a land tax
exemption to the end of 2025, allowing farm households and organisations to avoid paying an agricultural
land use tax or continue benefiting from a land tax reduction.
A number of countries developed new climate-related policies and strategies. Canada has established a
new Natural Climate Solutions for Agriculture Fund, which will support carbon sequestration and beneficial
management practices, such as cover crops or shelterbelts, through development, testing, peer-to-peer
learning and solution sharing with farmers. Furthermore, under the “A Healthy Environment and A Healthy
Economy” plan, the government of Canada plans to invest USD 123 million over seven years to support
the agricultural sector in developing transformative clean technologies, reducing emissions from fertilisers
to 30% below 2020 levels, boosting climate-smart agriculture, and supporting the production and use of
low-carbon fuels. Japan published a national Green Growth Strategy in December 2020, outlining a
comprehensive plan to achieve net-zero GHG emissions across the economy by 2050. The Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries has also announced a strategy for sustainable food systems, named
“Measures for Achievement of Decarbonisation and Resilience with Innovation”, which aims to achieve
zero CO2 emissions from agriculture, reduce the use of chemical pesticides and fertilisers, and make all
subsidies carbon neutral by 2040. Korea released the 2050 Carbon Neutral Strategy, a long-term plan for
GHG emissions mitigation. The strategy sets out four tasks for the agricultural sector: transition to smart
farming; develop and deploy low-carbon agricultural practices; promote participatory policies for farmers
and consumers; and scale up the deployment of eco-friendly energy. New Zealand has developed a ten-
year roadmap for boosting primary sector export earnings while reducing biogenic methane emissions in
accordance with the 2019 Zero Carbon Act. In addition, the “He Waka Eke Noa – Primary Sector Climate
Action Partnership” seeks to reduce agricultural GHG emissions and enhance the sector’s resilience to
climate change. Ukraine introduced new legislation to outline its strategy on environmental policies, along
with a framework to monitor, report and verify the country’s GHG emissions. Chile, Iceland, Israel and


38 

Viet Nam also outlined new strategies and objectives in 2020 to reduce their GHG emissions from
agriculture.
In addition, several countries took steps to improve the sustainable management of their water resources.
This group includes Chile (currently developing a Ministerial water plan), New Zealand (through the
2020 National Environment Standards for Freshwater), and Viet Nam (via the Irrigation Strategy to 2030).
This follows a more general trend in OECD countries, where governments changed their agriculture and
water policies, in the last decade, broadly in line with the OECD Council Recommendation on Water
(Gruère, Shigemitsu and Crawford, 2020[11]; OECD, 2021[12]).9
Several countries strengthened their promotion of organic farming. Notably, the European Union’s Farm
to Fork Strategy includes several agriculture-specific targets, one of which is to increase the share of
farmland under organic farming to at least 25%. Furthermore, increasing the area of organic farming is
also a key policy objective of Japan’s Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. Russia introduced a
new law providing requirements for the production and labelling of organic products. The creation of a
system of certification for organic products is ongoing, with 64 producers currently certified. Viet Nam
approved a Scheme for Developing Organic Agriculture in 2020-30, setting out specific goals to increase
the share of organic production in agricultural land use and for improving the value per hectare of organic
production by 2030.
Some countries developed new solutions to tackle food loss and waste. Canada is investing
USD 15 million to establish the Food Waste Reduction Challenge, encouraging innovative business
models to develop solutions to prevent or divert food waste along the food supply chain. Turkey published
a national strategy document and action plan on Prevention, Reduction and Monitoring of Food Loss and
Waste, setting four strategic goals and 13 targets.
Risk management and disaster assistance policies were strengthened. Australia introduced drought
resilience response programmes through the Future Drought Fund, and provided support to farm clean up
and emergency response activities through the National Bushfire Recovery Fund. China’s Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development and the Ministry of Finance jointly allocated USD 47 million to a new
disaster relief fund assisting agricultural producers in flood-hit southern provinces. Kazakhstan’s
mandatory crop insurance system was transformed into a voluntary insurance scheme with a view towards
expanding crop and livestock insurance markets in the country. In New Zealand, a flooding event and
significant drought affecting large parts of the country triggered public support for recovery and relief, as
well as to individual farmers in hardship through Rural Assistance Payments. Turkey provided additional
coverage through the state-supported agricultural insurance scheme, issuing 2.1 million insurance policies
and USD 250 million of state insurance premium support. The United States provided an additional
USD 1.5 billion for the continuation of disaster assistance programme delivery, adding several new
qualifying disaster events and eligible participants under the Wildfire and Hurricane Indemnity Program
Plus (WHIP+). The USDA’s Risk Management Agency also introduced a new policy to help farmers recover
from hurricanes, covering 70 different crops.
New laws and regulations on animal and plant health were introduced. Chile’s animal and plant health
agency promoted electronic certification, now established for exports to 34 countries and covering around
70% of all phytosanitary certificates. Costa Rica’s animal and plant health institutions established a single
export window to deal with sanitary and phytosanitary procedures, and created an online system for
consulting phytosanitary certificates for agricultural exports in real time. Switzerland introduced new plant
health legislation, requiring stricter regulations and stronger preventive measures to protect plants from
harmful pests. In the United States, the USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS)
published the Sustainable, Ecological, Consistent, Uniform, Responsible, Efficient (SECURE) rule, the first
comprehensive revision of the Agency’s biotechnology regulations in over 30 years. The new rule puts in
place a more efficient process to identify plants that would be subject to regulation, focusing on the
properties of the plant rather than on its method of production.


 39

Concerning land reform and investment, Russia increased support for investments in agriculture, including
purchases of agricultural machinery, goods and processing equipment. The company Rosagroleasing
aims to supply 9 000 units of equipment in one year, which represents a 40% increase on last year’s
numbers. South Africa established the Agriculture Development Agency to support the development of
sustainable land reform programmes and reduce barriers to the commercialisation of small-scale farmers.
Ukraine passed new legislation ending the ban on the sale of agricultural land. As of July 2021, individual
citizens of Ukraine will be permitted to purchase up to 100 hectares of land, while from January 2024
purchases of up to 10 000 hectares will be made available to legal entities whose founders or final
beneficiaries are Ukrainians, and which do not have business abroad or in offshore companies. Viet Nam
approved a plan to promote investment in the agricultural and rural sector in 2021-25, including the
following priorities: evaluating market potentials, trends and investment partners; building a database on
investment promotion activities; establishing a list of projects calling for investment; and providing support
to enterprises and investors.
Some countries provided new support to agricultural innovation and the development of digital
technologies. Japan published the Smart Agriculture Comprehensive Policy Package, identifying key
measures to advance data-driven agriculture over the next five years. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry
and Fisheries also established the Conception and Projects for DX of Agriculture Initiative, which provides
a roadmap for the development of artificial intelligence, big data, and the digitalisation of administrative
procedures. Korea established the Smart Agriculture Project, which aims to promote the application of
new technologies and attract young and innovative farmers to the agricultural sector. Young farmers can
benefit from concessional leasing of agricultural facilities and farmlands in smart farm complexes, and
cross-sectoral R&D projects will be conducted to support the development of new technologies. Turkey
introduced the Digital Agriculture Market (DITAP), a digital platform to help develop supplier linkages
between smallholders and large-scale food processing and retail firms. DITAP also helps small farmers to
access markets for inputs such as seeds and fertilisers, and provides a platform for farmers to lease their
land.
Numerous countries have concluded bilateral and regional trade agreements. On 15 November 2020, the
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) was concluded by fifteen countries in the Asia-
Pacific region, including Australia, China, Indonesia, Japan, New Zealand, the Philippines, Korea and
Viet Nam. The Agreement will reduce tariffs on goods among the 15 participating economies by 90% over
two decades from entry into force, and provides a framework for strengthening co-operation in the areas
of standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures, as well as for streamlining
rules of origin and border processes for perishable goods. The Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement
(CUSMA) entered into force on 1 July 2020, preserving the existing agricultural commitments under the
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). The European Union and Mexico finished negotiations
on a new EU-Mexico trade agreement, which will further liberalise more than 85% of the agricultural tariff
lines that were left out of the original EU-Mexico Global Agreement that has been in force since 2000. On
31 January 2020, the United Kingdom left the EU Single Market and Customs Union, ending the free
movement of people, goods and services with the European Union. The rules governing trade and
movement between the two are laid down in the draft EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement, which
was agreed on 24 December 2020 and ratified by the European Parliament on 27 April 2021. Of particular
relevance to agriculture, the trade component of the agreement includes duty- and quota-free imports on
all goods that comply with rules-of-origin provisions.
Several additional bilateral free trade agreements (FTAs) were negotiated or came into effect in 2020 and
2021, helping to facilitate bilateral trade in agricultural products. These include: the Canada–United
Kingdom Trade Continuity Agreement; Colombia-Israel FTA; European Union-Viet Nam FTA; Indonesia-
Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA); Indonesia-Korea CEPA; Japan-US
FTA; Korea-Israel FTA; Ukraine-Israel FTA; United Kingdom-Israel FTA (and related protocol for the
mutual recognition of organic produce); United Kingdom-Japan CEPA; United Kingdom-Korea FTA; United


40 

Kingdom-Mexico Trade Continuity Agreement; United Kingdom-Ukraine political, free trade and strategic
partnership agreement; United Kingdom-Viet Nam FTA; United States-China Phase One Trade
Agreement. Numerous other FTA negotiations are ongoing.
Trade promotion and market development policies were introduced by a number of countries. India
initiated reforms to remove limits on private stocking, trading or buying of commodities, allow farmers to
sell their agricultural products outside of government-regulated markets, and promote barrier-free inter and
intra-state trade of agricultural commodities. The government also established a new Agriculture
Infrastructure Fund to support farmers, producer organisations and agribusinesses through subsidised
loans for post-harvest infrastructure such as cold storage, collection centres and processing units. To
facilitate the exports of processed food products, the Ministry of Trade of Indonesia adopted measures to
simplify the certificate of origin service and introduce automatic authentication procedures in licensing
processes. Japan introduced the Act on Facilitating the Export of Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery
Products and Food, which streamlines export policies for these products. The Strategy to Realize Export
Expansion of Agricultural, Forestry, Fishery Products and Food designates products to prioritise resources
and actions for agricultural export expansion. Russia introduced a programme to support exports of
agricultural products, including additional financing for export infrastructure, simplification of border
procedures, veterinary and phytosanitary services, information support, and support to promotion and
market access.
Are agricultural support policies helping to address the triple challenge faced by
food systems?
Food systems face a daunting “triple challenge”. First and foremost, they are expected to achieve food
security and nutrition for a growing world population. Second, they have an essential role to play in
providing incomes and livelihoods for hundreds of millions of people involved in farming and other
segments of the food chain. And third, they must do so in a sustainable manner, without depleting land,
water and biodiversity resources, while contributing to reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
The urgency of these challenges is reflected in the international political timetable, with food and agriculture
at the heart of foreseen discussions in 2021 at the COP-26 UN Climate Change Conference, the COP-15
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, and the UN Food
Systems Summit.
Agricultural support policies have played a major role in shaping today’s food systems. Historically, the
provision of support to agriculture has been motivated by a variety of policy objectives, which have included
ensuring food security, supporting farmers’ incomes and livelihoods and improving environmental
outcomes – key components of the “triple challenge”. The instruments chosen to pursue these objectives
have varied widely. Some countries have relied on trade and open access to markets to ensure food
security, while others have stressed domestic production and high rates of self-sufficiency, maintained via
subsidies and trade protection. Countries have similarly varied in the extent to which they see income
support as a goal for agricultural policy (as opposed to being covered by wider social protection
programmes), and in the instruments they have chosen to deliver it. Most countries also have specific agri-
environmental programmes, but many of the environmental impacts of agricultural policies stem from the
choice of policies to address the first two objectives.
This section begins with an overview of the level and composition of agricultural support policies across
countries. This is followed by an assessment of the implications of agricultural support for the performance
of food systems, reflected in the extent to which they may be helping or hindering progress in meeting the
triple challenge. Finally, the section considers the effectiveness of agricultural support policies in
strengthening the overall productivity, sustainability and resilience of the agricultural sector – key channels
for improving the performance of food systems.


 41

An overview of support to agriculture
The OECD has been monitoring developments in agricultural support in OECD countries on an annual
basis since 1988, with an increasing number of economies outside the OECD area included since then.
This exercise quantifies different forms of policy intervention according to their implementation criteria, and
forms the basis for an assessment of policy performance against stated objectives.
The current assessment covers 54 countries across six continents, including all OECD member countries,
5 non-OECD EU Member States, and 12 emerging and developing economies.10 Together, these
countries represent three-quarters of global agricultural value-added. The assessment also discusses
aggregate results for OECD member countries, the emerging economies, and all countries combined. In
these aggregates, however, Costa Rica, which became the 38th Member of the OECD in May 2021, is
included as one of the 12 Emerging Economies. The European Union is presented as one economic
region, and includes the United Kingdom, which has left the European Union in early 2020 but remained
part of the single market and continued to implement the Common Agricultural Policy through to the end
of 2020 (a separate set of support indicators is presented in this report for the United Kingdom for 2017-20).
Figure 1.7 provides an overview of the structure of agricultural support indicators. The Total Support
Estimate (TSE) is the OECD’s broadest indicator of support. It comprises policy expenditures in general
services for primary agriculture that benefit the sector as a whole (General Services Support Estimate or
GSSE); policy transfers to individual producers (Producer Support Estimate or PSE); and budgetary
support to consumers included in the Consumer Support Estimate (CSE). Annex 1.A provides definitions
of the OECD indicators of agricultural policy support.
Figure 1.7. Structure of agricultural support indicators

Note: *Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost.
Source: Annex 1.A.
In 2018-20, agricultural support policies across the 54 countries covered in this report generated
USD 720 billion per year in transfers to agriculture. This was counter-acted by more than
USD 104 billion per year in implicit taxation of farmers. Individual producers received USD 540 billion in
support per year (about 75% of all positive transfers to agriculture) through various support measures,
including higher prices paid by consumers.
Governments employ a variety of different policy measures to deliver agricultural support (Figure 1.8). An
important share of support is delivered through measures that modify domestic prices relative to world
TOTAL SUPPORT ESTIMATE (TSE)
Producer Support Estimate
(PSE)
Budgetary
transfers to
consumers
General
Services
Support
Estimate
(GSSE)
Market transfers
to/from producers:
Market Price Support
(MPS)*
Budgetary
transfers
to producers
MARKET TRANSFERS
BUDGETARY TRANSFERS
Consumer Support Estimate
(CSE)
Market transfers
to/from consumers


42 

market prices. These policies do not result in government expenditures per se, but rather represent market
transfers from consumers to producers, or vice-versa:

Market price support (MPS) arises from policies that create a price gap between domestic market
prices and border prices for specific agricultural commodities (Box 1.2). Import licences, tariffs,
tariff rate quotas and minimum prices are examples of measures that would result in higher prices
paid by consumers. Total positive MPS amounted to USD 272 billion per year in 2018-20.

Some emerging and developing countries (Argentina, India, Viet Nam, Kazakhstan, Russia and
Indonesia) implicitly tax producers on some or all agricultural commodities through measures that
depress the domestic prices of these products, such as export taxes and export restrictions
(resulting in negative market price support). Overall, negative MPS amounts to more than
USD 104 billion per year.
The remaining support measures amounted to USD 447 billion per year, and are delivered in the form of
budgetary payments and expenditures targeted to the agricultural sector (i.e. they represent transfers from
taxpayers to producers, consumers, or to the sector as a whole):

Other most distorting support refers to subsidies linked to output or the unconstrained use of
variable inputs (USD 66 billion per year), which have similar propensity to create market distortions
to those generated by MPS.

Other producer support (USD 202 billion per year) includes payments based on land area, animal
numbers, receipts or income, or payments not linked to the production of agricultural commodities,
such as payments based on historical entitlements. These subsidies are considered to be “less
coupled” to production and therefore more efficient in transferring income to the owners of land
and other production factors. Payments can also be conditional on specific production practices
and input uses designed to support environmental objectives. This category also includes specific
payments designed to encourage farmers to adopt environmentally friendly technologies and
practices.

Policies that benefit the agricultural sector as a whole include investments in R&D and innovation,
infrastructure (including off-farm irrigation systems, transportation and the provision of information
and communication technologies), biosecurity, marketing and public stockholding. These policies
are measured by the General Services Support Estimate (GSSE), which amounted to
USD 102 billion per year, or 14% of all positive transfers to agriculture.

Subsidies for consumers (such as food assistance programmes) amounted to USD 78 billion per
year, or 11% of all positive transfers to agriculture.


 43

Figure 1.8. Breakdown of agricultural support, total of all countries, 2018-20

Notes: Data refer to the All countries total, including all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the 12 Emerging Economies.
“Implicit taxation" of producers refers to negative market price support, “General services” refers to the General services support estimate,
“Consumer support” is transfers to consumers from taxpayers, “Other most dist.” refers to the most distorting producer support measures other
than market price support (i.e. support based on output payments and on the unconstrained use of variable inputs).
Due to missing value-added data, the Total support to agriculture in 2018-20 is related to agricultural value-added data for 2017-19.
Source: Based on OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/ov3flq
Total support to agriculture has grown considerably in nominal terms over the past two decades,
largely driven by increasing support in large emerging economies (Figure 1.9). The nominal value of
the total support estimate (TSE) for OECD countries has remained relatively stable, reaching
USD 329 billion in 2018-20, with reforms stalling over the last decade following some previous reforms. At
the same time, the share of total support in GDP has declined steadily from 1.0% in 2000-02 to 0.6% in
2018-20, reflecting the declining importance of the sector. In the 12 emerging economies, the TSE grew
from USD 44 billion in 2000-02 to USD 280 billion in 2018-20, driven by increasing rates of producer
support in the largest emerging economies – in particular, China, India and Indonesia. The TSE for
emerging economies averaged 1.2% of GDP in 2018-20, reflecting the importance of support in the largest
emerging economies, which are home to large agricultural sectors with sizeable agricultural populations.
Additionally, emerging economies subjected their producers to more than USD 104 billion in negative
market price support (i.e. implicit taxation) in 2018-20.
Implicit
taxation
of producers
USD 104 bn
Negative MPS
(lower prices)
USD 104 bn
Total support to agriculture:
USD 720 bn - 27% of agricultural value-added
USD 540 bn - 75 % of all support to agriculture
goes to producers individually
General
services:
USD 102 bn
14%
Consumer
support:
USD 78 bn
11%
Positive market price support (MPS)
(higher prices)
USD 272 bn - 38%
Other
most dist.
USD 66 bn
9%
Other producer support:
USD 202 bn - 28%
General services and
consumer support:
USD 180 bn - 25%
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
USD billion per year
Most distorting measures
Total budgetary support to agriculture: USD 447 bn


44 

Figure 1.9. Evolution of total support to agriculture in OECD and 12 emerging economies, 2000 to
2020

Notes: Negative MPS for OECD countries, mostly reflecting adjustments for higher feed costs due to positive MPS for feed commodities,
averaged USD 427 million per year between 2000 and 2020, and is therefore too small to be visible on the graph.
The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States. Latvia and Lithuania are included only from 2004.
The 12 Emerging Economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation,
South Africa, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/7zqrgy
Aggregate figures mask the diversity in levels of support across countries (Panel A in Figure 1.10).
The share of TSE in GDP (%TSE) indicates the cost of support to the sector for the overall economy. It
was highest in Indonesia (2.5%), the Philippines (2.5%), and China (1.6%), partly reflecting the fact that
agriculture has a comparatively high weight in the economies of these countries. The largest reductions in
the %TSE since 2000-02 (in percentage points) have occurred in Turkey, Colombia and Korea – countries
where the burden of support was initially high, but nonetheless still remained above 1.2% in 2018-20.
The level of total support in OECD countries continues to be high when measured relative to agricultural
value added, amounting to 42% in 2018-20 (Panel B in Figure 1.10). Total support relative to the size of
the sector varies widely across OECD countries, from 146% in Switzerland, 81% in Korea, and 78% in
Japan, to less than 10% in just three countries: Australia, Chile and New Zealand. In comparison, total
support in the 12 emerging economies represented just 15% of agricultural value added in 2018-20. The
importance of support to the sector is highest in the Philippines (27%), China (22%), and Kazakhstan
(21%). Total support is low relative to agricultural value added in India (4%) and Brazil (7%), and negative
in Argentina and Viet Nam. The total effective tax on agriculture relative to the size of the sector was 54%
in Argentina and 8% in Viet Nam.
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
-200 000
-100 000
0
100 000
200 000
300 000
400 000
500 000
600 000
700 000
800 000
%
USD million
OECD
12 emerging economies
12 emerging economies (negative MPS)
OECD (% GDP) - right axis
12 emerging economies (% GDP) - right axis


 45

Figure 1.10. Total Support Estimate by country, 2000-02 and 2018-20

Notes: Countries are ranked according to the %TSE in 2018-20.
Due to missing value-added data, the 2018-20 average TSE is related to agricultural value-added data for 2017-19 except for Japan and the
United States (2016-18) and for Canada and New Zealand (2015-17).
1. EU15 for 2000-02, EU28 for 2018-19 and EU27 plus UK for 2020.
2. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States. Latvia and Lithuania are included only for 2018-20.
3. The 12 Emerging Economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation,
South Africa, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
4. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the Emerging Economies.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/rgim1j
The Producer Support Estimate (PSE) measures policy transfers to individual agricultural producers.
Transfers to producers in the PSE comprise market price support (MPS) provided through domestic market
prices that are higher (or lower if support is negative) than world prices, and budgetary payments from the
government to farmers (Figure 1.7). The price gaps generated by trade policies and domestic market
interventions are typically calculated as a differential between domestic and reference prices, but in some
cases alternative methods are used for these calculations (Box 1.2).


B. Relative to agricultural value added
A. Relative to GDP
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
All countries 4
12 Emerging Economies 3
OECD 2
Argentina
Viet Nam
Australia
Chile
New Zealand
United Kingdom
South Africa
Brazil
Canada
United States
Israel
Russia
Mexico
India
Costa Rica
European Union 1
Ukraine
Norway
Kazakhstan
Japan
Switzerland
Iceland
Colombia
Turkey
Korea
China
Philippines
Indonesia
2018-20
2000-02
%
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
All countries 4
12 Emerging Economies 3
OECD 2
Argentina
Viet Nam
Australia
Chile
New Zealand
United Kingdom
South Africa
Brazil
Canada
United States
Israel
Russia
Mexico
India
Costa Rica
European Union 1
Ukraine
Norway
Kazakhstan
Japan
Switzerland
Iceland
Colombia
Turkey
Korea
China
Philippines
Indonesia
2018-20
2000-02
%


46 

Box 1.2. Market price support – concept and interpretation
Market price support (MPS) is defined as the “annual monetary value of gross transfers from consumers
and taxpayers to agricultural producers, arising from policy measures that create a gap between
domestic market prices and border prices of a specific agricultural commodity, measured at the farm
gate level” (OECD, 2016[13]). It is calculated for individual commodities, as the gap between the
domestic price paid to producers and the equivalent price at the border (market price differential, MPD),
multiplied by the quantity produced, and aggregated to the national level.
This definition contains three key elements. First, it measures the transfers that arise from policy
measures that create a price gap (e.g. import tariffs, minimum prices, export taxes, etc.). Second, it
measures gross transfers (positive or negative) to agricultural producers from consumers and
taxpayers. Third, it is measured at the farm gate level to ensure that MPS values are consistent with
the production and price data for the farming sector overall.
The price gap (MPD) is calculated only if policies exist that can cause the gap such as border measures
that restrict or promote imports or exports, and government purchases, sales and intervention prices in
the domestic market. If countries do not implement such policies, the MPD is assumed to be zero. A
non-zero MPD, whether positive or negative, originates from price-distorting policies. It is important to
note that MPS measures the “policy effort” (or level of support to prices), not the policy effect (e.g. the
impact on farm income). In addition to policy instruments that restrict price transmission (say, a target
price), market developments (such as exchange rate movements affecting world prices expressed in
local currencies) may influence the implied policy effort and, hence, the resulting transfers.
The calculation of the MPD for individual commodities based on prices requires information not only on
product prices, but also on differences in product qualities, processing and transportation margins, to
compare like with like. In some cases, difficulties in identifying and obtaining relevant prices or other
required information prevent the MPD calculation from being based on observed price gaps. An
alternative option for calculating the MPD is the use of import tariffs or export taxes (OECD, 2016[13]),
which is likely to provide accurate MPS estimates only if a uniform tariff or tax rate is the sole border
measures in place.
The use of tariffs rather than price gap data comes with a number of complex measurement issues,
covering issues such as the composition of product groups across tariff lines and the seasonality of
production and trade. Moreover, in order to capture the marginal rather than the average import
protection rate, the statutory applied MFN tariffs are used. In light of the growing number of preferential
trade agreements (PTAs) engaged in by countries covered by this report, an important caveat therefore
relates to the fact that the statutory applied MFN tariffs remain unchanged even when increased
quantities of products are imported under preferential tariffs or duty-free within such PTAs. As a
consequence, potential liberalising effects of new PTAs are not reflected in the MPS estimates when
tariffs are used to calculate them. With the increased relevance of PTAs for international trade, it
therefore becomes even more important to base the MPD calculations on price gap calculations
whenever data allow.
When interpreting MPS values, it is important to bear in mind that MPS is not a measure of public
expenditures but an estimation of implicit or explicit transfers. MPS estimates published by the OECD
therefore often differ from, and should not be confused with, those published by other organisations,
including by the World Trade Organization, which may use very different concepts to calculate their
indicators, despite similar names (Diakosavvas, 2002[14]; Effland, 2011[15]; Brink, 2018[16]).
Source: (OECD, 2020[3]).


 47

The average %PSE (producer support as a share of gross farm receipts) for all 54 countries has been
declining over the past two decades, from 18% in 2000-02 to 11% in 2018-20 (Figure 1.11). Within this
average is a clear pattern of a decreasing rate of producer support in OECD countries and increasing rate
of producer support in emerging and developing economies from the beginning of the century until 2015.
In OECD countries, the %PSE fell from 28% in 2000-02 to 18% in 2018-20. Most of this decline was driven
by reforms initiated prior to 2008; the pace of decline has been markedly slower since and reversed to a
slight increase after 2014. In contrast, the %PSE in emerging economies almost doubled from 3.8% in
2000-02 to 7.4% in 2018-20.
Figure 1.11. Evolution of the % Producer Support Estimate, 2000 to 2020
Percentage of gross farm receipts

Notes: The two bars relate to the 12 Emerging Economies and represent a decomposition of PSE into its positive and negative parts.
1. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the 12 Emerging Economies.
2. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States. Latvia and Lithuania are included only from 2004.
3. The 12 Emerging Economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation,
South Africa, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/5ponzf
The %PSE in emerging economies reached a peak of 10.8% in 2015 and subsequently declined to 7.4%
in 2020. This is in part due to higher levels of negative market price support, which depressed the domestic
prices of certain commodities in some of these countries. Indeed, the %PSE represents the balance of
positive and negative MPS elements, and tends to underestimate the extent of price distortions when both
positive and negative price support are present.
Support remains highly concentrated. In 2000-02 the overall value of producer support was
concentrated in OECD countries, in particular the European Union, the United States and Japan. Since
then, support in some large emerging economies (China, India and Indonesia) has become increasingly
important. Four countries accounted for the vast majority of the aggregate net Producer Support Estimate
in 2018-20: China (44%), the European Union (24%), the United States (10%) and Japan (9%). Negative
market price support was predominantly provided by India (78%). The size of the agricultural sectors in
these countries means that any policy will automatically result in large absolute numbers. For this reason,
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
%
OECD 2
of which are budgetary payments and positive MPS
of which are negative MPS
All countries 1
12 Emerging Economies 3


48 

it is often useful to express the producer support estimate relative to gross farm receipts, as is done in
Figure 1.12 below.
Countries differ widely in their tendency to support (or tax) their farmers. The countries with the
highest levels of producer support when measured as a share of gross farm receipts are all in the OECD
area. In Norway, Iceland, Switzerland, Korea and Japan, agricultural policy transfers arising from tariffs
and other support measures generate between 40% and 60% of the revenues received by farmers.
Producer support is above the OECD average of 18% in the Philippines, Indonesia, the United Kingdom,
the European Union, and Israel. Seven countries have low levels of support, below 5%: Kazakhstan, South
Africa, Chile, Australia, Ukraine, Brazil and New Zealand. Finally, three countries have negative levels of
producer support, as a consequence of farmers facing implicit taxation through suppressed producer
prices: Argentina, Viet Nam and India.
The level of producer support as a share of gross farm receipts has declined across OECD countries
relative to the levels observed in 2000-02. Support has also declined in a number of emerging economies,
notably Brazil, South Africa, Kazakhstan and Costa Rica. As mentioned previously, some of the larger
emerging economies increased their level of support as measured by the %PSE, including Ukraine,
Indonesia, China, the Philippines and Russia. Support to producers became more negative in Argentina
and India, while Viet Nam’s %PSE turned from positive in 2000-02 to negative in 2018-20.
Figure 1.12. Producer Support Estimate by country, 2000-02 and 2018-20
Percentage of gross farm receipts

Notes: Countries are ranked according to the 2018-20 levels.
1. EU15 for 2000-02, EU28 for 2018-19 and EU27 plus UK for 2020.
2. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States. Latvia and Lithuania are included only for 2018-20.
3. The 12 Emerging Economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation,
South Africa, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
4. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the Emerging Economies.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/1omcgi
-30
-10
10
30
50
70
%
2018-20
2000-02


 49

How do agricultural support policies affect food security and nutrition?
According to the FAO, “a person is food insecure when they lack regular access to enough safe and
nutritious food for normal growth and development and an active and healthy life.” The severity of food
insecurity can vary by time and degree, ranging from mild (uncertainty regarding one’s ability to obtain
food) to moderate (compromising on food quality and variety, reducing food quantity, skipping meals) to
severe food insecurity (no access to food for more than a day) (FAO, 2020[17]).
The world as a whole is not on target to achieve the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
target 2.1, of “ensuring access to safe, nutritious and sufficient food for all people all year round”, nor
target 2.2, of “eradicating all forms of malnutrition”. While the proportion of people who are undernourished
declined significantly over the past few decades, this trend has reversed in recent years. The prevalence
of undernourishment increased from 8.6% in 2014 to 8.9% in 2019, and the absolute number of people
affected by hunger increased by 60 million over the same period. Nearly 750 million people, or 10% of the
world’s population, were considered to be severely food insecure in 2019, while an estimated 2 billion
people (26% of the global population) experienced moderate or severe food insecurity, meaning that they
did not have regular access to safe, nutritious and sufficient food.
Africa and Asia currently account for 92% of the world’s undernourished, or 631 million out of 688 million
people. If current trends persist, the number of people affected by hunger is projected to exceed 840 million
in 2030, of which 762 million (91%) will be in Africa and Asia. The COVID-19 pandemic has also led to a
significant worsening of the situation, potentially resulting in an additional 83-132 million undernourished
people in the world in 2020 (FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO, 2020[18]).
Food security is linked to multiple areas of government policy, including macroeconomic policies that raise
incomes and thereby improve access to food, trade policies that influence food availability, and public
health and sanitation policies that improve food safety and nutritional outcomes. Tackling this complex and
multi-faceted problem requires ensuring that sufficient food is available, that people have access11 to food,
and that food leads to good nutritional outcomes. A fourth requirement is the stability of these three
dimensions over time, which implies effective risk management (OECD, 2013[19]). This section assesses
the specific impact of agricultural support policies on the four dimensions of food security: availability,
access, nutrition, and stability.
Food availability
A global lack of food has not been a fundamental cause of continued food insecurity around the world.
Global agricultural production has increased four-fold since 1960, with the amount of food available per
person growing by 56%. This remarkable growth in supply can be largely attributed to productivity growth
and yield improvements, as agricultural production has rapidly outpaced population growth and the
expansion of agricultural land (Figure 1.13). The OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2020-2029 projects that
the pace of demand growth for agricultural commodities will slow over the coming decade, and will continue
to be outpaced by efficiency gains in crop and livestock production (OECD/FAO, 2020[20]).


50 

Figure 1.13. Global population, agricultural land use and food production

Sources: Population data from Maddison's historical statistics for 1820-1940; UN Population Division for 1950-2010; 1800 and 1810 extrapolated
from Maddison. Agricultural (crops and pasture) land data for 1800-2010 from the History Database of the Global Environment (HYDE 3.2),
Klein Goldewijk et al. (2017). Global agricultural production data for 1960-2010 from FAOSTAT (Net Agricultural Production Index); data for
2020 from OECD/FAO (2020), “OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-outl-
data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/mtjf29
Even so, some countries have suffered from a lack of food availability due to prolonged conflicts and
extreme fragility. More commonly, however, food insecurity in these countries is driven by poverty and a
lack of access to food. Across 15 countries with a protracted crisis for which food price data are available,
the cost of a healthy diet (USD 3.80) is roughly in line with the global average (USD 3.75), yet healthy diets
are unaffordable for 86% of the population (compared with the global average of 38%) (FAO, IFAD,
UNICEF, WFP and WHO, 2020[18]). Thus, the notions of food availability and access to food are closely
linked.
Governments can improve the availability of food by stimulating the domestic supply of food with non-
distorting policies (e.g. through productivity improvements, reduced post-harvest losses, or reduced
diversion of food crops to biofuels), and by limiting excess food demand (e.g. through reductions in over-
consumption and consumer waste). International trade also plays a vital role in increasing the availability
of food by balancing the deficits of net food importers with the surpluses of net food exporters, and
permitting an allocation of production across countries that reflects relative differences in resource
abundance. Trade is particularly important for the food security of regions experiencing growing food
demand, which often do not correspond to the areas in which supply can be increased in an efficient and
sustainable manner.
Agricultural support policies have adverse implications for global food availability by encouraging a sub-
optimal allocation of resources, altering the relative mix of products grown, and displacing production to
less efficient locations (OECD, 2016[21]). Many countries provide support to their agricultural sectors
through measures that artificially stimulate domestic production and distort trade, with potentially significant
consequences for global food availability. The most distorting measures – market price support, payments
based on output and payments based on variable inputs without constraints – represent more than half of
all transfers to and from producers in many countries, although some countries have implemented reforms
that have decoupled support from production levels (Figure 1.14).
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
1960=100
Population
Total agricultural land
Global agricultural production


 51

Agricultural support policies are therefore concentrated on measures that seek to increase domestic food
availability, but often do so in an inefficient way (e.g. by raising prices), rather than through productivity-
enhancing investments in R&D, innovation and infrastructure. These policies may contribute to domestic
supply increases, but also encourage crops to be diverted away from human food consumption and
towards the production of animal feed, biofuels, and the expansion of stocks (Pingali, 2015[22]). Policies to
reduce the overconsumption of food and reduce food waste have so far had limited success, but can also
play an important role in increasing domestic food availability.
Figure 1.14. Potentially most distorting transfers and other support by country, 2018-20
Percentage of gross farm receipts

Notes: Countries are ranked according to the %PSE levels.
1. Support based on output payments and on the unconstrained use of variable inputs.
2. EU28 for 2018-19, EU27 plus UK for 2020.
3. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States.
4. The 12 Emerging Economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation,
South Africa, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
5. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the Emerging Economies.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/qrukh7
The most distorting support policies reduce the global availability of food by impeding international trade
(Brooks and Matthews, 2015[23]). Market price support policies such as import tariffs, quotas, and minimum
prices may boost domestic production but also raise domestic prices, thus reducing domestic demand and
food imports. These policies also reduce access to food for low income consumers (discussed further in
the section on “Access to food”) Export taxes and restrictions (discussed further in the section on “Stability”)
lead to higher prices and lower exports, effectively amounting to an implicit tax on farmers (negative market
price support). Such measures discourage production and long-term investments in productive capacity.
Collectively, these policies also influence the pattern of specialisation across countries, causing production
to shift from more efficient to less efficient locations. Farmers in countries with export potential and low
levels of government assistance face lower returns, due to restrictions in market access and reduced
opportunities to sell into protected markets (OECD, 2013[19]; Anderson and Valenzuela, 2021[24]).
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
%
Positive MPS
Negative MPS
Other potentially most distorting support 1
Other support
Producer Support Estimate


52 

The trade-distorting effects of agricultural support policies in OECD countries have declined considerably
compared with earlier decades. Export subsidies were banned under WTO rules in 2015, and many
countries have replaced market price supports for individual products with less distorting measures that
are decoupled from current production. For example, Switzerland provides significant direct payments to
farms, almost all of which are subject to environmental cross-compliance. These have increased over time,
from around 20% of support to farmers in the 1980s to almost 50% in recent years. Successive reforms to
the European Union’s Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) since the early 2000s have decoupled nearly half
of budgetary support from production, by reducing distortive price supports and increasing direct payments
to producers (of which nearly 60% are contingent on mandatory environmental constraints). Area-based
payments and direct income payments have a weaker influence on production decisions, as they are not
directly tied to output.
The importance of market price support is reflected in the fact that higher tariffs continue to be applied to
trade in agricultural and food products, in spite of extensive tariff reductions since the 1994 Uruguay Round
Agreement on Agriculture. The average applied tariff on agricultural products globally in 2018 was 7.8%
(compared with 4.6% for industrial goods). At the same time, the gap between tariff rates bound under
WTO rules and applied rates means that countries can raise tariffs on agricultural products to an average
of 48.9% (compared with 27.1% for industrial goods). This significant water in the tariffs for agriculture
adds to policy risks. Furthermore, average tariff rates mask distortions along specific product lines; while
many tariff lines are at zero, some are considerably higher and may even exceed 100%, and there are
many instances where tariff rates increase with higher levels of processing (OECD, 2020[5]).
To further illustrate this point, Figure 1.15 shows that levels of market price support (as a share of gross
farm receipts) vary widely across countries and commodities. Only Australia, Chile, Brazil and Kazakhstan
have low average levels of market price support, at or below 6% for all commodities. All other countries
have at least one commodity with price support above 20%.12 Six countries (Korea, Japan, Iceland, the
Philippines, Norway and Switzerland) have high average levels of market price support in excess of 20%
of gross farm receipts, while average market price support is negative in Kazakhstan, Viet Nam, India and
Argentina. Figure 1.15 also demonstrates that there is significant dispersion of market price support within
countries, albeit with varying distributions across commodities. In several countries, some commodities
are supported whilst others are taxed, creating significant additional distortions to prices and market
signals.




 53

Figure 1.15. Relative magnitude of product-specific market price support by country, 2018-20
Simple average of MPS as a percentage of gross farm receipts

Notes: A. Number of MPS commodities. B. Number of MPS commodities with non-zero MPS values.
The ends of the whiskers represent the minimum and maximum values across commodities, while the boxes indicate ranges between the first
and the third quartiles with the horizontal line inside indicating the median. Diamonds represent mean values for total agriculture. Minimum
values for Kazakhstan and Viet Nam are -142% and -105%, respectively.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/dq3irx
Broad based multilateral reform of trade and domestic support policies is likely to generate large and
widespread benefits for food availability, by facilitating shifts in production to regions that are best able to
meet the growing global demand for food and agricultural raw materials. OECD (2016[21]) found that the
removal of all trade-related and domestic support to agriculture would increase trade in both intermediate
and final agro-food commodities (the largest effect was observed for final food products, due to higher
applied tariffs on processed products and the fact that products may face tariffs on multiple occasions as
intermediate goods travel across borders). Removing barriers to market access therefore has the potential
to boost trade (including in intermediate agricultural products) and strengthen participation in agro-food
global value chains (GVCs) (Greenville et al., 2019[25]).
Intra-regional trade can improve food availability in countries that face difficulties accessing world markets
and integrating in global supply chains. Bilateral and more extensive trade agreements have become
increasingly prevalent in the global agricultural trading environment since the early 1990s, in part due to
the slow progress of multilateral negotiations. These agreements are often viewed as a vehicle for
economic and political integration amongst members, and have resulted in substantial improvements in
market access, delivering reduced tariffs across a broad range of agricultural commodities (Thompson-
Lipponen and Greenville, 2019[26]). In some cases, however, preferential trade agreements may cause
rents to shift to participating countries, rather than creating new market opportunities.
Reforming trade-distorting support can strengthen global food availability by allowing countries to benefit
from improved market access and providing an important springboard for export-led growth. Trade
openness can also improve access to food and contribute to faster economic growth, by raising the
incomes of exporters (allowing them to profit from higher prices than would be received in the absence of
trade) and importers (who benefit from lower prices than would otherwise be paid) (Brooks and Matthews,
2015[23]). However, it is important to recognise that reforms to the most distorting forms of support are likely
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
-100
-75
-50
-25
0
25
50
75
100
KOR JPN
ISL
PHL NOR CHE IDN
ISR COL TUR CHN CRI MEX GBR CAN RUS EU28 ZAF USA UKR NZL BRA CHL AUS KAZ VNM IND ARG
11
19
7
11
10
11
13
17
13
16
18
10
15
12
16
13
21
14
16
13
11
11
16
17
13
12
20
10
11
17
5
7
9
10
9
10
9
11
15
5
5
9
3
12
14
3
5
8
2
8
1
0
12
12
20
9
%
B.
A.


54 

to impose short-term costs on some stakeholders. In particular, producers that formerly benefited from
protection, exporters that benefited from preferential market access, and consumers that benefited from
former policy arrangements may face difficulties adapting to a more competitive trading environment. In
such cases, it may be necessary to provide transitional assistance. Social safety nets can facilitate
structural adjustment, by ensuring adequate incomes for those with few viable economic alternatives
(Brooks and Matthews, 2015[23]; OECD, 2002[27]).
It is particularly important to reform the most distorting policies that stifle innovation and hamper the
agricultural sector’s long-term productivity and sustainability. In recent decades, agricultural productivity
growth has played an essential role in increasing the global supply of food and contributing to widespread
improvements in food availability. Productivity growth has also put significant downward pressure on food
prices, resulting in improved access to food for poor consumers worldwide. The growth in agricultural
productivity owes much to efforts by governments to facilitate the provision of public goods and services
and create enabling conditions to strengthen the competitiveness of agriculture. Continued policy attention
in these areas will be fundamental to achieving sustained improvements in food security.
The General Services Support Estimate (GSSE) includes expenditures on R&D and innovation, inspection
services, infrastructure development and maintenance, marketing and promotion, and public stockholding.
Despite its potential to contribute to sustainable productivity growth and strengthen food security, the
GSSE tends to be much lower than support provided directly to producers: in 2018-20, it represented 13%
of the Total Support Estimate (TSE) in OECD countries, and 20% of the TSE across the 12 emerging
economies.
When measured as a share of agricultural value added, the GSSE stood at just 5.6% in OECD countries
and 3.0% in the 12 emerging economies in 2018-20 (Figure 1.16). Expenditures on general services were
highest in Switzerland (16% of agricultural value added), Japan (16%) and Korea (12%). In the remaining
countries, the GSSE ranged between 1.0% of agricultural value added in Iceland and 6.1% in the United
States. The composition of expenditure also varies widely across countries: agricultural knowledge and
innovation systems accounted for just 5% of GSSE expenditures in Indonesia, and 92% in Brazil13.
Spending on infrastructure development and maintenance ranged from 3% of the GSSE in Ukraine to 86%
in Japan.




 55

Figure 1.16. General Services Support Estimate: Share in agricultural value added and
composition, 2018-20

Notes: “AIS” refers to the Agricultural knowledge and innovation system. “Other” includes the marketing and promotion, cost of public
stockholding, and miscellaneous categories of the GSSE. Countries are ranked according to the share of total GSSE in agricultural value added.
Due to missing value-added data, the 2018-20 average GSSE is related to agricultural value-added data for 2017-19 except for Japan and the
United States (2016-18) and for Canada and New Zealand (2015-17)
1. EU28 for 2018-19, EU27 plus UK for 2020.
2. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States. Latvia and Lithuania are included only for 2018-20.
3. The 12 Emerging Economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation,
South Africa, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
4. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the Emerging Economies.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/8nm5bp
R&D plays a vital role in strengthening productivity in agricultural production, food processing and delivery
to consumers. There is ample evidence that public investments in agricultural R&D generate large rates of
return  (Alston et al., 2010[28]; Piesse and Thirtle, 2010[29]), and can have positive implications for food
security (Kristkova, van Dijk and van Meijl, 2017[30]). Public funding is crucial in areas where private
investors are missing, and can help to stimulate private investment, including through public-private
partnerships (PPPs). Governments should also work to create an enabling environment for private
investments, provide stable funding for knowledge infrastructure, and strengthen linkages within the
agricultural innovation system between R&D and technical assistance. Making innovation systems more
collaborative and demand-driven can improve the impact of public expenditure. Efforts to improve the
governance of the agricultural innovation system may include the development of long-term strategies for
agricultural innovation, involving stakeholders more formally and earlier in the process, and strengthening
evaluation frameworks (OECD, 2019[31]). Agricultural R&D remains dominated by the public sector in many
countries, while private research tends to focus on specific areas (e.g. genetic improvements, fertilisers
and chemicals, machinery, food processing). However, growth in public agricultural R&D investment has
been slowing over the past decade in high-income countries (Heisey and Fuglie, 2018[32]).
In addition to maintaining strong levels of investment in agricultural R&D, investments in productivity-
enhancing infrastructure can also strengthen food availability. Well-developed transportation infrastructure,
including rural road networks and access to port facilities, can help to connect farmers with markets and
allow them to take advantage of export opportunities. Ensuring affordable access to ICTs in rural areas
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
%
AIS
Infrastructure
Inspection and control
Other


56 

can provide farmers with real-time information on food prices and weather conditions, improve the reach
of early-warning systems, and facilitate the adoption of new digital technologies and innovations. At the
same time, some investments to expand irrigation infrastructure may slow structural change and hamper
the development of diversified farming systems, with potential negative consequences for environmental
sustainability.
Access to food
Access to food is fundamentally driven by two related factors: the price of food, and real incomes. High
agricultural prices can impede access to food for low-income consumers, who typically spend a large
proportion of their household budgets on food. Food prices have been declining since the mid-1970s and
are low by historical standards (Figure 1.17). With no major structural shifts in agricultural commodity
demand on the horizon, the OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2020-2029 projects flat to declining real
agricultural prices over the next ten years (OECD/FAO, 2020[20]).
It is important to recognise that farmers are affected by food prices as both buyers and sellers. Whilst
higher prices can improve incomes and access to food for some farmers, the majority of the rural poor are
net buyers of food staples (OECD, 2013[19]). Sharp increases in the prices of food staples – as was
witnessed during the 2007-08 food price crisis – can therefore lead to lower real incomes and weaken the
purchasing power of poor farmers as well as consumers, undermining food security objectives. Several
studies have found that higher food prices have a negative impact on poverty and welfare outcomes,
particularly for poor households who tend to spend a greater share of their incomes on food  (Filipski and
Covarrubias, 2012[33]; Ivanic and Martin, 2008[34]).
Figure 1.17. Long-term evolution of real agricultural prices

Notes: Historical data for soybeans, maize and beef from World Bank, "World Commodity Price Data" (1960-1989). Historical data for pork from
USDA QuickStats (1960-1989).
Source: OECD/FAO (2020), “OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-outl-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/vbly7a
The prospect of continued low prices for food staples bodes well for the overall accessibility of food.
However, there are concerns that healthy and nutritious foods remain unaffordable for much of the world’s
population, leading to rising rates of hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition. According to the State of
Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2020, healthy diets14 cost 60% more than diets that only meet the
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Index (2019=100)
Soybeans
Maize
Beef
Pork


 57

requirements for essential nutrients, and are nearly five times more expensive than diets that only meet
the basic dietary energy needs through a starchy staple. More than 1.5 billion people cannot afford a diet
that meets the required levels of essential nutrients, and over 3 billion people cannot afford the cheapest
healthy diet  (FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO, 2020[18]).
Agricultural support policies are often implemented by raising domestic prices above world market prices,
leading to higher costs for the consumers of agricultural commodities. The percentage Consumer Support
Estimate (%CSE) expresses the monetary value of the transfers to consumers (both through prices and
through food assistance programmes) as a percentage of consumption expenditure (measured at farm
gate). When domestic prices are higher than world market prices, consumers are effectively subjected to
implicit taxation. In most countries, consumers are harmed by market price support policies, resulting in
negative values for the %CSE (Figure 1.18). The level of this implicit tax ranges from zero in Australia to
more than 35% in Iceland, Korea, Japan and Norway. Some emerging economies (India, Argentina,
Kazakhstan and Viet Nam) have a positive %CSE, meaning that they implicitly tax producers and support
consumers by artificially lowering the prices for agricultural commodities. The United States is the only
OECD country with a positive %CSE, due to the high level of budgetary transfers for food assistance
programmes.
Figure 1.18. Composition of the Consumer Support Estimate by country, 2018-20
Percentage of consumption expenditure at farm gate

Notes: Countries are ranked according to percentage CSE levels. A negative percentage CSE is an implicit tax on consumption.
1. EU28 for 2018-19, EU27 plus UK for 2020.
2. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States.
3. The 12 Emerging Economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation,
South Africa, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
4. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the Emerging Economies.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/5pntc3
Market price support policies generally result in lower real incomes and reduced access to food. Poor
consumers are disproportionately burdened by higher agricultural prices, as food accounts for a greater
share of their household budgets. In addition, small farmers in emerging and developing economies are
often net buyers of agricultural commodities, and therefore bear a part of these costs. Market price support
also has a negative influence on the competitiveness of downstream segments of the food chain: livestock
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
%
Market transfers
Budgetary transfers
Consumer Support Estimate


58 

producers face higher costs for animal feed, and food processing industries face higher prices for their
inputs. Furthermore, if support measures are sufficient to cause countries to have an export surplus, they
can curtail export opportunities for farmers in countries with low levels of government assistance (such as
Australia, Brazil and New Zealand) (Anderson and Valenzuela, 2021[24]).
While prices clearly matter and have a strong influence on the affordability of food, real incomes and
poverty levels also play an essential role in determining access to food. If incomes are extremely low, even
cheap food can be out of reach for the poor (OECD, 2021[35]). In many emerging and developing countries,
increases in food prices such as those experienced during the 2007-08 food price crisis were largely
compensated for by robust growth in incomes. Countries therefore have much better prospects of
strengthening access to food by raising incomes and tackling poverty than by attempting to lower domestic
prices below world levels (OECD, 2013[19]).
Governments have a range of policy tools at their disposal to support the incomes of rural households and
improve access to food (discussed further in the section on “Incomes and livelihoods. Conditional cash
transfers have been a popular and effective tool deployed by many developing countries in recent years.
Such programmes provide cash to poor households on the condition that they make pre-determined
investments (e.g. in schooling for their children). Emergency food reserves can also be used to protect the
most vulnerable, provided they supply food to specific groups without disrupting private markets (OECD,
2013[19]). In addition, many countries have introduced social safety nets and food assistance programmes
to provide low-income households with better access to food. Examples include the USDA’s Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Programme and National School Lunch Programme, Korea’s Food Voucher
Assistance Programme, and the United Kingdom’s Healthy Start scheme (Placzek, 2021[10]). The
COVID-19 pandemic has also had a measurable impact on access to food, mainly through declines in
income and increases in global poverty (Laborde et al., 2020[36]). In response to the crisis, for example,
India’s food subsidy allocation increased from USD 13 billion in the 2020-21 budget estimate to
USD 48 billion in the revised budget estimates, reflecting the additional cost of free food grain distribution
in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Nutrition
Poor nutrition is a significant threat to the health and well-being of the world’s population. According to
estimates from the State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2020, 144 million children (21%) under
the age of five were stunted, 47 million (6.9%) were affected by wasting, and 38 million (5.6%) were
overweight in 2019. At least 340 million children suffer from micronutrient deficiencies (FAO, IFAD,
UNICEF, WFP and WHO, 2020[18]). Countries are also facing a growing public health burden linked to poor
quality diets: more than two billion people (about 40% of the world’s adult population in 2016) are
overweight or obese, and adult obesity is rising in all regions across the globe (Figure 1.19). Across the
OECD, almost 60% of the population is overweight or obese, and nearly 25% of people are obese (OECD,
2019[37]).


 59

Figure 1.19. Undernourishment, overweight and obesity, 2000-2016

Source: WHO (2019), Global Health Observatory, World Health Data Platform, https://www.who.int/data/gho.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/ilxu9g
Malnutrition and obesity have significant negative consequences for health, quality of life, productivity and
economic outcomes. Poor diets have been associated with increased rates of type II diabetes, cancer,
cardiovascular diseases and other non-communicable diseases, as well as shorter lifespans. According to
the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study, dietary risks15 such as a high intake of
salt, sugar and red or processed meat, and a low intake of whole grains, fruits and vegetables, were
responsible for 7.9 million deaths among adults aged 25 years and older in 2019 (GBD 2019 Risk Factors
Collaborators, 2020[38]). In OECD countries, overweight and obesity will claim an estimated 92 million lives
by 2050, reducing life expectancy by nearly three years (OECD, 2019[37]).
Poor diets and unhealthy food choices impose considerable economic costs on society, including reduced
school performance for children, higher rates of workplace absenteeism, and lower labour productivity.
The combined economic impact of overweight on life expectancy, health expenditure and labour market
productivity will reduce GDP by an estimated 3.3% per annum in OECD countries between 2020 and 2050
(OECD, 2019[37]).
The causes of poor nutrition in developed countries are complex and highly context-dependent, and
include urbanisation, changes in lifestyles, socio-economic factors, as well as the low cost and widespread
availability of processed and fast food (Placzek, 2021[10]). In addition, there are concerns that agricultural
support policies may have contributed to worsening health and nutritional outcomes. Since the late 1960s,
many countries have pursued national food security goals through an overarching focus on achieving self-
sufficiency in the production of cereal crops such as wheat, maize and rice. Agricultural R&D was heavily
biased towards staple grains, through large-scale public investments in the development of new crop
varieties and advances in plant breeding. Policies such as price supports, preferential credit, input
subsidies, and grain procurement for public stocks, as well as infrastructure investment (e.g. in irrigation
networks), strongly encouraged farmers to specialise in the production of staple crops. As a result, global
grain production increased substantially, and developing countries experienced rapid increases in yields
per hectare during the Green Revolution: between 1960 and 2000, yields rose by 208% for wheat, 109%
for rice, 157% for maize, 78% for potatoes, and 36% for cassava (Pingali, 2012[39]).
Over the past few decades, agricultural productivity growth has been a fundamental driver of poverty
reduction and widespread improvements in global food security (Alston et al., 2010[28]; Kristkova, van Dijk
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2000
2016
2000
2016
2000
2016
2000
2016
2000
2016
World
Low income economies
Lower-middle-income
economies
Upper-middle-income
economies
High-income economies
% Share of adult population
Undernourished
Overweight
Obese


60 

and van Meijl, 2017[30]; Piesse and Thirtle, 2010[29]). In particular, productivity-led declines in food prices
have substantially improved access to food for poor consumers, resulting in increased calorie availability
per capita and a significant fall in the prevalence of undernourishment globally. However, an excessive
policy focus on staple crops may have reduced dietary diversity by promoting the production of energy-
dense cereals at the expense of micronutrient-rich non-staple foods, such as fruits, vegetables and pulses
(Pingali, 2015[22]). As land and resources were increasingly allocated towards staple crops, important
sources of critical micronutrients were displaced and became relatively less affordable (Bouis, 2000[40];
Kataki, 2002[41]). For example, during the 1970s and 1980s, farmers in India diverted land away from pulses
to produce wheat and rice, leading to sharp increases in the price of pulses and a drop in their per capita
consumption (Hazell, 2009[42]). More recently, work by the OECD has demonstrated that agricultural
policies promote staple products such as rice and wheat at the expense of other production activities
(OECD, 2016[21]). Today, diets across many societies are characterised by an over-consumption of
processed foods, sugar and fat, and insufficient consumption of fruits and vegetables (Giner and Brooks,
2019[43]). With the exception of Asia and some upper-middle income countries, most countries do not have
enough fruits and vegetables available to meet the FAO/WHO recommendation of consuming a minimum
of 400 g per person per day  (FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO, 2020[18]).
The current structure of agricultural support policies may have significant consequences for nutritional
outcomes. Figure 1.20 shows the transfers to specific commodities (expressed as a share of commodity
gross farm receipts), which collectively represented more than 47% of producer support in 2018-20. Sugar
has the highest reliance on government support, with transfers amounting to 28% of commodity gross farm
receipts. Milk is highly supported in many OECD countries, although the aggregate %SCT hides significant
variation in milk policies across countries (including -33% of implicit taxation in India). Energy-dense foods
such as vegetable oils (rapeseed), staple crops (maize and rice) and meat also feature prominently, while
relatively limited support is provided for fruits and vegetables. These measures ossify production and
increase the supply of these commodities. To the extent that support measures encourage the production
of nutrient-poor commodities, this may hamper incentives for farmers to diversify their production towards
foods that are potentially richer in micronutrients.
At the same time, it is worth noting that most commodity-specific transfers come from increased domestic
prices through policies such as import tariffs, quotas and minimum prices. Their immediate effect would
therefore be to reduce the domestic consumption of these products. However, this effect may be small if
consumers are not very responsive to higher prices (e.g. if demand is inelastic, or if the value of agricultural
commodities accounts for a small share of overall food expenditures), and may be overwhelmed by the
price-depressing effects of other support policies, such as taxpayer-financed subsidies and investments in
R&D (Beghin and Jensen, 2008[44]; Pingali, 2015[22]).


 61

Figure 1.20. Transfers to specific commodities (SCT), all countries, 2018-20

Note: Data refer to the All countries total, including all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the 12 Emerging Economies.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/af5c3d
Reducing trade-distorting support could therefore facilitate a transition towards more diverse agricultural
production systems, providing consumers with access to a broader range of nutritious foods necessary for
a healthy diet (Brooks and Matthews, 2015[23]). Decoupled payments allow farmers to follow market signals
in their production decisions, without biasing choices on what to produce, or whether to remain in the sector
at all. Furthermore, there may be scope to rebalance support measures that directly encourage the
production of staple crops towards the provision of a greater diversity of nutrient-rich perishable foods
(Global Panel on Agriculture and Food Systems for Nutrition, 2020[45]).
Additional public and private investments may be needed to strengthen market infrastructure and
information systems for nutrient-rich perishable foods (Pingali, 2015[22]). Investments in transport and
storage infrastructure (including cold chains) can help to retain the nutritional value of fresh produce and
high-value food products (FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO, 2020[18]). Public funding for R&D and
innovation focused on micronutrient-rich foods and food fortification, along with efforts to strengthen
farmers’ knowledge and capacities, can provide further incentives for the production of nutrient-rich foods
and the development of diversified farming systems (Bowman and Zilberman, 2013[46]; Global Panel on
Agriculture and Food Systems for Nutrition, 2020[45]). In countries where per capita meat consumption
exceeds healthy levels, a shift towards more plant-based diets, with lower levels of ruminant meat
consumption, would have the twin potential of benefiting public health while lowering GHG emissions
(Giner and Brooks, 2019[43]).
While there may be a need to rebalance agricultural investments across sub-sectors and towards more
nutrition-sensitive investment, agriculture and trade policies are not always the best instrument to address
the complex and multifaceted challenges of global malnutrition. Work by the OECD suggests that
governments should favour demand side strategies for encouraging healthier food choices, with a parallel
need to work with industry at the supply-demand interface, and in some cases impose stricter regulations
on retailers, for example in the marketing of specific food products, in particular to children (Giner and
Brooks, 2019[43]). Given alarming trends in public health, some governments are also giving increased
consideration to fiscal measures. In particular more than 40 countries have imposed consumption taxes
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
Market price support
Payments based on output
Other commodity-specific support
% of commodity gross farm receipt


62 

on sugar and sweetened beverages, a product category where consumption levels often exceed by a large
margin those recommended by health guidelines (Hattersley et al., 2020[47]). The announcement in the
United Kingdom of a soft drinks levy resulted in several major companies reformulating their products
ahead of the introduction of the tax, suggesting that the credible threat of policy action can play an
important role in prompting change and may be as important as the action itself.
Stability
Building stability in food systems is fundamental to achieving food security over the long term. Farmers
and consumers are increasingly confronted with risks relating to climate change, natural disasters, price
volatility and external shocks, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Stability can also be influenced by
agricultural support policies, including through sudden and unanticipated changes in the policy landscape.
Trade plays an essential role in maintaining stability in the global food system. By allowing produce to flow
from food surplus areas to food deficit areas, trade helps to absorb the impacts of local and regional supply
shocks. This generally results in lower price volatility, reduced uncertainty of supply, and greater integration
of global and regional markets (OECD, 2013[19]). Where production variability is weakly correlated among
countries, trade can help to mitigate supply volatility and manage domestic food shortages driven by poor
harvests, droughts, floods and other catastrophic events (Brooks and Matthews, 2015[23]). The stabilising
role of trade is only likely to increase in importance, as domestic production shocks become more frequent
due to climate change. Policy distortions that impede trade’s role in maintaining stability in food systems
can be measured by comparing the prices received by producers with world market prices (Box 1.3).
Box 1.3. The Nominal Protection Coefficient
The extent to which agricultural policies distort trade and impede price transmission is reflected in the
degree of alignment between the prices received by producers and those prevailing on world markets. The
Nominal Protection Coefficient (NPC) is a ratio that compares effective prices received by producers
(including per unit output payments) with world market prices (Figure 1.21).
The differences between effective producer prices and world prices are largest in Iceland (94%), Norway
(75%), Korea (68%) and Japan (61%). At the other end of the spectrum, effective producer prices are more
than 10% below world market prices in India (-14%) and Argentina (-20%). The closest alignment between
effective producer prices and world prices is observed in Australia, Chile, Brazil and New Zealand (all less
than 1%).
Since 2000-02, producer prices have become more closely aligned with world markets across almost all
OECD countries (Israel’s NPC has increased slightly). The picture across the emerging economies is more
mixed, with widened price gaps observed in seven out of twelve countries.


 63

Figure 1.21. Producer Nominal Protection Coefficient by country, 2000-02 and 2018-20

Notes: Countries are ranked according to 2018-20 levels.
1. EU15 for 2000-02, EU28 for 2018-19 and EU27 plus UK for 2020.
2. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States. Latvia and Lithuania are included only for 2018-20.
3. The 12 Emerging Economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation,
South Africa, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
4. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the Emerging Economies.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/s1u2b4
Many countries have attempted to pursue self-sufficiency in staple crop production through border
interventions such as import tariffs, quotas, and export restrictions. These measures ostensibly attempt to
protect domestic constituents and prevent the transmission of international food price volatility onto
domestic markets. The viability of such strategies is questionable however, as reducing a country’s
integration with world markets will only increase its exposure to volatility in domestic output and prices.
Domestic shocks tend to be more frequent and severe than international shocks, with output in individual
countries varying to a much greater degree than the world output of individual food commodities (Brooks,
2012[48]).
Trade policy interventions such as export taxes and restrictions are often introduced with the stated
intention of stabilising domestic markets, but have the perverse effect of withdrawing products from world
markets, reducing food availability and contributing to higher and more volatile world prices. During the
2007-08 food price crisis, several countries placed temporary export restrictions on staple crops as a
means to protect their domestic consumers from rising food prices. A number of grain-exporting emerging
and developing economies adopted export bans, whilst several major grain-importing nations reacted by
reducing pre-existing import tariffs and relaxing tariff-rate quotas. These measures exacerbated the
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
All countries 4
12 Emerging Economies 3
OECD 2
Iceland
Norway
Korea
Japan
Switzerland
Philippines
Indonesia
Israel
Colombia
China
Turkey
United Kingdom
Costa Rica
Mexico
Canada
European Union 1
Russia
United States
South Africa
Ukraine
New Zealand
Brazil
Chile
Australia
Kazakhstan
Viet Nam
India
Argentina
2018-20
2000-02


64 

increases in world prices and ultimately undermined the reputations of exporting countries as reliable
suppliers on world markets, resulting in reduced long-term demand from traditional trading partners
(Deuss, 2017[49]).
The reallocation of trade caused by export restrictions may encourage importing countries to lose
confidence in international markets, and pursue less efficient policy objectives such as self-sufficiency and
the expansion of public stocks. Public stockholding policies are almost always implemented using other
policy instruments such as administered prices, trade policy measures, and import and export monopolies.
These policies are often ineffective in reducing domestic price volatility, and may lead to negative spill-
overs in international markets. In comparison to private stockholding, public stocks are arguably less
responsive to market developments, and may therefore exacerbate rather than mitigate volatility if stock
changes are misaligned with market needs. In particular, the acquisition of large amounts of grain to build
or replenish public stocks can decrease the available supply on international markets, potentially putting
upward pressure on world market prices. Conversely, the sudden release of large amounts of grains from
public stocks can depress world market prices (Deuss, 2015[50]).
Trade interventions have had limited success in stabilising domestic market prices, and can result in
significant welfare losses for poorer food-deficit countries (Anderson and Nelgen, 2012[51]). Whilst price
stabilisation policies have on occasion been successful in containing the impact of large international price
movements, they can transfer instability onto world markets and often prove to be fiscally unsustainable.
Moreover, heavy trade distortions on some agricultural products make them susceptible to trade retaliation,
thus adding to instability and uncertainty. Removing trade restrictions and market distortions could further
strengthen the capacity of trade to stabilise markets and reduce price volatility, by allowing regions with
better harvests to supply output to regions with worse harvests. If trade measures cannot be avoided,
governments should design rules to limit their negative spill-over effects on other countries (OECD,
2013[19]).
Trade’s role in promoting stability can be further strengthened through investments in transport and storage
infrastructure, as well as efforts to improve the transparency of information on supply, demand, stocks and
prices – including through international initiatives such as the G20-led Agricultural Market Information
System (AMIS). However, trade openness may not be sufficient to contain rare but severe international
shocks, such as simultaneous harvest failures, price spikes on world markets, and supply chain disruptions
such as those witnessed during the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic (OECD, 2021[35]). It may be
necessary to gather more information on market concentration at various stages of food supply chains,
and where appropriate, to actively support the geographic diversification of food and feed supplies in order
to limit the risks of bottlenecks.
Beyond agricultural support policies, a range of other measures can be introduced to strengthen stability
in the food system. Market-based mechanisms such as weather-indexed insurance can help to finance
food imports during weather-related shortfalls in domestic production, without requiring costly monitoring
of individual farms. Care should be taken to avoid subsidised insurance products that do not accurately
reflect producers’ risk profiles, as such programmes can hamper incentives for on-farm risk management
and crowd out private insurance options (OECD, 2020[52]). Well-functioning futures markets for agricultural
commodities can play a significant role in reducing price fluctuations, through option contracts that lock in
future import purchases at pre-determined prices. Furthermore, targeted social programmes (including
cash transfers) can be an effective tool to mitigate the impacts of international price volatility on low-income
households (OECD, 2013[19]).
How do agricultural policies affect incomes and livelihoods?
Food systems are a major source of incomes and livelihoods around the world. Primary agriculture
accounted for 27% of total employment in 2019, and recent estimates suggest that there are at least
570 million farms worldwide, most of which are small (less than 2 hectares) and family-operated (World


 65

Bank, 2021[53]; Lowder, Skoet and Raney, 2016[54]). Food systems jobs represent the majority of self and
wage employment in developing countries, with farming generating about 68% of rural income in Africa
and about half of rural income in South Asia (Townsend et al., 2017[55]). Beyond farm production, food
systems support job creation in a range of upstream and downstream industries, such as input supply,
food processing, transport and logistics, supermarket chains and restaurants.
The structural transformation of economies has important influences on the development of agriculture
and food systems. As countries develop, productivity improvements lead to rising agricultural output yet a
decline in agriculture’s share in GDP, releasing labour out of agriculture and into faster growing
non-agricultural sectors. With growing rural to urban migration and a consolidation of farm structures,
agriculture’s share in total employment tends to decline as per capita incomes rise (Figure 1.22).
Structural change is also accompanied by transformations in the food system, with greater job
opportunities offered by other segments of the value chain such as food processing, retail and other food
services. Urbanisation and higher per capita incomes lead to changes in consumer preferences and new
demands for fresh, processed and convenience foods. In low income countries (e.g. in eastern and
southern Africa) agriculture accounts for about 90% of food-related employment, while in high income
countries such as the United States, food services account for about two-thirds of all jobs in the food
system  (Townsend et al., 2017[55]). Food and beverage manufacturing now ranks among the top three
manufacturing sub-sectors by value added in 27 OECD countries (OECD, 2021[35]).
At the same time, the agricultural sector is becoming increasingly integrated into global value chains
(GVCs), providing new sources of employment and opportunities for farmers to grow their incomes.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) and trade have facilitated greater participation in GVCs, spurred by the
liberalisation of investment, falling tariffs, and reductions in trade-distorting support for agricultural
producers (Punthakey, 2020[56]). Trade and GVC participation account for an estimated 20-26% of total
agricultural labour income globally, with significant employment spill-overs in other supporting sectors such
as industry and services (Greenville, Kawasaki and Jouanjean, 2019[57]).
Agricultural development can play an essential role in improving livelihoods and reducing rural poverty.
However, it is important to recognise that rural regions are diverse and complex socio-economic systems
that extend beyond agriculture, and encompass a broad range of manufacturing and service sector
activities (e.g. mining, renewable energies, tourism). Indeed, many farm households derive a substantial
share of their income from non-agricultural sources (OECD, 2003[58]). This implies that policies and
investments to strengthen incomes and livelihoods should aim to offer multiple development pathways for
farm households: improving competitiveness and productivity within agriculture, diversifying income
sources among household members, and facilitating the transition of labour into non-agricultural sectors
(Brooks, 2012[48]).


66 

Figure 1.22. Agriculture’s share in employment and GDP per capita, 1991-2019

Source: World Bank (2021), World Development Indicators, https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/6dnjv1
In 2018-20, the governments of 54 countries provided USD 540 billion per year in support to farm incomes,
either through higher prices paid by consumers or direct payments to farmers. This represents 75% of the
USD 720 billion in positive transfers to agriculture. In contrast, a relatively low proportion of total support
(14%: USD 102 billion) is provided in the form of general services, a category that includes public goods
and services such as R&D and innovation, inspection services, infrastructure development and
maintenance, and public stockholding (discussed previously, in the section on “Food Availability”).
Consequently, the current structure of agricultural support does not encourage farmers to diversify their
income sources and provides disincentives for them to leave the sector, thereby limiting adjustment
pathways beyond agriculture.
Government intervention in agriculture is often justified by the need to improve the incomes of farmers.
While support policies may have some success in raising farm household incomes, they often do so at
considerable cost to consumers and taxpayers. Policies tend to be poorly targeted: official policy
statements are seldom clear about which farm households should qualify for support, and policies often
Australia
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Iceland
Israel
Japan
Korea
Mexico
New Zealand
Norway
Switzerland
Turkey
United States
Argentina
Brazil
China
European Union
India
Indonesia
Kazakhstan
Philippines
Russian
Federation
South
Africa
Ukraine
Vietnam
United Kingdom
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
10 000
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
60 000
70 000
80 000
GDP per capita, PPP (current international $)
1991
2019
Employment in agriculture (% of total employment)


 67

fail to establish explicit eligibility criteria and discriminate between high income and low income farm
households  (OECD, 2002[27]; de Frahan, Dong and De Blander, 2017[59]). They are also inequitably
distributed, with support based on output or factors of production resulting in a greater share of the benefits
accruing to large-scale farms. Finally, they result in significant leakages, meaning that a substantial share
of support accrues to other unintended beneficiaries (e.g. input suppliers, downstream industries,
landowners, programme administration costs).
Evidence suggests that there is a clear inverse relationship between the tendency of a policy to distort
markets and its efficiency in transferring income benefits to farmers (Dewbre, Antón and Thompton,
2001[60]). In other words, policies that pay farmers without affecting their production decisions generally
result in a greater share of support being retained by the household (while also minimising impacts on
production and trade). This result is confirmed by estimates of the income transfer efficiency of support
policies for OECD countries, which show that the share of monetary transfers accruing to farmers are just
17% for input subsidies, 23% for market price support, 26% for deficiency payments, and 47% for area
payments (OECD, 2003[58]). This is because market price support and other distorting policies stimulate
output, and much of the value of the support is paid out to input suppliers or capitalised into land values
(especially for area payments, where over 90% of the benefits are absorbed in increased land values).
Such policies raise costs for farmers who want to buy or lease land, and slow structural change. In contrast,
direct income payments have a far higher income transfer efficiency, as they can be decoupled from
agricultural activity and targeted to households that are in need of assistance (e.g. through the imposition
of limitations on payment levels) (OECD, 2003[58]).
The vast majority of the world’s farmers are small-scale producers with less than 2 hectares of land, who
collectively produce an estimated 30-34% of the global food supply (Ricciardi et al., 2018[61]). Policies to
strengthen incomes in the food system will therefore need to focus on improving productivity and
connecting small farmers with markets. Increasing investments in public goods such as rural infrastructure,
agricultural R&D, technology transfer, extension and advisory services, can help farmers to increase their
competitiveness (Brooks, 2012[48]). New technologies can reduce transaction costs and increase
efficiencies: digitalisation is facilitating greater financial inclusion, and e-commerce platforms are
increasingly linking entrepreneurial producers with national and foreign markets. Standards, labelling and
certification schemes aim to create more differentiated products and can sometimes be explicitly designed
with the intention of improving farmers’ livelihoods (e.g. Fairtrade certification). Digital technologies also
have significant potential to create efficiencies in Sanitary and Phytosanitary systems (SPS), and can
enhance trade in agricultural and food products (OECD, 2021[62]).
While policies need to enable farmers to take advantage of the rising opportunities offered by agricultural
development, they also need to protect those who are unable to adjust to competitive pressures.
Productivity growth puts pressure on the incomes of less competitive farmers, due to declining real prices
which are not fully offset by a decline in production costs. Improving agricultural productivity therefore
inevitably implies that some less productive farmers that are unable to adjust will need to leave the sector.
If less productive farmers have access to viable economic alternatives in non-agricultural sectors, income
support may not be necessary and may hamper the transition out of agriculture. If viable alternatives do
not exist, then transitional assistance to another economic activity may be more effective than income
support (OECD, 2002[27]).
Ultimately, many of the policies required to improve farmers’ incomes are non-agricultural. They include
investments in education and healthcare, peace and political stability, sound macroeconomic
management, developed institutions, property rights, and governance (Brooks, 2012[48]). Labour market
and regional development policies can facilitate the absorption of labour into other sectors, including
downstream processing sectors. Social safety nets (e.g. conditional cash transfer programmes) can be an
effective means for providing income support whilst ensuring equal treatment between agricultural and
non-agricultural households. Income objectives and appropriate indicators should be clearly defined, with


68 

comprehensive information on the economic situation of farm households collected to allow for a more
accurate assessment and monitoring of income deficiencies (OECD, 2003[58]).
How do agricultural policies affect resource use and the environment?
The food systems underpinning the world’s current food consumption patterns are a major driver of climate
change and a significant source of environmental pressures worldwide. Agriculture, forestry and other land
use activities contribute an estimated 16-27% of total anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions,
including 13% of carbon dioxide (CO2), 44% of methane (CH4), and 81% of nitrous oxide (N2O). Other pre-
and post-production segments of global food systems (e.g. energy, transport and industry) account for
approximately 5-10% of emissions from human activity (IPCC, 2019[63]).
Direct GHG emissions from agriculture vary across regions and emanate from a variety of sources
(Figure 1.23). Two-thirds of direct emissions from agriculture come from livestock, with enteric
fermentation16 alone accounting for 40%. Emissions from manure contribute another 26% to direct
emissions. Synthetic fertilisers are responsible for 13% of direct emissions from agriculture, and rice
cultivation accounts for 10%.
Figure 1.23. Direct emissions from agriculture, by region and source, 2018

Notes: 2018 or latest available. LAC is Latin America and the Caribbean. Manure includes manure applied to soils, manure left on pasture, and
manure management. Other includes the FAOSTAT categories Burning - Crop Residues, Burning - Savanna, Crop Residues, and Cultivation
of Organic Soils.
Source: FAO (2021[62]), FAOSTAT database, http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#home.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/8r4hze
In recent decades, growth in agricultural production has put increasing pressure on natural resources.
Agriculture currently uses approximately half of the world’s habitable land (IPCC, 2019[63]). Livestock
occupies about 78% (40 million km2) of all agricultural land; this includes 35% of global crop production
which is devoted to the production of animal feed  (Dasgupta, 2021[64]). Irrigated agriculture accounts for
an estimated 70% of global freshwater usage (equivalent to 2 797 km3 per year in withdrawals from surface
and groundwater resources), and an even higher share of consumptive water use (i.e. water that is not
returned to the environment) due to the evapotranspiration of crops (United Nations, 2021[65]). Empirical
studies have shown that agricultural expansion is a major cause of deforestation (Busch and Ferretti-
Gallon, 2017[66]) Recent estimates suggest that large-scale commercial agriculture (i.e. cattle ranching,
soy production and palm oil plantations) accounts for about 40% of tropical and sub-tropical deforestation,
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
North America
LAC
Europe
Africa
Eastern Asia
Southern Asia South-Eastern Asia
Oceania
Other
Mt CO2eq
Enteric fermentation
Manure
Rice cultivation
Synthetic fertilisers
Other


 69

while local subsistence agriculture is responsible for a further 33%  (Hosonuma et al., 2012[67]; FAO and
UNEP, 2020[68]).
Food production is also the world’s most significant driver of terrestrial and marine biodiversity loss. Around
80% of all threatened terrestrial bird and mammal species are in danger of habitat loss due to agricultural
expansion  (Tilman et al., 2017[69]). The conversion of natural ecosystems for crop production or pasture
has been the biggest cause of habitat loss globally, driving an 82% decline in the collective weight of wild
mammals since 1970. Farmed animals such as cows and pigs now account for 60% of the global biomass
of all mammal species (compared with just 4% for wild mammals), while farmed chickens, ducks and
turkeys account for 71% of the global biomass of all bird species (wild birds make up 29%)  (Benton et al.,
2021[70]). In many regions, soil and pollinator biodiversity have deteriorated considerably due to the over
application of chemical fertilisers and pesticides, along with farm practices such as tilling and ploughing
(Dasgupta, 2021[64]). Agricultural intensification has also been identified as a leading cause of widespread
declines in insect biodiversity, together with climate change  (Raven and Wagner, 2021[71]).
Beyond their effects on production and trade, agricultural support policies have significant consequences
for the environment and resource use. Support policies can induce negative environmental impacts on the
intensive margin (e.g. increased input use, livestock numbers, water use), on the extensive margin
(e.g. reallocating land and other inputs between different outputs), or on the entry-exit margin
(e.g. expansion or contraction of agricultural land relative to other land uses) (Henderson and Lankoski,
2019[72]).
Market price support, payments based on commodity output and payments based on unconstrained
variable input use are among the potentially most environmentally harmful support policies (Henderson
and Lankoski, 2019[72]; Henderson and Lankoski, 2020[73]; OECD, 2020[74]; DeBoe, 2020[75]). Such policies
are coupled to farmers’ production decisions and cannot be easily targeted, thus providing incentives for
the intensification of input use, the allocation of land for supported crops, and the entry of land to the
agricultural sector. Studies have shown their negative impacts on water quality and direct agricultural GHG
emissions, and they may negatively influence biodiversity by promoting less diverse agricultural systems
(DeBoe, 2020[75]; Lankoski and Thiem, 2020[76]). At the global level, however, the widespread adoption of
these policies may constrain emissions by lowering production as a result of resource inefficiencies
(Laborde et al., 2021[77]).
Payments based on variable inputs without appropriate constraints can encourage the excessive use of
fertilisers, herbicides and pesticides. Over application of fertilisers and animal manure leads to substantial
nutrient surpluses and nitrogen and phosphorus run-off. Nitrogen pollution causes severe damage to
freshwater ecosystems, harming invertebrates and fish, causing acidification and eutrophication,
stimulating the growth of toxic algae and lowering oxygen levels in water (hypoxia). Excessive or
inadequate pesticide use has been associated with declines in populations of birds, insects, amphibians
and aquatic and soil communities, as well as negative impacts on human health  (Guerrero, 2018[78]; Sud,
2020[79]).
In most countries, support based on input use is provided without constraints to protect against the over
application of variable inputs. India has the largest rate of support based on inputs, primarily allocated to
electricity price subsidies for groundwater pumping and irrigation, and fertiliser subsidies. These measures
were worth 7.2% of gross farm receipts in 2018-20 (Figure 1.24). Kazakhstan and Iceland provide support
based on inputs amounting to 6.4% and 6.1% (respectively) of gross farm receipts, although in Iceland
most support based on input use is directed to fixed capital formation (i.e. on-farm investments), which are
potentially less environmentally damaging than general fertiliser subsidies. The optimal policy mix for
support that encourages the use of environmentally harmful inputs would be to impose a tax to account for
the damage they cause to waterways and natural ecosystems (Anderson and Valenzuela, 2021[24]).


70 

Figure 1.24. Use and composition of support based on input use in selected countries, 2018-20
Percentage of gross farm receipts

Notes: Figure presents countries having share of payments based on input use above 1% for 2018-20 period. Countries are ranked according
to the total share of payments for 2018-20.
1. EU15 for 2000-02, EU28 for 2018-19 and EU27 plus UK for 2020.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/rywio6
Well-designed environmental policies and regulations can play an essential role in containing some of the
adverse environmental impacts of input use. Policy makers have a range of instruments at their disposal,
including regulatory procedures for pesticide use, targets for reducing nitrogen and phosphorus
discharges, fertiliser accounting systems, nitrogen quota systems, bans on manure application on bare
fields, fertiliser taxes for non-agricultural uses, taxes on phosphorus content in feed, as well as agri-
environmental schemes and advisory services (OECD, 2021[35]). Water pricing or market mechanisms
related to the scarcity of water can help to encourage more efficient water use and prevent the depletion
of surface and groundwater resources. However, irrigation prices typically do not reflect the full cost of
water use, and many countries only partially recover the operational, maintenance and capital costs
associated with water use  (Gruère, Shigemitsu and Crawford, 2020[11]). Governments of OECD countries
have undertaken a number of policy changes related to water in agriculture since 2009, increasing their
alignment with OECD recommendations in this area (Box 1.4).


0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
%
Variable input use
On-farm services
Fixed capital formation
of which are with mandatory or voluntary constraints


 71

Box 1.4. Agriculture and water policies progressed from 2009 to 2019
Agriculture is facing growing water risks including intensified droughts and floods due to climate change,
and growing competition for water from energy, industry and expanding cities. Meanwhile, agriculture also
generates negative environmental impacts on water resources. It remains the largest user of water,
accounting for about 70% of total global freshwater demand, and agricultural water pollution by nitrates,
phosphorus, and pesticides is a growing concern in most countries.
Given these conditions, managing water for irrigation, bolstering resilience to agricultural water risks, and
reducing agricultural pollution are recognised objectives shared by OECD and G20 countries. A 2020
OECD study surveying governments’ actions on agriculture and water from 2009 to 2019,1, 2 found a wide
diversity of policy changes taking place in the management of water quantity, water quality, and water risks
in agriculture. Some countries undertook important water policy reforms, whereas others mainly improved
existing policies. The study also showed that these changes were on average relatively aligned with the
OECD guidance on water policy and governance defined by the 2016 OECD Council Recommendation on
Water (Figure 1.25).
To progress further, relatively water abundant countries should pay attention to their approaches to
managing water quantity and risks under climate change; all countries should consider improving their
policies to reduce pollution from agriculture; and selected countries should consider making additional
efforts to recover water charges and to use pricing instruments, in line with the 2016 OECD Council
Recommendation on Water.
Notes: 1. The survey was conducted on 38 countries including: OECD countries (Australia, Austria, Belgium (the Flanders region only), Canada,
Chile, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia,
Lithuania, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
United Kingdom, United States), OECD accession countries (Colombia and Costa Rica), pending adherents to the OECD Council
Recommendation on Water (Cabo Verde) and the European Union.
2. Survey responses were converted into quantitative indices of alignment of policy changes with OECD recommendations.


72 

Figure 1.25. Average relative alignment of agriculture and water policies in 38 countries with the
OECD Council Recommendation on Water, 2009 and 2019

Note: Higher indices -further from the centre- indicate increased alignment with the OECD Council Recommendation; 0 indicates no alignment,
1 perfect alignment. Categories represent the relevant chapters of the Recommendation. Pricing indices of alignments were adjusted to account
for text caveats in the Recommendation and should be subject to cautious interpretation.
Source: (Gruère, Shigemitsu and Crawford, 2020[11]).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/uzj42p
Payments based on current land area create incentives to expand cropping areas and maintain marginal
lands in production. Non-uniform crop area payments may have mixed environmental impacts, depending
on whether less or more emission intensive crops are favoured with non-uniform payment rates. If crop
area payments favour arable farming over livestock production, they may induce a shift away from livestock
and a reduction in agricultural GHG emissions and nutrient surpluses. Conversely, area payments may
increase GHG emissions in countries where crops account for the dominant share of agricultural GHG
emissions  (Henderson and Lankoski, 2019[72]). Payments based on animal numbers without constraints
will generally result in increased livestock numbers, which can be achieved either through increased
stocking densities or increased area, and in either case are likely to cause negative environmental effects
(DeBoe, 2020[75]).
Fully decoupled payments based on non-current crop area (e.g. payments based on historical entitlements
or overall farming income) are among the least environmentally harmful support policies  (Henderson and
Lankoski, 2019[72]). These measures allow farmers to follow market signals in their production decisions,
and in some cases, production is not required for farmers to receive support payments. If historical acreage
is fixed for payments, then there is no incentive to bring additional land into the sector (Lankoski and Thiem,
2020[76]). However, payments based on historical entitlements could still affect incentives, if farmers expect
0.54
0.58
0.54
0.55
0.55
0.49
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
General recommendations
Managing water quantity
Improving water quality
Managing water risks and disasters
Ensuring good water governance
Ensuring sustainable pricing for water and
water services
2009
2019


 73

their current decisions to influence future payments (DeBoe et al., 2020[80]). Moreover, by supplementing
farmer incomes and making agriculture more profitable relative to other land uses, decoupled payments
could still stifle structural change and hinder the conversion of agricultural land to more sustainable land
uses. Ultimately, the environmental impact of decoupled payments depends on the type and effectiveness
of mandatory environmental conditions and requirements (cross compliance) that accompany payments
(DeBoe, 2020[75]).
Reorienting agricultural support towards decoupled payments and away from the most production
distorting forms of support could reduce environmental pressures and substantially strengthen the
sustainability of production. At the same time, it is important to recognise that agricultural policies can
shape the structure and intensity of production over the long term. Decoupling is therefore unlikely to be
sufficient on its own, particularly in countries with a high livestock density and intensive production systems
(OECD, 2020[74]; Lankoski and Thiem, 2020[76]). In such cases, additional measures may be needed to
ensure that policies and market prices reflect the negative environmental externalities associated with
agricultural production.
Agricultural policies can also be specifically designed to generate positive environmental outcomes, by
encouraging farmers to provide environmental goods and services such as carbon sequestration,
preservation of rural landscapes, resilience to natural disasters, pollination, habitat provision, and control
of invasive species. Agri-environmental payments that encourage the use of environmentally friendly inputs
or practices (e.g. compliance with fertiliser use restrictions) are potentially among the most environmentally
beneficial types of support measures (DeBoe, 2020[75]). However, just USD 1.5 billion of the
USD 268 billion per year of budgetary payments to producers in 2018-20 was linked clearly to the provision
of environmental public goods (i.e. payments based on specific non-commodity outputs).
Some policies, such as support based on non-commodity output, can occasionally have positive
environmental effects. For example, land retirement policies can create incentives for farmers to switch
from crop production to permanent pasture or forests, encouraging a contraction of agricultural land and
reducing environmental pressures. However, if not managed well, a contraction of agricultural land
resulting from land abandonment can in some instances lead to negative environmental outcomes such
as biodiversity loss, increases in invasive species, or a greater risk of wildfire (DeBoe et al., 2020[80]). While
reductions in agricultural land use often have beneficial environmental effects, they can also be
accompanied by the intensification of production on remaining land areas, potentially resulting in
unintended negative environmental impacts.
This underscores the importance of carefully managing the reform process to account for potential
unintended environmental consequences. For example, reductions in market price support can also result
in land abandonment and further intensification of production, with potential negative consequences for
biodiversity and landscape ecology. Agri-environmental payments can create adverse environmental
impacts in mixed dairy and crop production systems, particularly if they favour crop production and
encourage land use changes from pasture to cereals  (Henderson and Lankoski, 2019[72]). Policy makers
should therefore take a proactive approach to managing the process of policy reform and subsequent land
use transitions. Furthermore, agri-environmental schemes could benefit from improvements in their design
and in the design of mandatory constraints to better deliver environmental improvements (DeBoe, 2020[75]).
OECD work with national-level collaborators seeks to exploit such potential benefits.
Are agricultural support policies improving the productivity, sustainability and resilience
of the sector?
The world faces a daunting “triple challenge” of providing safe and nutritious food for all, improving incomes
and livelihoods along the food supply chain, and contributing to environmental sustainability. Meeting this
challenge will require effective responses and co-ordination across many areas of public policy. With
respect to the agro-food sector, simultaneous progress in achieving sustainable productivity growth and


74 

improved resilience will be essential for the sector to contribute effectively to each dimension of the triple
challenge. The OECD Agro-Food Productivity-Sustainability-Resilience Policy Framework  provides a
structured tool for identifying policy priorities that strengthen long-term productivity, enhance environmental
performance, and increase resilience. The Framework highlights the importance of developing coherent
and integrated policy approaches that encompass the wider enabling policy environment for food systems.
Governments should seek to establish synergies across the objectives of productivity, sustainability and
resilience, while managing trade-offs and avoiding contradictory policy signals.
With the global population projected to reach 10 billion by 2050, food systems are facing growing pressure
to use resources sustainably, protect ecosystems, preserve biodiversity, and reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. Strengthening productivity and sustainability is therefore fundamental to enable food systems
to produce more with the use of less inputs and natural resources. At the same time, vulnerabilities to
climate change highlight the need to build resilience to natural disasters and strengthen capacities to
respond to an evolving risk environment.
Figure 1.26 shows that the drivers of agricultural output growth have shifted dramatically over time, with
important consequences for resource use and environmental sustainability. Historically, most of the growth
in food production came from increases in the total area of agricultural land used for crop and animal
production. After 1960, however, more intensive use of inputs (e.g. synthetic fertilisers, pesticides, labour
and machinery) became the most important driver of output growth. This trend persisted until the 1990s,
when improvements in total factor productivity (i.e. efficiency improvements such as better farm
management practices, improvements in crop varieties and breeds) took over as the most important factor
contributing to global agricultural production.
Figure 1.26. Sources of growth in global agricultural output, 1961-2016

Note: Each bar represents the annual average per cent growth over that period.
Source: USDA, Economic Research Service, International Agricultural Productivity statistics (November 2019 revision).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/cwh4e8
Total factor productivity growth has driven a “decoupling” of food production and land use, enabling global
food production to increase four-fold since 1960, while agricultural land use has grown by just 10% (see
the section on Food availability). Land use changes from agriculture are still a major concern, driving
deforestation, declines in biodiversity, GHG emissions, and the depletion of soil organic carbon (IPCC,
2019[63]). Nonetheless, productivity growth has been indispensable in enabling agriculture to feed the
world, while preventing worse and potentially catastrophic outcomes for environmental sustainability.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
1961-70
1971-80
1981-90
1991-2000
2001-16
%
Expansion of agricultural land
Extension of irrigation to cropland
More inputs per hectare
Improvements in total factor productivity
Output growth


 75

There are important synergies to be realised in policies to promote productivity, sustainability and
resilience. For example, improvements in technology and farm management practices have facilitated a
decline in the emissions intensity of agriculture (i.e. emissions per unit of output) across most regions.
Direct emissions from agriculture grew by approximately 0.5% per year between 1990 and 2016, while
crop production grew by an estimated 2.5% per year and livestock production grew by about 1.9% per year
over the same period (OECD, 2021[35]). This has primarily been achieved through more efficient use of
inputs, such as fertilisers, animal feed and land, which are significant sources of emissions.
Efficiency gains have also allowed many countries to reduce their use of synthetic nitrogen fertilisers and
pesticides, while steadily expanding agricultural production. Advances in genomic science and precision
agriculture can strengthen sustainable productivity by allowing for a more judicious application of
environmentally harmful inputs. Globally, some 45% of nitrogen added to fields is not taken up by crops,
implying that there is considerable scope to decrease emissions and reduce nutrient surpluses without
compromising productivity and food security  (Blandford and Hassapoyannes, 2018[81]). Pesticide use can
often be decreased without affecting the productivity and profitability of farms, resulting in reduced health
and environmental risks  (Lechenet et al., 2017[82]). Similarly, evidence suggests that with more sanitary
farming practices, the use of antibiotics on animal farms for growth-promoting purposes can be eliminated
with little or no adverse impact on the economic or technical performance of farms  (Ryan, 2019[83]).
A comprehensive approach to resilience and risk management can contribute to productivity and
sustainability by enhancing the long-term stability of food systems. Resilience implies strengthening the
agricultural sector’s capacity to prepare and plan for adverse events, absorb the impacts of negative
shocks, adapt in response to an evolving risk environment, and transform if current processes and systems
are no longer sustainable (OECD, 2020[52]). Developing a diverse portfolio of risk management instruments
is necessary to tackle food security risks, and can strengthen farmers’ capacities to innovate and adapt to
climate change (OECD, 2013[19]). Public funding for R&D can support the development of new innovations
such as drought-resistant seeds and water management technologies, which allow farmers to manage
risks more effectively and maintain more sustainable production practices (OECD, 2019[31]). Box 1.5
outlines the principles for effective disaster risk management for resilience.
Box 1.5. Principles for effective disaster risk management for resilience
In 2017, G7 Agriculture Ministers in Bergamo recognised the effects of natural hazards on farmers’
lives, agro-food systems, agricultural production and productivity in regions all over the world, and that
climate change is projected to amplify many of these impacts. Ministers also noted the importance of
strengthening the resilience of farmers to natural hazards (G7 Agriculture Ministers, 2017[84]).
Responding to this imperative, the joint OECD-FAO project on Building agricultural resilience to natural
disasters identifies good practices for building agricultural resilience at each stage of the disaster risk
management (DRM) cycle. Good practices in the case study countries are identified according to
principles and recommendations from key international frameworks for managing the risks posed by
disasters and other critical shocks, including OECD recommendations and the Sendai Framework.1
Based on these frameworks, each case study assesses their country-specific situation according to the
following four Principles for Effective DRM for Resilience:
1. An inclusive, holistic and all-hazards approach to natural disaster risk governance for resilience.
2. A shared understanding of natural disaster risk based on the identification, assessment and
communication of risk, vulnerability and resilience capacities.
3. An ex ante approach to natural disaster risk management.
4. An approach emphasising preparedness and planning for effective crisis management, disaster
response, and to “build back better”2 to increase resilience to future natural hazards.


76 

Good practices encompass policy measures and governance arrangements that encourage public and
private stakeholders to address gaps in their resilience levels. This can be done by helping stakeholders
understand the risks that they face from natural hazards and their responsibilities for managing the risks
they pose to their assets. For example, while rarer catastrophic risks such as natural hazard-induced
disasters (NHID) may require public intervention, on-farm strategies and the individual farmer’s overall
capacity to manage risk also play a critical role in reducing risk exposure to catastrophic events,
particularly over the long term (OECD, 2009[85]; OECD, 2020[52]). Specifically, good practices that build
agricultural resilience to natural hazards are policies and governance arrangements that:

Encourage public and private actors to consider the risk landscape over the long term, including
to take into account the potential future effects of climate change on the agricultural sector, and
to place a greater emphasis on what can be done ex ante to reduce risk exposure and increase
preparedness.

Provide incentives and support the capacity of farmers to prevent, mitigate, prepare and plan
for, absorb, respond, recover from, and more successfully adapt and transform in response to
natural hazards.

Consider a wide range of future scenarios, including expected environmental, economic and
social structural change, and contribute to agricultural productivity and sustainability, even in
the absence of a shock or stress.

Take into account the trade-offs inherent in natural disaster risk management, including
between measures to build the capacities of the sector to absorb, adapt, or transform in
response to natural disaster risk, and between investing in risk prevention and mitigation ex
ante and providing ex post disaster assistance.

Are developed with the participation of a wide range of actors, to ensure that all relevant
stakeholders are equally involved in the design, planning, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation of interventions; and share a common understanding of the risk landscape and their
respective responsibilities for managing natural disaster risk.
Note: 1. OECD’s Approach to Risk Management for Resilience (OECD, 2009[85]); (OECD, 2011[86]); (OECD, 2020[52]); the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR, 2015[87]); the OECD Recommendation on the Governance of Critical Risks (OECD, 2014[88]); and the
Joint Framework for Strengthening resilience for food security and nutrition of the Rome-based Agencies (FAO, IFAD and WFP, 2019[89]).
2. Building back better is defined as using the recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction phases after a disaster to increase the resilience
of nations and communities through integrating disaster risk reduction measures into the restoration of physical infrastructure and societal
systems, and into the revitalisation of livelihoods, economies and the environment.
Potential trade-offs between policies to promote productivity, sustainability and resilience also deserve
special attention. For example, improvements in total factor productivity often lead to lower prices and
increased food demand. In some cases, this may trigger an expansion of production, resulting in higher
GHG emissions  (Blandford and Hassapoyannes, 2018[81]). Productivity-driven increases in production
have also been associated with large-scale reductions in biodiversity on farms, with fewer varieties and
breeds of plants and animals being cultivated. This loss in genetic diversity undermines the resilience of
food systems to pests, pathogens and climate-related shocks  (IPBES, 2019[90]). Measures to strengthen
resilience by building redundancies into supply chains may involve some trade-offs with productivity
performance (at least in the short-term).
Efforts to strengthen total factor productivity in livestock production (e.g. through advances in herd
genetics, feed and pasture quality, farm and animal management) have translated into declining emissions
intensities over time. However, enteric fermentation from ruminant livestock production remains the leading
source of direct emissions from agriculture worldwide, with beef having the largest emissions footprint by
a wide margin (in terms of CO2eq per 100 g of protein produced)  (Blandford and Hassapoyannes, 2018[81]).
Generally, countries with a high livestock density (per hectare) have high nitrogen and phosphorus


 77

surpluses and high GHG emissions from agriculture, thus making it difficult to achieve sustainable
productivity  (Lankoski and Thiem, 2020[76]).
Policy choices to reduce GHG emissions from agriculture also invoke trade-offs. Emission taxes can
significantly reduce emissions by reallocating production towards less emission-intensive commodities, but
may raise production costs and increase food prices. They could also induce carbon leakage if applied
unilaterally by specific countries. Abatement subsidies used to reward carbon sequestration require
government expenditures, and are half as effective in mitigating GHG emissions, but have a much lower
impact on agricultural production and per capita food consumption, and would eliminate potential carbon
leakage. A shift to lower emission diets by consumers is assessed to have a much smaller impact on
reducing agricultural emissions than any emission tax  (Henderson et al., 2021[91]; OECD, 2019[92]).
Box 1.6. Benchmarking productivity and environmental sustainability performance
Countries have attempted to pursue productivity growth in agriculture while improving environmental
sustainability, with varying degrees of success. Some have been relatively successful in exploiting
synergies and simultaneously strengthening their productivity and sustainability performance. Others
have had to manage trade-offs, achieving improvements in one area at the expense of another. In some
instances, countries have witnessed declines across both areas of productivity and sustainability.
Figure 1.27 and Figure 1.28 provide insights on productivity-sustainability linkages, by benchmarking
total factor productivity (TFP) growth and environmental performance across countries. Environmental
performance can be measured using a variety of metrics such as GHG emissions, nutrient balances,
resource use and biodiversity. To measure sustainability across a wide range of countries, an index was
constructed using two OECD agri-environmental indicators: GHG emissions per hectare of agricultural
land (a proxy for impacts on climate change), and Nitrogen surplus (NS) in kg/ha (a proxy for impacts on
air and water quality). These metrics are by no means exhaustive and cannot capture all of the
environmental impacts arising from agricultural production. However, they are consistently available for
48 out of the 54 countries covered in this report, and are thus useful for international benchmarking.
The Strong Environmental Index measures the relative development of each country’s worst performing
environmental indicator. Measuring sustainability using the worst performing indicator does not allow for
substitution between the different environmental outcomes, meaning that poor performance in one
indicator cannot be compensated for by better performance in another. Each indicator is standardised1
to allow for comparisons across measures, and converted such that higher values indicate better
performance. The relative environmental performance of each country can then be compared to its
growth in total factor productivity.
Figure 1.27 plots TFP growth against the Strong Environmental Index growth for the period from 1997
to 2006. The median for OECD countries was used as a base for standardisation, meaning that countries
located above (below) the x-axis and to the right (left) of the y-axis performed above (below) the OECD
median. Furthermore, the dashed line is a 45-degree line, indicating the threshold where an increase
(decrease) in productivity growth is matched by an equivalent decrease (increase) in environmental
performance. This allows for three categories of sustainable productivity performance to be
distinguished:

Countries in the upper-right quadrant achieved strong sustainable productivity growth: they were
able to improve their performance by more than the OECD median across each of the three
indicators (GHG, NS and TFP).

Countries located above the dashed line (but not in the upper-right quadrant) achieved semi-
strong sustainable productivity growth, meaning that their productivity growth was sufficiently
high to compensate for a decline in environmental performance (or vice-versa).


78 


Countries located below the dashed line either experienced declines in both dimensions (lower-
left quadrant), or their improvement in productivity (sustainability) was offset by a relatively larger
decline in sustainability (productivity).
A comparison of Figure 1.27 and Figure 1.28 reveals that the number of countries achieving strong
sustainable productivity growth has declined in the most recent decade. From 2007 to 2016, only five
countries achieved strong sustainable productivity growth (improvements in all environmental indicators
and TFP growth relative to the OECD median), whereas from 1997 to 2006, that was the case for
13 countries. With the exception of the United States, countries that have achieved strong sustainable
productivity growth during 2007-16 are small countries that have limited contributions to total agricultural
GHG emissions (Belgium, Denmark, Lithuania and Croatia). Some of the most important countries in
terms of their contributions to total agricultural GHG emissions (China, India and Brazil) have not made
progress in achieving strong sustainable productivity growth. Figure 1.28 also shows that there was more
heterogeneity in productivity growth across countries between 2007 and 2016, when compared with the
previous decade.
Figure 1.27. Sustainable productivity growth, 1997-2006

Notes: The strong environmental index is the minimum of the standardised growth rates of GHG emissions intensity per hectare of agricultural
land area and Nitrogen surplus for the years 1997-2006. Positive values imply better environmental growth outcomes relative to the OECD
median. The size of the bubbles represents the country’s total agricultural GHG emissions in 2005. The countries used in the normalisation
include all OECD countries, except for Chile and Israel.
Due to data limitations, some countries covered by the present report are not included in this analysis.
Sources: Authors’ calculations based on USDA, Economic Research Service (2019), International Agricultural Productivity (database), for
agricultural TFP growth; and OECD (2021), OECD Agri-Environmental Indicators (database) for GHG emissions intensity and Nitrogen
surpluses (measured in kilogrammes per hectare).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/nvqury
AUS
AUT
CAN
COL
CZE
DNK
EST
FIN
FRA
DEU
GRC
HUN
ISL
IRL
ITA
JPN
KOR
LVA
LTH
LUX
MEX
NLD
NZL
NOR
POL
PRT
SVK
SVN
ESP
SWE
CHE
TUR
GBR
USA
CYP
BGR
ROU
HRV
BRA
CHN
CRI
IND
IDN
PHL
RUS
UKR
VNM
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Strong Environmental Index
growth
Normalised TFP growth
Semi-strong sustainable
productivity growth
Semi-strong sustainable
productivity growth
Strong sustainable
productivity growth


 79

Figure 1.28. Sustainable productivity growth, 2007-2016

Notes: The strong environmental index is the minimum of the standardised growth rates of GHG emissions intensity per hectare of agricultural
land area and Nitrogen surplus for the years 2007-16. Positive values imply better environmental growth outcomes relative to the OECD
median. The size of the bubbles represents the country’s total agricultural GHG emissions in 2005. The countries used in the normalisation
include all OECD countries, except for Chile and Israel. Due to data limitations, some countries covered by the present report are not included
in this analysis.
Sources: Authors’ calculations based on USDA, Economic Research Service (2019), International Agricultural Productivity (database), for
agricultural TFP growth; and OECD (2021), OECD Agri-Environmental Indicators (database) for GHG emissions intensity and Nitrogen
surpluses (measured in kilogrammes per hectare).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/arn7oe
Note: 1. The modified z-score for each country c and indicator i is calculated according to the following equation: 𝑍𝑐=
𝑥𝑐−𝑥
̃
1.486∗𝑀𝐴𝐷𝐽
where 𝑥𝑐 is the value of the indicator for country 𝑐∈𝑁, 𝑥
̃ is the median of the indicator across the subset of J OECD countries, 𝑀𝐴𝐷𝐽=
median(|𝑥𝐽 - 𝑥
̃|) is the median absolute deviation.  The MAD is multiplied by a constant 1.486 to approximate the standard deviation.
Source: (Lankoski and Thiem, 2020[76]); (OECD, 2020[74]); (OECD, 2021[93]).
Assessing support and reforms
Agricultural policy changes in 2020 were dominated by responses to the COVID-19
pandemic
Governments responded swiftly to the COVID-19 pandemic, with measures that were required to keep
food and agriculture markets functioning, and that were mostly co-operative at the international level. As a
result, most shocks were absorbed rapidly, with trade and markets recovering during the year. Average
gross farm receipts for OECD and emerging economies actually increased in 2020, and in several large
countries the sector was the best performing or least affected economically. That said, income shocks
have affected the food security of many poorer consumers. Moreover, the virus remains active in many
countries.
An estimated 776 unique policy response measures were adopted by governments of countries covered
in this report, covering all categories of measures, highlighting the breadth and responsiveness of public
actions to address the impact of the crisis. While 19% of these measures were urgent responses to ensure
supply and keep the sector functioning, just under 70% of measures took the form of temporary relief, and
should be phased out as the crisis recedes. Ten per cent of measures are “no regrets”, in the sense that
AUS
AUT
BEL
CAN
COL
CZE
DNK
EST
FIN
FRA
DEU
GRC
HUN
ISL
IRL
ITA
JPN
KOR
LVA
LUX
MEX
NLD
NZL
NOR
POL
PRT
SVK
SVN
ESP
SWE
CHE
TUR
GBR
USA
BGR
HRV
BRA
CHN
CRI
IND
IDN
PHL
RUS
UKR
VNM
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Strong Environmental Index
growth
Normalised TFP growth
Semi-strong sustainable
productivity growth
Semi-strong
sustainable
productivity
growth
Strong sustainable
productivity growth


80 

they improve market functioning and thereby contribute to improved resilience. These measures, such as
trade facilitation, should be maintained or even scaled up after the crisis. The remaining 2% of measures
did not fit this classification. At the same time, 11% of measures, mostly introduced as temporary relief,
were identified as potentially market distorting or environmentally harmful. In particular, these included
export bans, other trade restrictions, and regulatory flexibilities. Some of these were applied temporarily,
and the remainder need to be rescinded.
A first and partial assessment of budgetary expenditures in response to the COVID-19 crisis suggests that
a minimum of USD 157 billion was earmarked in funding or offered in financing means (subsidised loans
or credit) to the sector. Close to half of this amount (USD 75 billion) was allocated to support for agriculture
and food sector actors, and a further USD 55 billion to food assistance programmes, with the remaining
USD 27 billion directed towards general services or labour and biosecurity measures. These amounts do
not include the share of economy-wide recovery packages adopted in these countries (which exceeds
USD 5.6 trillion) from which the agriculture sector may have benefited.
OECD countries favoured relief measures for the agro-food sector and food assistance, largely via
earmarked funds, while emerging economies used more non-support measures and allocated relatively
more loans and credits towards the agriculture and food sector. While extensive contingencies were made
for the agricultural sector, the fact that overall economic effects were in many cases less serious than those
faced in other sectors means that actual financial disbursements may turn out to be substantially lower
than allocations.
Although the COVID-19 pandemic dominated policy responses, a number of other policy reforms or
initiatives were introduced in 2020. In addition to revised agricultural policy frameworks, and changes or
reforms to existing support measures and policies, two important developments relate to strengthened
agri-environmental policies and the continued trend of new bilateral or regional free trade agreements.
New steps aimed at enhancing the environmental performance of agriculture and food systems include
the European Union’s Green Deal together with the Farm to Fork and Biodiversity Strategies, the Carbon
Neutral Strategy, New Zealand’s 2019 Zero Carbon Act and complementing strategies in 2020, Canada’s
A Healthy Environment and A Healthy Economy plan, Japan’s Green Growth Strategy, and new strategies
on reducing agricultural GHG emissions in several other countries. A number of initiatives also focused on
making water management systems more sustainable, and on tackling food loss and waste.
On the trade side, the existing trend towards bilateral and regional trade agreements continued in 2020.
With the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, the world’s largest Free Trade Agreement was
signed in 2020, including the ten members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations and five other
countries in Asia-Pacific. Smaller trade agreements also continued to be put in place, including a number
of agreements signed by the United Kingdom to ensure continued trade relations after the country’s
departure from the European Union.
Reforms to agricultural policies have stalled
In 2018-20, agricultural support policies across the 54 countries covered in this report generated
USD 720 billion per year in transfers to agriculture, which in nominal terms is more than twice the
aggregate level of transfers observed in 2000-02, but nevertheless lower when expressed relative to
agricultural value added. About three-quarters of this support, USD 540 billion, was directed to individual
producers, either in the form of higher prices or through direct payments.
Reforms in OECD countries have stalled in the past ten years, with little change in the level or composition
of support. Indeed, some countries have rolled back earlier reform efforts. Across the 54 countries,
two-thirds of support is still provided in ways that are potentially most market and trade distorting, likely to
harm the environment including by raising GHG emissions. This is reflected in a weakened sectoral
performance in terms of delivering sustainable productivity growth.


 81

Overall, total net support to the sector (TSE) costs the economy 0.8% of combined GDP across the
54 countries, down from 1.0% at the beginning of the century. When measured relative to the size of the
agricultural sector, total net support amounted to 23% of agricultural value added in 2018-20, compared
with 35% in 2000-02.
Producer support as a share of gross farm receipts (%PSE) has been declining over the past two decades,
from 18% in 2000-02 to 11% in 2018-20. While producer support in OECD countries declined from 28% of
gross farm receipts (GFR) in 2000-02 to 18% in 2018-20, it almost doubled in emerging economies from
3.8% in 2000-02 to 7.4% in 2018-20. To some extent, the decline in the overall average %PSE also reflects
higher levels of negative market price support in some emerging economies.
A central element of many countries’ support policies continues to be market price support. Total positive
price support amounted to USD 272 billion per year in 2018-20, corresponding to 7% of the combined
GFR. In contrast, a small number of countries implicitly taxed their farmers by suppressing domestic prices
of some or all commodities, for instance through export restrictions. This resulted in a transfer of
USD 104 billion per year away from producers.
Of payments to farmers, USD 66 billion was linked to output or unconstrained input use, and has a similar
tendency to create distortions as market price support. Added to the positive price transfer, this gives a
total of USD 338 billion of potentially most distorting support to producers. A larger amount,
USD 202 billion, was more decoupled from production decisions. Of this, only a small element,
USD 1.5 billion, was conditional on the provision of clearly identified public goods, such as ecosystem
services.
Payments to agriculture as a whole, “general services” (GSSE), amounted to USD 102 billion, or 14% of
total net support. This category includes investments in public goods, such as R&D and innovation, off-
farm infrastructure and biosecurity (USD 76 billion). It also includes payments with a potential to distort
markets, in the form of marketing and promotion and support for public stockholding (USD 42 billion).
Subsidies for consumers (such as food assistance programmes) amounted to USD 78 billion per year, or
11% of all positive transfers to agriculture. Nonetheless, on average consumers were taxed by agricultural
policies, as these subsidies remained small relative to the higher food expenditures, due to the persistent
market price support in many countries.
The variation in support levels across countries remains significant, however. Levels of producer support
in 2018-20 ranged from less than 3% of GFR in New Zealand, Brazil, Ukraine, Australia and Chile to
between 40% and 60% in Japan, Korea, Switzerland, Norway and Iceland, while net producer support was
negative in Argentina, Viet Nam and India. High levels of producer support continue to be underpinned by
a strong focus on market price support, but the importance of budgetary payments to producers varies
strongly as well. Iceland, Norway, India, Turkey and Kazakhstan directed most-distorting output and input
support to their producers at rates of between 4% and 12% of GFR in 2018-20, while less distorting
payments worth more than 10% of GFR were provided in the European Union and the United Kingdom,
as well as in Iceland, Switzerland and Norway.
Overall, most current support policies are not serving the wider needs of food systems
Across the dimensions of the triple challenge – ensuring food security and nutrition for all, providing
livelihoods to farmers and others along the food chain, and using natural resources sustainably while
reducing greenhouse gas emissions – food systems are sometimes accused of “systems failure”. Such an
assessment overlooks important achievements, not least that of feeding a world population that has grown
from 3 billion in 1960 to about 7.5 billion today, predominantly through improved yields and productivity
rather than increased agricultural area. Even so, policies have not managed to address rapid structural
change across food systems and the problems these changes have induced, be they a rising incidence of
obesity, continued adjustment pressures on farmers, or mounting resource pressures and GHG emissions.


82 

The USD 272 billion of positive market price intervention and USD 104 billion of implicit taxation both have
negative implications for food security at the global level, because they impede the efficient allocation of
domestic resources and weaken the balancing role of trade in getting food from surplus to deficit regions.
By constraining trade, they also contribute to increased price volatility on international food markets.
The USD 338 billion of potentially most distorting support, comprising market price support and payments
linked to output or the unconstrained use of inputs, is inefficient at transferring income to farmers, as a
large share of the benefits are capitalised into land values or leak in the form of higher prices for inputs. It
also tends to be inequitable, to the extent that support is linked directly to production. Finally, through its
direct incentive to increase production, it contributes to increased resource pressures, including through
impacts on water quality, biodiversity, and can raise GHG emissions. At the global level, however, the
widespread adoption of such policies may constrain emissions by lowering production as a result of
resource inefficiencies.
The USD 202 billion of producer support that is decoupled from production decisions creates fewer
distortions at the margin and therefore has less adverse impacts on global food security. It also has a
reduced tendency to contribute to additional resource pressures and GHG emissions. While the effects on
farmers’ incomes may still be inequitably distributed, there tend to be lower rates of leakage to non-farm
landowners or input suppliers.
Two important rationales for farm support are to provide social transfers in order to redress problems of
low incomes, and to support the provision of environmental public goods. However, little of the budgetary
support that is extended to producers is based on an assessment of their overall income from all sources,
while just USD 1.5 billion of the USD 268 billion of budgetary payments to producers was linked clearly to
the provision of environmental public goods.
Instruments with potentially more positive effects on food security, incomes and resource use mostly fall
within the category of general services for the sector (GSSE), and include investments in R&D, biosecurity
and infrastructure. However the USD 102 billion of expenditure in this category represented just 16.5% of
total net support (TSE) in 2018-20, a slight decline from the 17.2% estimated for 2000-02. Across the
OECD, this share was even lower at 13.5% in the most recent period. Relative to the size of the agricultural
sector, support to general services declined even more strongly, from 6% of agricultural value added in
2000-02 to 3.8% in 2018-20. Despite evidence of high returns, spending on agricultural knowledge and
innovation systems was just USD 26 billion per year (1.0% of agricultural value added), while spending on
the development and maintenance of infrastructure for the sector amounted to USD 42 billion per year
(1.5% of agricultural value added).
Agricultural policies should focus on promoting sustainable productivity growth and
improved sectoral resilience
The foremost ways in which agricultural policies can contribute to improved food systems performance are
through sustainable productivity growth and system-wide resilience. The former is necessary to reconcile
the objective of ensuring food security (i.e. availability and access at affordable prices) with resource
constraints. It also contributes to income generation, albeit while imposing a burden on those producers
who do not participate in productivity gains (and which may require flanking policies). The latter will be
required to confront new sources of risk caused by a changing climate, unanticipated changes in policy, or
the economy-wide effects of shocks external to the agricultural sector, such as the global COVID-19
pandemic.
As policy reforms have stalled, progress in achieving sustainable productivity growth has also deteriorated.
For the 48 countries for which data are available, only five countries achieved strong sustainable
productivity growth (improvements in all environmental indicators and TFP growth relative to the OECD
median) between 2007 and 2016, compared with 13 countries between 1997 and 2006. Similarly, the


 83

disproportionately low allocation of resources to policies that enhance the sector’s capacity to absorb risks
has undermined its capacity to adapt and transform in response to those risks.
Trade plays an essential role in maintaining stability and fostering resilience in the global food system. By
allowing produce to flow from food surplus areas to food deficit areas, trade helps to absorb the impacts
of local and regional supply shocks. This generally results in lower price volatility, reduced uncertainty of
supply, and greater integration of global and regional markets. Where production variability is weakly
correlated among countries, trade can help to mitigate supply volatility and manage domestic food
shortages driven by poor harvests, droughts, floods and other catastrophic events. The stabilising role of
trade is only likely to increase in importance, as domestic production shocks become more frequent due
to climate change. The continued use of price policies – in the form of both positive and negative market
price support – and associated use of border measures undermines this critical aspect of resilience.
Three specific actions could enable agricultural policies to better support sustainable
productivity growth and increased resilience, and accelerate progress in addressing the
“triple challenge” facing food systems
Phase out price interventions and market distorting producer support. These policies have the most
negative overall impact on food security and the environment. They are also an inefficient way of supporting
livelihoods, with poor targeting in terms of either who is paying for the policy or who is receiving the benefit.
The withdrawal of positive market price support and associated trade protection would nevertheless imply
a loss of income by producers that may need to be accompanied by transitional assistance and social
safety nets. Conversely, the removal of policies that suppress domestic prices would raise prices, with a
potential need for targeted income transfers to low-income households and consumers.
Target income support to farm households most in need; where possible shift its role away from
agricultural budgets, and towards economy-wide social policies and safety nets. In many countries,
income support predominantly benefits large farm households with comparatively high income and wealth.
A move to more targeted support would bring gains in efficiency and equity, but require deeper investments
in data collection, in particular on the total incomes and assets of agricultural households. Agricultural
policy would still have an important role in underwriting those aspects of agricultural risk management that
cannot be covered by farmers themselves or by risk markets, and in fostering greater resilience to future
shocks.
Re-orient public expenditures towards investments in public goods with the potential to deliver
sustainable productivity growth and improved sectoral resilience. Specifically, investments in
innovation systems should be made central to agricultural support policies. However, innovation – which
encompasses not just new technologies, but improved practices and systems – is currently marginal, with
just 6% of all budgetary support going to research and innovation directly, 9% to public investments in
infrastructure and 2% to biosecurity. These shares could be almost doubled by a redirection of market
distorting payments, and raised further still by a reallocation of income support away from farmers whose
incomes from farm and off-farm sources would be above average even without support. Public goods can
also be generated by individual agricultural producers in the form of ecosystem services and other
environmental amenities demanded by societies. Targeted and tailored payments to producers can foster
the availability of such goods, and provide additional income opportunities for farm households.
The formidable challenges facing food systems call for a range of policies, many of
which extend beyond primary agriculture
Food systems around the world face a formidable triple challenge of providing food security and nutrition
to a growing global population, providing livelihoods to those along the food supply chain, and contributing
to environmental sustainability. Effective agricultural policies can make an important contribution to each


84 

of these goals, but they will not be sufficient. A wider food systems approach means mobilising policies in
a wide range of areas that go beyond primary agriculture, for example via targeted policies to encourage
healthier dietary choices, broad policies to ensure balanced rural and economic development, and
economy-wide plans to curb GHG emissions. It also means exploiting synergies and managing trade-offs
between the different dimensions of the triple challenge. A “food systems approach” to addressing these
challenges requires that agricultural policymakers take a holistic view of the performance of policies related
to multiple objectives, and co-ordinate to avoid incoherent policies.




 85

References


Alston, J. et al. (2010), A Meta-Analysis of Rates of Return to Agricultural R&D: Ex Pede
Herculem?, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) Research Report 113,
https://www.ifpri.org/publication/meta-analysis-rates-return-agricultural-r-d.
[28]
Anderson, K. and S. Nelgen (2012), “Trade Barrier Volatility and Agricultural Price Stabilization”,
World Development, Vol. 40/1, pp. 36-48, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2011.05.018.
[51]
Anderson, K. and E. Valenzuela (2021), “What impact are subsidies and trade barriers abroad
having on Australasian and Brazilian agriculture?”, Australian Journal of Agricultural and
Resource Economics, Vol. 65/2, https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8489.12413.
[24]
Baragwanath, T. (2021), “Digital opportunities for demand-side policies to improve consumer
health and the sustainability of food systems”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers,
No. 148, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/bec87135-en.
[6]
Beghin, J. and H. Jensen (2008), “Farm policies and added sugars in US diets”, Food Policy,
Vol. 33/6, pp. 480-488, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2008.05.007.
[44]
Benton, T. et al. (2021), Food system impacts on biodiversity loss: Three levers for food system
transformation in support of nature, Chatham House, London,
https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/default/files/2021-02/2021-02-03-food-system-
biodiversity-loss-benton-et-al_0.pdf.
[70]
Blandford, D. and K. Hassapoyannes (2018), “The role of agriculture in global GHG mitigation”,
OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 112, OECD Publishing, Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/da017ae2-en.
[81]
Bouis, H. (2000), “Improving Human Nutrition through Agriculture: The Role of International
Agricultural Research. Conference Summary and Recommendations.”, Food and Nutrition
Bulletin, Vol. 21/4, pp. 550-567, https://doi.org/10.1177/156482650002100441.
[40]
Bowman, M. and D. Zilberman (2013), “Economic Factors Affecting Diversified Farming
Systems”, Ecology and Society, Vol. 18/1, https://www.jstor.org/stable/26269286.
[46]
Brink, L. (2018), “Two indicators, little in common, same name: Market Price Support”, CAP
Reform, http://capreform.eu/two-indicators-little-in-common-same-name-market-price-
support/ (accessed on 25 March 2019).
[16]
Brooks, J. (ed.) (2012), Agricultural Policies for Poverty Reduction, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264112902-en.
[48]
Brooks, J. and A. Matthews (2015), “Trade Dimensions of Food Security”, OECD Food,
Agriculture and Fisheries Papers No. 77, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5js65xn790nv-en.
[23]
Busch, J. and K. Ferretti-Gallon (2017), “What Drives Deforestation and What Stops It? A Meta-
Analysis”, Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, Vol. 11/1, pp. 3-23,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/reep/rew013.
[66]


86 

Dasgupta, P. (2021), The Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review. Abridged Version,
HM Treasury, London,
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_dat
a/file/957292/Dasgupta_Review_-_Abridged_Version.pdf.
[64]
de Frahan, B., J. Dong and R. De Blander (2017), “Farm Household Incomes in OECD Member
Countries over the Last 30 Years of Public Support”, LIS Working Paper Series 700,
https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/169260/1/700.pdf.
[59]
DeBoe, G. (2020), “Impacts of agricultural policies on productivity and sustainability performance
in agriculture: A literature review”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 141,
OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/6bc916e7-en.
[75]
DeBoe, G. et al. (2020), “Reforming Agricultural Policies Will Help to Improve Environmental
Performance”, EuroChoices, Vol. 19/1, pp. 30-35, https://doi.org/10.1111/1746-692X.12247.
[80]
Deuss, A. (2017), “Impact of agricultural export restrictions on prices in importing countries”,
OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers No. 105, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/1eeeb292-
en.
[49]
Deuss, A. (2015), “Review of the performance and impacts of recent stockholding policies”, in
Issues in Agricultural Trade Policy: Proceedings of the 2014 OECD Global Forum on
Agriculture, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264233911-5-en.
[50]
Dewbre, J., J. Antón and W. Thompton (2001), “The Transfer Efficiency and Trade Effects of
Direct Payments”, American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 83/5, pp. 1204-1214,
https://doi.org/10.1111/0002-9092.00268.
[60]
Diakosavvas, D. (2002), “Agricultural Policies in China after WTO Accession”, in China in the
Global Economy, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264158894-en.
[14]
Effland, A. (2011), “Classifying and Measuring Agricultural Support: Identifying Differences
Between the WTO and OECD Systems”, Economic Information Bullentin 74,
http://www.ers.usda.gov/ (accessed on 19 April 2019).
[15]
FAO (2020), Hunger and food insecurity, http://www.fao.org/hunger/en/ (accessed on
1 March 2021).
[17]
FAO (2006), “Food Security”, Policy Brief, Issue 2,
http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/faoitaly/documents/pdf/pdf_Food_Security_Cocept_No
te.pdf (accessed on 29 April 2021).
[95]
FAO and UNEP (2020), The State of the World’s Forests 2020. Forests, biodiversity and people.,
FAO, Rome, https://doi.org/10.4060/ca8642en.
[68]
FAO, IFAD and WFP (2019), Strengthening resilience for food security and nutrition: A
Conceptual Framework for Collaboration and Partnership among the Rome-based Agencies,
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the International Fund for
Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the World Food Programme (WFP),
https://docs.wfp.org/api/documents/WFP-0000062320/download/.
[89]
FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO (2020), The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the
World 2020. Transforming food systems for affordable healthy diets, FAO, Rome,
https://doi.org/10.4060/ca9692en.
[18]


 87

FEBA (2020), FEBA EU Monitoring - November-December 2020, European Food Banks
Federation, https://lp.eurofoodbank.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/12/FEBA_EU_Monitoring_NovDec2020.pdf.
[9]
Filipski, M. and K. Covarrubias (2012), Distributional Impacts of Commodity Prices in Developing
Countries, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264112902-en.
[33]
G7 Agriculture Ministers (2017), , G7 Bergamo Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting Communiqué 14-
15 October 2017 - Empowering Farmers, Developing Rural Areas and Enhancing
Cooperation to Feed the Planet, http://www.g7italy.it/en/documenti-ministeriali.
[84]
GBD 2019 Risk Factors Collaborators (2020), “Global burden of 87 risk factors in 204 countries
and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
2019”, Global Health Metrics, Vol. 396/10258, pp. 1223-1249, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(20)30752-2.
[38]
GFN (2020), Strengthening Food Donation Operations During COVID-19: Key issues and Best
Practices for Governments Around the Globe, The Global FoodBanking Network,
https://www.foodbanking.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Global-Food-Donation-Policy-Atlas-
COVID19-Issue-Brief.pdf.
[7]
Giner, C. and J. Brooks (2019), “Policies for encouraging healthier food choices”, OECD Food,
Agriculture and Fisheries Papers No. 137, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/11a42b51-en.
[43]
Global Panel on Agriculture and Food Systems for Nutrition (2020), Foresight 2.0: Future Food
Systems: For people, our planet, and prosperity, https://foresight.glopan.org/.
[45]
Greenville, J. et al. (2019), “Influencing GVCs through Agro-Food Policy and Reform”, OECD
Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers No. 125, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9ce888e0-en.
[25]
Greenville, J., K. Kawasaki and M. Jouanjean (2019), “Employment in Agriculture and Food
Trade: Assessing the Role of GVCs”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers,
No. 124, OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5ed3b181-en.
[57]
Gruère, G. and J. Brooks (2021), “Viewpoint: Characterising early agricultural and food policy
responses to the outbreak of COVID-19”, Food Policy, Vol. 100, p. 102017,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2020.102017.
[4]
Gruère, G., M. Shigemitsu and S. Crawford (2020), “Agriculture and water policy
changes: Stocktaking and alignment with OECD and G20 recommendations”, OECD Food,
Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 144, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/f35e64af-en.
[11]
Guerrero, S. (2018), “Farmland Birds under Pressure”, EuroChoices, Vol. 17/3, pp. 24-25,
https://doi.org/10.1111/1746-692X.12204.
[78]
Hattersley, L. et al. (2020), “Countering common arguments against taxes on sugary drinks”,
Health, Nutrition and Population Knowledge Brief, World Bank, Washington, DC,
http://hdl.handle.net/10986/34361.
[47]
Hazell, P. (2009), “The Asian Green Revolution”, IFPRI Discussion Paper, International Food
Policy Research Institute, https://www.ifpri.org/publication/asian-green-revolution.
[42]


88 

Heisey, P. and K. Fuglie (2018), “Public agricultural R&D in high-income countries: Old and new
roles in a new funding environment”, Global Food Security, Vol. 17, pp. 92-102,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2018.03.008.
[32]
Henderson, B. et al. (2021), “Policy strategies and challenges for climate change mitigation in
the Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) sector”, OECD Food, Agriculture and
Fisheries Papers, No. 149, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/47b3493b-en.
[91]
Henderson, B. and J. Lankoski (2020), “Assessing the Environmental Impacts of Agricultural
Policies”, Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, pp. 1-16,
https://doi.org/10.1002/aepp.13081.
[73]
Henderson, B. and J. Lankoski (2019), “Evaluating the environmental impact of agricultural
policies”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 130, OECD Publishing, Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/add0f27c-en.
[72]
Hosonuma, N. et al. (2012), “An assessment of deforestation and forest degradation drivers in
developing countries”, Environmental Research Letters, Vol. 7/4,
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/7/4/044009.
[67]
IMF (2021), Primary Commodity Prices, https://www.imf.org/en/Research/commodity-prices
(accessed on 20 April 2021).
[2]
IPBES (2019), Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity and
ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services, IPBES secretariat, Bonn, Germany,
https://www.ipbes.net/sites/default/files/2020-
02/ipbes_global_assessment_report_summary_for_policymakers_en.pdf.
[90]
IPCC (2019), “Summary for Policymakers”, in Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report
on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food
security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems,
https://www.ipcc.ch/srccl/chapter/summary-for-policymakers/.
[63]
Ivanic, M. and W. Martin (2008), “Implications of Higher Global Food Prices for Poverty in Low-
Income Countries”, Agricultural Economics, Vol. 39/s1, pp. 405-416,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-0862.2008.00347.x.
[34]
Kataki, P. (2002), “Shifts in Cropping System and Its Effect on Human Nutrition: Case Study from
India”, Journal of Crop Production, Vol. 6/1-2, pp. 119-144,
https://doi.org/10.1300/J144v06n01_08.
[41]
Kristkova, Z., M. van Dijk and H. van Meijl (2017), “Assessing the Impact of Agricultural R&D
Investments on Long-Term Projections of Food Security”, World Agricultural Resources and
Food Security (Frontiers of Economics and Globalization), Vol. 17, pp. 1-17,
https://doi.org/10.1108/S1574-871520170000017001.
[30]
Laborde, D. et al. (2021), “Agricultural subsidies and global greenhouse gas emissions”, Nature
Communications, Vol. 12/2601, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22703-1.
[77]
Laborde, D. et al. (2020), “COVID-19 risks to global food security”, Science, Vol. 369/6503,
pp. 500-502, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abc4765.
[36]


 89

Lankoski, J. and A. Thiem (2020), “Linkages between agricultural policies, productivity and
environmental sustainability”, Ecological Economics, Vol. 178,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2020.106809.
[76]
Lechenet, M. et al. (2017), “Reducing pesticide use while preserving crop productivity and
profitability on arable farms”, Nature Plants, Vol. 3, https://doi.org/10.1038/nplants.2017.8.
[82]
Lowder, S., J. Skoet and T. Raney (2016), “The Number, Size, and Distribution of Farms,
Smallholder Farms, and Family Farms Worldwide”, World Development, Vol. 87, pp. 16-29,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2015.10.041.
[54]
OECD (2021), Agriculture and water policies: characteristics and evolution from 2009 to 2019,
OECD country profiles, OECD Publishing, Paris, http://www.oecd.org/agriculture/topics/water-
and-agriculture#profiles.
[12]
OECD (2021), “Digital opportunities for Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) Systems and the trade
facilitation effects of SPS Electronic Certification”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
Papers, No. 152, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/cbb7d0f6-en.
[62]
OECD (2021), Making Better Policies for Food Systems, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/ddfba4de-en.
[35]
OECD (2021), OECD Economic Outlook, Interim Report March 2021, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/34bfd999-en.
[94]
OECD (2021), Policies for the Future of Farming and Food in Norway, OECD Agriculture and
Food Policy Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/20b14991-en.
[93]
OECD (2020), Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2020, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/928181a8-en.
[3]
OECD (2020), “Exploring the Linkages between Agricultural Policies, Productivity and
Environmental Sustainability”,
https://one.oecd.org/document/COM/TAD/CA/ENV/EPOC(2019)4/FINAL/en/pdf.
[74]
OECD (2020), “Measuring distortions in international markets: The agriculture sector”,
Agriculture Policy Brief,
https://issuu.com/oecd.publishing/docs/measuring_distortions_in_internatio.
[5]
OECD (2020), “OECD Agro-Food Productivity-Sustainability-Resilience Policy Framework:
Revised Framework”,
https://one.oecd.org/document/TAD/CA/APM/WP(2019)25/FINAL/en/pdf.
[96]
OECD (2020), OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 2020 Issue 2, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/39a88ab1-en.
[1]
OECD (2020), Strengthening Agricultural Resilience in the Face of Multiple Risks, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/2250453e-en.
[52]
OECD (2019), Enhancing Climate Change Mitigation through Agriculture, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/e9a79226-en.
[92]


90 

OECD (2019), Innovation, Productivity and Sustainability in Food and Agriculture: Main Findings
from Country Reviews and Policy Lessons, OECD Food and Agricultural Reviews, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/c9c4ec1d-en.
[31]
OECD (2019), The Heavy Burden of Obesity: The Economics of Prevention, OECD Health
Policy Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/67450d67-en.
[37]
OECD (2016), Evolving Agricultural Policies and Markets: Implications for Multilateral Trade
Reform, OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264264991-en.
[21]
OECD (2016), OECD’S Producer Support Estimate and Related Indicators of Agricultural
Support - Concepts, Calculations, Interpretation and Use (The PSE Manual),
https://www.oecd.org/agriculture/topics/agricultural-policy-monitoring-and-
evaluation/documents/producer-support-estimates-manual.pdf.
[13]
OECD (2014), Boosting Resilience through Innovative Risk Governance, OECD Reviews of Risk
Management Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264209114-
en.
[88]
OECD (2013), Global Food Security: Challenges for the Food and Agricultural System, OECD
Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264195363-en.
[19]
OECD (2011), Managing Risk in Agriculture: Policy Assessment and Design, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264116146-en.
[86]
OECD (2009), Managing Risk in Agriculture: A Holistic Approach, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264075313-en.
[85]
OECD (2003), Farm Household Income: Issues and Policy Responses, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264099678-en.
[58]
OECD (2002), Agricultural Policies in OECD Countries: A Positive Reform Agenda, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264199682-en.
[27]
OECD/FAO (2020), OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2020-2029, FAO, Rome/OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/1112c23b-en.
[20]
Piesse, J. and C. Thirtle (2010), “Agricultural R&D, technology and productivity”, Philosophical
transactions of the Royal Society B, Vol. 365/1554, pp. 3035-3047,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2010.0140.
[29]
Pingali, P. (2015), “Agricultural policy and nutrition outcomes – getting beyond the preoccupation
with staple grains”, Food Security, Vol. 7, pp. 583–591, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12571-015-
0461-x.
[22]
Pingali, P. (2012), “Green Revolution: Impacts, limits, and the path ahead”, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS), Vol. 109/31,
pp. 12302-12308, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0912953109.
[39]
Placzek, O. (2021), “Socio-economic and demographic aspects of food security and nutrition”,
OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 150, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/49d7059f-en.
[10]


 91

Punthakey, J. (2020), “Foreign direct investment and trade in agro-food global value chains”,
OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 142, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/993f0fdc-en.
[56]
Raven, P. and D. Wagner (2021), “Agricultural intensification and climate change are rapidly
decreasing insect biodiversity”, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America (PNAS), Vol. 118/2, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2002548117.
[71]
Ricciardi, V. et al. (2018), “How much of the world’s food do smallholders produce?”, Global
Food Security, Vol. 17, pp. 64-72, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2018.05.002.
[61]
Ryan, M. (2019), “Evaluating the economic benefits and costs of antimicrobial use in food-
producing animals”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 132, OECD
Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/f859f644-en.
[83]
Sud, M. (2020), “Managing the Biodiversity Impacts of Fertiliser and Pesticide Use: Overview
and insights from trends and policies across selected OECD countries”, OECD Environment
Working Papers, No. 155, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/63942249-en.
[79]
Thompson-Lipponen, C. and J. Greenville (2019), “The Evolution of the Treatment of Agriculture
in Preferential Trade Agreements”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers No. 126,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/751d274f-en.
[26]
Tilman, D. et al. (2017), “Future threats to biodiversity and pathways to their prevention”, Nature,
Vol. 546, pp. 73-81, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22900.
[69]
Townsend, R. et al. (2017), Future of food: Shaping the food system to deliver jobs, World Bank
Group, Washington, DC,
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/406511492528621198/Future-of-food-shaping-
the-food-system-to-deliver-jobs.
[55]
UNISDR (2015), Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 - 2030, United Nations
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction,
https://www.unisdr.org/files/43291_sendaiframeworkfordrren.pdf (accessed on
22 August 2018).
[87]
United Nations (2021), The United Nations World Water Development Report 2021: Valuing
Water, UNESCO, Paris, http://www.unesco.org/reports/wwdr/2021/en.
[65]
USDA (2021), USDA Announces Continuation of the Farmers to Families Food Box Program,
Fifth Round of Food Purchases, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC,
https://www.usda.gov/media/press-releases/2021/01/04/usda-announces-continuation-
farmers-families-food-box-program-
fifth#:~:text=(Washington%2C%20D.C.%2C%20January%204,to%20Families%20Food%20B
ox%20Program (accessed on 4 January).
[8]
World Bank (2021), “Employment in agriculture (% of total employment) (modeled ILO
estimate)”, World Development Indicators,
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.AGR.EMPL.ZS (accessed on 28 March 2021).
[53]






92 

Annex 1.A. Definition of OECD indicators of
agricultural support
Nominal indicators used in this report
Producer Support Estimate (PSE): The annual monetary value of gross transfers from consumers and
taxpayers to agricultural producers, measured at the farm gate level, arising from policy measures that
support agriculture, regardless of their nature, objectives or impacts on farm production or income. It
includes market price support, budgetary payments and budget revenue foregone, i.e. gross transfers from
consumers and taxpayers to agricultural producers arising from policy measures based on: current output,
input use, area planted/animal numbers/receipts/incomes (current, non-current), and non-commodity
criteria. PSE categories are defined in Box 1 A.1.
Market Price Support (MPS): The annual monetary value of gross transfers from consumers and
taxpayers to agricultural producers arising from policy measures that create a gap between domestic
market prices and border prices of a specific agricultural commodity, measured at the farm gate level. MPS
is available by commodity, and sums of negative and positive components are reported separately where
relevant along with the total MPS.
Producer Single Commodity Transfers (producer SCT): The annual monetary value of gross transfers
from consumers and taxpayers to agricultural producers, measured at the farm gate level, arising from
policies linked to the production of a single commodity such that the producer must produce the designated
commodity in order to receive the payment. This includes broader policies where transfers are specified
on a per-commodity basis. Producer SCT is also available by commodity.
Group Commodity Transfers (GCT): The annual monetary value of gross transfers from consumers and
taxpayers to agricultural producers, measured at the farm gate level, arising from policies whose payments
are made on the basis that one or more of a designated list of commodities is produced, i.e. a producer
may produce from a set of allowable commodities and receive a transfer that does not vary with respect to
this decision.
All Commodity Transfers (ACT): The annual monetary value of gross transfers from consumers and
taxpayers to agricultural producers, measured at the farm gate level, arising from policies that place no
restrictions on the commodity produced but require the recipient to produce some commodity of their
choice.
Other Transfers to Producers (OTP): The annual monetary value of gross transfers from consumers and
taxpayers to agricultural producers, measured at the farm gate level, arising from policies that do not
require any commodity production at all.
Consumer Single Commodity Transfers (consumer SCT): The annual monetary value of gross
transfers from (to) consumers of agricultural commodities, measured at the farm gate level, arising from
policies linked to the production of a single commodity. Consumer SCT is also available by commodity.
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE): The annual monetary value of gross transfers from (to) consumers
of agricultural commodities, measured at the farm gate level, arising from policy measures that support
agriculture, regardless of their nature, objectives or impacts on consumption of farm products. If negative,
the CSE measures the burden (implicit tax) on consumers through market price support (higher prices),
that more than offsets consumer subsidies that lower prices to consumers.


 93

General Services Support Estimate (GSSE): The annual monetary value of gross transfers arising from
policy measures that create enabling conditions for the primary agricultural sector through development of
private or public services, institutions and infrastructure, regardless of their objectives and impacts on farm
production and income, or consumption of farm products. The GSSE includes policies where primary
agriculture is the main beneficiary, but does not include any payments to individual producers. GSSE
transfers do not directly alter producer receipts or costs or consumption expenditures. GSSE categories
are defined below.
Total Support Estimate (TSE): The annual monetary value of all gross transfers from taxpayers and
consumers arising from policy measures that support agriculture, net of the associated budgetary receipts,
regardless of their objectives and impacts on farm production and income, or consumption of farm
products.
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE): The annual monetary value of all gross budgetary transfers
from taxpayers arising from policy measures that support agriculture, regardless of their objectives and
impacts on farm production and income, or consumption of farm products.
Ratio indicators and percentage indicators
Percentage PSE (%PSE): PSE transfers as a share of gross farm receipts (including support in the
denominator).
Percentage SCT (%SCT): Single Commodity Transfers as a share of gross farm receipts for the specific
commodity (including support in the denominator).
Share of SCT in total PSE (%): Share of Single Commodity Transfers in the total PSE. This indicator is
also calculated by commodity.
Producer Nominal Protection Coefficient (producer NPC): The ratio between the average price
received by producers (at farm gate), including payments per tonne of current output, and the border price
(measured at farm gate). The Producer NPC is also available by commodity.
Producer Nominal Assistance Coefficient (producer NAC): The ratio between the value of gross farm
receipts including support and gross farm receipts (at farm gate) valued at border prices (measured at farm
gate).
Percentage CSE (%CSE): CSE transfers as a share of consumption expenditure on agricultural
commodities (at farm gate prices), net of taxpayer transfers to consumers. The %CSE measures the
implicit tax (or subsidy, if CSE is positive) placed on consumers by agricultural price policies.
Consumer Nominal Protection Coefficient (consumer NPC): The ratio between the average price paid
by consumers (at farm gate) and the border price (measured at farm gate). The Consumer NPC is also
available by commodity.
Consumer Nominal Assistance Coefficient (consumer NAC): The ratio between the value of
consumption expenditure on agricultural commodities (at farm gate) and that valued at border prices.
Percentage TSE (%TSE): TSE transfers as a percentage of GDP.
Percentage TBSE (%TBSE): TBSE transfers as a percentage of GDP.
Percentage GSSE (%GSSE): Share of expenditures on general services in the Total Support Estimate
(TSE).
Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers (%): represents
the sum of positive MPS, the absolute value of negative MPS, payments based on output and payments


94 

based on unconstrained use of variable inputs, relative to the sum of positive MPS, the absolute value of
negative MPS, and all budgetary payments to producers.
Annex Box 1.A.1. Definitions of categories in the PSE classification
Definitions of categories
Category A1, Market price support (MPS): Transfers from consumers and taxpayers to agricultural
producers from policy measures that create a gap between domestic market prices and border prices
of a specific agricultural commodity, measured at the farm gate level.
Category A2, Payments based on output: Transfers from taxpayers to agricultural producers from
policy measures based on current output of a specific agricultural commodity.
Category B, Payments based on input use: Transfers from taxpayers to agricultural producers arising
from policy measures based on on-farm use of inputs:

Variable input use that reduces the on-farm cost of a specific variable input or a mix of variable
inputs.

Fixed capital formation that reduces the on-farm investment cost of farm buildings, equipment,
plantations, irrigation, drainage, and soil improvements.

On-farm services that reduce the cost of technical, accounting, commercial, sanitary and
phytosanitary assistance and training provided to individual farmers.
Category C, Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required: Transfers from taxpayers
to agricultural producers arising from policy measures based on current area, animal numbers, revenue,
or income, and requiring production.
Category D, Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required: Transfers from
taxpayers to agricultural producers arising from policy measures based on non-current (i.e. historical or
fixed) area, animal numbers, revenue, or income, with current production of any commodity required.
Category E, Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required: Transfers from
taxpayers to agricultural producers arising from policy measures based on non-current (i.e. historical or
fixed) area, animal numbers, revenue, or income, with current production of any commodity not required
but optional.
Category F, Payments based on non-commodity criteria: Transfers from taxpayers to agricultural
producers arising from policy measures based on:

Long-term resource retirement: Transfers for the long-term retirement of factors of production
from commodity production. The payments in this subcategory are distinguished from those
requiring short-term resource retirement, which are based on commodity production criteria.

A specific non-commodity output: Transfers for the use of farm resources to produce specific
non-commodity outputs of goods and services, which are not required by regulations.

Other non-commodity criteria: Transfers provided equally to all farmers, such as a flat rate or
lump sum payment.
Category G, Miscellaneous payments: Transfers from taxpayers to farmers for which there is a lack
of information to allocate them among the appropriate categories.
Note: A (area), An (animal numbers), R (receipts) or I (income).



 95

Definitions of labels
With or without current commodity production limits and/or limit to payments: Defines whether
or not there is a specific limitation on current commodity production (output) associated with a policy
providing transfers to agriculture and whether or not there are limits to payments in the form of limits to
area or animal numbers eligible for those payments. Applied in categories A–F.
With variable or fixed payment rates: Any payments is defined as subject to a variable rate where
the formula determining the level of payment is triggered by a change in price, yield, net revenue or
income or a change in production cost. Applied in categories A–E.
With or without input constraints: defines whether or not there are specific requirements concerning
farming practices related to the programme in terms of the reduction, replacement, or withdrawal in the
use of inputs or a restriction of farming practices allowed. Applied in categories A–F. The payments
with input constrains are further broken down to:

Payments conditional on compliance with basic requirements that are mandatory (with
mandatory);

Payments requiring specific practices going beyond basic requirements and voluntary (with
voluntary).
o
Specific practices related to environmental issues.
o
Specific practices related to animal welfare.
o
Other specific practices.
With or without commodity exceptions: defines whether or not there are prohibitions upon the
production of certain commodities as a condition of eligibility for payments based on non-current
A/An/R/I of commodity(ies). Applied in Category E.
Based on area, animal numbers, receipts or income: defines the specific attribute (i.e. area, animal
numbers, receipts or income) on which the payment is based. Applied in categories C–E.
Based on a single commodity, a group of commodities or all commodities: defines whether the
payment is granted for production of a single commodity, a group of commodities or all commodities.
Applied in categories A–D.
Drivers of the change in PSE
Decomposition of PSE
Per cent change in PSE: Per cent change in the nominal value of the PSE expressed in national currency.
The per cent change is calculated using the two most recent years in the series.
Contribution of MPS to per cent change in PSE: Per cent change in nominal PSE if all variables other
than MPS are held constant.
Contribution of price gap to per cent change in the PSE: Per cent change in nominal PSE if all variables
other than gap between domestic market prices and border prices are held constant.
Contribution of quantity produced to per cent change in the PSE: Per cent change in nominal PSE if
all variables other than quantity produced are held constant.
Contribution of budgetary payments (BP) to per cent change in PSE: Per cent change in nominal PSE
if all variables other than BP are held constant.


96 

Contribution of BP elements to per cent change in PSE: Per cent change in nominal PSE if all variables
other than a given BP element are held constant. BP elements include Payments based on output,
Payments based on input use, Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required, Payments based
on non-current A/An/R/I, production required, Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not
required, Payments based on non-commodity criteria and Miscellaneous payments.
Change in Producer Price
Per cent change in Producer Price: Per cent change in Producer Price (at farm gate) expressed in
national currency. The per cent change is calculated using the two most recent years in the series.
Decomposition of the change in the Border Price
Per cent change in Border Price: Per cent change in Border Price (at farm gate) expressed in national
currency. The per cent change is calculated using the two most recent years in the series.
Contribution of Exchange Rate to per cent change in Border Price: Per cent change in the Border
Price (at farm gate) expressed in national currency if all variables other than Exchange Rate between
national currency and USD are held constant.
Contribution of Border Price expressed in USD to per cent change in Border Price: Per cent change
in the Border Price (at farm gate) expressed in national currency if all variables other than Border Price (at
farm gate) expressed in USD are held constant.
Note: The producer price change and the border price change are not calculated when the negative price
gap occurs at the commodity level for the current or previous year.
Definition of GSSE categories
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system

Agricultural knowledge generation: Budgetary expenditure financing research and development
(R&D) activities related to agriculture, and associated data dissemination, irrespective of the
institution (private or public, ministry, university, research centre or producer groups) where they
take place, the nature of research (scientific, institutional, etc.), or its purpose.

Agricultural knowledge transfer: Budgetary expenditure financing agricultural vocational schools
and agricultural programmes in high-level education, training and advice to farmers that is generic
(e.g. accounting rules, pesticide application), not specific to individual situations, and data
collection and information dissemination networks related to agricultural production and marketing.
Inspection and control

Agricultural product safety and inspection: Budgetary expenditure financing activities related
to agricultural product safety and inspection. This includes only expenditures on inspection of
domestically produced commodities at first level of processing and border inspection for exported
commodities.

Pest and disease inspection and control: Budgetary expenditure financing pest and disease
control of agricultural inputs and outputs (control at primary agriculture level) and public funding of
veterinary services (for the farming sector) and phytosanitary services.

Input control: Budgetary expenditure financing the institutions providing control activities and
certification of industrial inputs used in agriculture (e.g. machinery, industrial fertilisers, pesticides,
etc.) and biological inputs (e.g. seed certification and control).


 97

Development and maintenance of infrastructure

Hydrological infrastructure: Budgetary expenditure financing public investments into
hydrological infrastructure (irrigation and drainage networks).

Storage, marketing and other physical infrastructure: Budgetary expenditure financing
investments to off-farm storage and other market infrastructure facilities related to handling and
marketing primary agricultural products (silos, harbour facilities – docks, elevators; wholesale
markets, futures markets), as well as other physical infrastructure related to agriculture, when
agriculture is the main beneficiary.

Institutional infrastructure: Budgetary expenditure financing investments to build and maintain
institutional infrastructure related to the farming sector (e.g. land cadastres; machinery user groups,
seed and species registries; development of rural finance networks; support to farm organisations,
etc.).

Farm restructuring: Budgetary payments related to reform of farm structures financing entry, exit
or diversification (outside agriculture) strategies.
Marketing and promotion

Collective schemes for processing and marketing: Budgetary expenditure financing investment
in collective, mainly primary, processing, marketing schemes and marketing facilities, designed to
improve marketing environment for agriculture.

Promotion of agricultural products: Budgetary expenditure financing assistance to collective
promotion of agro-food products (e.g. promotion campaigns, participation on international fairs).

Cost of public stockholding: Budgetary expenditure covering the costs of storage, depreciation
and disposal of public storage of agricultural products.

Miscellaneous: Budgetary expenditure financing other general services that cannot be
disaggregated and allocated to the above categories, often due to a lack of information.
More detailed information on the indicators, their use and limitations is available in OECD’s Producer
Support Estimate and Related Indicators of Agricultural Support: Concepts, Calculation, Interpretation
and Use (the PSE Manual) available on the OECD public website
(http://www.oecd.org/agriculture/topics/agricultural-policy-monitoring-and-
evaluation/documents/producer-support-estimates-manual.pdf).




98 

OECD indicators of support
ACT
All Commodity Transfers
CSE
Consumer Support Estimate
GCT
Group Commodity Transfers
GSSE
General Services Support Estimate
MPS
Market Price Support
NAC
Nominal Assistance Coefficient
NPC
Nominal Protection Coefficient
OTP
Other Transfers to Producers
PEM
Policy Evaluation Model
PSE
Producer Support Estimate
SCT
Single Commodity Transfers
TSE
Total Support Estimate
Currencies
ARS
Argentinian peso
AUD
Australian dollar
BRL
Brazilian real
CAD
Canadian dollar
CLP
Chilean peso
COP
Colombian peso
CHF
Swiss frank
CNY
Chinese yuan renminbi
CRC
Costa Rican colon
EUR
Euro
GBP
British pound
IDR
Indonesian roupiah
INR
Indian rupee
ILS
Israeli shekel
ISK
Icelandic krona
JPY
Japanese yen
KRW
Korean won
KZT
Kazakh tenge
MXN
Mexican peso
NOK
Norwegian krone
NZD
New Zealand dollar
PHP
Philippines peso
RUR
Russian rouble
TRY
New Turkish lira
UAH
Ukrainian hryvnia
USD
United States dollar
VND
Vietnamese dong
ZAR
South African rand





 99



Notes
1 More recent estimates from OECD  (2021[94]) suggest a slightly smaller GDP decline at -3.4% globally.
Data provided in this section are based on the regular report from December 2020.
2 Publicly supported short-time work schemes allow companies to temporarily reduce the work time of
employees by up to 100%, while wage differences are partly or fully subsidised by the government.
3 Three main types of impacts were observed on the agriculture and food sector  (OECD, 2020[96]). First,
there were impacts on agricultural production, due to the unavailability of labour, restrictions on access to
intermediate agricultural inputs, and impacts on farmers’ income in affected subsectors that could not sell
their output. Second, there have been impacts on consumer demand, with increased food insecurity led
by unemployment and income shocks associated with containment measures, reduced demand for high
value products, shifts in consumer demand towards retail, over food consumed away from home, and
decline in biofuel demand due to transportation restrictions. Third, supply chain disruptions were observed
in many countries, due in part to contamination in processing firms, transport and logistic issues, and
difficulties in obtaining inputs.
4 Some of the early responses, such as the declaration of agriculture and food as being an essential sector
that were reported in the 2020 report, have not been repeated in all country chapters for this year’s edition;
however, they are also included in the analysis to ensure a full coverage of measures.
5 This categorisation can be further separated into 20 sub categories of measures (OECD, 2020[3]).
6 This grouping was also used in Gruère and Brooks (2021[4]) to characterise early policy responses to the
COVID--19. Efforts were made to ensure a consistent and unique attribution of a group to each of the
policy measures, although the attribution of some measures to a specific group could be subjective.
7 While targeted food assistance for low income households can also be considered urgent, the
implemented measures essentially aim to cushion consumers from the economic impacts rather than cope
with the urgency of the crisis for the delivery of agriculture and food products.
8 The majority of measures in this group could be considered market distorting and potentially
environmentally harmful if maintained for long enough to affect producers’ decisions.
9 For a discussion on agriculture and water management progress, see Box 1.4.
10 The OECD also collaborates with other international organisations (FAO, IDB, the World Bank and
IFPRI) in the Consortium for Measuring the Policy Environment for Agriculture (www.ag-incentives.org),
which provides estimates for countries not covered by the OECD.
11 Food availability refers to the supply of sufficient quantities of food (either through domestic production
or imports), while Access to food refers to the ability of individuals to access adequate resources to acquire
appropriate foods for a nutritious diet (FAO, 2006[95]).




100 


12 In the case of New Zealand, market price support for eggs and poultry arises as an unintended impact
of science-based SPS measures whose sole purpose is to keep out diseases.
13 Possibly due to underreporting of other components of the GSSE (e.g. infrastructure and inspection and
control).
14 The composition of a “healthy diet” varies according to individual characteristics, cultural contexts, local
availability of foods and dietary customs. Healthy diets reflect global guidelines and ensure that a person’s
needs for macronutrients (proteins, fats and carbohydrates including dietary fibres) and essential
micronutrients (vitamins and minerals) are met  (FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO, 2020[18]).
15 Dietary risks as defined by the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study include diets
“low in whole grains, fruit, fibre, legumes, nuts and seeds, omega-3 fatty acids, Polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFAs), vegetables, milk, and calcium”; and diets “high in sodium, trans fats, red or processed meat, and
sugar-sweetened beverages” (GBD 2019 Risk Factors Collaborators, 2020[38]).
16 Enteric fermentation is a digestive process that occurs in cattle, sheep, goats and other ruminant
livestock, whereby methane (CH4) emissions are produced in the rumen through a process of microbial
fermentation.


 101

This part contains an overview of the developments of support in the OECD
area and selected Emerging Economies overall, followed by chapters on
agricultural policy developments and support to agriculture in each of the
countries covered in this report. Each country chapter includes a brief
summary of policy developments and support to agriculture, including in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic affecting the agro-food sector, and
related assessments and recommendations; a brief outline of historical
policy trends; a more detailed description of the main policy developments
in 2020-21; and information on the context in which agricultural policies are
implemented.
Developments in Agricultural Policy and
Support by Country


102 

OECD countries
Total support to agriculture (TSE) in OECD countries1 represented USD 329 billion (EUR 289 billion) per
year on average in 2018-20 of which 73%, or USD 240 billion (EUR 211 billion), was provided as support
to producers individually (PSE). Producer support represented 18.2% of gross farm receipts (%PSE) in
2018-20 across the OECD area, a decline from around 28% in 2000-02 and more than 35% in 1986-88
(Table 2.1).
The way support is delivered to producers also evolved. In particular, the long-term decline of support
based on commodity output (including market price support and output payments) characterises the
evolution of support to agriculture in the OECD area. OECD work identifies this as having the strongest
potential to distort agricultural production and trade together with payments based on the unconstrained
use of variable inputs, which slightly increased across OECD countries compared to the beginning of the
millennium.
At the other end of the spectrum in the PSE classification, some countries apply significantly less-distorting
forms of support, such as payments based on parameters not linked to current production, or based on
non-commodity criteria such as land set-aside, or payments for specific environmental or animal welfare
outcomes. Most notably, payments based on historical entitlements (generally crop area or livestock
numbers of a given reference period in the past) increased in many OECD countries in the last two
decades, representing some 4% of gross farm receipts (GFR) and about 22% of the PSE during 2018-20.
Payments based on current crop area and animal numbers remain largely unchanged compared to
2000-02, and represent around 21% of total producer support (Table 2.1).
Expenditures financing general services to the sector (GSSE) increased (in nominal terms) in the OECD
area from USD 37 billion per year in 2000-02 to USD 44 billion in 2018-20. However, relative to the size of
the sector, expenditures for general services declined from more than 7% of agricultural gross value-added
to less than 6% suggesting that these expenditures did not keep pace with sector growth. In 2018-20, most
of this went to infrastructure (USD 18 billion), a slight increase compared to 2000-02, and agricultural
knowledge and innovation (USD 14 billion), an increase of 70%. Expenditures for inspection and control
services more than doubled, while spending for marketing and promotion remained around the same and
public stockholding declined substantially over the same period. But all of these represented smaller
shares of the GSSE expenditure (Table 2.1). Total support to agriculture as a share of GDP declined
significantly over time.
2 Overall trends in agricultural
support


 103

Figure 2.1. OECD: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/rw2ymk
Figure 2.2. OECD: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/ubg9zn


0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
TSE as % GDP
1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Wool
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Rapeseed
Sunflower
Soybeans
Rice
Sorghum
Oats
Maize
Barley
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


104 

Table 2.1. OECD: Estimates of support to agriculture (USD)
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
594 108
671 296
1 175 905
1 215 719
1 148 956
1 163 040
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
71.3
70.2
73.7
71.6
74.4
75.2
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
556 062
659 840
1 121 675
1 104 208
1 121 990
1 138 828
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
230 213
216 862
240 185
240 063
242 507
237 984
Support based on commodity output
187 273
139 137
102 931
113 492
100 356
94 946
Market Price Support1
174 678
124 184
93 942
101 282
96 187
84 359
Positive Market Price Support
178 979
124 776
94 176
101 618
96 537
84 375
Negative Market Price Support
-4 302
-592
-234
-336
-350
-16
Payments based on output
12 596
14 953
8 988
12 210
4 169
10 587
Payments based on input use
19 571
19 513
31 325
29 415
28 865
35 695
Based on variable input use
9 146
8 008
11 886
10 199
9 982
15 477
with input constraints
1 146
341
1 102
811
868
1 627
Based on fixed capital formation
6 882
5 078
10 963
11 463
10 605
10 823
with input constraints
1 638
629
2 517
2 902
2 322
2 327
Based on on-farm services
3 543
6 427
8 476
7 754
8 278
9 395
with input constraints
439
964
1 611
1 575
1 533
1 723
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
19 377
41 382
50 182
43 694
56 813
50 038
Based on Receipts / Income
2 052
3 173
4 255
4 195
4 077
4 493
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
17 325
38 209
45 926
39 499
52 735
45 545
with input constraints
4 093
16 898
38 538
32 010
45 437
38 166
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
533
71
2 196
2 231
2 373
1 985
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
2 080
13 721
48 620
47 485
48 981
49 394
With variable payment rates
181
4 318
5 023
3 021
6 391
5 659
with commodity exceptions
0
4 079
4 880
2 864
6 254
5 521
With fixed payment rates
1 899
9 403
43 597
44 464
42 591
43 735
with commodity exceptions
1 561
6 081
2 565
2 510
2 515
2 669
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
1 078
3 205
4 160
3 052
4 386
5 043
Based on long-term resource retirement
1 076
2 900
2 598
1 549
2 872
3 374
Based on a specific non-commodity output
2
237
1 465
1 424
1 450
1 520
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
68
98
78
65
150
Miscellaneous payments
300
-166
771
694
733
884
Percentage PSE (%)
35.4
28.4
18.2
17.7
18.7
18.1
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.46
1.26
1.09
1.10
1.09
1.09
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.55
1.40
1.22
1.22
1.23
1.22
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
25 568
36 555
44 366
44 360
44 264
44 474
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
4 846
8 009
14 305
14 266
13 986
14 663
Inspection and control
1 076
1 927
4 208
4 416
4 174
4 034
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
10 223
16 393
18 180
18 623
18 365
17 552
Marketing and promotion
2 156
5 572
5 221
4 778
5 155
5 732
Cost of public stockholding
5 872
2 282
610
551
689
591
Miscellaneous
1 395
2 371
1 842
1 727
1 897
1 903
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
9.3
13.2
13.5
13.4
13.5
13.6
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-155 044
-117 029
-72 295
-76 850
-77 707
-62 327
Transfers to producers from consumers
-163 987
-121 691
-90 282
-96 875
-93 067
-80 905
Other transfers from consumers
-22 432
-19 518
-27 377
-28 053
-26 878
-27 199
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
19 956
23 580
44 343
46 979
41 047
45 002
Excess feed cost
11 420
599
1 021
1 099
1 191
775
Percentage CSE (%)
-28.9
-18.4
-6.7
-7.3
-7.2
-5.7
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.50
1.27
1.12
1.13
1.12
1.10
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.41
1.23
1.07
1.08
1.08
1.06
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
275 737
276 997
328 894
331 403
327 818
327 460
Transfers from consumers
186 419
141 209
117 659
124 928
119 945
108 104
Transfers from taxpayers
111 750
155 306
238 611
234 527
234 751
246 555
Budget revenues
-22 432
-19 518
-27 377
-28 053
-26 878
-27 199
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.9
1.0
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
101 060
152 813
234 951
230 121
231 632
243 101
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.7
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.5
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
The OECD total for 1986-88 includes all countries except Chile, Colombia, Israel, Latvia, Lithuania and Slovenia, for which data are not available. The
OECD total for 2000-02 includes all countries except Latvia and Lithuania. TSE as a share of GDP for 1986-88 for the OECD is an estimate based on
available data.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities: see notes to individual country tables.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 105

Emerging economies
Agricultural policies in the 12 emerging economies2 covered by this report generated transfers to the sector
averaging USD 385 billion (EUR 336 billion) per year in 2018-20 of which USD 294 billion
(EUR 257 billion) went to individual producers. At the same time, however, policies in a few countries
suppressed domestic prices for certain products, generating an implicit tax in the form of negative market
price support (MPS) averaging USD 104 billion (EUR 91 billion) per year in the same period.
As a consequence, net TSE represented USD 281 billion (EUR 247 billion) per year, while net PSE
averaged USD 190 billion (EUR 167 billion) per year during 2018-20. Aggregate support to producers
across emerging economies represented on average 7.4% of gross farm receipts in 2018-20: transfers to
producers worth 11.5% of GFR, and an implicit tax worth -4.1% of GFR. This %PSE represents a
substantial increase from 3.8% in 2000-02 (Table 2.2).
The share of transfers based on output (accounting for both positive and negative MPS and output-based
payments) and unconstrained variable input use in gross producer support still averaged 82% in 2018-20
– a modest decline from the 89% observed at the beginning of the century.
Among remaining forms of producer support, the most important are payments based on other input use
(mainly fixed capital formation) and payments to areas planted and animal numbers. Payments based on
areas and animal numbers were almost non-existent across emerging economies in 2000-02 but reached
close to 15% of aggregate net support to producers in 2018-20. In turn, the relative importance of support
for investments, (often related to irrigation) declined over time, now representing less than 10% of the PSE.
All other forms of support to producers remain marginal (Table 2.2).
Expenditure on GSSE in emerging economies reached an annual average of USD 57 billion
(EUR 50 billion) in 2018-20. Most of this went to infrastructure projects (USD 23 billion), often related to
irrigation, and public stockholding (USD 17 billion). The remaining expenditure mainly went to finance
agricultural knowledge and innovation (USD 12 billion) (Table 2.2). Relative to agricultural value-added,
average expenditures for general services declined somewhat and remain lower than the OECD average.
Aggregate total support to agriculture as a share of GDP barely changed over time, and is mainly driven
by producer support, at around 70% of the total support.

Notes
1 The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States, nor Costa Rica which joined the
OECD in May 2021.
2 The Emerging Economies in this report include Argentina, Brazil, the People’s Republic of China
(hereafter “China”), India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Ukraine
and Viet Nam, as well as Costa Rica which joined the OECD in May 2021.






106 

Figure 2.3. Emerging Economies: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/uv90pf
Figure 2.4. Emerging Economies: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/faom9w


0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%
1.0%
1.2%
1.4%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20
-40%
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Imported fruit and vegetables
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Rapeseed
Sunflower
Soybeans
Rice
Oats
Maize
Barley
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 107

Table 2.2. Emerging Economies: Estimates of support to agriculture (USD)
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
524 524
2 436 586
2 328 723
2 406 122
2 574 914
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
75.2
77.7
76.6
77.5
79.1
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
522 068
2 319 726
2 192 039
2 299 963
2 467 174
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
20 891
189 929
181 831
189 743
198 214
Support based on commodity output
1 616
76 933
75 602
75 910
79 286
Market Price Support1
1 200
73 421
71 041
72 847
76 375
Positive Market Price Support
24 826
177 615
169 814
174 288
188 742
Negative Market Price Support
-23 625
-104 194
-98 774
-101 441
-112 367
Payments based on output
416
3 512
4 561
3 063
2 912
Payments based on input use
17 330
64 023
63 601
62 494
65 974
Based on variable input use
11 483
43 261
41 118
42 221
46 443
with input constraints
1
758
835
1 011
429
Based on fixed capital formation
4 466
17 883
19 518
17 434
16 698
with input constraints
2
997
1 292
1 052
648
Based on on-farm services
1 381
2 879
2 965
2 839
2 833
with input constraints
3
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
813
27 649
27 339
28 195
27 414
Based on Receipts / Income
813
2 406
2 397
2 455
2 365
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
25 243
24 941
25 740
25 049
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
370
17 769
11 432
20 022
21 853
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
370
17 769
11 432
20 022
21 853
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
459
2 222
2 325
2 169
2 171
Based on long-term resource retirement
459
2 222
2 325
2 169
2 171
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
1
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
302
1 333
1 532
953
1 515
Percentage PSE (%)
3.8
7.4
7.5
7.5
7.4
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.01
1.04
1.04
1.04
1.04
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.04
1.08
1.08
1.08
1.08
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
18 734
57 230
60 982
55 276
55 432
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
2 988
12 019
12 501
11 951
11 606
Inspection and control
791
4 030
3 531
4 304
4 255
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
6 962
23 271
25 252
21 771
22 790
Marketing and promotion
29
644
620
652
658
Cost of public stockholding
7 861
17 135
18 946
16 442
16 017
Miscellaneous
103
131
132
156
105
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
42.2
20.4
23.3
20.8
17.6
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-1 254
-79 308
-78 842
-92 468
-66 613
Transfers to producers from consumers
-4 166
-91 616
-87 906
-91 285
-95 656
Other transfers from consumers
-2 892
-30 379
-19 568
-30 734
-40 835
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
4 735
33 524
19 340
20 134
61 096
Excess feed cost
1 069
9 163
9 291
9 416
8 782
Percentage CSE (%)
-0.2
-3.5
-3.6
-4.1
-2.8
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.01
1.06
1.05
1.06
1.06
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.00
1.04
1.04
1.04
1.03
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
44 360
280 683
262 154
265 153
314 743
Transfers from consumers
7 058
121 994
107 473
122 018
136 492
Transfers from taxpayers
40 195
189 068
174 248
173 868
219 086
Budget revenues
-2 892
-30 379
-19 568
-30 734
-40 835
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.4
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
43 160
207 262
191 113
192 306
238 368
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.2
0.9
0.8
0.8
1.0
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
The Emerging Economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa,
Ukraine and Viet Nam.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities: see notes to individual country tables.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




108 

All countries
The total support to agriculture provided in all countries covered in this report represented USD 615 billion
(EUR 540 billion) per year on average in 2018-20, of which around 71% or USD 436 billion
(EUR 383 billion) were provided as support to producers. Gross transfers to the sector are significantly
larger than that, given the negative market price support estimated for some emerging economies: in total,
USD 719 billion (EUR 631 billion) were transferred to the sector across the 54 countries covered, while at
the same time negative MPS in some countries amounted to USD 104 billion (EUR 91 billion). Expressed
as a share of gross farm receipts, aggregate support to producers represented 11.2% in 2018-20 on
average for all countries covered, a reduction from 18.2% in 2000-02 (Table 2.3).
Changes between 2000-02 and 2018-20 to the structure of support in all countries in the report were
relatively moderate. The share of potentially most-distorting transfers (based on output or based on
unconstrained use of variable inputs) declined slightly, but these policies continue to represent around
69% of gross producer transfers across all countries (whether positive or negative, in absolute terms).
Transfers based on output became less prominent while those based on unconstrained input use
increased.
Among the remaining forms of support to producers, the most important are payments based on area
planted and animal numbers (18% of all producer support), and those based on historical parameters not
requiring production. The importance of these latter payments (which are decoupled from current
production and hence much less production- and trade-distorting) increased significantly and now
represents 16% of all producer support (Table 2.3).
Across all countries in this report, the expenditures financing general services to the sector (GSSE)
reached an annual average of USD 102 billion (EUR 90 billion) in 2018-20, almost twice the amount in
nominal terms spent at the beginning of the century. Most of this went to infrastructure projects
(USD 42 billion), agricultural knowledge and innovation (USD 26 billion), and public stockholding
(USD 18 billion) (Table 2.3). In spite of the growth, expenditures for general services declined in relative
terms as value added in agriculture almost tripled in nominal terms since 2000-02. Total support to
agriculture as a share of GDP declined slightly over time, mainly driven by the smaller relative size of the
sector within economies.




 109

Figure 2.5. All countries: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/jfd7m2
Figure 2.6. All countries: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/hwitjy


0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
1.1
1.12
1.14
1.16
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%
1.0%
1.2%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Imported fruit and vegetables
Wool
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Rapeseed
Sunflower
Soybeans
Rice
Sorghum
Oats
Maize
Barley
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


110 

Table 2.3. All countries: Estimates of support to agriculture (USD)
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
1 195 819
3 638 643
3 572 201
3 581 869
3 761 858
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
72.4
76.4
74.9
76.4
77.8
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
1 181 908
3 495 771
3 355 887
3 475 764
3 655 662
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
237 753
435 565
427 680
437 727
441 287
Support based on commodity output
140 753
180 512
189 789
176 910
174 838
Market Price Support1
125 385
167 956
172 960
169 624
161 285
Positive Market Price Support
149 601
272 438
272 142
271 504
273 668
Negative Market Price Support
-24 217
-104 482
-99 182
-101 880
-112 384
Payments based on output
15 369
12 556
16 829
7 286
13 553
Payments based on input use
36 844
95 950
93 628
91 967
102 254
Based on variable input use
19 491
55 312
51 477
52 353
62 107
with input constraints
342
1 861
1 647
1 880
2 057
Based on fixed capital formation
9 545
29 194
31 379
28 425
27 778
with input constraints
630
3 514
4 194
3 374
2 974
Based on on-farm services
7 808
11 444
10 772
11 190
12 370
with input constraints
967
1 611
1 575
1 533
1 723
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
42 194
79 505
72 787
86 667
79 062
Based on Receipts / Income
3 986
6 734
6 607
6 548
7 046
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
38 209
72 772
66 180
80 119
72 016
with input constraints
16 898
39 658
33 179
46 551
39 245
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
71
2 197
2 235
2 373
1 985
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
14 091
68 864
61 592
71 519
73 482
With variable payment rates
4 318
5 023
3 021
6 391
5 659
with commodity exceptions
4 079
4 880
2 864
6 254
5 521
With fixed payment rates
9 773
63 841
58 571
65 128
67 823
with commodity exceptions
6 081
2 565
2 510
2 515
2 669
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
3 664
6 421
5 415
6 595
7 253
Based on long-term resource retirement
3 358
4 820
3 875
5 041
5 545
Based on a specific non-commodity output
237
1 502
1 462
1 489
1 555
Based on other non-commodity criteria
69
99
78
65
153
Miscellaneous payments
136
2 115
2 235
1 697
2 412
Percentage PSE (%)
18.2
11.2
11.2
11.4
10.9
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.13
1.06
1.06
1.06
1.05
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.22
1.13
1.13
1.13
1.12
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
55 289
101 670
105 413
99 616
99 983
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
10 996
26 362
26 805
25 978
26 304
Inspection and control
2 718
8 238
7 947
8 477
8 289
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
23 354
41 501
43 918
40 178
40 408
Marketing and promotion
5 602
5 845
5 387
5 799
6 349
Cost of public stockholding
10 144
17 751
19 497
17 131
16 624
Miscellaneous
2 475
1 973
1 859
2 053
2 008
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
17.2
16.5
17.6
16.6
15.4
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-118 283
-152 228
-156 394
-170 858
-129 433
Transfers to producers from consumers
-125 857
-182 574
-185 556
-185 099
-177 068
Other transfers from consumers
-22 410
-57 761
-47 623
-57 622
-68 038
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
28 315
77 881
66 334
61 192
106 117
Excess feed cost
1 669
10 226
10 450
10 671
9 557
Percentage CSE (%)
-10.3
-4.5
-4.8
-5.0
-3.6
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.14
1.07
1.07
1.08
1.07
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.11
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.04
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
321 358
615 116
599 427
598 535
647 386
Transfers from consumers
148 267
240 335
233 179
242 721
245 107
Transfers from taxpayers
195 501
432 542
413 871
413 436
470 318
Budget revenues
-22 410
-57 761
-47 623
-57 622
-68 038
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.0
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.9
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
195 973
447 160
426 467
428 911
486 101
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the Emerging Economies: Argentina, Brazil, China, Costa Rica,
India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Ukraine and Viet Nam. The All countries total for 2000-02 includes data for
all countries except Latvia and Lithuania, for which data are not available.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities: see notes to individual country tables.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.


 111

Support to agriculture
Argentine export taxes depress domestic prices received by producers, leading to negative support to the
agricultural sector. The limited payments producers receive focus on input support, provided mainly in the
form of credit at preferential rates.
Support to producers has been negative since the beginning of the 2000s, with fluctuations due to changes
in export tax rates, also influenced by unstable macroeconomic conditions such as the depreciation of the
peso since 2018. The most extreme negative value was -51.1% of gross farm receipts in 2008, rising
to -10.3% in 2017, but more negative since the beginning of the 2018 recession, at -23.4% in 2018-20.
Negative market price support is the main component of the Producer Support Estimate (PSE) and, as a
result, 98% of policy transfers were most-distorting in 2018-20. The ratio of producer to border price (NPC)
was as low as 0.80 in 2018-20, making producers’ prices on average 20% below world market prices.
Negative market price support is dominated by soybeans, the main export product, with the highest export
tax rate and the most negative Specific Commodity Transfers (STC), comprising 50% of commodity gross
farm receipts. Some grains and several livestock products also have significantly negative SCT, while price
support and SCT are positive for pig meat and eggs.
The support to general services (GSSE) relative to agricultural value-added increased from 0.8% in 2000-
02 to 1.6% in 2018-20. Most of this was spent on agricultural innovation systems. Agricultural production
and exports in Argentina grew dynamically in the last two decades due to an innovative private sector and
to public services, particularly for knowledge, research and extension, and sanitary inspection.
Most of Argentina’s budgetary support to the sector goes to these GSSE. Total budgetary support to
farmers and the sector overall (TBSE) was 0.1% of GDP, well below the absolute value of negative market
price support, making the total support estimate to agriculture (TSE) also negative: -1.1% of GDP in
2000-02 and -2.3% in 2018-20.
Recent policy changes
Since December 2019, agricultural policies in Argentina have shifted to more active export restrictions, in
particular reintroducing taxes that were reduced or eliminated between 2015 and 2018. In March 2020,
export taxes for soybean and soybean products increased from 30% to 33%, though from October to
December 2020, the tax temporarily reverted to 30%. In December 2020, export tax rates were set at 0%
for non-pampas products such as olives, honey, fruits, tea, yerba mate and eggs. To ensure feed inputs
for the domestic food supply, maize exports were banned between December 2020 and January 2021.
After negotiation with the private sector, in which the maize value chain guaranteed domestic supply at
lower prices, the government lifted the export restrictions.
The Compensation and Stimulus Programme was created to compensate small soybean producers for
revenue losses with export tax refunds. Also, the federal revenues agency (AFIP) allowed companies in
3 Argentina


112 

the Register of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises to postpone export duty payments for 60 days. This
measure was extended until the end of 2020.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries gave a bonus
to beneficiaries of the Food Cards that provide food assistance to vulnerable populations. The government
also launched the “Programme of critical assistance to family and indigenous farmers” to provide support
to smallholder producers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Government and chambers of commerce collaborated on defining good practices and protocols for food-
related enterprises in order to avoid disruptions in the food chain and international trade. Argentina’s main
exporting ports along the Paraná River suffered disruptions during 2020. In March, ships were unable to
dock in Rosario, the main port for soybean meal and oil exports, as procedures to clear crews for
contagious diseases were suspended by the COVID-19 pandemic. Traffic resumed after a few days,
following a government decision exempting export-related workers from pandemic restrictions.
Assessment and recommendations

Taxes and other restrictions on exports create distortions and uncertainty. In response to the
macroeconomic turmoil in September 2018, a new tax was established on all exports and, since
December 2019, export restrictions target specific agricultural commodities, with increased tax
rates for some products and a temporary export ban on maize. The use of export restrictions should
be phased out as part of a long-term plan to integrate the sector into an economy-wide tax system
and enhance policy certainty with alternative sources of fiscal revenue. In the current environment,
it will be crucial to reduce policy uncertainty and find the balance between the long-term objective
to reduce export taxes and short-term needs to raise fiscal revenues. Historically, Argentine
policies are unpredictable and biased against agriculture. Agricultural policy could be better
anchored in broad legislation, such as a sector-specific framework and an economy-wide tax
reform, moving towards more neutral, stable, predictable and targeted policies.

The stimulus for small soybean producers seeks to compensate for revenue losses due to export
taxes, by providing direct payments and postponing those export duties. Gradually reducing and
eliminating export taxes as part of a long-term strategy would be a more transparent approach and
provide certainty to the sector.

“Argentina against hunger” provides monthly financial support through an electronic card, proven
as a useful tool in providing additional food assistance to vulnerable populations in the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic. The approach to support consumers through such social policies is more
effective and efficient than trade measures that depress domestic prices of primary food
commodities that represent only a small share of food expenditures. However, these food
assistance programmes need to target the population in need in order to tackle food poverty, and
require effective monitoring of their implementation.

The COVID-19 crisis highlighted the importance of keeping markets working, combining guidelines
and protocols to govern the agro-food sector with monitoring and rapid action to keep ports and
critical market and trade infrastructures operative. Looking to the post-COVID-19 era, the
contribution of all public policy (including taxes, payments, market regulations and investment in
infrastructure) to the resilience and responsiveness of the food system deserves systematic
evaluation.

Improving the environmental performance of agriculture will require improved monitoring and
information systems for better policy design. In order to deliver research, extension and other public
goods required for agricultural innovation, Argentina needs to develop systematic monitoring of
efforts and results in agricultural R&D and innovation, and define and implement strategic priorities.
Innovation policy should focus on providing public goods in areas where the private sector has


 113

difficulties to deliver, such as those related to sustainability and less-developed value chains, or for
regional economies outside the pampas region.

The Special Tobacco Fund (FET), with a budget similar to that of the National Institute for
Agricultural Technology (INTA), should be reformed. Output payments to tobacco producers
should be phased out, with the resources used to diversify poor tobacco-producing areas through
investment in human and physical capital. The reform should include monitoring and evaluation of
all initiatives implemented by the provinces.

In December 2020 Argentina submitted its second Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC)
under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, committing to further reductions of total
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of 25.7% compared to the previous NDC submitted in 2016.
The new submission is welcome, including actions in the agriculture and livestock sector such as
sustainable and resilient practices, prevention and climatic risk transfer, and research and capacity
building. The NDC implementation plans under development should be applicable, concrete and
verifiable.
Figure 3.1. Argentina: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/1iykn0


-30%
-25%
-20%
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
-2.5%
-2.0%
-1.5%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20


114 

Figure 3.2. Argentina: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Note: The producer price change and the border price change are not calculated when the negative price gap occurs at the commodity level
for the current or previous year.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/zb9kct
Figure 3.3. Argentina: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/w6laxe


0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
PSE change decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE
-100%
-50%
0%
50%
100%
Eggs
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sunflower
Soybeans
Maize
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 115

Table 3.1. Argentina: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
17 022
43 742
48 261
41 266
41 698
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
85.7
84.4
84.2
83.6
85.4
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
7 998
29 741
33 811
26 863
28 549
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
-1 035
-10 719
-12 332
-11 937
-7 889
Support based on commodity output
-1 069
-10 860
-12 556
-12 049
-7 975
Market Price Support1
-1 131
-10 968
-12 631
-12 128
-8 147
Positive Market Price Support
150
240
245
257
219
Negative Market Price Support
-1 280
-11 209
-12 875
-12 385
-8 365
Payments based on output
62
109
75
79
171
Payments based on input use
34
137
218
108
84
Based on variable input use
2
7
10
2
9
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
23
99
152
89
57
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
8
30
55
18
19
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
4
6
3
2
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
4
6
3
2
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
-11.9
-23.4
-25.4
-28.8
-18.8
Producer NPC (coeff.)
0.89
0.80
0.79
0.77
0.84
Producer NAC (coeff.)
0.89
0.81
0.80
0.78
0.84
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
116
307
374
293
254
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
66
175
210
168
148
Inspection and control
33
92
114
89
73
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
17
38
48
35
32
Marketing and promotion
0
1
2
1
1
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
..
..
..
..
..
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
456
7 813
9 161
8 399
5 879
Transfers to producers from consumers
483
8 243
9 674
8 957
6 096
Other transfers from consumers
-6
-2
-4
-2
0
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
-21
-427
-509
-556
-217
Percentage CSE (%)
12.6
25.3
27.1
31.3
20.6
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
0.88
0.79
0.78
0.75
0.82
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
0.89
0.80
0.79
0.76
0.83
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
-919
-10 413
-11 958
-11 644
-7 635
Transfers from consumers
-477
-8 240
-9 670
-8 955
-6 096
Transfers from taxpayers
-436
-2 170
-2 284
-2 687
-1 539
Budget revenues
-6
-2
-4
-2
0
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
-1.1
-2.3
-2.3
-2.6
-2.1
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
212
556
672
484
512
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
4 488
2 928
4 411
6 125
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
1.70
48.99
28.11
48.23
70.64
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Argentina are: wheat, maize, soybean, sunflower,
fruit and vegetables, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




116 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
For many decades, Argentine agricultural policy alternated between free trade and import substitution
under different economic policy frameworks (OECD, 2019[1]). Argentina liberalised trade in the late 1970s
and explored ways to increase trade with its neighbours and others from the second half of the 1980s. The
Argentine economy became more integrated into the international system with the creation of
MERCOSUR1 in 1991 and the 1994 WTO Agreement.
After the financial crisis in 2001, Argentina increased tariffs, established price controls and re-introduced
export taxes on agricultural products such as soybeans in order to raise revenue and reduce basic food
prices. Further export restrictions in the form of quotas for wheat, corn, milk, and beef were imposed in
2008 introducing uncertainty in transactions. Between 2007 and 2011, a consumer price subsidy was put
in place. The agency ONCCA provided payments to processors selling wheat, maize, soybeans and
sunflower products on the local market.
In 2015, the government reduced export taxes on soybeans and soybean oil, and eliminated those on all
other agricultural and livestock products. It also eliminated all export quotas and free-floated the exchange
rate of the Argentine peso to other currencies. However, after the 2018-19 peso depreciation, followed by
economic recession, export taxes were re-established, applying to all exports rather than targeting
agricultural ones.
The change of government in December 2019 resulted in an agricultural policy shift. Specific export taxes
that had been eliminated or reduced in December 2015 were re-instated for most products in early 2020,
while exchange-rate controls since the beginning of 2020 resulted in a widening gap between the official
and the market exchange rate.
While agricultural trade policies and their effect on farm prices change back and forth, long lasting
agricultural institutions created since the 1950s remain relevant to the sector’s development. For instance,
the National Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA), created in the mid-1950s, continues to provide
general services to research and extension. The long-established animal and plant health institutes were
merged into SENASA in 1996. In the private sphere, innovative service providers to farmers were created,
such as AACREA in 1960 and AAPRESID in 1989 (Table 3.2).
Table 3.2. Argentina: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1990
Alternate free trade and import
substitution economy
Price interventions on main agricultural products, mandatory public stockholding, export
taxes on agricultural trade, tariffs on imports of agricultural inputs such as fertiliser, low levels
of investment in private agricultural R&D and infrastructure in general
Several attempts to open to trade
Creation of agricultural R&D and extension services institute INTA (1956); private institutions
such as AACREA (1960) and AAPRESID (1989) created to provide services to farmers
1991-2001
Gradual shifts to open the
economy
Dismantling stockholding and price-setting public institutions, reduction of import and export
tariffs, free trade agreements (Mercosur and WTO)
Price stabilisation, reduction of barriers to trade, privatisation and deregulation of markets
Dissolution of National Commercial Boards (1991)
Creation of animal and plant health and food safety SENASA (1996)
Creation of the seed regulatory institution INASE (1991)
2002-2015
Return to a closed economy
Implementation of export taxes, high import tariffs, value chains subject to regulations as
export quotas and price controls at the retail level
The National Office of Agricultural Commercial Control (ONCCA) dismantled (2011)


 117

Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
2015-2017
Gradual shifts to open up the
economy
Elimination of export taxes for all agricultural commodities, except reduced taxes on soybean
exports
Elimination and reforms to the Register of Export Operations ROEs (2015)
Federal Agricultural Council (CFA) reformed (2017)
2018-2020
Reintroduction of export taxes
Export taxes established for all exports including agriculture in response to the economic
crisis of 2018
Reintroduction of specific taxes on agricultural products and exchange rate controls since
2019
Prior to the economic crisis of 2001, producer support fluctuated around zero. With the reintroduction of
export taxes and other trade restrictions after the 2001-02 financial crisis, the PSE turned negative due to
substantial negative market price support, and in the absence of any significant budgetary support to
farmers. Negative producer support peaked with price spikes in world markets in 2008, reaching -51.6%
of gross farm receipts. The reduction in export taxes in 2015 resulted in reductions of the negative support.
While market price support continued to be negative, budgetary support to farmers remained limited and
mainly in the form of subsidies for tobacco (Figure 3.4). Around 60% of total expenditures on agriculture
in the last ten years financed general services to the sector. From 2007 to 2010, Argentina provided
subsidies to food processors (primary consumers), to compensate for high prices of agricultural products.
Figure 3.4. Argentina: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1997 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
In contrast to most countries covered by this report, producers of Argentina’s main agricultural products
are implicitly taxed through negative price support. Export taxes are by far the most important public
intervention in agricultural markets in Argentina. Additional measures include quantitative export
restrictions on maize, wheat, beef meat, and milk. These had and continue to have major impact by
depressing domestic prices below international references and creating negative transfers to producers.
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


118 

In addition to the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, which implements specific programmes
and defines quantitative restrictions on exports, other government agencies implement policy providing
support to agriculture. The Ministry of Finance designs and implements export taxes, the major source of
policy-driven transfers away from the agricultural sector. The government adjusts export tax rates by
decree.
To a limited extent, Argentina provides input subsidies, mostly in the form of implicit interest rate subsidies
through preferential credit provided by FINAGRO. These credits finance investment and working capital in
the production a range of productions. A new fund, FONDAGRO created in 2017, also finances investment
in the sector at preferential interest rates, but its scope is limited. There are almost no other forms of
budgetary support to Argentine producers. Small amounts of direct payments are provided as disaster
assistance in response to extreme weather events, mainly droughts. There are no national direct payments
for agri-environmental services, and few at provincial level. The Agricultural Provincial Services
Programme (PROSAP), financed with loans by the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) and
managed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, invests mainly in large-scale agricultural
irrigation infrastructure.
The Argentinian legal framework on intellectual property rights on seeds dates from 1973 and differs from
those in other major exporting countries. There is no constraint on “own use” of seeds in Argentina. This
is particularly relevant for self-pollinating crops such as soybeans, wheat, cotton and rice, where seeds
used by farmers are not produced by hybridisation, and farmers do not pay royalties for those. The National
Institute for Seeds (INASE) sets conditions for farmers to benefit from this exemption and monitors its
implementation. There is also a private extended royalty system under which farmers pay for certain
varieties of seeds.
The Special Tobacco Fund (Fondo Especial del Tabaco) provides a supplementary payment to market
prices and other support to tobacco producers. Created in 1972, FET provides additional revenue to
tobacco producers in the northern provinces of Jujuy, Salta, Misiones, Tucuman, Corrientes, Chaco and
Catamarca. The fund is mainly financed by a tax of 7% on tobacco retail prices (excluding VAT) and directly
managed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. The federal government transfers 80% of
collected funds to tobacco producing provinces proportional to their share of production. After the signature
of the WTO agreement in 1994, Argentina committed to reduce this support as part of its Aggregate
Measurement of Support (AMS) commitment. FET payments to tobacco producers shrank to
USD 75 million, with the rest of the funds spent on technical assistance, to invest in local infrastructure,
and to provide social and health assistance.
Most expenditure finances general services to the sector such as the agricultural knowledge and innovation
system, or inspection control services. Research and development and extension services are mainly
provided by INTA, while animal and plant health and input control services are provided mainly by
SENASA.
For instance, SENASA Resolution 67/2019 approved the National Plan for the Control and Eradication of
Bovine Brucellosis, mandatory throughout the national territory, except in the Province of Tierra del Fuego,
Antarctica and South Atlantic Islands.2 For dairy production, the Good Practices Programme for Farming
in primary dairy production was created in 2019.3 In 2019, Argentina signed the Rotterdam Declaration,
which implies commitment to a comprehensive approach to the sustainability of dairy systems, considering
social, economic, health and environmental dimensions.4
SENASA defines phytosanitary regulations applied to the registration of plant-based products.5 Since
2018, a new national regulation (Law No. 27279) for the management of pesticide containers created
enforcement authorities in 20 provinces.
Agri-environmental regulations are mostly decided at provincial level. Córdoba province has a Law of Good
Agricultural Practices setting standards for sustainable agricultural production. This was the first regulation


 119

at a provincial level and is part of a Good Agricultural Practices Program launched by the Province in
2017.6 Compliance with the programme gives farmers access to lump-sum payments, with an annual
budget of ARS 180 million (USD 2.9 million) in 2020. The province of Entre Ríos enacted a Law on Soil
Conservation in December 2018. The new standard declares mandatory soil conservation for any area
with soil degradation. Farmers are subject to mandatory conservation and management practices up to
15% of their production area. Compliance permits farmers temporary and partial exemptions from
provincial rural property taxes.7
The agriculture and livestock sector contributes up to 26% of total GHG emissions in Argentina. Argentina’s
goal is to reduce these by 39% in 2030 with respect to projected emissions for that year. The National Plan
for Agriculture and Climate Change is the public policy designed to comply with the objectives of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change under the Paris Agreement. The plan includes
adaptation measures for the sector based on risk management, and three GHG mitigation measures.8 An
inventory of greenhouse gases from the agriculture, livestock and forestry industry9 was completed to
perform evaluation and monitoring of GHG emissions by sector.
The Biofuel Law 26.093 approved in 2006 established compulsory fuel blend mandates since 2010,
starting at 5% and increasing to 10% for diesel and 12% for gasoline. The law is scheduled to end in
May 2021. In October 2020, the Senate approved its extension to 2025. This extension will be discussed
by the Deputies Chamber in 2021.
Since 2016, Argentina is party to the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
Agriculture (ITPGRFA) for the conservation and sustainable use of all plant genetic resources for food and
agriculture, following guidelines of the Convention on Biological Diversity. The National Advisory
Committee on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (CONARGEN) co-ordinates public agencies
on biodiversity issues related to the sector. The Application Authority of the ITPGRFA is in the Ministry of
Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, whereas the Political Focal Point is in the Ministry of Foreign
Relations, International Trade and Cult. The Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria (INTA) is
developing projects supported by the Benefit Sharing Fund of the ITPGRFA and the Global Crop Diversity
Trust.
The National Forest Management Plan with Integrated Livestock (MBGI) is a joint plan created in 2015 by
the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development, the Ministry of Agriculture and the National
Institute for Agricultural Technology (INTA). The MBGI develops technical guidelines for native forest
management and livestock management in the framework of the Native Forest Law.10 The National
Forestry Strategy 2030 (ForestAR 2030) has been implemented since 2019.11 This programme aims to
protect native forests and promote forest plantations, and the entire wood value chain in order to achieve
the objectives in the Paris Agreement and the 2030 Agenda.12 It foresees the creation of Manuals of Good
Practices and guidelines for strategic assessment of forest plantations, as well as of the Argentine Forest
Certification System CERFOAR.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
Since January 2020, a new social programme “Argentina against hunger (AUH)” provides financial support
for children, pregnant women and disabled people. Support is channelled through an electronic food card
(ALIMENTAR Card) to be used in any food product store. The food card is received by AUH beneficiaries
with children under 6 years old and pregnant women that receive the universal pregnancy allowance
(AUE). The programme reached 1.5 million adult beneficiaries and 2.8 million children in 2020. The
average monthly expenditure for this programme in 2020 was USD 80 million. Beneficiaries receive
between USD 50 and USD 100 per month, depending on the number of children in the family.
In October 2020, the new “Compensation and Stimulus Programme” for small soybean producers was
created under the administration of the MoA (decree 786/2020). The scheme will compensate soybean


120 

producers with total sales under ARS 20 million (USD 325 000) in 2019. Under this programme, farmers
receive “export tax refunds” depending on their cultivated area from 1 hectare to a maximum of
400 hectares. Farmers in the Pampean region receive between ARS 441 and ARS 1 543 (USD 7.2 and
USD 25.1) per tonne, and outside the Pampean region between ARS 661 and ARS 2 205 (USD 10.7 and
USD 35.8) per tonne, for a total ARS 12 billion (USD 195 million) in 2020, benefiting 41 293 producers and
10 million hectares. The first payment was made in November 2020 for sales made between February and
September 2020.
Argentina implements the bioethanol and biodiesel mandates by setting production quotas and the official
prices that biofuel producers can charge fuel companies to fill the mandate. In October 2020, the Ministry
of Economy in Argentina increased the price of maize-based ethanol used in fuel blending and sugarcane
bioethanol by 9.7% to ARS 32.7 per litre (USD 0.53 per litre) (Resolution 4/2020). At the same time, the
Secretariat of Energy increased the domestic market price of biodiesel by 10% to ARS 48 533 per tonne
(USD 788 per tonne) (Resolution 5/2020).
In August 2020, the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries created the National Direction of Agro-
ecology (DNA) aimed at the design and implementation of policies, programmes and projects that promote
intensive and extensive primary production based on agro-ecological principles.
In December 2020 Argentina submitted its second Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) under the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, committing to further reductions of total GHG emissions, not
exceeding the net emission of 359 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent (MtCOe) in 2030. This is the equivalent
of a total decrease in emissions of 19% by 2030, compared to the historical peak reached in 2007, and a
reduction of 25.7% compared to the previous NDC submitted in 2016. The second NDC includes economy
wide mitigation and adaptation efforts, which include action in the agriculture and livestock sector such as
sustainable and resilient practices, prevention and climatic risk transferring, and research and capacity
building. Sectorial plans for the implementation of the NDC are being defined under the National Cabinet
of Climate Change.
The new Programme for the promotion of Local Work, Holding and Supply (PROTAAL) seeks to generate
new jobs, strengthen rural livelihoods, and increase production of family farmers13 in communities of less
than 50 000 inhabitants (Resolution 163/2020 the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries). The
programme promotes the formation of associations of family farmers providing benefits for the
unemployed, under-employed and small producers.
The cultivation of a drought-resistant GM wheat variety (HB4) was authorised by the Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock and Fisheries in Argentina (Resolution 41/2020). However, its marketing has not yet been
authorised, largely subject to pending Brazil’s assessment and import approval, as the country accounts
for 40% of Argentina’s wheat exports.
In 2020, the MoA launched a National Plan for Access to Water (Plan Nacional de Acceso al Agua) with a
particular focus on small producers. The Plan is implemented through the Secretariat of Family, Peasant
and Indigenous Agriculture (SAFCI), the General Directorate of Sectorial and Special Programs and
Projects (DIPROSE) and the National Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA).
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Social distancing measures escalated after mid-March 2020 following the Decree 260/2020 declaring a
public health emergency and followed by Decree 297/2020 of mandatory quarantine that was extended in
successive stages until 6 November 2020. The decrees enabled the Health Ministry to adopt the measures
needed to fight the outbreak, authorised the reallocation of funds and the adoption of measures to prevent
shortages of key sanitary products. The quarantine included mandatory self-isolation measures, except for
essential services such as health, pharmacies and the food industry and commerce. The production,


 121

transportation and trading of food and agricultural inputs such as fertilisers were in the list of essential
sectors not subject to the limitations by lockdown measures.
The Ministry of Agriculture launched the “Programme of critical assistance to family and indigenous
farmers” (Programa de Asistencia Crítica y Directa para la Agricultura Familiar, Campesina e Indígena,
Resolution 138/20), with a total budget of USD 420 000. The initiative will support smallholder producers
affected by the COVID-19 pandemic with direct financial support.
Some measures were also taken in specific fruit sectors. A programme was put in place to assist producers
of pears and apples in main producing provinces, delaying social security payments and extending the
timeframe of the existing emergency programmes (Decree 615/220). The Law 27.507 of emergency in the
citric sector was also extended for an additional year and expanded to additional provinces.
The government and chambers of commerce worked together on a harmonised set of protocols to be used
in all food related enterprises. Good practices protocols per branch of activity were designed for agriculture,
food industries, fisheries, family farming, cattle farming, poultry production, and fruit and vegetable
production among others.14
The National Institute for Agricultural Technology (INTA) made available four laboratories in different parts
of the country (Castelar in Buenos Aires; Marco Juarez in Cordoba; Concepcion del Uruguay in Entre Rios
and Balcarce in Buenos Aires) to perform PCR tests for the detection of COVID-19. The laboratories were
adapted under the biosafety protocols and the staff was trained for this task.
Policy interventions focused on restoring households’ incomes and supporting firms, especially small and
medium businesses, and with some income maintenance support measures for poor households and for
people receiving the minimum pension. At the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak the government
announced the following specific measures to strengthen Argentina’s social programmes:

A rise in the unemployment insurance benefit.

A bonus for beneficiaries of AUH (universal child allowance) and for retirees that earn the minimum
pension.

An emergency subsidy (Ingreso Familiar de Emergencia - IFE) of ARS 10 000 (USD 125) in
April 2020 for those who are unemployed, for informal workers and for independent workers with
the lowest incomes.

A bonus for beneficiaries of the Food Card (Tarjeta Alimentaria).

Price ceilings for some groceries, cleaning products, medicines and medical inputs.
The government also announced different measures to relieve companies of non-essential industries that
are hit by the pandemic, and to protect the disposable income of their workers. In March 2020, the
government decided to partially subsidise wage payments, and postpone or significantly reduce payroll
taxes.15 The relief package is expected to cost 3% of GDP (ARS 850 billion – USD 12 billion).
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
Following the Law 27.541 (Article 52) that authorised the government to modify the export tax of soya and
other agricultural products to a maximum of 33% and 15%, respectively, in March 2020, Argentina
(Decree 230/2020) modified certain export tax rates (Table 3.3). Export taxes for soybeans and soybean
products increased from 30% to 33%, while they were reduced for maize and wheat flour, sunflower and
peanuts. In turn, export taxes for a range of products were kept constant: maize, wheat, milk, beef and
paddy rice. Export taxes on other products from outside the Pampean region such as wine, pears, apples,
grapes, cotton and lemon were also kept constant at 5%.


122 

Table 3.3. Argentinian export tax rates for selected products

2019
2020
(Decree 230/2020)
Soybeans and derived products
30%
33%
Sunflower (grain and oil)
12%
7%
Maize and wheat
12%
12%
Maize Flours
9%
5%
Wheat Flour
9%
7%
Peanuts
12%
5%
Milk products
5%
5%
Beef
9%
9%
Paddy Rice
6%
6%
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, and Decree 230/2020.
From October to December 2020, a temporary reduction in export taxes for soybeans and soybean
products from 33% to 30% was implemented through Decree 789/2020 to incentivise farmers and
exporters to sell. After 31 December 2020, the export tax for soybeans returned to 33% but for soybean
products (oil and flour) was increased only to 31%. In December 2020, Decree 1060/20 fixed export tax
rates at 0% for an important number of non-Pampean products such as olives, honey, fruits, tea, yerba
mate and eggs. On 30 December 2020, the Ministry of Agriculture announced a ban on maize exports until
28 February 2021 as part of the government’s policy to ensure feed inputs for the domestic food supply.
In January 2021, after negotiations with private representatives of the maize value chain, it was agreed to
allow exports and guarantee domestic supply at lower domestic prices but without imposing explicit bans
or quantitative export restrictions.
In June 2019, the European Union and Mercosur reached a free trade agreement involving EU Member
States and the members of Mercosur (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay). The agreement includes
a “Trade and Sustainable Development” chapter obliging to “implement measures to combat illegal logging
and related trade” without detailing what these measures should comprise. During 2020, the agreement
was under legal revision and public debate, and continues its process to be approved by the European
Union Parliament and the Parliaments of the European Union Member States and Mercosur countries.
Drought has led to historically low water levels in the Paraná River, a key transportation route for grains
and oilseeds from the Argentine main port in Rosario. The low levels hamper river trade, and from 10 to
12 May 2020, ships from Rosario had to reduce their freight by 22% to 39 million tonnes after an
obstruction of the navigation channel for several days. On 16 May, Brazil agreed to release water from the
Itaipú dam to alleviate Parana River’s water level. Strikes at grain ports in protest against the deadlock in
wage re-negotiations affected the shipment and unloading of grain in San Lorenzo and Rosario in
November 2020.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The Southern Agricultural Council (joining Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay) made
a joint declaration on 24 March guaranteeing the secure transit of trucks across their borders.
In June 2020, the Federal Revenue Agency (Administración Federal de Ingresos Públicos-AFIP) issued
the Resolution 4728/2020 that allows the postponement of the payment of export duties for 60 days for
companies registered in the Register of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MiPyMEs Law 24,467). The
measure was later extended until the end of December 2020. A similar exemption was applied to the export
of leather products (Decree 549/2020).


 123

On 16 March 2020, ships were not able to dock along the Paraná River in Rosario, the main port for
soybean meal and oil exports in Argentina as procedures to clear the crew from contagious diseases was
suspended due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On 19 March 2020, Timbues, another main port town
announced the closure of ports and mills until 2 April in order to prevent the spread of the COVID-19. Only
a few days later port terminals in Argentina were reopened to cargo following a government decree
exempting export-related workers from preventive isolation. During the period of closure, shipments are
reported to have been unaffected thanks to the reserves kept by companies at key terminals.
Contextual information
Argentina is an upper middle income country with an efficient agricultural sector that makes a growing
contribution to the GDP, from 4.7% of the GDP in 2000 to 6.1% in 2019. In contrast, agriculture’s share of
employment is decreasing and well below 1%, with a high degree of mechanisation of the production in
the Pampas region. The country is one of the world’s largest agricultural exporters, and agro-food exports
have been growing significantly in the last decades, representing 42% of total exports in 2000, and 56%
in 2019. In contrast, agro-food imports represent only 7% of total imports.
Argentina has abundant agricultural land representing almost 5% of the total agricultural area of all
countries covered in this report, although a large share constitutes pasture land. The share of livestock in
the total value of production was 39% in 2019.
Table 3.4. Argentina: Contextual indicators

Argentina
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
428
1 031
1.1%
0.9%
Population (million)
37
45
0.9%
0.9%
Land area (thousand km2)
2 737
2 737
3.3%
3.2%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
128 510
148 768
4.2%
4.9%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
14
16
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
11 619
22 947
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
9
13
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
4.7
6.1
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
0.7
0.1
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
41.5
55.6
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.4
6.7
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
59
61
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
41
39
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
22
26
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year. 1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
The Argentine economy began to stall when the peso came under pressure in April 2018. The value of the
peso vis-à-vis the USD was reduced by 40% in 2018, and by 75% in the period 2018-2020, plunging the
economy into recession and inducing high annual inflation rates above 40%. Subject to exchange rate


124 

controls, the electronic exchange market rate has diverged from the official rate. Adversely affected by
COVID-19, the Argentine GDP declined by 13% in 2020
The agro-food trade surplus exceeded USD 30 billion in 2019. Most of agro-food exports (74%) are primary
or processed products used as inputs in downstream industries abroad, whereas the much smaller bundle
of agro-food imports is mostly composed of primary products for the industry.
Figure 3.5. Argentina: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 3.6. Argentina: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database
Argentine agricultural production has grown at an annual rate of 2% between 2007 and 2016, similar to
the world average. Within this total growth, 0.6% was due to an increase use of intermediate inputs, while
the bulk of production growth (1.4%) was due to Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth, that is, innovations
and technical improvements in the way resources are used in production. The contribution of TFP to
production growth is slightly below the world average.
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
11
5
20
19
56
37
13
39
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


 125

Agricultural nutrient balances in Argentina are below the OECD average. The shares of agriculture in
energy use and in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are, at 6.1% and 30.6% respectively, well above the
OECD average, related to the importance of the sector in GDP and the large number of ruminants.
Figure 3.7. Argentina: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 3.5. Argentina: Productivity and environmental indicators

Argentina
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.7%
1.4%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
2.1
6.9
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
1.7
2.0
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
5.8
6.1
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
40.5
30.6
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
..
1.6
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
71.4
73.9
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
..
..
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


0.6%
0.5%
0.1%
0.05%
1.4%
1.6%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
Argentina
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


126 

Reference

OECD (2019), Agricultural Policies in Argentina, OECD Food and Agricultural Reviews, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264311695-en.
[1]



Notes
1 Mercosur is a free trade agreement among South American countries including large agricultural
exporters like Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay.
2 http://www.senasa.gob.ar/normativas/resolucion-67-2019-senasa-servicio-nacional-de-sanidad-y-
calidad-agroalimentaria.
3 https://www.boletinoficial.gob.ar/detalleAviso/primera/215569/20190905.
4 https://www.boletinoficial.gob.ar/detalleAviso/primera/220195/20191030.
5 http://www.senasa.gob.ar/normativas/resolucion-350-1999-senasa-servicio-nacional-de-sanidad-y-
calidad-agroalimentaria.
6 https://bpa.cba.gov.ar/.
7 https://www.entrerios.gov.ar/boletin/calendario/Boletin/2019/Enero/08-01-19.pdf.
8 https://www.argentina.gob.ar/agricultura/cambio-climatico.
9 https://datos.agroindustria.gob.ar/dataset/emisiones-de-gases-de-efecto-invernadero-provenientes-del-
agro.
10 http://servicios.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/135000-139999/136125/norma.htm.
11 https://www.argentina.gob.ar/forestar2030.
12 https://www.agroindustria.gob.ar/sitio/areas/sycf/.
13 A farm is defined as a family farm if some of assets belong to the farmer and the farmer’s household
provides most of the labour.
14 https://www.argentina.gob.ar/agricultura/covid-19.
15 https://www.argentina.gob.ar/noticias/los-ministros-de-economia-y-de-desarrollo-productivo-
anunciaron-un-paquete-de-medidas-para.



 127

Support to agriculture
Australia’s support to agricultural producers is among the lowest in the OECD area, estimated around 2%
of gross farm receipts for 2018-20, with total support to agriculture (TSE) representing around 0.2% of
GDP. Over time, the composition of the TSE moved away from producer support (PSE), and the share of
general services support (GSSE) in total support increased from less than 10% in the late 1980s to 55%
in 2018-20.
Market price support to producers ended in 2000 and domestic prices for Australia’s main agricultural
outputs are at parity with world prices since then. Around 48% of support provided to producers in 2018-
20 was input subsidies. Much of these went to on-farm investments, including in response to adverse
events. The bulk of remaining producer support (about 30% of the PSE) went towards income-smoothing
programmes that address cashflow fluctuations, such as the Farm Management Deposits and income tax
averaging arrangements. Notwithstanding and in addition to these programmes, disaster payments
occurred in the recent period.
Approximately one-third of total public expenditure for agriculture is support for research, development and
extension services, and Australia has an extensive agricultural knowledge and innovation system. Public
expenditure on biosecurity inspection and control services, and to develop and upgrade infrastructure
(mostly hydrological) represents the bulk of the remaining expenditure on general services.
Recent policy changes
Recent policy developments relate to adverse events: droughts, wildfires and the COVID-19 pandemic.
Drought response programmes introduced in 2020 were funded through the Future Drought Fund.
Programmes strengthened on-farm capacity and public investment in research and development, and
improved access to climate information systems. The programmes channel public funds to region-based
innovation generation and adoption, and to farms to develop strategic management skills and support the
development of Farm Business Plans, among other activities. Innovation generation and adoption are also
at the centre of the Agricultural Innovation Agenda. The agenda offers a regulatory environment enabling
greater private sector participation in the innovation system.
The National Bushfire Recovery Fund formalised wildfire-recovery programmes that, while they place
greater emphasis on the forestry sector, also support farm clean up and emergency response activities.
The fund provides low-interest loans to affected farmers for working capital or larger investments. It also
supports the Rural Financial Counselling Service providers in bushfire-affected regions, and industry-
specific support to apple growers and wine grape producers.
Trade developments mainly relate to progress in trade agreements and facilitating access to export
markets in the COVID-19 context. Trade agreements with Hong Kong, China; Peru; and Indonesia entered
into force in 2020, in addition to the Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations Plus (PACER Plus).
The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) agreement between the Association of South
4 Australia


128 

East Asian Nations (ASEAN), Australia, the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”), Japan, Korea
and New Zealand was signed on 15 November 2020. These include food and agriculture.
Australia is in separate FTA negotiations with the European Union and the United Kingdom. Negotiations
have been on-going for an extended period with India, and with the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) and
the Pacific Alliance Free Trade Agreement. Australia is also in the Environmental Goods Negotiations
(undertaken in conjunction with 45 other WTO member countries) and the Trade in Services Agreement
(TiSA) also undertaken with a sub-group of WTO members (DFAT, 2021[1]).
Several schemes aim to facilitate access to export markets through simplified regulations, digital tools,
export market diversification and logistics support. The Busting Congestion for Agricultural Exporters
package aims to simplify export regulations, limit export costs and accelerate exporters’ use of digital
services. It includes sector-specific support to seafood and live-animal exporters to transition towards data-
and technology-enabled ways of meeting regulatory standards, improve the export regulatory environment
of the meat industry and simplify plant exports.
The Agri-Business Expansion Initiative funds the Australian Trade and Investment Commission (Austrade)
and the Australian Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment (DAWE) to support farming,
forestry and fishing exporters to expand and diversify export markets. The initiative also expands the
Agricultural Trade and Market Access grant programme (ATMAC) through partnerships with industry
associations. The International Freight Assistance Mechanism (IFAM) was established in April 2020 to
help keep international supply chains open during COVID-19. Support is available to domestic connections
for producers and growers in regional and rural areas that rely on airfreight.
Together with the enhanced use of digital technology, simplified regulations aimed to accelerate export
processes under COVID-19 conditions. Industry-specific support was also introduced to ease the transition
in industries exporting live animals and seafood, meat and plants.
Assessment and recommendations

Australia provides low levels of support to its agricultural sector. In recent years, public expenditure
on services that support the sector as a whole exceeded support to individual farmers.

Farm support comes through subsidised inputs and loans, and advisory and biosecurity services,
together with financial risk management tools. Decline in farm income as a result of natural hazards
is compensated at times through ad hoc grants, as was the recent case with challenging farming
conditions caused by continued drought, wildfires and the COVID-19 pandemic. Concessions on
credit, water rates, fodder transport subsidies and additional ad hoc payments were used. These
policies contrast with past approaches that aimed to strengthen farm resilience to drought as a
normal farming condition, and may encourage risk-taking by producers and disincentivise the
sector’s adaptation and transformation to future risks.

Research and development are a major component of general services provided to the sector,
while extension and education services receive smaller funding. Recent programmes increased
funding to advisory services networks. The Future Drought Fund and Agricultural Innovation
Agenda both encompass innovation generation and adoption. Knowledge transfer services should
receive continued consideration, as they facilitate farmers’ innovation take-up, which increases
productivity and sustainability, and can build on-farm capacity to manage risks.

Ensuring farm economic viability in the face of resource constraints – particularly with respect to
water – remains the greatest challenge to Australia’s agricultural sector. Reforms initiated water
pricing mechanisms that help improve the alignment of incentives for water use with scarcity
conditions in the Murray-Darling Basin (MDB). Investments support water use efficiency at both
the farm level and in wider water management basins. Policymakers should continue to evaluate


 129

existing policies and future projects to develop new sources of water outside of the MDB to ensure
that they take longer-term climatic projections into account and do not incentivise behaviour that
may worsen conditions for the sector’s future.

Despite wide acknowledgement that the changing climate affects Australia’s farmers, the sector’s
role in contributing to climate change through emissions remains overlooked in terms of policy
response. Information on the sector’s emissions should be improved by the release of a new
version of the FullCAM modelling tool. Improved evidence offers an opportunity to develop a more
systematic and sector-wide approach in anticipation of future climate policies that may impact the
sector to a greater extent than in the past. The FullCAM model is also to be used for calculations
under the Emissions Reduction Fund (ERF).




130 

Figure 4.1. Australia: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/5opw1m
Figure 4.2. Australia: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/do5gqt


0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.08
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.3%
0.4%
0.5%
0.6%
0.7%
TSE as % GDP
1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
-50%
-45%
-40%
-35%
-30%
-25%
-20%
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD


 131

Table 4.1. Australia: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
14 358
19 605
44 208
45 527
42 316
44 783
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
82.4
74.3
73.0
73.2
72.5
73.4
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
5 072
7 514
20 629
22 700
22 320
16 867
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
1 411
761
1 113
1 122
1 451
764
Support based on commodity output
1 000
0
0
0
0
0
Market Price Support1
1 000
0
0
0
0
0
Positive Market Price Support
1 002
0
0
0
0
0
Negative Market Price Support
-2
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
230
309
530
475
802
312
Based on variable input use
217
14
138
77
312
25
with input constraints
0
4
15
22
10
12
Based on fixed capital formation
4
145
271
218
330
265
with input constraints
0
0
13
30
6
4
Based on on-farm services
9
150
121
180
160
23
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
11
220
220
332
107
Based on Receipts / Income
0
11
220
220
332
107
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
181
442
345
422
309
303
With variable payment rates
181
343
342
418
306
303
with commodity exceptions
0
110
207
276
174
172
With fixed payment rates
0
99
2
4
3
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
18
5
7
42
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
1
1
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
18
4
7
42
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
9.7
3.7
2.5
2.4
3.3
1.7
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.08
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.11
1.04
1.03
1.02
1.03
1.02
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
98
370
1 376
1 452
1 001
1 674
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
95
252
729
795
692
700
Inspection and control
3
39
97
103
96
92
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
0
75
362
517
139
431
Marketing and promotion
0
4
176
30
61
436
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
11
7
12
15
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
6.5
36.4
55.3
56.4
40.8
68.7
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-513
-116
0
0
0
0
Transfers to producers from consumers
-513
0
0
0
0
0
Other transfers from consumers
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
-116
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-10.1
-1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.11
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.11
1.02
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
1 509
1 015
2 488
2 574
2 452
2 439
Transfers from consumers
513
0
0
0
0
0
Transfers from taxpayers
996
1 015
2 488
2 574
2 452
2 439
Budget revenues
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.6
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
509
1 015
2 488
2 574
2 452
2 439
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
149
245
239
247
247
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
1.40
1.83
1.41
1.34
1.44
1.45
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Australia are: wheat, barley, oats, sorghum, rice,
soybean, rapeseed, sunflower, sugar, cotton, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, wool, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




132 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Before the 1980s, Australian agriculture was supported by a range of measures designed to maintain and
stabilise farm income, and to provide farmers with market power to offset the perceived disadvantages of
remoteness. In 1980, Australia had 65 statutory marketing boards that used border protection through
tariffs and import controls to divide domestic and international markets, and set higher prices in domestic
markets (Table 4.2).
Price stabilisation schemes assisted export industries such as wheat, manufactured dairy products, sugar
and dried vine fruit. Other policy measures included fertiliser subsidies, income tax incentives, rural credit
for and subsidies to agricultural research and extension, and public investment in land and water
development and rural infrastructure.
Agricultural policy evolved significantly from the mid-1980s. Competition policy reforms in the 1980s and
1990s led to removing policies that distort agricultural production and trade. The National Drought Policy
introduced in 1992 formalised the transfer of drought risk management to farmers and repurposed
government support towards resilience-strengthening activities. Trade practices and anti-dumping
legislation ensured competitive markets across the whole economy, reducing the need for sector-specific
measures. Price stabilisation policies were relaxed, price and output controls removed and centralised
marketing schemes gradually dismantled (Gray, Oss-Emer and Sheng, 2014[2]). Tariffs were reduced.
Floating exchange rates and trade liberalisation reduced price volatility in agricultural commodities.
Table 4.2. Australia: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1980s
Closed economy (interventionist
agriculture policy)
High tariffs
Production quotas
Price controls
Tariff protection and import controls carried out by 65 statutory commodity marketing
boards
1980-Present
Reforms and trade liberalisation
Floating exchange rates
Removal of agricultural price and output controls
Gradual dismantling of Statutory marketing authorities
Reduction of agricultural tariffs of both outputs and inputs
Sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures continue
In Australia, total support to the sector is composed of general services and budgetary payments to
producers; market price support disappeared since the late 1990s (Figure 4.1). PSE or support to
producers was reduced to one of the lowest in OECD. It is mostly delivered through input use support and
payments not requiring production.


 133

Figure 4.3. Australia: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Australia’s agricultural sector is market oriented, with domestic and international prices generally aligned.
Support to agriculture comprises a mix of direct budgetary outlays, concessional loans and tax
concessions. Direct support is provided to upgrade on-farm infrastructure that aims to improve natural
resource use. Several programmes support the development and uptake of farming practices to enhance
sustainability,1 including through innovation take-up and pilot testing of certification schemes.2
Concessional loan schemes incentivise investments in weather and market risks preparedness. Income
stabilisation tools such as the Farm Management Deposits scheme and income tax averaging
arrangements further strengthen farm preparedness. These are supplemented with natural disaster
payments and farm household income support during periods of hardship. Public funding is planned
through the Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements that came into force in 2018. The Drought
Response, Resilience and Preparedness Plan was released in November 2019 and initially allocated
AUD 3.5 billion (USD 2 billion). The Plan’s FarmHub supports farmer access to weather information and
improved weather information collection and dissemination. (Department of Agriculture, 2019[3]). Central
and regional funding support large scale water infrastructure investments. Programmes also support
farmers and land managers in pests and weeds control during drought.
Since 2018, the Regional Investment Corporation (RIC) administers farm business loans and support to
States and Territories for water infrastructure projects. Changes to the portfolio of concessional loans are
described in Domestic policy developments.
Given the low level of direct government support to farmers, research and development (R&D)
programmes are a major component of Australian support to agriculture. A smaller portion of public
expenditure goes to development and maintenance of large infrastructures and inspection services,
including pest and disease control activities. Industry and governments cost-share the eradication of
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


134 

outbreaks, while trade-related costs of biosecurity and food safety inspection services are covered by
industry.
Rural research and development corporations (RDC) are the Australian Government’s primary vehicle to
support rural innovation. RDCs are a partnership between the government and industry created to share
funding and strategic direction-setting for primary industry R&D, investment in R&D and subsequent
adoption of R&D outputs. A levy system collects contributions from farmers to finance RDCs, and the
Australian Government provides matching funding for the levies, up to legislated caps.
Improving market transparency is also part of the government’s assistance to the food sector. One example
is the mandatory dairy code of conduct under the authority of the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission, which came into force in January 2020 (ACCC).3
The Australian Climate Change policy directed towards agriculture seeks to address both adaptation and
mitigation while, at the same time, developing responses that maintain and enhance productivity,
profitability and food security. The policy was reviewed in 2017 and implementation of review outcomes
began in 2019.
Australia’s agricultural sector contributes as part of the land-based sectors to the country’s response to the
2016 Paris Agreement on Climate Change. This includes a commitment to reduce the sector’s greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions by between 26% and 28% in 2030 compared to 2005 levels, as defined in the
Australian Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC).
Australia’s Direct Action Plan supports whole-of-economy emissions cuts through government purchase
of emission reductions by the Emission Reduction Fund (ERF). The ERF is a voluntary scheme, open to
all sectors, to undertake emission reductions and carbon sequestration (capture and storage) projects that
meet strict integrity requirements, including in relation to additionality. For agriculture, the Direct Action
Plan builds on the Carbon Credits (Carbon Farming Initiative) Rule 2015, now integrated in the ERF. Under
the scheme, landowners and farmers can earn alternative and additional income through sales of
generated Australian Carbon Credit Units to the government or third parties. The scheme is amended
periodically,4 offering space for improving issues identified. These include the ability of the scheme to
deliver additional carbon abatement relative to what may have occurred anyway (Burke, 2016[4]; Freebairn,
2016[5]), and for the funded projects to deliver on their intended reductions.
Australia’s agriculture is trade oriented with fifteen comprehensive regional or bilateral free trade
agreements in force.5 Policies support access to export markets, including helping small exporters
overcome market access barriers and costs associated with exports registration. While imports of
agriculture and food products, on average, face lower tariff rates than non-agricultural goods,6 a number
of SPS measures are in place to manage pest and disease risks that could harm the sector. These SPS
arrangements mean that a number of import restrictions are in place for imports of agricultural products
from certain regions.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
Recent policy developments were mostly related to adverse events; droughts, wildfires and the COVID-19
pandemic that affected Australia’s economy and farm sector. Building on the current menu of policy tools,
support was deployed at farm and sector levels.
The eight programme headings under the AUD 5 billion (USD 3.4 billion) Future Drought Fund were
announced in July 2020. The largest envelopes are for the Drought Resilience Research and Adoption
Program (AUD 86 million or USD 59 million over four years) in the form of grants provided to eight region-
based Adoption and Innovation Hubs; and for the Farm Business Resilience Program (AUD 20 million or
USD 14 million) for farmer training to develop strategic management skills and support the development
of a Farm Business Plan. Other headings support Regional Drought Resilience Planning with a focus on


 135

cross territorial collaboration and stakeholder participation; a digital Climate Service for Agriculture platform
targeted to farmers’ drought and climate decision making needs; and Natural Resource Management
programmes available to regional resource management bodies for landscape related actions that improve
drought resilience, and to farmers and farmer groups to build resilience through management practices.
Government support under the programme also goes to the development of an online Drought Resilience
Self-Assessment Tool for farmers. The tool will be developed with end-users and is expected to help
farmers assess their exposure to drought and other climate risks, based on economic, social and
environmental indicators.
In response to the continued effects of droughts, the government widened and reinforced the range of
existing programmes and introduced new measures at the farm and sectoral levels. Drought response
measures include loans, water infrastructure support, advisory services, as well as research and
development and improved access to specialised weather information. The government increased by
AUD 2 billion (USD 1.4 billion) the budget for concessional loans available to farm businesses and
managed through the Regional Investment Corporation (RIC), and made available two-year interest free
terms to eligible applications up to 30 September 2021. RIC’s farm business drought loans support farm
businesses to recover, manage through or prepare for droughts. Their eligibilty was widened to cover more
areas. In addition, small businesses that directly provide primary production related goods and services to
farm businesses in specific geographic areas have access to the preferential conditions of the AgBiz
Drought loan (OECD, 2020[6]). The Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) was attributed
AUD 62 million (USD 43 million) for the period from July 2021 to June 2024.
On-farm support is provided for water infrastructure as well as pest and weed control. The on-farm
Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate Scheme foreseen under the Drought Response, Resilience and
Preparedness Plan was reinforced to reach AUD 100 million (USD 60 million). The scheme supports the
purchase and installation of on-farm water infrastructure for permanent plantings and livestock farmers.
Response to the 2019-20 wildfires is delivered through the AUD 2.1 billion (USD 1.4 billion) National
Bushfire Recovery Fund, announced in January 2020. Low interest loans are available since
January 2020 to affected farmers for up to AUD 500 000 (USD 344 000), with varying amounts and
duration for working capital or larger investments.7 A two-year interest free repayment deferral period
applies to these loans. Agriculture related measures under the fund consist of clean-up and emergency
response activities. Sectoral subsidies are provided to apple growers to assist them to re-establish their
apple orchards and to wine grape producers whose losses are not covered by the Disaster Recovery
Funding Arrangement. The fund also supports the Rural Financial Counselling Service providers in
bushfire-affected regions.
A new concessional loan product was introduced through the RIC in January 2021. The AgriStarter loan
supports sector entry as well as farm succession arrangements with loans of up to AUD 2 million
(UD 1.4 million) from the overall AUD 75 million (USD 52 million) budget.
The National Agricultural Innovation Agenda was announced in September 2020 and its implementation
is planned to begin in 2021. The agenda considers innovation generation and adoption, and foreshadows
the regulatory environment enabling greater private sector participation in the innovation system.
Funds attributed to the Emissions Reduction Fund were increased to AUD 4.6 billion (USD 3 billion) with
an additional AUD 2 billion (USD 1.4 billion) made available to farmers from the Climate Solutions Fund,8
for projects relating to land and water quality improvements and adaptation to drought.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
Australia’s trade policy seeks further market opening through multilateral, bilateral and regional trade
agreements (DFAT, 2021[1]). Recent developments were mainly related to progress in trade agreements
and facilitating access to export markets in the COVID-19 context.


136 

Four free trade agreements came into force in 2020 and one was signed that is not yet in force. The
Australia-Hong Kong, China Free Trade Agreement entered into force on 17 January 2020. At this date,
custom duties were eliminated for all goods including food and agriculture, while special provisions apply
to imports into Australia. On 11 February 2020, the Peru-Australia Free Trade Agreement (PAFTA) entered
into force. At this date, most duties on food and agricultural goods were eliminated and the elimination of
remaining duties is scheduled during the subsequent four-year period. The Indonesia-Australia
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (IA-CEPA) entered into force on 5 July 2020.
The Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations Plus (PACER Plus) entered into force on
13 December 20209. Beyond its free trade dimension covering sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS)
measures, rules of origin, customs, trade in goods and services and investment; PACER Plus provides for
AUD 19 million (USD 13 million) to support Pacific Island parties with the implementation of the trade
agreement and benefit from regional and global trade more generally (DFAT, 2021[1]). It will also help
support the region’s economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) agreement between Australia, the
Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) member states and China, Japan, Korea and New
Zealand was signed on 15 November 2020. The agreement includes agriculture and will enter into force
60 days after six ASEAN members and three non-ASEAN members have ratified the agreement.
Australia is currently engaged in FTA negotiations with the European Union (launched in 2018), and with
the United Kingdom (launched in 2020). Negotiations have been on-going for an extended period with
India, with the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), and the Pacific Alliance Free Trade Agreement. Australia
also engages in the plurilateral Environmental Goods Negotiations (undertaken in conjunction with 45 other
WTO member countries) and the Trade in Services Agreement (TiSA) also undertaken with a sub-group
of WTO members (DFAT, 2021[1]).
Standards that apply to exports of livestock, the Australian Standards for the Export of Livestock (ASEL),
are reviewed every three years to ensure that the standards remain fit for purpose and reflect the latest
science. The latest version of the ASEL (ASEL 3.1) was published in March 2021.
The enactment of the Biosecurity Amendment (Traveller Declarations and Other Measures) Act 2020
increases penalties and extends the biosecurity-related visa cancellation grounds from 1 January 2021 to
travellers who fail to declare high risk goods identified in a pre-established list including live animals, meat
and meat products, seeds and live plants.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The Busting Congestion for Agricultural Exporters package was announced in 2020 with AUD 328 million
(USD 226 million) over four years. It aims to simplify export regulations, limit export costs and accelerate
exporters’ use of digital services. It includes sector specific support to help seafood and live animal
exporters transition toward data and technology enabled ways to meet regulatory standards, to improve
the export regulatory environment of the meat industry and to simplify plant exports.
Government support to access export markets was reinforced subsequently with several programmes. The
Agri-Business Expansion Initiative was announced in December 2020, more than half of the
AUD 73 million (USD 50 million) under this initiative is attributed to Austrade to support farming, forestry
and fishing exporters to expand and diversify their export markets in 2021. The initiative also expands the
Agricultural Trade and Market Access grant programme (ATMAC) through an additional AUD 18.4 million
(USD 13 million) in funding over two years. The revised programme enables government to develop
strategic partnerships with industry to support the agriculture, fisheries and forestry sectors’ efforts to
improve and diversify access to overseas markets by mobilising research, training, and capital works that
support market diversification among other actions. The International Freight Assistance Mechanism
(IFAM) was established in April 2020 to help keep international supply chains open during COVID-19. Its


 137

initial budget was increased in July and October 2020 and March 2021 to total AUD 782 million
(USD 538 million). The funding also supports domestic connections for producers and growers in regional
and rural areas that rely on airfreight to get their products to existing markets. The Package Assisting Small
Exporters (PASE) helps small exporters to overcome market access barriers and costs associated with
exports registration, it is in place four years up to 2022 with a total budget of AUD 5 million (USD 3 million).
Contextual information
Australia is the world’s 14th largest economy (in 2019) and the sixth largest country by land area,
accounting for 12% of all agricultural land in the countries included in this report but only 0.5% of the
population. The country’s GDP per capita is more than twice the average of the countries covered in this
report (Table 4.3). Agriculture represents a small share in the economy, but contributes significantly to total
exports. Australia is an important producer and exporter of agricultural products, making the country a key
supplier to world markets for agricultural products.10
Table 4.3. Australia: Contextual indicators

Australia
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
538
1 420
1.3%
1.2%
Population (million)
19
25
0.4%
0.5%
Land area (thousand km2)
7 682
7 692
9.2%
9.1%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
455 469
358 895
14.9%
11.8%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
2
3
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
28 249
55 962
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
17
18
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
3.8
2.0
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
4.8
2.6
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
23.1
12.4
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
4.3
6.9
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
55
45
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
45
55
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
5
9
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year. 1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Years of consistent positive economic growth came to a halt in 2020 when the economy shrunk by 4% and
unemployment rose by 30% to 7% as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions
(Figure 4.4).
Australia’s agro-food sector is well integrated into world markets; imports are sizeable as are exports and
the country is a consistent and significant net exporter. Processed goods for final consumption and further
processing make up 60% of the country’s agro-food exports. Approximately three-quarters of Australia’s
agro-food imports go to domestic final consumption and the remaining share (23%) is destined for the
processing industry (Figure 4.5).


138 

Figure 4.4. Australia: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 4.5. Australia: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Over the 2007-16 period, total factor productivity (TFP) growth in Australia (2.5% per year) outpaced the
world average, driven by continued structural adjustment and the uptake of innovative technologies and
practices in the sector (Figure 4.6). Average TFP growth slowed compared to 1991-2000 partly due to
challenging climate conditions (Table 4.4). Water availability and competition with other sectors is a
particularly limiting factor, which may be exacerbated by climate change.
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
13
9
64
54
7
30
16
6
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


 139

Figure 4.6. Australia: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 4.4. Australia: Productivity and environmental indicators

Australia
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
3.3%
2.5%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
20.7
19.8
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
1.3
0.8
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.3
3.2
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
16.9
13.5
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
0.5
0.6
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)¹
67.7
70
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
5.4
4.2
9.3
8.5
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Data are not comparable between time periods, 2019 data from (Australian Bureau of Meteorology, 2020[7]).
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


0.4%
0.5%
-0.4%
0.05%
2.5%
1.6%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
Australia
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


140 

References

Australian Bureau of Meteorology (2020), Water in Australia 2018-19, Bureau of Meteorology,
http://www.bom.gov.au/water/waterinaustralia/files/Water-in-Australia-2018-19.pdf.
[7]
Crawford School of Public Policy, T. (ed.) (2016), “Undermined by Adverse Selection: Australia’s
Direct Action Abatement Subsidies”, CCEP Working Paper No. 1605,
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2783542.
[4]
Department of Agriculture (2019), Australian Government Drought Response, Resilience and
Preparedness Plan, http://agriculture.gov.au/drought-preparedness-resilience.
[3]
DFAT (2021), Australia’s free trade agreements (FTAs),
https://www.dfat.gov.au/trade/agreements/Pages/trade-agreements (accessed on
30 March 2021).
[1]
Freebairn, J. (2016), “A Comparison of Policy Instruments to Reduce Greenhouse Gas
Emissions”, Economic Papers: A journal of applied economics and policy, Vol. 35/3,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1759-3441.12141.
[5]
Gray, E., M. Oss-Emer and Y. Sheng (2014), Australian agricultural productivity growth: past
reforms and future.
[2]
OECD (2020), Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2020, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/928181a8-en.
[6]






 141

Notes
1 The Smart Farms Program (Agriculture) and Regional Land Partnerships under the second phase of the
National Landcare Program 2019-23 http://www.nrm.gov.au/national-landcare-program.
2 The Agriculture Stewardship Package https://www.agriculture.gov.au/about/reporting/budget/sustaining-
future-australian-farming.
3 https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/F2019L01610.
4 Last updated in April 2019 https://www.legislation.gov.au/Series/F2015L00156.
5 These include with New Zealand (ANZCERTA 1983), Singapore (SAFTA 2003), Thailand (TAFTA 2005),
the United States (AUSFTA 2005), Chile (AClFTA 2009), the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade
Area (AANZFTA 2010), Malaysia (MAFTA 2013), Republic of Korea (KAFTA 2014), Japan (JAEPA 2015),
the People’s Republic of China (ChAFTA 2015), the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for
Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP 2018), Australia-Hong Kong (A-HKFTA 2020), Peru-Australia (PAFTA
2020), Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (IA-CEPA 2020) and the
Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations (PACER Plus 2020).
6 https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/daily_update_e/tariff_profiles/NZ_E.pdf.
7 https://www.raa.nsw.gov.au/disaster-assistance/special-disaster-loan-bushfires
8 https://www.environment.gov.au/climate-change/climate-solutions-package.
9 The eight participating countries include Australia, Cook Islands, Kiribati, New Zealand, Niue, Samoa,
Solomon Islands and Tonga.
10 Based on UN Comtrade data, Australia ranked 6th world exporter of agro-food products in the 2017-19
period.



142 

Support to agriculture
Brazil’s relatively low levels of support and protection to its agricultural sector reflect its position as a
competitive exporter. Producer support as a share of gross farm receipts (PSE) fell from 7.6% to 1.5%
between 2000-02 and 2018-20. In the last five years, PSE fell both in nominal terms and as a percentage
of gross farm receipts. There is very little market price support (MPS) and domestic prices almost fully
align with international markets with a ratio (NPC) of 1.00. Most support to producers is through input
payments, in particular concessional credit, and to lesser extent crop insurance. Concessional credit is
available for farm marketing and working capital, but also for investment fixed capital. The products with
the highest rates of specific commodity transfer (SCT) were wheat, rice and cotton, all below 10% of
commodity gross farm receipts.
Since 2008, all support based on input use – mainly to credit and insurance – is conditional on
environmental criteria and farming practices. As a result, the share of potentially most-distorting support
fell to 21% of cumulated gross producer transfers in 2018-20 compared to 66% in 2000-02.
Support to general services (GSSE), more than 90% of which supports research, development and
innovation, grew to represent 39% of the Total Support Estimate (TSE) in 2018-20. However, expenditure
on GSSE fell from 3.6% of agricultural gross value-added in 2000-02 to 2.5% in 2018-20, indicating that
the rise in expenditures did not keep pace with the sector’s growth. As a percentage of GDP, the TSE
declined from 0.7% in 2000-02 to 0.3% in 2018-20.
Recent policy changes
Several measures implemented during 2020 confirmed Brazil’s commitment to rural credit as its main
agricultural policy tool. New legislation known as the Agro Law has created financial mechanisms to attract
funds for rural credit. Pronaf1 reduced the preferential annual interest rates for rural credit by
1-2 percentage points, down to 2.75% for some credit lines for small producers. In response to the
COVID-19 situation, Brazil improved preferential conditions on some credit lines and postponed credit
reimbursement.
The expansion of rural insurance subsidies continued in 2020, while new initiatives were taken to monitor
and improve the insurance system. A new project uses video conferences for surveys to monitor
agricultural insurance implementation. A digital platform is underway to disclose information and facilitate
the development of applications. And a new training programme was implemented to improve the capacity
of insurance indemnity experts. Meanwhile research is underway to improve the National Agricultural
Zoning Programme for Climate Risk (ZARC 4.0) by modernising the methods and information on most
suitable planting periods.
The COVID-19 stimulus package of the Ministry of the Economy included several social measures for
vulnerable households. The Ministry of Agriculture expanded its programmes of purchase from small
5 Brazil


 143

producers with simultaneous donations to vulnerable populations (PAA) and allowed the continuation of
distribution of foodstuffs to students through the National School Feeding Programme (PNAE).
A main priority of the government was to guarantee the flow of food supply to the Brazilian population
during the pandemic, declaring the whole food and agriculture value chains as essential activities during
the pandemic. A monitoring system is in place to follow the risks of restriction of the flows in the food value
chain.
Assessment and recommendations

Agricultural credit at preferential interest rates represents a significant share of agricultural support
in Brazil. The National Rural Credit System (NRCS), based on compulsory quotas of bank deposits
dedicated to rural credit, does not explicitly target well-defined objectives. Reform of the
concessional credit system could consider further downsizing concessional loans for working
capital to commercial farms. Simplified regulations and procedures for commercial credit could
facilitate access by rural borrowers. Some credit programmes like Inovagro, Moderinfra and
Moderagro are targeted to innovation. Agricultural credit support could further improve targeting to
specific outcomes, such as on-farm investments that explicitly enhance innovative and advanced
farm management, and environmental practices. The Low Carbon Agricultural Programme (ABC)
is one of the main programmes designed to modernise sustainable production systems and
mitigate emissions through Low Carbon Emission Agriculture; it points in the right direction, but
represents a small share of supported rural credit.

Insurance subsidy programmes require continuous monitoring and evaluation. It is essential to
continue strengthening their information base while ensuring efficient use of public funds,
monitoring their impacts and ensuring they do not crowd out market solutions.

Insurance and credit support are conditional on environmental criteria and zoning rules that
encourage environmental improvements. The impact of environmental conditionality set by the
Environmental Rural Registry (CAR), the Agricultural Risk Zoning (ZARC) and the Forestry Code
needs to be assessed with respect to specific outcomes, such as targets related to deforestation
and GHG emissions. This assessment should be the basis for improving policy design for
environmental conditionality and specific programs such as ABC credit and initiatives against
deforestation. Brazil has no agricultural sector-specific mitigation targets in its Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDC), but well-designed policies for agriculture, forestry and land use
can contribute to implementing strategies for climate change mitigation and adaptation.

Access to export markets is crucial for Brazilian agriculture. The agreement between Mercosur and
the European Union should open new opportunities for Brazilian exports. In this respect, efforts
should continue to improve animal health and traceability, while good environmental performance
may also facilitate the conclusion of trade agreements and market access.

Almost 40% of total support to the agricultural sector in 2018-20 goes to general services,
particularly the knowledge and innovation system. The agricultural innovation system succeeds in
maintaining relatively high productivity growth in the commercial sector. It is important to maintain
Brazil’s significant research capacity, notably through the Brazilian Agricultural Research
Corporation (EMBRAPA), and increase the diffusion of innovations to a wider range of smaller
farmers.

Brazil responded to the COVID-19 pandemic with a stimulus package, an expansion of social
programmes, including Bolsa Familia to ensure access to food, and monitoring of food value chains
by developing protocols to facilitate their continued smooth functioning. Expansion and flexibility in
the implementation of credit and insurance programmes have been the main agricultural policy


144 

responses, and an ex-post evaluation of their impact on those in need could help build a policy
environment that enhances resilience.
Figure 5.1. Brazil: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/jk9ahp
Figure 5.2. Brazil: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/af2iyu
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.3%
0.4%
0.5%
0.6%
0.7%
0.8%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20
-40%
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD


 145

Figure 5.3. Brazil: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/7ey6la


-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Cotton
Coffee
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Soybeans
Rice
Maize
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


146 

Table 5.1. Brazil: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
35 538
148 431
147 639
147 878
149 777
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
77.5
87.2
87.1
86.0
88.5
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
34 573
88 477
86 962
88 999
89 471
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
2 869
2 311
2 650
2 249
2 033
Support based on commodity output
1 013
462
459
63
864
Market Price Support1
973
455
448
56
863
Positive Market Price Support
1 179
509
448
56
1 023
Negative Market Price Support
-206
-54
0
0
-161
Payments based on output
40
6
11
7
2
Payments based on input use
1 856
1 768
2 159
2 067
1 078
Based on variable input use
825
745
823
995
416
with input constraints
0
745
823
995
416
Based on fixed capital formation
955
995
1 289
1 050
646
with input constraints
0
995
1 289
1 050
646
Based on on-farm services
76
28
46
21
16
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
81
32
119
91
Based on Receipts / Income
0
81
32
119
91
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
7.6
1.5
1.8
1.5
1.3
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.04
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.01
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.08
1.02
1.02
1.02
1.01
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
1 242
2 078
2 221
2 189
1 824
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
663
1 914
2 012
2 028
1 700
Inspection and control
51
17
20
17
13
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
471
80
104
77
59
Marketing and promotion
5
4
7
4
3
Cost of public stockholding
53
63
77
63
49
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
29.8
38.8
36.7
40.2
39.4
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-1 184
572
913
875
-72
Transfers to producers from consumers
-1 176
-375
-188
-56
-883
Other transfers from consumers
-284
-95
-74
-73
-137
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
31
982
1 175
1 004
768
Excess feed cost
245
60
0
0
179
Percentage CSE (%)
-3.4
0.6
1.1
1.0
-0.1
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.04
1.01
1.00
1.00
1.01
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.03
0.99
0.99
0.99
1.00
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
4 143
5 371
6 045
5 441
4 625
Transfers from consumers
1 460
470
262
129
1 020
Transfers from taxpayers
2 967
4 995
5 857
5 385
3 743
Budget revenues
-284
-95
-74
-73
-137
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.7
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
3 169
4 915
5 597
5 385
3 763
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.6
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
364
349
364
378
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
2.37
4.25
3.65
3.94
5.15
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Brazil are: wheat, maize, rice, soybean, sugar, milk,
beef and veal, pig meat, poultry, cotton, coffee.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 147

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Brazil has a history of government intervention in the agricultural sector. Price interventions were
introduced in the 1940s amid food security concerns (OECD, 2015[1]; OECD, 2005[2]). From the 1950s,
Brazil adopted an import-substitution industrialisation strategy, which involved wide-ranging controls over
supply and prices in the agro-food sector. Prices were both supported for producers and subsidised to
consumers.
The National Agency for Food Supplies SUNAB regulated distribution of basic foodstuffs and set prices
and profit margins for all levels of the food chain, including low prices for consumers. This agency also
controlled agro-food imports and exports. At the producer level, a general price support system existed for
rice, maize, soybeans, beans, cassava, and cotton. Another government agency, the Company for
Production Financing CFP, carried out direct purchases of these commodities at minimum guaranteed
prices. Marketing boards were created for wheat, sugar and coffee. They set overall production volumes,
administered marketing quotas, and controlled prices and trade.
These policies continued until the late 1980s, when the government began to reform Brazil’s economy.
The economy began restructuring in the 1990s: trade was liberalised, state owned enterprises privatised,
domestic markets deregulated and a customs union established with other South American countries
(Mercosur). Agricultural policies were no exception to this move towards openness and less state
intervention. State enterprises related to agriculture were dismantled or their functions reduced.
Agricultural import tariffs were substantially reduced. Export licensing for primary agricultural products was
removed. Brazilian producers faced fewer controls and obtained freer access to world commodity and input
markets.
Since the mid-2000s, policy emphasised support to smallholders, and minimum prices for staples produced
in the poorest regions of the country were established. Government enhanced purchases of staple foods
to be distributed to poor populations, and mandatory sugar cane ethanol fuel-blending continued to be
imposed at ratios set by the state. All of these measures remain in place (Table 5.2).
Table 5.2. Brazil: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1990s
Import Substitution
Industrialisation model
Closed economy
Fixed exchange rates
High agricultural tariffs
Production and marketing control of agricultural products (CFP state company)
Minimum agricultural prices for producers (CFP state company)
Subsidised prices of agricultural products for consumers (SUNAB state company)
1990-2005
Reforms to trade liberalisation
Floating exchange rates
Removal of agricultural price and output controls
Reduction of agricultural tariffs of both outputs and inputs
Dismantling of marketing boards for wheat, sugar and coffee
Dismantling of SUNAB and CFP
WTO agreement and Mercosur signed
Minimum prices of basic products kept but reduced
Subsidised credits (working capital and marketing loans) enhanced as the financial crisis hit
farmers
Liberalisation of the wheat, coffee and sugar sectors
Consumption of sugar cane ethanol stimulated through obligatory blending of ethanol with
gasoline


148 

Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
2005-2015
Continuing reforms
Creation of the Ministry of Agrarian Development (smallholders)
Subsidised agricultural credit and insurance subsidies as main agricultural policy, supported
by the Law of agribusiness bonds 11076/2004.
Minimum prices of basic products set for smallholders through government purchases of
staple foods
Sugar cane ethanol ratio policy continues to apply
Government purchases of staples kept in order to provide food to poor populations
2015-present
Institutional changes
Dismantling of the Ministry of Agrarian Development (Smallholders) in 2016
Relatively low support, with subsidised credit continuing as key agricultural policy tool
New competences of the Ministry of of Agriculture, Livestock and Supply includes small-
scale family farming, agrarian reform, aquaculture, fisheries and forests
Brazil’s support to agricultural producers included market price support and input subsidies in the 2000s,
up to 10% of gross farm receipts. Market price support has gradually disappeared. In recent years, total
support in Brazil is mostly in the form of budgetary support, in particular for producers’ inputs and for the
provision of general services. Consumer support is also an important part of support since the 2000s,
particularly for vulnerable and poor populations. Brazil provides a relatively low aggregate level of support
and protection to agriculture, reflecting its position as a competitive exporter and price maker for a range
of commodities. Market price support is almost inexistent, and producer support is dominated by
subsidised credit and insurance subsidies (Figure 5.4).
Figure 5.4. Brazil: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Brazil’s main instruments of agricultural policy are: rural credit, implemented and developed since the
1960s; risk management programmes, including subsidised insurance programmes introduced in 2005;
some administered prices and marketing interventions; and disaster payments. Other policy instruments
include agricultural land zoning, with environmental compliance, and promotion of biofuels. The annual
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 149

Agricultural and Livestock Plan (PAP) administered by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food
Supply (MAPA) defines the key parameters of agricultural policy. Since 2019, small-scale family agriculture
previously managed by the Special Secretariat for Family Agriculture and Agrarian Development (MDA)
directly under the Presidency, also falls under MAPA.
Despite the reduction of price support to very low levels, this form of support retains regionally set
minimum guaranteed prices, which cover a broad range of crops and a few livestock products such as
cow and goat milk, and honey. These are set by the National Monetary Council (CMN) considering
domestic and international prices, and the evolution of production costs in different locations. To secure
these minimum guaranteed prices, the government implements several price support mechanisms on the
domestic market, including direct government purchases (AGF programme), premiums to commercial
buyers who pay minimum fixed prices to producers, and public and private options contracts backed by a
private risk premium option. In addition, producers receive reduced-interest marketing loans, which enable
them to withhold the sale of a product in anticipation of a higher market price. The National Food Supply
Agency (CONAB) operates these programmes on behalf of MAPA. Several programmes offer deficiency
payments calculated as the difference between the market price and the minimum (reference) price
(e.g. the Rural Equity Prize programme called PEPRO, and the Product Reward Prize programme known
as PEP).
Agricultural credit is the major policy instrument supporting both commercial, medium and small-scale
family farms. It is designed and implemented in co-operation between the Central Bank, the Treasury
(Ministry of the Economy) and the Ministry of Agriculture. Most rural credit is earmarked under the National
Rural Credit System (SNCR) and provided at preferential interest rates with differentiated conditions for
small farmers (PRONAF) and medium size farmers (PRONAMP) compared to commercial farms. The main
sources of preferential rural credit are Compulsory Resources or lending quotas, equivalent to 27.5% of
sight deposits in commercial banks and 59% of Rural Saving deposits, Constitutional Funds and loans
from the National Bank for Economic and Social Development (BNDES). Additional sources of preferential
rural credit are the Coffee Fund (FUNCAFÉ) and the Agribusiness Credit Notes called LCAs (Letras de
Crédito do Agronegócio). These are fixed-income securities backed by credit transactions linked to
agribusiness, of which 35% have to be allocated to rural credit at interest rates not fixed by government
policy. Major agricultural debt rescheduling occurred during the late 1990s and early 2000s for both
commercial and family producers. Since then, support is provided through debt rescheduling arrangements
that are set to end by 2022.
Brazil has other specific credit lines and programmes to promote sustainable agricultural practices,
mainly the Low Carbon Agricultural Programme. These include credit for the recovery of fragile areas and
pastureland, the implementation of organic agriculture and livestock production systems, the
implementation and improvement of no-till farming systems, plantings on unproductive and degraded soils,
forest planting, improved production systems and the preservation of natural resources.
Four main agricultural insurance programmes provide support either in the form of insurance premium
subsidies or by compensating farmers for production losses due to natural disasters. Two target
commercial farmers: the rural insurance premium programme (PSR) grants insurance premium subsidies
to commercial producers who establish contracts with insurance companies listed by the government; and
the general agriculture insurance programme (PROAGRO) for farmers contracting credit offers partial
compensation for bank debts on working capital loans indemnifying losses of own resources invested in
production. Most resources from this programme are allocated to the southern region for grain crops,
mainly soybeans. Small-scale family farms can benefit from two other programmes: the PROAGRO-Mais
or family agriculture insurance (SEAF); and the crop guarantee programme in the north-east of the country
(Garantía Safra, GS).
All rural credit is conditional on compliance with environmental criteria defined for the Environmental
Rural Registry (CAR). Working capital credit is conditional on agricultural zoning of climatic risks


150 

(Agricultural Risk Zoning ZARC), which links agricultural support to farming practices and activities adapted
for the environmental sustainability of each geographical zone. Compliance with zoning is required to
access concessional rural credit, subsidised insurance programmes and PROAGRO. Since 2008, access
to subsidised credit for agricultural production in the Amazon biome requires compliance with
environmental regulations, in particular land use regulations set out in the Forestry Code. Rural
environmental registration of geo-referenced information on rural property, including property perimeters,
location of Permanent Preservation Areas, Legal Reserves, Restricted Use Areas, and areas of agricultural
production is compulsory across the country since 2012. Access to rural credit also requires compliance
with the Environmental Rural Registry (CAR), a mandatory digital registration.
Biofuels production is supported since the launch of the National Alcohol Programme (Pró-Álcool) and
the Plan of Production of Vegetable Oils for Energy Purposes (Pró-Óleo) in 1975. The main tool is
compulsory blending of gasoline and ethanol (mainly from sugar cane). The National Programme for the
Production and Use of Biodiesel (PNPB) from oilseeds was launched in 2004 to improve environmental
performance and energy independence. In 2017, the national policy initiative RenovaBio launched to foster
the implementation of GHG emission reduction commitments under the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change by increasing the supply of alternatives to fossil fuels.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
In July 2020, the MAPA released the Agricultural and Livestock plan 2020/21 (PSA). The plan defines the
maximum resources for rural credit (BRL 236.3 billion or USD 53 billion) with an increase of 6.1%
compared to the 2019/20 plan. The resources for investment credit represent 24% of the total, the rest
being dedicated to working capital and commercialisation, with shares similar to 2019. Credit for small
producers represents 14% (PRONAF) and for medium producers an additional 14% (PRONAMP), while
72% of the resources are dedicated to other producers not qualified for the former two. The continuity of
rural investment is also supported by the new Law 13.986 of 7 April 2020 (known as the “Agro” Law). This
law creates new mechanisms to attract funds for rural credit:

strengthening the diversification of agricultural credit resources

creating a solidarity fund to guarantee agricultural financing

opening the possibility for farmers to submit, partially or entirely, their rural property as credit
guarantee

extending the benefit of the agricultural credit interest rate subsidy to all financial agents, beyond
federal public banks and co-operative banks
The inflation rate in Brazil continued to fall from 10.7% in 2015 to 3.3% in 2019 and 2.7% in 2020, and the
decrease in the reference interest rate SELIC was even larger from 14.2% to 4.5% and 2% in the same
period. In this context, preferential interest rates were reduced by 1-2 percentage points in most rural credit
programmes (Table 5.3); to 2.75% or 4% for small producers (PRONAF), 5% for medium-size producers
(PROMAMP) and 6% for the rest.




 151

Table 5.3. Interest rates for rural credit in Brazil
Annual percentage rates

2019-20
2020-21
Working Capital


Pronaf (small producers)
3.0 to 4.6
2.75 to 4.0
Pronamp (medium producers)
6.0
5.0
Other producers
8.0
6.0
Investment


Moderfrota
8.5
7.5
ABC (Low carbon)
5.25 to 7.0
4.5 to 6.0
Source: Plano Agricola e Pecuario 2020-2021.
The available resources for the GHG Emission Reduction Program (ABC) has increased by 19.5%
reaching BRL 2.5 billion (USD 561 million) in 2020-21. These funds are now allowed to finance the
replenishment of the legal environmental reserve of permanent protection areas (ABC Ambiental),
benefiting from the lowest interest rate in business agriculture (4.5%). The rest of credit under the ABC
programme is subject to a 6% interest rate.
The amount of rural insurance subsidies in 2020 doubled to BRL 881 million (USD 197 million) compared
to the previous year, and BRL 1 061 million (USD 238 million) is foreseen in the Annual Budget Law
Project (PLOA) for 2021. This will allow to support the contracting of 233 000 rural insurance policies for
127 000 producers, in addition to providing coverage of 16 million hectares and a total insurance value of
BRL 55 billion (USD 12.3 billon). BRL 50 million (USD 11.2 million) was reserved for the more isolated
north and northeast regions.
A new project to monitor agricultural insurance was implemented in 2020 and is set to continue up to 2022.
A system of video conferences helps to evaluate the services provided by insurance companies and to
propose improvement in the insurance system in co-operation with farmers’ organisations. A digital
platform is to be developed to disclose this information and facilitate access and the development of
applications and systems integration. A new training programme in 2020-21 aims to improve the capacities
of 760 insurance experts to enhance the technical methods of estimating damages.
Decree no. 9.841, of 18 June 2019, institutionalised the National Agricultural Zoning Program Climate Risk
(ZARC) and in 2020, “ZARC 4.0” will be implemented in order to integrate various technical risk data agro-
climatic, management, soils and producing indications of risk of drops in productivity. An agreement
between the Ministry of Agriculture and EMBRAPA with the Central Bank will allow financing research on
the ZARC, with the objective of expanding the cultures and production systems with zoning in the country
and modernising the methods and information on more suitable planting periods. The objective is to
minimise the risks related to adverse climatic phenomena. In 2020, 11 crops and production systems were
reviewed by the ZARC.
Amid expectations of short supplies and recovering diesel consumption, the National Petroleum Agency in
Brazil reduced the volume of biodiesel blended with diesel sold at the pump from 12% to 10%. The
measures applied between September and October 2020.
The National Agency of Sanitary Surveillance (ANVISA) published new regulations on nutrition labelling of
packaged food products. This regulation requires signalling high levels of sugar, saturated fat, and sodium,
which are to be included on the front panel of food and beverage products. However, the new legislation
will go into effect two years after its publication.


152 

Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The Ministry of Economy has led a stimulus package of BRL 1 169 trillion (USD 233.8 billion), including
support for workers and most vulnerable population, aids to states and municipalities, credit measures,
keeping employment in companies and fighting the pandemic disease. Congress approved the legislative
decree of public calamity up to 31 December 2020, which provides fiscal flexibility to the government. A
constitutional amendment allowed to have a “War Budget” (PEC) permitting the expansion of public
expenditure. A waiver of custom duties on health products needed for the pandemic was approved to avoid
shortages, and administrative procedures were simplified.
Together with the Ministry of Economy, MAPA facilitated the postponement and renegotiation of rural credit
debts, expanded the timeline of the harvest plan and guaranteed liquidity for a large part of rural producers.
Rural credit lines with more preferential conditions (including simplified administrative procedures) were
provided for commercial farmers and small producers (under PRONAF). These measures will be
maintained for as long as the effects of the crisis affect the agricultural sector. Despite the crisis generated
by the COVID-19 pandemic, the value of the credit and insurance increased in 2020 in line with previous
trends, and the total insured area reached a historical maximum in 2020.
The payment of the Guarantee-Safra benefit insurance programme in the north and northeast regions,
normally paid in five instalments, in 2020 was made in a single instalment (Ministerial Ordinance 15/2020
of 14 April).
The main objective of MAPA’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic was to guarantee the flow of food
supply to the Brazilian population and to the rest of the world. In March 2020, the whole food and agriculture
value chains, from agricultural inputs to consumers’ products and services, were declared as essential
activities during the pandemic. The risks of disruptions of the production flow, from the supply of inputs to
the production of agroindustry have been closely monitored. To contain the effects of the pandemic in
essential food activities and to preserve the health of people who are directly involved, Brazil has
developed protocols for the operation of food production and marketing environments within the precepts
of the World Health Organization and the Ministry of Health of Brazil.
Several measures addressed the impact of the pandemic on the most vulnerable population, including
farm households. In particular, these include: a temporary transfer of monthly allowance to unemployed
and informal workers, accounting, respectively for 11% and 41% of the labour force; the reinforcement of
cash transfer under the Family Aid Program (Bolsa Família), including over 1 million beneficiaries; the
postponement of real estate financing reimbursing payments for three months, benefiting 800 000 families;
and other measures related to employment, energy supply, and income tax.
The Purchase with Simultaneous Donation modality (PAA) received an additional budget of
BRL 370 million (USD 71.8 million) from MAPA to purchase food produced by small farmers and their co-
operatives for the subsequent donation to the population vulnerable to nutritional risk (Provisional Measure
957/2020 of 27 April 2020) (Government of Brazil, 2020[3]). The PAA Milk modality received an additional
budget of BRL 130 million (USD 25.2 million). The Law 13.987 of 7 April 2020 allowed to continue the
distribution of foodstuffs purchased with resources from the National School Feeding Programme (PNAE)
to parents or guardians of public school students during the period of suspension of classes.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
In order to contain food price inflation, in October the Executive Management Committee of the Chamber
of Foreign Trade in Brazil announced the temporary suspension of non-Mercosur import tariffs on
soybeans, soymeal and soy oil until 15 January 2021, and on maize until 31 March 2021 (AMIS, 2020[4]).
Import tariffs were previously 8% for maize and soybean, 6% for soymeal and 10% for soy oil. On
18 November 2020, the Brazilian National Energy Policy Council published a resolution to allow the use of
imported oilseeds in the production of biodiesel. Brazil also announced in September 2020 that it will


 153

suspend import duties on a quota of 400 000 tonnes of paddy and milled (or semi-milled) rice from outside
the Mercosur area until the end of the year.
Since September 2020, Brazil reinstated a 20% tariff on US Ethanol imports, following the expiration of a
one-year exemption from import duties for up to 750 million tonnes. However, duty-free imports will be
allowed through a tariff rate quota (TRQ) system.
The United States and Brazil agreed to update Protocols on Trade Rules and Transparency to further
facilitate bilateral trade flows. In particular, the use of electronic documents and approval systems is
enhanced and phytosanitary certificates and customs declarations can now be submitted and accepted by
traders electronically.
In June 2019, the European Union and Mercosur reached a free trade agreement involving EU Member
States and the members of Mercosur (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay). The agreement includes
a “Trade and Sustainable Development” chapter obliging to “implement measures to combat illegal logging
and related trade” without detailing what these measures should comprise. During 2020, the agreement
was under legal revision and public debate, and continues its process to be approved by the Parliaments
of the European Union, its Member States and Mercosur countries.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Brazil agribusiness exports were not negatively affected by the pandemic crisis and increased 5.7% in the
period January-October, from USD 81.2 billion in 2019 to USD 85.8 billion in 2020. The main destination
for this export continues to be China whose imports account for 41% of Brazil agricultural exports.
Contextual information
Brazil is the largest country in Latin America in area and population, and one of the ten biggest economies
of the world. It has abundant land and water resources and is a major agricultural producer and exporter.
The share of agriculture in Brazil’s GDP has fallen from 5.5 % in 2000 to 5.3% in 2019, while the share in
employment has halved during this period to 9.2%. These shares remain higher than in most other
countries covered in this report. Agro-food exports have grown, representing 36% of total exports. Brazil
accounts for 4.1% of the population of countries covered in this report, and for 7.8% of all agricultural land.
Arable land accounts for 24% of Brazilian agricultural land.
Brazil is among the world’s leaders in the production of soybeans, poultry, beef, cotton, corn, and orange
juice, being the third biggest exporter of agro-food products after the European Union and the United
States. Two-thirds of the total value of agricultural production are crop products, and one-third livestock
products. The main product in Brazilian exports is soybeans (grain, meal, and oil), which represent almost
50% of the agro-food exports.




154 

Table 5.4. Brazil: Contextual indicators

Brazil
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
1,584
4 137
4.0%
3.6%
Population (million)
175
211
4.1%
4.1%
Land area (thousand km2)
8 358
8 358
10.0%
9.9%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
228 324
236 879
7.5%
7.8%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
21
25
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
9 061
15 259
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
8
11
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
5.5
5.3
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
16.5
9.2
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
23.4
36.1
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.1
5.8
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
67
64
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
33
37
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
20
24
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Brazilian GDP has been growing at moderate rates just below 2% between 2017 and 2019, but the
economy shrunk by 6% in 2020 during the COVID 19 crisis. Inflation has stabilised at around 3.5%, but
unemployment is high with rates above 10%. Agro-food exports in Brazil are above USD 80 billion per year
since 2017, generating an annual agro-food trade surplus of more than USD 70 billion. While 55% of
Brazilian agro-food exports are primary products for industry (including soybeans), more than 60% of the
country’s imports are processed products.
Figure 5.5. Brazil: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate


 155

Figure 5.6. Brazil: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Between 2007 and 2016, Brazilian agricultural production increased at an annual rate of 2.8%, slightly
above the world’s output growth. Increases in production were driven by a growth in Total Factor
Productivity (TFP) of 2.8% per year, well above the global average, but also by an increased use of
intermediary inputs. In parallel, the use of primary factors in agricultural production declined.
Agriculture accounted for 42% of GHG emissions in 2019, which is below the level observed in 2000 but
still well above the OECD average. The use of energy by the agricultural sector has increased up to 5.6%
of total use in 2019, also above OECD average. The larger share of the agricultural sector in the Brazilian
economy and the importance of pasture-based livestock contribute to these outcomes. Even if the share
of agriculture in water abstractions remained high at 60%, but water stress is low. Nutrient surpluses in
Brazil have increased since 2000, and the phosphorous balance is six times the OECD average.
Figure 5.7. Brazil: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
12
2
34
26
28
55
26
17
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
1.5%
0.5%
-1.7%
0.05%
2.8%
1.6%
-3.0%
-2.0%
-1.0%
0.0%
1.0%
2.0%
3.0%
4.0%
5.0%
Brazil
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


156 

Table 5.5. Brazil: Productivity and environmental indicators

Brazil
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.9%
2.8%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
26.8
28.2
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
11.7
16.1
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
4.8
5.6
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
45.2
41.8
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
1.3
2.1
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
57.0
60.0
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
0.5
0.7
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.

References

AMIS (2020), AMIS Market Monitoring No 84.
[4]
Government of Brazil (2020), Ad hoc report on covid-19 measures taken by brazil in the
agricultural sector. Submission by Brazil to WTO Committee on Agriculture. G/AG/GEN/165.
[3]
OECD (2015), Innovation, Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability in Brazil, OECD Food and
Agricultural Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264237056-en.
[1]
OECD (2005), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Brazil 2005, OECD Review of Agricultural
Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264012554-en.
[2]


Note
1 Pronaf is the main credit programme for small farmers in Brazil.



 157

Support to agriculture
Canada significantly reduced support to agriculture since the late 1980s. Producer support as a share of
gross farm receipts was halved between 1986-88 and 2000-02, in large part because market price support
(MPS) to the grains industry was discontinued in 1995. Producer support was halved again between
2000-02 and 2018-20, and now accounts for about 9% of gross farm receipts – about half of the OECD
average.
Despite past reductions, MPS dominates support to producers – even though it is limited to the dairy,
poultry and egg sectors, which remain under supply management – with custom tariffs, production quotas
and price-setting putting domestic prices above world prices. Milk in particular receives high single
commodity transfers at 34% of its commodity gross farm receipts. On average, prices received by farmers
in 2018-20 were 5% higher than world markets, while prices for commodities not under supply
management aligned with world levels.
Payments based on unconstrained use of variable inputs, notably fuel, also are potentially most-distorting.
Together with MPS, these represented 60% of cumulated gross producer transfers in 2018-20, or 5% of
gross farm receipts. Other budgetary support to individual producers focused on risk management.
Support to general services (GSSE) declined relative to the size of the sector, indicating that rising
expenditures have not kept pace with the sector’s growth. These amounted to 5.1% of agricultural value-
added during 2018-20, down from 7.6% at the beginning of the century. In terms of composition, the top
two priorities for Canada are consistently expenditures on agricultural knowledge and innovation, and
inspection and control systems, each accounting for about 40% of GSSE expenditures in recent years.
However, while agricultural knowledge and innovation held a relatively stable share of the GSSE since the
late 1980s, the share of expenditures devoted to inspection and control systems increased by
17 percentage points over the same period.
Overall, the cost of total support to the agricultural sector fell. The total support estimate represented 0.3%
of Canada’s GDP in 2018-20, down from 1.6% in 1986-88 and 0.7% in 2000-02, well below the OECD
average. Of this total support, 72% went to individual farmers in the past three years, with almost all the
remainder to general services.
Recent policy changes
The government of Canada released its A Healthy Environment and a Healthy Economy plan on
11 December 2020. Within this framework, the government plans to support the agricultural sector by the
following actions: (1) invest to support the development of transformative clean technologies and the
adoption of commercially available clean technology over seven years; (2) set a national target for
emissions from fertilisers reduced to 30% below 2020 levels; and (3) boost climate-smart agriculture under
the current Canadian Agricultural Partnership.
6 Canada


158 

New requirements related to licensing, preventive controls and traceability under the Safe Food for
Canadians Regulations applied to relevant food manufacturing businesses on 15 July 2020. However, due
to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency did not prioritise compliance related to
these new requirements.
The Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement entered into force on 1 July 2020, replacing the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). The agreement continues tariff-free access for most
agricultural commodities, expands market access for some additional commodities, and provides new rules
for governing agricultural biotechnology, and sanitary and phytosanitary measures. Canada and the United
Kingdom signed the Canada–UK Trade Continuity Agreement on 9 December 2020 to ensure trade
continuity between the parties after the Brexit transition period.
Much of Canada’s policy efforts in 2020 focused on the impacts of the COVID-19 crisis on agricultural
production, the food chain and consumers. In the international arena, Canada advocated for open and
predictable trade in agriculture and agro-food1 products.2 Domestically, Canada’s federal and provincial
governments implemented multiple measures to support the sector in various areas:

To alleviate financial pressure on farmers and food producers, both federal and provincial
governments adjusted and enhanced targeted programmes, including loan deferrals for eligible
farmers through Farm Credit Canada and under the Advance Payments Program, and changes to
a number of the Business Risk Management programme parameters and deadlines.

To address the insufficient supply of labour in the agro-food sector, the government of Canada
designated workers in the food supply chain as essential; allowed temporary foreign workers to
travel to Canada, with the expectation that workers and employers comply with public health and
safety requirements (including 14-day mandatory quarantine upon arrival during which wages are
paid); and reduced the administrative burden for employers. Furthermore, the government of
Canada created the Temporary Foreign Worker Program and the Mandatory Isolation Support for
Temporary Foreign Workers Program, and provided additional funds for the AAFC’s Youth
Employment and Skills Program.

To boost agro-food businesses’ capacity to adapt and recover after the crisis, the federal
government invested in the Emergency Processing Fund to help companies implement changes
to safeguard the health and safety of workers and to improve, automate and modernise their
facilities.

To support critical food inspection, funding went to the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA).
CFIA temporarily suspended certain low-risk inspection activities to reassign existing employees
to higher priority activities.

To provide food assistance to vulnerable populations, the government of Canada funded food
banks and other national food rescue organisations through the Emergency Food Security Fund
and launched the Surplus Food Rescue Program.
Assessment and recommendations

The Canadian Agricultural Partnership Framework Agreement for 2018-23 continues to emphasise
general services support to the sector through programmes that target industry-led research and
development, adoption of innovation, and inspection and control systems. This policy focus should
remain, aiming to improve the sector's long-term competitiveness and sustainability.

Although producer support relative to gross farm receipts was well below the OECD average in
recent years, potentially most-distorting transfers remain the main component of transfers to
producers – particularly market price transfers to the dairy sector. For most commodities, domestic
market prices fully align with world prices, but the dairy, poultry and egg sectors continue to be


 159

protected from international competition and receive market price support, which distorts
production and trade. As a step towards phasing out supply management for these commodities,
the available quotas should increase, and price support for the dairy, poultry and egg sectors
should be reduced. This would encourage greater market responsiveness, stimulate innovation (to
increase efficiency and diversify towards higher value products), and reduce quota rents.

The Canadian agro-food system performed reasonably well during the COVID-19 pandemic.
However, the crisis brought to light vulnerabilities, such as issues around labour supply and food
insecurity, which should be addressed in a coherent way (Arrell Food Institute and Canadian Agri-
Food Institute, 2021[1]). The crisis presents an opportunity to build on this experience to achieve a
more resilient and sustainable food system.

The 2018-23 agricultural policy framework provides farmers with an array of risk management
tools. The Canadian approach to risk management evolved over time, aiming to reduce reliance
on ad hoc policy responses and shifting towards a more proactive policy framework. Nonetheless,
holistic evaluation of the performance of the risk management policy toolkit and additional
resilience-building programmes could enable adoption on a larger scale of the most successful
programmes, stimulate the development of market-based tools, and encourage farmers to find
better ways of managing risks at farm level. Furthermore, long-term resilience of the sector could
benefit from exploring linkages and trade-offs between business risk management programmes
and environmental outcomes (OECD, 2020[2]).

The Healthy Environment and a Healthy Economy plan is a promising step in reducing negative
environmental externalities from agriculture and boosting the sector’s sustainability. However,
monitoring and impact assessment will be crucial to achieve the policy’s ambitions.
Figure 6.1. Canada: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/lbw20k
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%
1.0%
1.2%
1.4%
1.6%
1.8%
TSE as % GDP
1986-88
2000-02
2018-20


160 

Figure 6.2. Canada: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/zp5exg
Figure 6.3. Canada: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/o4spjq


-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Flax
Potatoes
Lentils
Dried peas
Dried beans
Eggs
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Rapeseed
Soybeans
Oats
Maize
Barley
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 161

Table 6.1. Canada: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
14 083
20 696
47 040
46 416
46 409
48 295
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
85.6
82.0
81.4
83.2
81.0
80.1
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
11 833
15 015
31 426
29 867
30 446
33 965
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
5 855
3 891
4 224
3 629
4 219
4 825
Support based on commodity output
3 214
1 622
2 148
1 804
1 934
2 707
Market Price Support1
2 851
1 602
2 148
1 804
1 934
2 707
Positive Market Price Support
2 997
1 602
2 183
1 908
1 934
2 707
Negative Market Price Support
-146
0
-35
-104
0
0
Payments based on output
364
20
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
1 091
368
478
434
493
508
Based on variable input use
622
242
344
299
342
392
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
448
108
127
125
141
114
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
20
18
7
9
10
2
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
1 336
1 307
1 457
1 318
1 492
1 560
Based on Receipts / Income
467
586
615
622
608
615
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
869
721
841
695
884
945
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
9
23
0
4
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
553
85
0
255
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
553
85
0
255
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
8
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
8
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
206
41
47
51
44
47
Percentage PSE (%)
34.4
16.9
8.6
7.5
8.7
9.6
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.34
1.08
1.05
1.04
1.04
1.06
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.53
1.20
1.09
1.08
1.09
1.11
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
1 153
1 260
1 594
1 697
1 622
1 462
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
483
536
623
635
605
629
Inspection and control
283
348
671
752
714
545
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
268
182
139
131
138
149
Marketing and promotion
85
179
132
154
129
113
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
34
15
29
25
36
26
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
16.3
24.5
27.2
31.7
27.7
23.0
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-2 533
-1 712
-2 349
-1 997
-1 958
-3 093
Transfers to producers from consumers
-2 766
-1 596
-2 146
-1 800
-1 931
-2 707
Other transfers from consumers
-31
-117
-240
-222
-51
-448
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
31
0
37
24
24
62
Excess feed cost
234
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-21.5
-11.4
-7.5
-6.7
-6.4
-9.1
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.31
1.13
1.08
1.07
1.07
1.10
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.27
1.13
1.08
1.07
1.07
1.10
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
7 039
5 151
5 855
5 350
5 865
6 349
Transfers from consumers
2 798
1 713
2 386
2 021
1 982
3 155
Transfers from taxpayers
4 273
3 555
3 709
3 551
3 934
3 642
Budget revenues
-31
-117
-240
-222
-51
-448
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.6
0.7
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.4
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
4 188
3 549
3 706
3 546
3 931
3 642
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.0
0.5
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
138
194
192
196
195
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
1.32
1.53
1.32
1.30
1.33
1.34
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Canada are: wheat, maize, barley, oats, soybean,
rapeseed, flax, potatoes, lentils, dried beans, dried peas, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




162 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Prior to the mid-1980s, Canada heavily supported the agricultural sector through measures such as
import tariffs, export and production subsidies, and price and production controls. The dominant features
of agricultural policy were supply management measures in the dairy and poultry sectors, collective
marketing in grains and oilseeds (notably by the Canadian Wheat Board, or CWB), and income stabilisation
programmes (Barichello, 1995[3]). Support varied between eastern and western provinces, largely due to
Canada’s decentralised political system, and the independence of provincial governments in policies such
as marketing legislation (Anderson, 2009[4]).
In the mid-1980s, Canada began agricultural policy reform, particularly in the grain sector. In 1990, the
Western Grains Stabilization Program, which was intended to stabilise net margins for major grains and
oilseeds from Western Canada, was terminated (Anderson, 2009[4]). The Farm Income Protection Act of
1991 changed Canada’s approach to supporting crop producers by moving from policies aimed at
particular commodities towards programmes supporting farm incomes generally. This established two
safety-net programmes: (1) the Gross Revenue Insurance Plan (GRIP, 1991-1996/2002) to protect against
reductions in revenues and yields; and (2) the Net Income Stabilization Account (NISA, 1991-2009) to
subsidise savings accounts for individual producers (Anderson, 2009[4]; Klein and Storey, 1998[5]).
Furthermore, compliance with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and free trade agreements of
the early 1990s (NAFTA) accelerated the reform process, eliminating most commodity-based policies
except those targeting supply-managed commodities (Antón, Kimura and Martini, 2011[6]). In 1995,
transport subsidies to feed grains were abolished (Anderson, 2009[4]), ending the period of high market
price support to these commodities (Figure 6.4).
The Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance (AIDA) programme introduced in 1998 was the first to comply
with criteria for income insurance and safety-net programmes under the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Agriculture. AIDA was established to serve as a core income stabilisation policy, reducing
the need for ad hoc programmes. The “disaster” component was integrated into subsequent programmes:
the Canadian Farm Income Program (CFIP, 2001-03); the Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization
(CAIS, 2004-08); and AgriStability (Anderson, 2009[4]; Statistics Canada, 2021[7]; Antón, Kimura and
Martini, 2011[6]). Since 2003, agricultural policy objectives and approaches are set out in longer-term
Agricultural Policy Frameworks developed through co-operation by federal, provincial and territorial
(FPT) governments. The first Framework covered five areas: (1) business risk management, (2) food
safety and quality, (3) environment, (4) science and innovation, and (5) renewal (extension services)
(Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 2005[8]). Initially, the federal government delivered programmes
directly. However, the Growing Forward framework (2008-13) transferred programme implementation to
the provinces and territories, allowing for more flexibility and better adaptability to local needs (OECD,
2015[9]). During this time, the AgriStability and AgriInvest programmes replaced CAIS and NISA,
respectively, continuing to provide farmers with income stabilisation products and subsidised saving
accounts. The Growing Forward 2 framework (2013-18) strengthened the role of these programmes and
incorporated additional initiatives, such as AgriInsurance (previously referred to as the Crop Insurance)
and the AgriRecovery disaster  programme framework (Anderson, 2009[4]; Statistics Canada, 2021[7];
Antón, Kimura and Martini, 2011[6]). Risk management programmes continue under the current Canadian
Agricultural Partnership (2018-23) (see next section).




 163

Table 6.2. Canada: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1985
Import barriers for import-competing products and
support for traded products; domestic market control
Agricultural tariffs for import-competing products
Import quotas/tariff-rate quotas
Export subsidies for agricultural products
Transportation subsidies for agricultural products
Supply management for grains, dairy and poultry products
Price controls for agricultural products using marketing boards such as
the collective marketing of wheat and barley (CWB)
1985-2000
Gradual reforms and trade liberalisation
Increasing emphasis on income and revenue support
Reduction of agricultural tariffs and quotas
Diminishing reliance on marketing boards, supply management, price
controls
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, free trade agreements
Dismantling of Western Grains Stabilization Program
Gradual dismantling of payments coupled to production
Introduction of farmer subsidies (income stabilisation)
Introduction of insurance subsidies
2000-present
Income stabilisation emphasis implemented through
federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) co-operation
Continued supply management of dairy, poultry and eggs sectors:
price-setting mechanisms and tariffs
Privatisation of the CWB
Agricultural policy frameworks developed through the cooperation of
FPT governments
Subsidies for farm income stabilisation
Subsidies for farm savings
Insurance subsidies
Support to agricultural producers in Canada decreased over the last three decades, with government
support declining from over 35% of farmers’ revenues in the mid-1980s to around 8% in recent years
(Figure 6.4). This resulted from the discontinuation of market price support to grains and oilseeds in the
mid-1990s, and the reduction or phase-out of several programmes offering payments based on output
(e.g. support to dairy farmers under the Agriculture Stabilization Act) and input use (e.g. Property Tax
Exemption) between the late 1980s and the early 2000s. Market price support to supply-managed
commodities, particularly to the dairy sector, remains the largest share of transfers to producers. Payments
based on current production, including multiple risk management programmes (e.g. AgriStability), are the
second largest contributor, while other categories of payments play a relatively minor role in Canadian
farm revenues.


164 

Figure 6.4. Canada: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Canada’s agricultural support policies differentiate between supply-managed sectors (dairy, poultry and
eggs) protected and oriented towards the domestic market, and other commodity sectors, which operate
within an open market environment and are export-oriented.
A supply management system provides market price support to the dairy, poultry and eggs sectors
through customs tariffs (import control) and production quotas (production control), tradable within
provinces, combined with domestic price-setting according to production costs (pricing mechanism).
Successive agriculture policy frameworks regard this system as a risk management instrument (Parliament
of Canada, 2017[10]; Parliament of Canada, 2012[11]).
The Canadian Agricultural Partnership (CAP) 2018-23 frames general policies and programmes
established to support Canada’s agriculture and agro-food sector (AAFC, 2018[12]). Under the Constitution
of Canada, the general agricultural policy framework is governed by joint FPT agreements. The principle
of shared responsibility provides provinces and territories flexibility to design and deliver programmes that
respond to regional needs while remaining aligned with national priorities. Provinces and territories can
also develop and fund agriculture programmes outside of this framework.
The current policy framework comprises a suite of business risk management (BRM) programmes to
help farmers manage market volatility and disaster risks, and strategic initiatives to increase
competitiveness, productivity and profitability in the sector, increase its environmental sustainability,
expand domestic and international markets, and improve the anticipation and mitigation of and response
to risks.
The suite of BRM programmes, built on the backbone of those delivered during the previous multilateral
policy framework agreement, support producers in managing risks that threaten the viability of their farm
or are beyond their capacity to control. It also attempts to balance ex ante and ex post measures while
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 165

limiting ad hoc forms of assistance. Under the CAP 2018-23, FPT governments jointly provide
approximately CAD 1.5 billion (USD 1.1 billion) per year to finance five BRM programmes:

AgriStability, an income stabilisation programme to support producers in years of significant whole-
farm margin declines.

AgriInvest, a savings tool matching contributions to producers who make annual deposits to an
AgriInvest account, to help them manage moderate income declines, make investments in farming
operations to mitigate risk or improve market income.

AgriInsurance, a cost-shared insurance programme to reduce the financial impact of production or
asset losses due to natural hazards.

AgriRecovery, a disaster relief framework to help producers with the cost of activities necessary to
recover from natural disasters.

AgriRisk, a programme to support the development of new risk management tools by the private
sector.
Strategic initiatives aim to foster the long-term prosperity of Canada’s agriculture and agro-food sector
under the CAP 2018-23 by providing an investment of CAD 3 billion (USD 2.3 billion), including
CAD 1 billion (USD 0.8 billion) in federal programmes and activities and CAD 2 billion (USD 1.5 billion) in
cost-shared programmes and activities.
Federally funded strategic initiatives comprise large, national programmes to support the sector in areas
of federal jurisdiction and focus on three pillars:

Growing trade and expanding markets through the AgriMarketing programme, which supports
industry-led market development activities by helping the sector identify and seize domestic and
international opportunities; and the AgriCompetitiveness programme, which helps the sector adapt
to changing commercial and regulatory environments, share best practices, and provide
mentorship opportunities.

Fostering innovative and sustainable growth in the sector through the AgriScience programme,
which supports innovation driven by industry research priorities, including pre-commercialisation
activities and investments in cutting-edge research to benefit the agricultural and agro-food sector;
and the AgriInnovate programme, which supports projects that accelerate the demonstration,
commercialisation or adoption of innovative products, technologies, processes or services that
increase the sector’s competitiveness and sustainability.

Supporting diversity and a dynamic, evolving sector through the AgriAssurance programme, which
aims to foster public trust by helping industry develop and adopt systems, standards and tools to
measure food safety and traceability; and the AgriDiversity programme, which aims to increase the
capacity of youth, women, Indigenous Peoples and persons with disabilities to better participate in
the agricultural sector. It supports skills, leadership, and entrepreneurial development; and
facilitates knowledge sharing and best management practices.
Cost-shared strategic initiatives are funded 60% by the federal government and 40% by the
provincial/territorial governments, and delivered by the latter to ensure that programmes meet their needs.
These initiatives focus on six priority areas:

Science, research and innovation to help farmers, food processors and agro-businesses adopt
innovative products and practices in order to improve resiliency and productivity through research,
innovation and knowledge transfer.

Markets and trade to facilitate the maintenance and expansion of domestic and international
markets, and help farmers and food processors improve their competitiveness through skills
development and improved export capacity, underpinned by a strong and efficient regulatory
system.


166 


Value-added agriculture and agro-food processing to foster continued growth by supporting
targeted actions aiming to increase productivity and competitiveness.

Public trust to build a firm foundation for the sector through improved assurance systems in food
safety and plant and animal health, stronger traceability and effective regulation.

Risk management to enable proactive and effective risk mitigation and adaptation, and strengthen
the resilience of the sector by ensuring comprehensive, responsive and accessible programmes.

Environmental sustainability and climate change to build the sector’s capacity to protect natural
resources, mitigate agricultural greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to the anticipated impacts of
climate change by enhancing sustainable growth.
Provincial/territorial governments design and administer most farm-level environmental programmes. For
instance, the Environmental Farm Plans (EFP) programmes and the Environmental Stewardship Incentive
programmes, financed jointly by FPT governments, strive to advance environmentally sustainable
agriculture. The EFP consists of an assessment of on-farm environmental risks and the development of
an action plan to mitigate them. The Environmental Stewardship Incentive programmes provide financial
assistance to farms with an EFP to adopt specific beneficial practices, such as nutrient management,
manure storage and soil erosion controls (OECD, 2015[9]). They are implemented on the basis of specific
regional partnership programmes, such as the 2018 Canada-Ontario Lake Erie action plan to reduce
phosphorus pollution (Gruère and Le Boëdec, 2019[13]). The government of Quebec has its own agro-
environmental programme, the Prime-Vert, and consulting services that aim to increase and facilitate the
adoption of agri-environmental practices by agricultural producers.
The 2018-23 CAP programmes are to help the Canadian agriculture and agro-food sectors contribute to
the Pan-Canadian Framework (PCF) on Clean Growth and Climate Change. The PCF was adopted
following Canada’s ratification of the Paris Agreement in 2016, with the goal to reduce greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions across all sectors in Canada, including agriculture. It identifies three agriculture-related
actions: (1) increasing stored carbon in agricultural soils to partially offset emissions from the sector;
(2) generating bioenergy and bio-based products to displace emissions in other economic sectors; and
(3) advancing innovation in GHG-efficient management practices to reduce agricultural emissions and
emission intensity.
In 2019, the government of Canada established the first Food Policy for Canada aiming to create a co-
ordinated and food-systems-based approach to taking action on food-related opportunities and challenges.
The initial funding of CAD 134.4 million (USD 101.3 million) was allocated for short-term actions in 2019-
24 in the areas of: (1) helping Canadian communities access healthy food; (2) making Canadian food the
top choice at home and abroad; (3) supporting food security in northern and indigenous communities; and
(4) reducing food waste.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
On agri-environment, in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, the government of Canada proposed to
provide Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC) with CAD 98.4 million (USD 73.2 million) over ten
years, starting in the 2021-22 fiscal year, and CAD 1.6 million (USD 1.2 million) in remaining amortisation,
to establish a new Natural Climate Solutions for Agriculture Fund. The fund would also leverage
CAD 85 million (USD 63.2 million) through existing programmes and would support the agricultural
sector’s actions on climate change by accelerating the adoption of carbon sequestering beneficial
management practices, such as cover crops or shelterbelts, through development, testing, peer-to-peer
learning and solution sharing with farmers. The expenditure from the fund is to be guided by a new
Canadian Agri-Environmental Strategy to be developed in collaboration with provinces and territories,
industry representatives, and non-governmental organisations to support the sector’s actions on climate
change and other environmental priorities towards 2030 and 2050. This strategy is expected to revolve


 167

around core themes such as greenhouse gas emissions reductions; soil health and carbon sequestration;
biodiversity; adaptation, resilience and disaster mitigation; water and clean technology.
On 11 December 2020, the government of Canada released its A Healthy Environment and a Healthy
Economy plan. The plan builds on the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change
from 2016 and contains a mix of new and strengthened federal policies, programmes and investments to
cut pollution and build a stronger and cleaner economy, including initiatives supporting climate-smart
agriculture in Canada. Within this frame, the government plans to take the following actions: (1) invest
CAD 165.7 million (USD 123.3 million) over seven years to support the agricultural sector in developing
transformative clean technologies and help farmers adopt commercially available clean technology; (2) set
a national target for emissions from fertilisers reduced to 30% below 2020 levels, and work with fertiliser
manufacturers, farmers, provinces and territories to develop an approach to meet the target; and (3) work
with provinces and territories to boost climate-smart agriculture under the current CAP. The government
also proposed to invest CAD 1.5 billion (USD 1.1 billion) in a Low-carbon and Zero-emissions Fuels Fund
to increase the production and use of low-carbon fuels. This initiative will help farmers diversify by
producing feedstocks for biofuels.
On 18 December 2020, the government of Canada published the proposed regulations for the Clean Fuel
Standard (CFS). The proposed regulations would reduce the lifecycle carbon intensity3 of liquid fossil fuels
used in Canada, as well as support the domestic production of cleaner fuels such as lower carbon intensity
biofuels. A credit market would be established with each credit representing a lifecycle emission reduction
of one tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq.). The CFS regulations would contribute to the goal of
reducing GHG emissions by more than 20 million tonnes per year by 2030. They would also create
economic opportunities for voluntary parties like biofuel and other lower-carbon fuel producers to create
and sell their credits, which in turn would generate favourable conditions for feedstock providers, such as
farmers, supporting lower-carbon fuel production. The final version of the regulations is expected in late
2021, with the CFS reduction requirements coming into force on 1 December 2022.
A Sustainability Sector Engagement Table was launched on 10 December 2020 under the lead of the
AAFC, to provide a forum for ongoing dialogue between industry, governments, academia and other
stakeholders on approaches to address environmental issues facing the sector such as climate change
and biodiversity. The table is scheduled to engage in a strategic planning exercise in early 2021 to identify
and direct its specific work activities and desired outcomes.
At the provincial level, the government of Quebec launched the 2020-2030 Sustainable Agriculture Plan
(Plan d’agriculture durable) in October 2020 to complement and reinforce the action deployed following
the implementation of the 2018-2025 Biofood Policy (Politique bioalimentaire 2018-2025). The Plan,
developed in consultation with stakeholders in the agricultural sector, proposes interventions adapted to
regional particularities and to different production models. The five key objectives of the Plan are: reducing
pesticide use and associated risks; improving soil health and conservation, improving fertiliser
management, optimising water management and improving biodiversity. According to this Plan, a budget
of CAD 125 million (USD 93 million) spread over five years will be provided to accelerate the adoption of
efficient agri-environmental practices by 2030. This total includes CAD 70 million (USD 52.1 million)
devoted to incentivise agricultural producers whose efforts and favourable agri-environmental practices go
beyond regulatory requirements and generate significant environmental gains. In addition, CAD 30 million
(USD 22.3 million) are earmarked to be invested in research and knowledge development, and
CAD 25 million (USD 18.6 million) are budgeted to facilitate knowledge transfer, training and support for
agricultural producers.
A new Efficient Grain Dryer Program was implemented in Alberta to assist grain producers to improve
energy efficiency within their operations. The programme helps to cover costs for eligible energy efficient
grain drying equipment.


168 

The government of Manitoba provided over CAD 5 million (USD 3.7 million) to the GRowing Outcomes in
Watersheds (GROW) initiative for the delivery of ecological goods and services (EG&S) on agricultural
landscapes. GROW promotes conservation of natural areas or changes to land uses that provide EG&S
by helping farmers develop projects that maintain or improve local watershed health. Through the GROW
Trust, watershed districts in Manitoba delivered 16 projects that improve resilience to the effects of climate
change in 2020-21.
On risk management, a new approach to the Organic Option of the AgriInsurance programme was
implemented in Saskatchewan in 2020 to ensure that this option remains relevant to local producers.
Premiums and coverage are updated to better reflect the production experience of organic producers. With
this change, organic insured prices are higher and premium rates are lower. Average coverage is also
lower, realigning to reflect current risks to the organic sector.
In Manitoba, the Contract Price Option has been introduced on canola and field peas. This option allows
producers to blend the price from their contracted production with the base AgriInsurance value to better
reflect expected market price. Also, fall rye has been introduced as an eligible crop for organic insurance.
The government of Manitoba supported beef producers affected by dry conditions by providing a one-time,
20% rent credit to producers who held a forage lease or renewable permit on agricultural Crown lands in
2019 and who continue to hold it in 2021.
The government of Quebec provided financial support to cervid producers – particularly for red deer –
ordered to slaughter and dispose of animals or to implement new sanitary measures in order to eradicate
the Chronic Wasting Disease. Both measures are required under the Animal Health Protection Act.
It also provided an exceptional financial support to grain corn producers to reduce the impact of the rising
price of propane used to dry grain corn. This assistance measure is targeted to producers who harvested
after 19 November 2019, when Canadian National Railways employees went on strike.
On supply-managed commodities, the government of Canada continues to provide support to producers
of supply-managed commodities who incurred income losses resulting from implementation of the
Canada–European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) and the
Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP). The federal
government approved the financing of the remaining compensation to dairy farmers, amounting to
CAD 1.4 billion (USD 1 billion), to be provided over a three-year period, from fiscal year 2020-21 to 2022-
23. Payments to producers are to be delivered through the Dairy Direct Payment Program based on
individual milk quota as of 31 October each year.
In its 2020 Fall Economic Statement, the government of Canada also announced CAD 691 million
(USD 514.2 million) over ten years for programmes specific to supply-managed chicken, egg, broiler
hatching egg and turkey farmers. These programmes include support for farmers to make productivity-
increasing investments, and for marketing activities.
On infrastructure development, in July 2020, the government of Saskatchewan announced an irrigation
project valued at CAD 4 billion (USD 3 billion). The vision of this project is to irrigate up to 500 000 acres
of land (202 343 hectares), more than doubling the irrigable area in Saskatchewan. The project is
beginning with a CAD 22.5 million (USD 16.7 million) investment in preliminary engineering and initial
construction and is expected to be developed in three phases over a period of ten years.
On inclusiveness, in August 2020, the government of New Brunswick implemented a new Indigenous
Agriculture Development Program under the CAP to support First Nations interested in participating in the
agriculture and agro-food industry. This programme is to help indigenous farmers develop viable business
plans, manage finances and production costs, and build capacity required for their farming operations.
On interprovincial partnership, in 2020, the government of Manitoba officially adopted New West
Partnership Trade Agreement, which commits each of the four western provinces (British Columbia,


 169

Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba) to enhance trade, investment and labour mobility, and to remove
barriers to the movement of goods, services, investment and people within and between the jurisdictions.
This agreement also streamlines the regulatory requirements to start and operate a business and
eliminated the need to file multiple registrations and reports between the four provinces.
On food safety, on 15 July 2020, new requirements related to licensing, preventive controls and
traceability under the Safe Food for Canadians Regulations applied to businesses in the manufactured
food sector, including confectionary, snack foods, beverages, oils, dried herbs and spices, nuts and seeds,
coffee and tea, processed grain-based foods such as baked goods, cereals and pasta. However, due to
the COVID-19 pandemic, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) will not prioritise compliance
activities related to these new requirements until announced with adequate lead time.
On food policy, within the framework of the Food Policy for Canada, the federal government has allocated
funds to several initiatives planned for the period of 2019-24. Among others, it implemented the Local Food
Infrastructure Fund, which is a five-year programme of CAD 50 million (USD 37.7 million) aiming to
strengthen food support organisations and help improve access to safe and nutritious food for Canadians
at risk.
The government of Canada has been also encouraging the development of solutions to food waste by
investing CAD 20 million (USD 14.9 million) to establish the Food Waste Reduction Challenge. In
November 2020, the first two streams of this challenge were launched with awards totalling up to
CAD 10.8 million (USD 8 million) dedicated to innovative business models that can prevent or divert food
waste at any segment of the food supply chain. The launch of two additional challenge streams focused
on technological solutions to food waste is planned for spring 2021. These challenge streams will focus on
technologies that can extend the life of food or transform food that would otherwise be lost or wasted.
The federal government has been addressing food fraud in order to protect consumers from deception and
companies from unfair competition. As a part of this initiative, the CFIA published the Enhanced Honey
Authenticity Surveillance Report (2019 to 2020) raising awareness about honey adulterated with sugars.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Federal and provincial governments in Canada have been implementing various measures to address
impacts of the COVID-19 crisis on agricultural production, the food chain and consumers. Support is being
provided through both sector specific and overall economic measures.
A number of general measures were introduced to support individual or corporate firms affected by the
COVID-19 crisis, to which agriculture and agro-food firms have access. Business support includes tax
deferrals, wage subsidies, minimum income to those who had to stop their activity because of COVID-19,
and additional funding for existing programmes. The main programmes benefiting agro-food sector include:

The Business Credit Availability Program, allowing the Business Development Bank of Canada
and Export Development Canada to enable access to capital for small and medium-sized business.

Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy providing up to a 75% wage subsidy to eligible employers.

Regional Relief and Recovery Fund, providing, through regional development agencies, liquidity
assistance for businesses affected by the COVID-19 pandemic that have been unable to access
existing support measures.

Canada Emergency Rent Subsidy, providing rent and mortgage support for qualifying businesses.

New measures under the CanExport SMEs programme to help small business owners to market
their products through e-commerce and virtual trade shows, and help them manage the costs of
new COVID-19 related trade barriers.


170 

Federal and provincial governments in Canada adjusted and enhanced targeted programmes to alleviate
financial pressure on food producers and help them deal with challenges surrounding COVID-19
(Government of Canada, 2021[14]).
Farm Credit Canada (FCC) increased its lending capacity by an additional CAD 5 billion (USD 3.7 billion)
and put in place deferrals of principal and interest payments for existing loans and new credit lines to help
farmers, agribusinesses and food processors who face cash flow issues. To support the sector, the FCC
invested CAD 100 million (USD 74.4 million) in the Agriculture and Food Business Solutions Fund, which
primarily offers convertible debt investments, as well as other flexible financing solutions.
Eligible grain, cattle and flower producers with outstanding loans under the Advance Payments Program
(APP) benefited from debt restructuring to repay APP advances totalling CAD 173 million
(USD 128.7 million). Over the extension period, the federal government continued to pay the interest on
the interest-free portion of these advances.
The government of Canada also amended the Canadian Dairy Commission (CDC) Act to increase the
CDC’s borrowing limit by CAD 200 million (USD 148.8 million) to a total of CAD 500 million
(USD 372 million) to allow cheese and butter to be temporarily stored and avoid waste. Those
amendments complement existing CDC programmes helping the sector to manage surplus milk.
Under the CAP, producers continue to have access to a comprehensive suite of Business Risk
Management programmes to help them manage significant financial impacts and risks beyond their
control. In that vein, in May 2020, the government of Canada launched national AgriRecovery initiatives of
up to CAD 125 million (USD 93 million) in funding to help livestock producers facing additional costs
incurred by COVID-19. Initiatives have been designed and implemented jointly by the federal and provincial
governments to ensure that they meet the specific needs of the provinces. They include set-asides for
cattle and hog management programmes to manage livestock back-up on farms due to the temporary
closure of food processing plants.
Aside from direct aid, a number of the BRM programme parameters and deadlines have been modified or
extended in multiple provinces. For instance:

The federal government and governments of Manitoba, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Quebec and
Saskatchewan agreed to increase the interim payment rate from 50% to 75% of estimated final
2020 AgriStability benefits for the 2020 programme year.

The government of Prince Edward Island provided to its producers an AgriStability top-up and an
AgriInsurance discount for the 2020 and 2021 programme years. The provincial government is
paying the provincial portion of removing the reference margin limit and increasing the trigger from
70% to 85% in AgriStability. The government is also providing a 10% discount on the farmer share
of AgriInsurance premiums.

In May 2020, the government of Saskatchewan announced an additional CAD 10 million
(USD 7.4 million) assistance package to help livestock producers in the province manage the
effects of COVID-19 related to market interruptions. The funds consist of CAD 5 million
(USD 3.7 million) for Saskatchewan’s share of the costs associated with participation in the
national AgriRecovery set-aside programme, and CAD 5 million (USD 3.7 million) to partially offset
higher premium costs under the Western Livestock Price Insurance Program.
The Ontario Government has expanded the cap for the Risk Management Program and the Self-Directed
Risk
Management
programme
from
CAD 100 million
(USD 74.4 million)
to
CAD 150 million
(USD 111.6 million) annually. The initially planned implementation date of the funding increase was
brought forward from 2021 to 2020 in the context of COVID-19. However, the scope of the programmes
remains unchanged, supporting producers and helping them to manage risks.


 171

The government of Canada and the government of Alberta have been expanding and extending the Alberta
Beekeepers Stock Replacement Program to help Alberta beekeepers address the impact of COVID-19 on
their beekeeping operations.
Business support also includes the expansion of financial and advisory services to the agriculture and
agro-food sector. FCC put in place customer support programmes, which invite customers to contact their
offices to discuss their finances and options. At the provincial level, Alberta’s Agricultural and Finance
Services Corporation has been also encouraging its customers to contact their relationship manager for
enhanced loan arrangements. Support could include personalised solutions such as, loan payment relief
through interest-only payment, payment re-amortisation or payment deferral options. The Government of
Saskatchewan launched the Business Response Team, which works with businesses to identify
programme supports available to them both provincially and federally.
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC) holds Industry-Government COVID-19 information sharing
calls with stakeholders every second week to share information and discuss issues facing the industry,
including potential impacts on trade. This allows both government and private-sector stakeholders to
identify any developing issues and take mitigating actions to avert more serious consequences.
The government of Canada designated workers in the food supply chain as essential and introduced
labour-related measures to facilitate the movement of agro-food products and inputs, both at home and
abroad. Truck drivers, plane crews and others who are transporting goods are exempted from travel bans,
as long as they are not showing symptoms. Temporary foreign workers (TFW) in agriculture, agro-food,
seafood processing and other key industries are being allowed to travel to Canada. However, these
workers and their employers are expected to follow the latest public health and safety requirements to help
prevent the introduction and spread of COVID-19. TFWs entering Canada are subject to an Emergency
Order under the Quarantine Act, which requires a 14-day mandatory quarantine upon arrival. The
employers of TFWs are compelled, under the Amendments to the Immigration and Refugee Protection
Regulations, to meet additional requirements such as paying workers for the initial quarantine period upon
entry into Canada.
To ease the burden on Canadian employers, the government of Canada put in place the Mandatory
Isolation Support for Temporary Foreign Workers Program with initial funding of CAD 50 million
(USD 37.2 million) that, following the Quarantine Act, was extended until 31 March 2021 with an additional
CAD 34.4 million (USD 25.6 million). The programme intends to help with the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic on food supply in Canada by assisting the farming, fish harvesting, and food production and
processing sectors with some of the incremental costs associated with the mandatory 14-day isolation
period imposed on TFWs. Eligible costs could include wages, food, benefits, transportation, housing, and
other protocol compliance requirements under the Quarantine Act.
The government of Canada invested CAD 58.6 million (USD 43.6 million) in the Temporary Foreign
Worker Program to safeguard the health and safety of Canadian and temporary foreign workers from
COVID-19: CAD 7.4 million (USD 5.5 million) to increase support to temporary foreign workers;
CAD 16.2 million (USD 12.1 million) to strengthen the employer inspections regime, particularly on farms;
and, CAD 35 million (USD 26 million) through the Emergency On-Farm Support Fund to improve health
and safety on farms and in employee living quarters to prevent and respond to the spread of COVID-19.
The latter going toward direct infrastructure improvements to living quarters, temporary or emergency
housing, as well as personal protective equipment, sanitary stations, and any other health and safety
measures. As part of these measures, the government of Canada committed to developing mandatory
requirements to improve employer-provided accommodations for the TFW Program, with a focus on
ensuring better living conditions for workers.
Provincial governments have also implemented programmes to assist employers in meeting the new
requirements for temporary foreign and domestic farm workers. In British Columbia, TFWs are required to
self-quarantine in government-managed accommodations for 14 days before being transported to their


172 

farm. The province funds hotel, food service and worker support costs during this period, while the
employers are responsible for paying these workers for a minimum of 30 hours per week. The government
of British Columbia launched a programme that reimburses up to 70% of costs for personal protective
equipment to support farmers housing domestic temporary farm workers on-farm in temporary structures.
The government of Quebec invested CAD 45 million (USD 33.5 million) to support recruiting farm workers.
The measures included a pay premium of CAD 100 (USD 74.4) to seasonal agricultural workers, including
TFWs, who work a minimum of 25 hours per week; creation of a new worker travel programme that takes
distancing rules into consideration; establishment of field squads to support producers in training new
workers; and financial support to the agricultural employment centres to facilitate the matching of farm
businesses and workers.
Furthermore, since March 2020, the government of Canada has also taken measures to reduce the
administrative burden for employers, including increasing the maximum duration of employment under
Labour Market Impact Assessment for employers of workers in the low-wage stream of the Temporary
Foreign Worker Program from one to two years as part of a three-year pilot.
The AAFC’s Youth Employment and Skills Program (YESP), which offers a wage subsidy to employers
who hire youth for agricultural jobs, received an additional CAD 9.2 million (USD 6.8 million) in funding in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The 2020 Fall Economic Statement further increased funding for
YESP of up to CAD 21.4 million (USD 15.9 million) for 2021-22. The programme provides support for 50%
of wages to a maximum of CAD 14 000 (USD 10 400), with a focus on youth facing barriers.
On Business Support and Development, the federal and provincial governments have been supporting
agro-food businesses in implementing changes to safeguard the health and safety of workers due to
the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as boost their capacity to adapt and recover after the
crisis. For instance, the Emergency Processing Fund (EPF), a one-time federal investment of up to
CAD 77.5 million (USD 57.5 million), aims to support projects that help companies respond to the urgent
health and safety needs of workers in agro-food sectors impacted by COVID-19, and improve, automate
and modernise facilities needed to increase Canada’s food supply capacity. The EPF provides up to
CAD 5 million (USD 3.7 million) per recipient in non-repayable funding for emergency response activities
and/or repayable funding for strategic investments.
A raft of business support measures were introduced at the provincial level as well. These include:

In British Columbia, the B.C. Agri-Business Planning Program offers business planning services
and coaching to develop an immediate and long-term recovery plan for agriculture, seafood and
agro-food producers/processors who have seen a drastic loss in sales due to COVID-19.

The government of Manitoba provided CAD 3 million (USD 2.2 million), as part of the Special
COVID-19 Response Initiative, to agro-processors, industry organisations and industry service
providers to adapt production processes and implement new strategies and technologies to
mitigate the impact of the pandemic, ensure the security of the food supply and improve the
competitiveness of the agricultural sector.

The government of Alberta created the Agriculture Training Support Program of up to CAD 5 million
(USD 3.7 million) in support to farmers, agro-businesses and food processors to offset costs for
COVID-19 safety and training, including the costs for personal protective equipment.

The government of Prince Edward Island implemented the Strategic Fund for Agriculture Project
to support the local agriculture industry in mitigating impacts from the pandemic. Eligible expenses
include costs associated with activities designed to assist with the marketing, movement and
distribution of product, and assistance to address marketing challenges by implementing solutions
using technology.


 173


The government of New Brunswick enhanced some existing programmes under the CAP to help
producers deal with pandemic-related shocks and build resilience. Programming changes for
2020-21 include higher per project maximums, as well as an increased maximum cost-share levels.

The government of Newfoundland and Labrador announced funding to create jobs in the
agricultural sector and assist farmers. The funding is part of a plan to support employment in rural
communities and help open new markets and products for renewable resource-based businesses
during the COVID-19 pandemic. This funding will help increase beef production and large-scale
potato production, and support the development of local secondary beef facilities and regional
vegetable cold storage facilities, as well as regional equipment banks for new farming entrants.
Provincial governments also supported the sector to adapt their market operations during the COVID-
19 pandemic by taking advantage of digital technologies. The government of Manitoba launched a
project, as part of the CAP, to create a centralised online platform for Manitoban producers to allow local
food producers and farmers’ markets to sell their products online. The government of British Columbia
(BC) provided funding to the BC Association of Farmers’ Markets to cover fees for individual farmers’
markets to join the online platform and set up their digital market store presence. It also supported the Buy
BC e-commerce initiative to allow more local products to be advertised online and sold digitally. The
government of Newfoundland and Labrador also provided funding to support agricultural virtual market
opportunities.
On food safety compliance, the CFIA has temporarily suspended certain low-risk inspection activities to
reassign existing employees to higher priority activities to better support Canadians and industry during
the pandemic. The government of Canada invested CAD 20 million (USD 14.9 million) to support critical
food inspection and ensure that Canadians have continued access to safe, high-quality food. This
investment is allowing the CFIA to hire, train and equip additional staff to conduct critical inspection
activities, as well as to support the training of provincial food inspectors so that they can provide assistance
to the CFIA as needed. The funding is also supporting the CFIA in developing new means of carrying out
inspections, including through the expanded use of electronic tools such as tablets and via access to the
CFIA’s remote service delivery network.
The CFIA is also working closely with industry and trading partners to minimise supply disruptions during
this crisis. Among other activities, it has provided guidance to industry in cases of a positive COVID-19
case in a meat slaughter/processing plant, as well as an escalation protocol to follow; and created flexibility
in the standard food packaging and labelling requirements to help redirect packaged food intended for use
in restaurants and hotels to retail outlets and grocery stores.
To provide food assistance to food vulnerable populations during the pandemic, CAD 200 million
(USD 148.8 million) in funding is being provided to food banks and other national food rescue organisations
through the Emergency Food Security Fund. Funding is being used to purchase food and other basic
necessities; buy or rent equipment and materials; transport and distribute food; access new distribution
centres; hire temporary help to fill volunteer shortages; and implement biosecurity measures.
The government of Canada also launched the Surplus Food Rescue Program to help manage and redirect
existing food surpluses to organisations addressing food insecurity. This one-time limited programme of
up to CAD 50 million (USD 37.2 million) aims to provide assistance to acquire and process surplus
commodities and food that would otherwise be lost or destroyed and distribute them to populations in need;
assist producers and processors to dispose of such surpluses; and connect surplus commodities to food
vulnerable populations to avoid food waste.
The Nutrition North Canada subsidy programme has been enhanced during the COVID-19 pandemic. New
items have been added to the subsidy list and the medium and high subsidy rates have been increased to
help the most vulnerable populations buy healthy food and other essentials.


174 

Trade policy developments in 2020-21
The Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement (CUSMA) entered into force on 1 July 2020. The agreement
preserves the existing agricultural commitments under the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA), including duty-free access for a wide range of Canadian agricultural products such as meats,
grains, oilseeds, fruits and vegetables, pulses, maple syrup, wines and spirits, and processed foods.
Additionally, it will eliminate tariffs for margarine and whey between Canada and the United States. The
CUSMA establishes US tariff rate quotas (TRQs) for Canadian exports of refined sugar and sugar-
containing products, as well as certain dairy products (including cheese, cream, milk beverages and
butter). As part of the overall agreement, Canada agreed to provide new market access to the United
States in the form of tariff rate quotas for dairy, poultry, and egg products. The agreement also requires
Canada to eliminate milk classes 6 and 7; establishes a mechanism to monitor exports of skim milk powder,
milk protein concentrate, and infant formula; and allows US-grown wheat of varieties registered in Canada
to receive an official Canadian grain grade. Furthermore, the agreement includes a new chapter on
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS), which reinforces and builds on provisions contained in the
original NAFTA and the World Trade Organization (WTO) SPS Agreement, and reflects the strong trade
and regulatory relationship between the Parties. The agriculture chapter in the agreement includes new
obligations for agricultural biotechnology, aiming to provide further transparency and predictability in the
trade of products derived from current and future technologies.
Canada and the United Kingdom signed the Canada–UK Trade Continuity Agreement (TCA) on
9 December 2020. The TCA substantively replicates the Canada-European Union Comprehensive
Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA), ensuring continuity in Canada’s trade with the United Kingdom
after 31 December 2020 (the end of the Brexit transition period). The TCA maintains tariff elimination
commitments for most agricultural exports, including products still subject to tariff phase-outs. The
agreement continues Canada’s duty-free quota access for beef, pork, bison, wheat, and processed
sweetcorn, while not providing any additional market access for cheese or any other supply-managed
products (dairy, poultry and eggs). The TCA is a transitional measure and includes a commitment by both
Parties to negotiate a new comprehensive bilateral trade agreement that can best reflect the Canada–
United Kingdom bilateral relationship.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
On 22 April 2020, Canada and a diverse group of WTO Members, representing two-thirds of global
agriculture exports, signed onto a joint statement called “Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic with open
and predictable trade in agricultural and food products” in order to reinforce international co-operation on
trade in agricultural and agro-food products. The statement articulates a set of principles whereby
Members committed to not impose agriculture export restrictions; to keep supply chains open to avoid food
shortages; that emergency measures related to agriculture and agro-food products designed to tackle
COVID-19 are targeted, proportional, transparent and temporary; and to support international efforts on
making information available on production, stocks, and prices.
On 15 June 2020, the Ottawa Group4 Ministers endorsed an Action Plan on COVID-19, which includes
specific actions on agriculture. The agreed action items on agriculture trade are consistent with and build
on the principles included in the joint statement on open and predictable trade in agriculture and agro-food
products led by Canada and initially circulated on 22 April 2020. The action items on agriculture are:

to engage in ongoing discussions on the fulfilment of joint declarations on maintaining predictable
and open agriculture trade

to lead by example, and withdraw or end any emergency measures that may adversely affect trade
in agriculture as quickly as possible


 175


to advance analysis and consideration on what steps WTO Members could take to continue
improving agriculture trade based on the lessons learned from COVID-19 to ensure that future
crises will not undermine trade, food security, and the stability of agricultural markets in the long-
term.
Contextual information
Canada is a large, wealthy country with a small population relative to its land area, and relatively abundant
land and water available to the agricultural sector. Primary agriculture accounts for only 2% of GDP and
1.8% of employment (Table 6.3), but accounts for a larger share of economic output in some of the
country’s regions. Crop production is concentrated in the western prairies, where the typical farm is twice
as large as the national average, highly productive, and produces largely for export. Most milk production
is located in eastern Canada, which has relatively smaller farms and a larger variety of crops. Red meat
industries are present across Canada, with beef cattle production being especially prominent in western
Canada, and hog production concentrated in Quebec, Ontario and Manitoba.
Table 6.3. Canada: Contextual indicators

Canada
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
901
1 930
2.3%
1.7%
Population (million)
31
38
0.7%
0.7%
Land area (thousand km2)
8 966
8 966
10.7%
10.6%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
61 287
58 199
2.0%
1.9%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
3
4
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
29 364
51 342
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
33
25
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
2.3
2.0
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
3.3
1.8
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
6.0
10.9
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.0
8.0
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
43
58
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
57
42
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
67
66
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Over the past two decades, Canada has enjoyed a stable macroeconomic environment characterised by
relatively low inflation rates fluctuating around its 2% target, and positive economic growth supporting
steady declines in unemployment rates. However, the economy has been heavily affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions, which caused a recession: Canada’s GDP declined by more
than 5% between 2019 and 2020, while the unemployment rate grew to almost 10% (Figure 6.5).


176 

Figure 6.5. Canada: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; ILO estimates and projections; and Statistics Canada.
Canada’s economy is well integrated in international markets – as measured by the ratio of trade to GDP
at 25% in 2019 (Table 6.3). Agro-food products represent 11% of total Canadian exports and 8% of
imports. Canada is a large net exporter of agro-food products and access to export markets is a significant
issue for the sector. More than half of Canada’s agro-food exports are destined for the United States. Most
of Canada’s agro-food exports are either processed products intended for direct consumption (39%), or
primary products for processing (33%). Canadian households’ final consumption absorbs 75% of
agriculture and food imports, of which two thirds are processed goods (Figure 6.6).
Figure 6.6. Canada: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
At 1.1%, Canada’s agricultural output growth over the decade 2007-16 was below the global average.
Total factor productivity (TFP) growth has become much less dynamic than in the 1990s and intermediate
input growth, in particular the use of fertilisers, has come to be the primary driver of agriculture output
growth (Figure 6.7). Nevertheless, agriculture output growth has been achieved with either reduced or
minimally increased pressure on natural resources, as shown in various environmental indicators. Average
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
23
11
52
39
11
33
14
17
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


 177

nutrient surplus intensities have been stable since 2000 for nitrogen and decreasing for phosphorous. Both
nutrient surpluses are below the average for OECD countries, as is the share of agriculture in Canada’s
GHG emissions, although the latter has increased since 2000 (Table 6.4).
Figure 6.7. Canada: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 6.4. Canada: Productivity and environmental indicators

Canada
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
2.4%
0.5%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
24.0
23.7
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
1.5
0.6
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.2
3.5
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
7.8
8.1
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
1.2
1.0
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
9.7
8.6
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
1.2
0.9
9.3
8.5
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


0.7%
0.5%
-0.1%
0.05%
0.5%
1.6%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
Canada
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


178 

References

AAFC (2018), Canadian Agricultural Partnership, https://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/about-our-
department/key-departmental-initiatives/canadian-agricultural-
partnership/?id=1461767369849.
[12]
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (2005), Agricultural Policy Framework: Federal–Provincial–
Territorial Programs, http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=9.687269&sl=1.
[8]
Anderson, K. (2009), Distortions to Agricultural Incentives: A Global Perspective, 1955-2007,
World Bank and Palgrave Macmillan, Washington, DC,
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/9436.
[4]
Antón, J., S. Kimura and R. Martini (2011), “Risk Management in Agriculture in Canada”, OECD
Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 40, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5kgj0d6189wg-en.
[6]
Arrell Food Institute and Canadian Agri-Food Institute (2021), Conclusions from Agri-Food
Community Consultations (Growing Stronger project), https://capi-icpa.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2021/01/Growing-stronger-final-report.pdf.
[1]
Barichello, R. (1995), “Overview Of Canadian Agricultural Policy Systems”, Proceedings of the
1st Agricultural and Food Policy Systems Information Workshop, 1995: Understanding
Canada\United States Grain Disputes, http://dx.doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.16747.
[3]
Government of Canada (2021), Supporting farmers and food businesses to help feed Canada
during COVID-19, https://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/supporting-farmers-and-food-businesses-to-
help-feed-canada-during-covid-19/?id=1589312283901.
[14]
Gruère, G. and H. Le Boëdec (2019), “Navigating pathways to reform water policies in
agriculture”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 128, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/906cea2b-en.
[13]
Klein, K. and G. Storey (1998), “Structural Developments In The Canadian Grains And Oilseeds
Sector”, Proceedings of the 4th Agricultural and Food Policy Systems Information Workshop
1998: Economic Harmonization in the CanadianU.S.Mexican Grain-Livestock Subsector,
http://dx.doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.16758.
[5]
OECD (2020), “Resilience to natural disasters in Canada”, in Strengthening Agricultural
Resilience in the Face of Multiple Risks, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/d1b84788-en.
[2]
OECD (2015), Innovation, Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability in Canada, OECD Food
and Agricultural Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264238541-
en.
[9]
Parliament of Canada (2017), Next Agricultural Policy Framework, Report of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture and Agri-food, House of Commons, 42nd Parliament, 1st Session,
https://www.ourcommons.ca/DocumentViewer/en/42-1/AGRI/report-5/.
[10]


 179

Parliament of Canada (2012), Growing Forward 2, (Includes a Summary of the Study of the
Biotechnology Industry), Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture and Agri-food,
House of Commons, 41st Parliament, 1st Session,
https://www.ourcommons.ca/DocumentViewer/en/41-1/AGRI/report-3/.
[11]
Statistics Canada (2021), Data quality, concepts and methodology: Explanatory notes on direct
program payments to agriculture producers, https://www.statcan.gc.ca/eng/statistical-
programs/document/5229_D1_V4 (accessed on 15 January 2021).
[7]



Notes
1 In Canada, the term “agri-food” is more common and generally includes upstream industries in addition
to agriculture and the downstream value-chain. In this chapter, policy measures related to the “agro-food”
sector reflect this notion.
2 Canada was the initiator of a joint statement with a group of WTO Members called “Responding to the
COVID-19 pandemic with open and predictable trade in agricultural and food products”
(https://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2020/april/tradoc_158718.pdf)
3 The amount of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions associated with all stages of fuel production and use
per unit of energy.
4 A group of 13 WTO Members: Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, the European Union, Japan, Kenya, South
Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore and Switzerland.



180 

Support to agriculture
Chile’s support to farmers is among the lowest of OECD countries, at 2.6% of gross farm incomes in
2018-20, down from 7.3% in 2000-02. Since Chile reduced border protection during the first decade of this
century, agricultural support creates very limited distortions to agricultural markets, with almost no market
price support to the sector as domestic producer prices almost fully align with world prices.
Budgetary support to farms mostly targets small-scale farmers, mainly based on input use, particularly to
support fixed capital formation. More than half of public expenditures in the sector go to general services
(GSSE), especially for off-farm irrigation infrastructure, inspection and control, land access and
restructuring, and agricultural knowledge and innovation systems. At 4% of agricultural value-added in
2018-20, expenditures for general services were slightly below the OECD average. Total agricultural
support represented 0.3% of GDP in 2018-20, half the ratio observed in 2000-02.
Recent policy changes
Chile’s focus during 2020 was to implement policies within a framework of the current administration’s four
strategic pillars: (1) sustainability and water, (2) institutional modernisation, (3) promotion of farmer
associativity, and (4) rural development. Nonetheless, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, some priorities
were adapted and existing programmes or initiatives reinforced or put on hold. For example, public-private
co-ordination initiatives were strengthened to guarantee the production and distribution of food across the
country.
During 2020, new regulations applied to the PRODESAL and PADIS programmes, focused on improving
smallholders’ wellbeing. These involved establishing bilateral agreements between the national
government and 254 municipalities that implement those programmes. INDAP (the smallholders’ agency)
and the Ministry of Public Works signed a strategic collaboration agreement to ensure potable water
supplies for INDAP beneficiaries, seeking synergies between both institutions to promote rural
development.
The animal and plant health agency (SAG) promoted electronic certification, now established for exports
to 34 countries and covering around 70% of all phytosanitary certificates. It also provides for important
development potential for sanitary certification.
At national level, Chile began to update its climate change adaptation plan for agriculture, with
commitments by the sector in the National Determined Contribution (NDC). The plan has three objectives:
(1) governance and co-ordination of sub-national adaptation planning in the agriculture and forestry sector
in the country’s sixteen administrative regions; (2) a co-ordinated approach to the country’s general
development policy and strategy; and (3) territorial implementation of a pilot project on climate change
adaptation in the region of Aysén in order to evaluate and possibly scale up to other regions.
7 Chile


 181

The Office of Agricultural Policies and Studies (ODEPA) is co-ordinating new actions of the Ministry of
Agriculture on water. In 2020, three tasks were achieved: (1) the starting of the design of an action plan,
that should provide guidelines on water resources for the agencies of the Ministry of Agriculture; (2) the
creation of a water board that discusses and identifies main water concerns for agriculture; and (3) the
creation of a technical working group on water resources within the Ministry of Agriculture.
Assessment and recommendations

Chilean agricultural policies involve almost no market distortions and producer support is low at an
average 2.6% of gross farm receipts in 2018-20. Moreover, total support to agriculture imposes a
smaller burden on the economy than in most OECD countries, accounting for only 0.3% of GDP in
2020.

Chile emphasises the provision of public services to the agricultural sector. As a result, general
services account for around 50% of total support to the sector, allocated mostly to irrigation
infrastructure inspection and control, and agricultural knowledge and innovation systems. Even so,
expenditures are low relative to agricultural value added, and could potentially be scaled up further.

Payments to farmers target small-scale agriculture and indigenous farmers, who potentially are
most in need. While these payments aim to improve productivity, competitiveness, recovery of
degraded soils, and on-farm irrigation systems, attention should be paid to their effectiveness.
Impact assessments should be carried out systematically, as these payments account for about
half of public outlays directed at the sector.

Given the rising number of support programmes targeting rural populations not directly
implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, improved co-ordination across ministries and agencies
that provide support to the agricultural sector, and strong systems of evaluation, are key to ensuring
efficient use of public resources.

Moreover, given the increasing number of support programmes developed by regional
governments targeting rural populations,
improved co-ordination, communication and
accountability processes are needed between regional and national governments to avoid
overlapping efforts and supports.

Chile positions itself as supporting strong climate action. Chile committed to a 30% emissions
reduction by 2030 relative to 2007, and significant efforts, such as the climate change adaptation
plan for agriculture, both mitigate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and adapt to climate change
within the commitment made by the sector in the National Determined Contribution (NDC). This
commitment will have important implications for agriculture.




182 

Figure 7.1. Chile: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/9be84r
Figure 7.2. Chile: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/lvmdwf
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
1.06
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.3%
0.4%
0.5%
0.6%
0.7%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD


 183

Figure 7.3. Chile: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/fvisku


0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Sugar
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


184 

Table 7.1. Chile: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
4 806
13 480
14 714
13 281
12 444
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
72.9
73.5
69.4
71.7
79.3
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
4 118
10 053
11 621
9 504
9 034
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
369
361
387
366
329
Support based on commodity output
227
19
14
7
35
Market Price Support1
227
19
14
7
35
Positive Market Price Support
228
19
14
7
35
Negative Market Price Support
-1
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
140
330
364
338
287
Based on variable input use
21
63
68
67
55
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
85
181
201
183
158
with input constraints
66
88
99
89
77
Based on on-farm services
35
86
95
88
74
with input constraints
7
37
35
40
36
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
1
12
9
21
7
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
1
12
9
21
7
with input constraints
1
12
9
21
7
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
7.3
2.6
2.6
2.7
2.6
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.05
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.08
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.03
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
103
406
464
452
303
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
22
76
96
73
59
Inspection and control
3
110
101
120
109
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
67
208
251
247
127
Marketing and promotion
10
12
15
13
7
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
1
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
22.0
52.7
54.5
55.3
47.9
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-317
-24
-32
-25
-17
Transfers to producers from consumers
-226
-13
-14
-7
-17
Other transfers from consumers
-92
-12
-17
-18
0
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
1
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-7.5
-0.2
-0.3
-0.3
-0.2
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.08
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.08
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
472
767
851
818
632
Transfers from consumers
318
24
32
25
17
Transfers from taxpayers
245
754
837
812
615
Budget revenues
-92
-12
-17
-18
0
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.6
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
244
748
837
812
597
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.2
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
233
224
230
245
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
621.08
712.31
641.90
703.31
791.72
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Chile are: wheat, maize, apples, grapes, sugar,
tomatoes, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry, eggs, blueberries, cherries and peaches.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 185

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Prior to 1973, agricultural policies in Chile followed an import substitution industrialisation model. The
country implemented measures such as price and production controls for staples (e.g. wheat), import
tariffs, and export restrictions. At the same time, key institutions were created that remain in place, such
as INDAP (the smallholders’ agency), SAG (animal and plant health), INIA (agricultural innovation), and
others. During this period, the government also undertook land reform, providing land to small-scale
farmers and landless people (Anderson and Valdés, 2008[1]).
Economic and agricultural policies shifted in 1973. Chile was the first country in the developing world to
adopt market oriented open-economy reforms and structural macroeconomic reforms. These reduced the
role of government in the economy and liberalised trade (OECD, 2008[2]).
From 1973-83, general reforms such as macroeconomic stabilisation went into effect while agricultural
sector-specific reforms were deferred. However, marketing boards and price control agencies for
agricultural products were dismantled, import tariffs were reduced and export restrictions were lifted. From
the mid-1980s, the government took measures to improve competitiveness and stimulate production and
exports, principally by providing general services to the sector. Several agricultural institutions related to
innovation and irrigation were created, but smallholder development, the environment and resource use
received little attention (Anderson and Valdés, 2008[1]).
Since the restoration of democracy in 1990, agricultural policy focuses on three objectives: (1) increasing
competitiveness, (2) achieving more balanced agricultural development by better integrating poorer, less-
competitive, farmers into commercial supply chains, and (3) preserving the environment through
sustainable use of resources. Successive governments continued to commit to open markets. Tariffs were
further reduced and numerous Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) were signed, granting trade preferences to
partners for agricultural products (OECD, 2008[2]) (Table 7.2).
Table 7.2. Chile: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1973
Import substitution industrialisation
model
Closed economy
High import tariffs
Price controls (e.g. minimum prices of main agricultural products such as wheat, fixed
consumer prices, fixed marketing margins)
Export quotas, licenses and export bans on main staple foods
Subsidies to some producers (e.g. milk)
Interventions in input markets
Investments in agricultural infrastructure (e.g. slaughterhouses, storage and processing
facilities, roads)
Establishment of key agricultural institutions (e.g. INDAP, SAG, INIA, COTRISA)
Land reform
1973-1990
Reforms for trade liberalisation
Removal of agricultural price controls
Dismantling of marketing boards and price control agencies, except for wheat, milk and
oilseeds
Rapid tariff reduction on most imports
Introduction of a uniform, non-discriminatory tariff system
Elimination of export restrictions
Establishment of price stabilisation mechanisms (price band systems) for imported
products (wheat, sugar and oilseeds)
Creation of further agricultural institutions (e.g. FIA, CNR)


186 

Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1990- present
Return to democracy continues with
open markets model
Most Favoured Nation tariff reduction up to 1% by 2020 for all agricultural products
Many free trade agreements signed
Dismantling of the price band systems for sugar and oilseed
Increase in budgetary allocation to support smallholders and for investments in general
services
As market price support (MPS) has practically disappeared, Chile’s level of producer support declined from
close to 10% of gross farm receipts at the end of the 1990s to below 4% throughout the 2010s, and
averaged 2.6% in the past three years. To some extent, MPS was replaced by payments related to
agricultural input use, targeted to small-scale agriculture. Budgetary support also increased towards the
provision of general services, which today account for half of Chile’s total support estimate to agriculture.
Figure 7.4. Chile: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1990 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Agricultural policy remained mostly unchanged over the past ten years, emphasising the development of
small-scale agriculture, improvement of sustainable productivity and competitiveness, and conservation of
natural resources.
Around half of budgetary expenditures are direct payments to small-scale farmers. These include various
input subsidies and access to credit at preferential interest rates; subsidies for fixed capital formation, in
particular improving degraded soils; and on-farm services like producer association programmes for small-
scale and indigenous farmers.
The second half of budgetary expenditure finances general services to the agricultural sector, such as
investments in infrastructure, mainly the expansion and improvements of irrigation systems, restructuring
of and access to land, agricultural research and development, sanitary and phytosanitary services and
inspection services.
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 187

Open trade helped Chile become an important producer and exporter of agricultural and food products
such as fruits, vegetables, dairy products, poultry, pig meat and wine. Moreover, MPS declined over time
as MFN tariffs for agricultural products fell to 1%.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
The year 2020 was dedicated to the implementation of policies within the framework of the four strategic
pillars of the current administration: a) sustainability and water, b) institutional modernisation, c) promotion
of farmer associativity, and d) rural development. Nonetheless, due to the COVID-19 pandemic some of
the priorities were adapted and while some existing programmes or initiatives were reinforced others were
put on hold. For example, public-private co-ordination initiatives were strengthened to guarantee the
production and distribution of food across the country.
The Institute for Agricultural Development (INDAP) – an agency promoting smallholders’ agriculture –
continued modernising the governance of three of its emblematic programmes: the Local Development
Programme (PRODESAL), the Agricultural Programme for the Comprehensive Development of Small
Farmers of the Coquimbo Region (PADIS), and the Technical Advice Programme (SAT). New regulations
(now more focused on the improvement of smallholders’ wellbeing) were applied for PRODESAL and
PADIS during 2020. These regulations involved the creation of national/local agreements with
254 municipalities that implement those programmes. New rules to the SAT programme were also
established, which now require business plans for beneficiaries. An investment subsidy and a new credit
line were also incorporated into this programme.
During 2020, INDAP and the Ministry of Public Works signed a collaboration agreement to provide potable
water for INDAP beneficiaries and seeking synergies between both institutions to promote rural
development such as better water management in agricultural activities.
The rural development initiative in the Araucania Region was created in 2020 and aims to develop a
modern and sustainable agriculture by focusing on three strategic lines: 1) Rural Development; 2) Foster
productive diversification; and 3) Associativity and market. Several programmes were created to
strengthen small-scale agriculture under this initiative.
Around 83% of the area of Chile belongs to rural municipalities (263 of the 346), where 25.5% of the
national population lives. The Ministry of Agriculture is working to improve the quality of life of the rural
population and reduce the gaps with respect to those living in urban territories. For this, the National Rural
Development Policy was published in May 2020, which aims to improve access and quality of public
services and connectivity in rural areas. This initiative also seeks to guide actions, programmes, and
projects of different Ministries by developing a better targeting and avoiding overlapping.
As part of, the national plan “Más Unidos” (“working closely”), that aims to encourage farmers’ associations,
the Ministry of Agriculture began during 2020 the development of a strategy for associations within the
agricultural, livestock and forestry sectors which will be the reference framework for the next ten years.
During 2020, the animal and plant health agency, the Agriculture and Livestock Service (SAG) promoted
the electronic certification in its different modalities, reaching 34 countries, transmitting around 70% of the
total phytosanitary certification and with an important development potential for zoo-sanitary certification.
This tool has allowed to maintain the commercial flow, speed-up processes, improve communication
among all actors and facilitate the exchange of agricultural, livestock and forestry products by eliminating
the use of paper in port procedures.
The final draft of the “Sustainability Strategy for the Chilean Agri-food Sector” was submitted during
November 2020 to stakeholders (farmers associations, agribusiness associations, academia, NGOs, and
public sector). The draft included three general dimensions: 1) environmental dimension (i.e. water, soil,
climate change, biodiversity and ecosystem services), 2) social dimension (i.e. relationship with local


188 

communities, labour regulations, healthy food and food safety), and 3) economic dimension (i.e. resilience,
market development and competitiveness).
In April 2020, the Office of Agricultural Policies and Studies (ODEPA) established a technical board,
bringing together experts from SAG and INDAP, to prepare a proposal for updating the emblematic
Programme of Incentives for Agro-Environmental Sustainability of Agricultural Soils (SIRDS-S). The idea
is to maintain the focus of the programme on recovering the productive potential of degraded soils but in
a more sustainable way.
At national level, Chile began to update its climate change adaptation plan for agriculture, within the
framework of compliance with the commitment made by the sector in the National Determined Contribution
(NDC). The plan has three main objectives: 1) establishment of a governance and co-ordination of sub-
national adaptation planning in the agricultural and forestry sector in the sixteen administrative regions of
the country; 2) alignment of the country’s general development policy and strategy; and 3) start the
territorial implementation of a pilot project on climate change adaptation in the region of Aysén in order to
evaluate and potentially scale up to other regions.
ODEPA is co-ordinating new actions of the Ministry of Agriculture on water. In 2020, three tasks were
achieved: 1) the starting of the design of an action plan that should provide main guidelines on water
resources for the agencies of the Ministry of Agriculture; 2) the creation of a water board for agriculture;
and 3) the creation of a technical working group on water resources within the Ministry of Agriculture.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
In response to the health crisis caused by COVID-19, INDAP decided to postpone the expiration date of
all credit operations (credits, extensions, renegotiations) from March to June. This extension was
automatic, and only implied the change of the due date, without affecting the rest of the original conditions
of the credit, nor the risk category, 17 225 farms benefited from the extension. Moreover, INDAP created
a special credit renegotiation programme for all its credit beneficiaries, in which 50% of the interest is
written-off. The rest of the debt is renegotiated according to the farmer’s payment capacity.
Moreover, INDAP made more flexible its irrigation programme regulations to smallholders
(e.g. rescheduling of debts, reduction of interest rates) and increased its credit allocations. Moreover, the
National Irrigation Commission (CNR) implemented an easing of requirements to apply to the instruments
of Law No. 18.450 (on-farm irrigation subsidies) for the promotion of private investment in irrigation.
To avoid major disruptions in the agro-food chains during the pandemic, the Ministry of Agriculture
established a public-private co-ordination, the Safe Supply Committee (Comité de Abastecimiento
Seguro), with the participation of different stakeholders, including the private sector, to co-ordinate joint
actions and centralise information. Additionally, ODEPA maintained its monitoring and continuous
dissemination concerning the evolution of producer and consumer prices and import prices. Furthermore,
a series of actions were launched:

Creation of a Council of Ex-Ministers of Agriculture, as an advisory body of a consultative nature,
whose function has been to advise the Ministry of Agriculture in the management of contingencies
that put the functioning of the food chains at risk.

Meetings of the Council of Ministers of Agriculture of Americas, which reunites 35 ministers of
agriculture of the Americas, to ensure the food supply of the region and learn from the experiences
of other countries.

Identification of critical points in the entire food chains (production, distribution, commercialisation)
and permanent monitoring of the national and international markets, through ODEPA. This
monitoring has identified, in a timely manner, the areas where the support of the ministry is
necessary to unblock bottlenecks of the supply chains of agricultural products.


 189


Co-ordination with local authorities to ensure the operation of local markets and street markets
(Ferias libres).

Creation of a website1 with official information on the sanitary situation, protocols for agricultural
facilities and a Manual of Good Hygiene Practices in street markets (Ferias libres).

All administrative procedures of the Ministry of Agriculture agencies started to be carried out online.
The government implemented an emergency income support for families that experienced a reduction in
their incomes. This support has been maintained in 2021.
Food baskets are delivered to the poorest families with schoolchildren who normally get food at school
canteens but have been affected by the suspension of classes.
The programme (Food for Chile/Alimentos para Chile) provided food baskets to the poorest families that
were affected by the lockdowns in 2020. It delivered around 5.6 million baskets with food and hygiene
products.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
To deepen bilateral preferential trade, Chile is broadening the Partial Scope Agreement (PSA) with India,
in force since 2007 and once modernised in 2017. Ongoing negotiations with the European Union
continued in 2020. Negotiations with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) continue during 2021.
During 2020, Chile and Paraguay began their negotiations for a Free Trade Agreement, the first round of
negotiations was held in 2020 and the next rounds will continue during 2021. In the context of the Brexit,
Chile and the United Kingdom have signed an agreement that entered in force on 1 January 2021.
Access to the market for the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”) was secured for pears,
hazelnuts (without shell), citrus fruits, honey and bee products; access to the Indian market was secured
for blueberries, avocados, nuts with/without shell; and access to Viet Nam was secured for apples. At the
Chilean border control, the SAG’s Import Information System (SIIS) was also implemented, enabling a
paperless registration connected with customs agencies and importers.
Contextual information
Chile has averaged a real GDP growth of around 4% since 2000 that helped it to become an upper middle-
income country. Agriculture accounted for 3.9% of GDP and 9% of total employment in 2019. It has a dual
structure, where small-scale labour intensive farms co-exist alongside a large-scale commercial farm
sector. Chile is a net exporter of agro-food products with a surplus of around USD 5 billion (excluding fish
and forestry). Agro-food exports were around 18% of total exports of the country.
In 2020, Chile, like most of countries, was hit by the global pandemic. Consequently GDP growth was
negative and the unemployment rate increased. Chile’s agricultural and agro-food sector has been
successful in adding value to the production of primary commodities, by producing more differentiated
products like temperate fruits and processed products such as wine. In 2019, 87% of exports were mostly
products for final consumption, both primary and processed, and only 13% were products for further
industrial processing. Agro-food imports are mostly processed products, where 61% are for consumption
and 24% for further processing in industry.




190 

Table 7.3. Chile: Contextual indicators

Chile
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
147
477
0.4%
0.4%
Population (million)
15
19
0.4%
0.4%
Land area (thousand km2)
744
744
0.9%
0.9%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
15 110
15 693
0.5%
0.5%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
21
26
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
9 519
25 041
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
22
25
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
5.9
3.9
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
14.1
9.0
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
17.0
18.1
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.7
10.1
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
68
65
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
32
35
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
12
8
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Figure 7.5. Chile: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate


 191

Figure 7.6. Chile: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
The agricultural sector has played a key role in Chile’s economic success, both benefiting from stability
and reforms, and making an important contribution via strong output and exports growth. Productivity
growth has been central to Chile’s agriculture. With a relatively stable use of primary and intermediate
inputs into production, growth in output has been achieved by significant improvements in total factor
productivity (TFP), with an average of 1.9% per year over the period 2007 to 2016, slightly higher than the
global average. Agriculture contributes with around 11% of GHG emissions, while only 7% of the total
agricultural land is irrigated.
Figure 7.7. Chile: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.


Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
6
51
55
36
15
4
24
8
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
-0.4%
0.5%
-0.4%
0.05%
1.9%
1.6%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
Chile
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


192 

Table 7.4. Chile: Productivity and environmental indicators

Chile
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
2.2%
1.9%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
..
..
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
..
..
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
..
1.7
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
18.3
10.6
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
7.0
7.0
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
..
..
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
..
..
9.3
8.5
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.

References

Anderson, K. and A. Valdés (2008), Distortions to Agricultural Incentives in Latin America, World
Bank, Washington DC, https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/6604.
[1]
OECD (2008), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Chile 2008, OECD Review of Agricultural
Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264042247-en.
[2]


Note
1 http://covid19.minagri.gob.cl/.



 193

Support to agriculture
The share of support to agricultural producers in gross farm receipts in the People’s Republic of China
(hereafter “China”) decreased gradually since 2016 after two decades of steady growth. This support
averaged 12.5% in 2018-20, reflecting policy reforms with respect to market intervention for soybeans,
rapeseed, cotton and maize, as well as to the minimum purchase price for wheat and rice. The nominal
depreciation of the CNY against the USD since 2014 (after a long period of appreciation) is another factor
influencing the evolution of price gaps and contributing to stabilising levels of market price support (MPS)
in recent years. Payments based on planted area have consistently increased since 2014 as a result of
the recent reforms, but MPS remains the dominant part of total support, generated through both domestic
price support policies and various border measures on imports. Overall, more than two-thirds of support to
producers are in the form of potentially most-distorting transfers, a consistent pattern since 2000-02.
MPS levels differ across imported commodities, while prices of exported commodities are not supported.
With the exception of eggs, peanuts, and fruit and vegetables that are exported, producers benefited from
large transfers accounting for between 10% and 60% of commodity receipts in 2018-20. Prices received
by farmers were on average 10% higher than world prices in 2018-20. The higher domestic producer prices
on average indicate an implicit tax imposed on consumers, with a percentage consumer support estimate
of -9.6% in 2018-20.
Within the general services support estimate (GSSE), three categories attract the largest financial support:
public stockholding, development and maintenance of infrastructure, and the agricultural knowledge and
innovation system. However, the GSSE corresponds to only 14.1% of total support to agriculture in 2018-
20, and at 3% relative to agriculture value-added the GSSE is below the OECD average. Total support to
agriculture as a share of GDP (%TSE) has remained relatively stable since 2000-02. At 1.6% in 2018-20,
%TSE was nevertheless one of the highest among the countries covered, and about three times the OECD
average.
Recent policy changes
Through the February 2021 No. 1 Central Document and the March 2021 14th Five-Year Plan 2021-2025
for National Economic and Social Development, China stepped up the focus on food availability aiming to
boost grain yields, increase support for the domestic seed industry and enhance digital technology use in
agriculture.
China took a diverse set of measures related to the agro-food sector in response to the COVID-19 crisis,
focusing on institutional measures, overall economic measures, support to agricultural production,
information and co-ordination measures, and trade measures affecting the operation of supply chains. In
support to agricultural production, the minimum support price for indica rice increased in February 2020
for the first time since 2014. The 14th Five-Year Plan 2021-2025 targets further increases in minimum
support prices for both wheat and rice. In May 2020, the National Development Research Council (NDRC)
8 China


194 

released a food security response plan to the COVID-19 pandemic restricting further shifts in farmland to
non-grain crops use and consolidating the central government’s oversight of stocks in regions and
provinces.
Since June 2020, China implemented measures to test for infectious SARS-CoV-2 material in domestic
and imported food and food packaging. In December 2020, China introduced additional COVID-19
protocols at the border for agro-food transactions, which include testing and disinfection of agro-food
products at border posts. It also established an online national traceability platform managed by the State
Administration for Market Regulation (SAMR) operating in 13 provinces, where food companies have to
report information on imported goods.
The three-year safeguard on sugar ended in May 2020 and the out-of-quota tariff dropped from 85% to
50%. Following the end of the safeguard, in July 2020 China introduced automatic import licensing for out-
of-quota sugar imports.
The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) was concluded in November 2020. China’s
schedule of tariff commitments foresees tariff reductions and phase-outs for selected agro-food goods
such as meat products, while other commodities such as cereals are largely excluded.
Assessment and recommendations

Recent reforms to replace intervention prices for key crops by direct payments based on area
planted are a step in the direction of rebalancing the policy portfolio. This reflects China’s increasing
policy orientation towards long-term productivity growth and sustainability. The reform of the maize
purchasing and storage system towards direct payments eased the burden of public stockholding
costs, which still represent the largest expenditure share in general services support. Such reforms
could be gradually extended to include wheat and rice. Should direct payments to farmers be
maintained over a longer-term, the link between these payments and production decisions should
be loosened for instance by providing payments on a historical area basis, and ‘greened’ by making
them conditional on environmentally friendly production practices.

Public expenditures on general services have increased, but at a slower pace than support to
individual producers. More efforts are needed to restructure agricultural support towards public
investment in research and development, and agricultural infrastructure. In particular, further
investments in sanitary inspection and control services will be key to support implementation of the
revised provisions of the Food Safety Law, the envisaged nation-wide surveillance system for
diseases and pests, and ultimately the recovery of the pig meat sector affected by African swine
fever. This restructuring of public expenditure can be achieved by scaling down input subsidies,
such as the subsidy to purchase farm machinery, and ensuring that support through direct
payments only has a transitory role in backing farmers’ adjustment to a new market environment.

Reforms to land transfer rules contributed to the emergence of “new-style” farms, including large
family farms, co-operative farms and farms run by agribusiness companies. To continue delivering
expected outcomes, these reforms need to be complemented by investments in education and
training, and improved access to financial services.

To establish a solid framework for agri-environmental policies, China should define environmental
targets adapted to local ecological conditions and strengthen monitoring mechanisms for the
enforcement of environmental regulations. In this sense, the soil environmental information
platform and monitoring system with regular soil examinations – under the 2019 Soil Pollution
Prevention and Control Law – need to be fully implemented and can set the stage for similar efforts
relating to water use in agriculture. More specifically, under continued discussions on the
establishment of a national groundwater environmental monitoring system, a comprehensive


 195

review of water governance could better define responsibilities, remove conflicts, and ensure
effective and efficient policy implementation.

China’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) recognises agriculture’s importance to its
economy-wide emission-reduction target, but no sector-specific targets were set. Nevertheless, a
number of policy efforts aim to mitigate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by focusing on fertiliser
efficiency, less emissions from rice cultivation, and agricultural biogas production. Several plans
were put forward across institutions to strengthen policies supporting the sector’s adaptation to
climate change. In this context, the Ministry of Ecology and Environment could mainstream
adaptation policy objectives across current and planned programmes, including better targeting of
extension services for farmers. In addition, prior to any extension of insurance premium coverage,
an evaluation of the performance of the subsidy to the agricultural insurance premium would
assess its cost-efficiency and impacts on adaptation.
Figure 8.1. China: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/p1of8c


0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
1.1
1.12
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20


196 

Figure 8.2. China: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/zfrtlp
Figure 8.3. China: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/okv1xr


-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Imported fruit and vegetables
Cotton
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Rapeseed
Soybeans
Rice
Maize
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 197

Table 8.1. China: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
270 118
1 472 294
1 362 576
1 434 460
1 619 846
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
75.8
80.6
80.3
80.7
80.9
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
281 331
1 556 683
1 423 557
1 527 298
1 719 193
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
14 354
191 554
185 452
184 361
204 850
Support based on commodity output
7 329
129 674
122 776
122 910
143 336
Market Price Support1
7 329
126 680
118 609
120 504
140 927
Positive Market Price Support
11 162
128 433
120 370
122 168
142 762
Negative Market Price Support
-3 833
-1 753
-1 761
-1 664
-1 834
Payments based on output
0
2 994
4 167
2 406
2 408
Payments based on input use
5 684
20 475
22 917
19 244
19 264
Based on variable input use
1 414
4 305
5 568
3 671
3 675
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
3 026
13 519
14 702
12 920
12 933
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
1 244
2 652
2 647
2 653
2 656
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
533
26 700
26 181
26 946
26 974
Based on Receipts / Income
533
2 095
2 116
2 084
2 086
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
24 605
24 064
24 863
24 889
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
370
12 484
11 254
13 092
13 106
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
370
12 484
11 254
13 092
13 106
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
438
2 221
2 324
2 168
2 171
Based on long-term resource retirement
438
2 221
2 324
2 168
2 171
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
5.2
12.5
13.0
12.3
12.2
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.03
1.10
1.11
1.10
1.10
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.05
1.14
1.15
1.14
1.14
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
11 861
31 643
35 838
29 530
29 560
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
1 347
7 208
7 492
7 062
7 069
Inspection and control
349
2 581
2 114
2 812
2 815
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
3 424
6 232
8 351
5 169
5 174
Marketing and promotion
0
405
380
417
418
Cost of public stockholding
6 741
15 218
17 501
14 070
14 084
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
45.0
14.1
16.2
13.8
12.6
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-8 512
-149 630
-133 514
-143 131
-172 246
Transfers to producers from consumers
-8 688
-135 617
-127 603
-128 655
-150 592
Other transfers from consumers
-1 119
-21 710
-14 276
-21 534
-29 320
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
128
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
1 167
7 696
8 365
7 058
7 666
Percentage CSE (%)
-3.0
-9.6
-9.4
-9.4
-10.0
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.04
1.11
1.11
1.11
1.12
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.03
1.11
1.10
1.10
1.11
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
26 343
223 197
221 291
213 890
234 411
Transfers from consumers
9 807
157 327
141 879
150 189
179 912
Transfers from taxpayers
17 655
87 581
93 688
85 235
83 818
Budget revenues
-1 119
-21 710
-14 276
-21 534
-29 320
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
2.0
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.6
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
19 014
96 517
102 681
93 386
93 483
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.4
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.6
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
188
186
189
190
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
8.28
6.81
6.62
6.91
6.90
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for China are: wheat, maize, rice, rapeseed, soybean,
sugar, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, pig meat, poultry, eggs, cotton, apples, groundnuts, peanuts, exported fruit and vegetables, and imported fruit and
vegetables.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




198 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
The evolution of China’s agricultural policy objectives reflects the changing role of agriculture at different
stages of economic development. In the 1950s and 1960s, the agricultural sector was taxed to support the
industrial sector’s development. In the late 1970s, China initiated an important economic transformation
process, implementing reforms towards a market-oriented economy with a direct impact on agriculture
(OECD, 2005[1]; OECD, 2018[2]). China implemented its first rural reform, the household responsibility
system (HRS), during 1978-84. This dismantled the people’s communes and contracted cultivated land to
individual households, mostly based on the number of people or labourers in the household.1
Until the late 1990s, agricultural policies focused on increasing food production, particularly grains, through
the provision of fertiliser and other input subsidies to farmers. At the same time, policy actions targeted
deregulation and diversification of marketing channels. Central and local governments allocated increasing
support for irrigation.
Liberalisation of international trade started in the early 1990s with relaxation of trade restrictions and
allowing private traders to play a role in agricultural commodity markets. In the context of China’s WTO
accession in 2001, the average import tariff for agricultural products fell from 42% in the early 1990s to
12% in the early 2000s.
In the 2000s, the growing income gap between urban and rural populations, and between developed and
underdeveloped rural areas became an important policy issue. Increasing farmers’ income was included
among the key policy objectives together with food self-sufficiency2 in several of the No. 1 Central
Documents3 during the 2000s. The importance of improving farmers’ incomes was reflected in the
introduction of minimum purchase prices for grains, the temporary purchasing and storage system, and
subsidies for agricultural materials, superior crop varieties and agricultural insurance premiums.
Moreover, many of the No. 1 Central Documents emphasised other policy goals, such as ensuring the
quality of agricultural products and food safety, enhancing agricultural competitiveness, and protecting the
agricultural ecosystem. In the early 2000s, China introduced agri-environmental payments under
programmes such as “Grain for Green” (officially called the Returning Farmland to Forests Programme),
converting grazing land to grassland, or Grassland Ecological Protection.
In 2014, China further promoted land reforms through the “three rights separation system” into village
collective landowner rights, individual household land contract rights, and land operation rights. These
aimed to consolidate farm operations and contribute to productivity growth. To control the conversion of
farmland for non-agricultural use, a “red line” on arable land was set at no less than 124.3 million hectares
in the 2016 Adjusted Scenario of the Outline of the National Overall Planning on Land Use.
Reforms to the government-led temporary purchase and storage policy for cotton, soybeans and rapeseed
at pre-determined prices were introduced in 2014-15, and 2016 for maize. For cotton, this was replaced
by compensation payments covering the difference between pre-determined target prices and actual
market prices. For soybeans and maize, it was replaced by direct payments based on area planted. In
2016, China also merged all subsidies on grain, seed and aggregate inputs into a single general income
support payment. While wheat and rice remain subject to the minimum price procurement programme,
support prices were gradually reduced between 2015 and 2019. In 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic,
the minimum support price increased for indica rice.
In 2017, China introduced a rural revitalisation strategy to close the urban-rural development gap. The
rural revitalisation strategy foresees support to general services to increasingly contribute to the
development of agro-food supply chains.


 199

Table 8.2. China: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1978
Centrally planned economy
Centralised control of agricultural activities
Collective and commune-farmer land systems
Production, marketing and price controls, implicitly taxing agriculture
Investments in irrigation systems and extension services
State agricultural trading firms and high tariffs
1978-1999
Initial reforms to the centrally planned
economy
Collective and commune land system dismantled, household responsibility
system set up for land use
Some deregulation of agricultural marketing
State Grain Authority ensuring food availability and affordability to the population
Public stockholding, food price subsidies to urban consumers
Fertiliser and input subsidies
2000-2009
Improving farmers’ incomes and food
self-sufficiency key policy objectives
Further trade liberalisation
Increase in spending on agricultural research and development
Technical assistance services
Input subsidies, implicit credit subsidies
Increasing allocations to the “Grain for Green” conservation programme
Input and output markets increasingly allow private traders
WTO accession in 2001, free trade agreements signed, reduction of tariffs
Minimum purchase price system for grains
Temporary purchase and storage policy established for selected commodities
2010-2014
Increasing support to agriculture
Increasing minimum purchase prices, and larger set of commodities covered by
the temporary purchase and storage system
Agricultural insurance premium subsidies
Since 2014
Policy efforts to adjust the price support
system and respond to agricultural
productivity and sustainability challenges
Continued reforms in land transfer rules
National Agricultural Sustainable Development Plan 2015-2030
Agricultural support and protection subsidy payments per area
2017 National strategy on “rural revitalisation”
Dismantling of price support systems for cotton, soybeans, rapeseed, maize;
introduction of direct payments based on area
Gradual decrease in support prices for wheat and rice during 2015-19; increase
in support price for indica rice in 2020
At the end of the 1990s, China’s support to the agricultural sector mostly comprised budgetary allocations
while market price support (MPS) was negative. Budgetary allocations went to input subsidies and general
services to the sector. However, since 2002, MPS increased and became the main instrument to support
agricultural producers. After 2009, China continued to increase its minimum support prices, leading to
significant price gaps between domestic and international markets. Support to farmers increased until
2015, when reforms to commodities such as rapeseed, soybeans, cotton and maize contributed to lowering
MPS. Nevertheless, MPS accounts for more than two-thirds of PSE, followed by budgetary support for
payments based on current area and input subsidies (Figure 8.4).


200 

Figure 8.4. China: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1993 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Market price support is the main channel for providing support to Chinese farmers. It is provided through
both domestic price policies, such as the minimum purchase prices for wheat and rice, and trade policies,
including tariffs, tariff rate quotas (TRQ) and state trading.
The minimum purchase prices for wheat and rice are set every year by the National Development and
Reform Commission (NDRC) in consultation with the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA), and
other government institutions. Their application is limited to major wheat and rice producing provinces. The
minimum purchase prices for wheat and rice are announced before sowing seasons, and only apply for
several months after the harvest. The central government mandates that state-owned China Grain
Reserves Corporation (Sinograin) and other state-owned companies undertake intervention purchases in
case market prices fall below respective minimum prices. Only grain of national grade 3 or higher4 can be
purchased at minimum prices since 2018. However, in situations with large volumes of grain below grade 3,
such as in cases of extreme weather events, provincial authorities can also purchase these under
temporary reserves. Minimum price procurement can begin only when the market price has fallen below
the minimum price for three consecutive days, and must be suspended when the market price rises above
the minimum for three consecutive days. Ceilings on the volumes of grains procured at minimum purchase
prices during a marketing year are set at 37 million tonnes for wheat (since 2019) and at 50 million tonnes
for rice (since 2020).
Budgetary transfers to specific commodities include compensatory and direct payments. Compensation
payments cover the difference between pre-determined target prices and actual market prices for cotton
producers, and are a combination of output payments and area payments. Direct payments based on
area planted are provided for soybeans and maize producers.
Other key budgetary programmes include: the agricultural support and protection subsidy, combining
direct payments for grain producers, subsidies for agricultural inputs, and subsidies for improved seed
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 201

variety, all paid on per unit of land basis; subsidies for purchases of agricultural machinery; subsidies for
land consolidation; subsidies for farmland irrigation construction; subsidies for agricultural insurance
schemes; subsidies for returning farmland to forests and excluding degraded grassland from grazing.
Public stockholding of grains and programmes supporting the development of agricultural infrastructure
(including irrigation and drainage facilities) represent the most important categories of general services.
Expenditures related to agricultural knowledge and innovation are also sizable.
China ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change on 3 September 2016. Its Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC) includes several commitments, such as: to peak CO2 emissions by 2030 at the latest;
to lower the carbon intensity of GDP by 60-65% below 2005 levels by 2030; to increase the share of non-
fossil energy in the total primary energy supply to around 20% by 2030; and to increase its forest stock
volume by 4.5 billion cubic metres compared to 2005 levels. In September 2020, China committed to
achieving carbon neutrality by 2060. While the NDC explicitly mentions agriculture, land-use change and
forestry, among other sectors, no specific net-emission target has yet been set for the agricultural sector.
The only specific quantitative target set for agriculture relates to achieving zero growth in fertiliser and
pesticide utilisation by 2020, which MARA reported as already achieved in 2018. Other broad objectives
concern controlling methane emissions from rice fields and nitrous oxide emissions from farmland,
promoting comprehensive utilisation of straw or reutilisation of agricultural waste (UNFCC, 2015[3]; Climate
Action Tracker, 2018[4]).
In 2016, the State Council released the Work Plan to Control GHG Emissions, looking to strengthen
policies controlling GHG emissions besides CO2, such as methane and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). The
plan targets reducing methane emissions in the agricultural sector and in municipal waste and sewage
treatment (NDRC, 2017[5]).
The National Agricultural Sustainable Development Plan (2015-2030) sets the goals and paths in terms of
natural resources protection, farming practices that are protective of the environment and a focus on
production quality and efficiency. It sets priorities for different zones by taking into account the capacity of
agricultural production, resource endowments, and ecological characteristics (MOA, 2015[6]).
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
Several economy-wide and agriculture-specific policy documents issued in 2020 and early 2021
identified the priorities for the agricultural sector, marking an increased emphasis on food availability and
digital technologies. In March 2021, the CCCPC released the 14th Five-Year Plan 2021-25 for National
Economic and Social Development. The Plan outlines specific key priorities in the area of agriculture
modernisation: enhancing food security, including by safeguarding a minimum arable land area of
120 million hectares; maintaining subsidies for grain producers and increasing minimum purchase prices
for wheat and rice as appropriate; implementing high standard infrastructure and conservation projects,
which can also advance the development of green agriculture; investing in innovative farm technologies
and smart agriculture systems, including with respect to seeds and animal breeding; and improving pest
and disease control systems. In addition, as regards the acceleration of the “rural revitalisation” strategy,
the Plan foresees increased investments in rural infrastructure and financial services, agro-food supply
chains and agri-businesses, further rural land reforms, and diversification of income generation activities,
such as through rural eco-tourism. At an economy-wide level, the Plan also promotes the “dual circulation”
strategy.5
The 2021 No. 1 Central Document released in February 2021 proposes that local governments gain
increased responsibility with respect to food security, for which China plans to set up a “national food
security industry belt” connecting all key grain areas. The No. 1 Document also introduces the following
objectives: maintain grains production at more than 650 million tonnes per year; increase land area for
maize; support the production of rapeseed, peanuts and other oil crops; and boost the recovery of pig meat


202 

production while also increasing beef and sheep meat output. The No. 1 Document also emphasises the
diversification of import sources of major agricultural products and the development of global supply chains
for grains and other agro-food products. The development of digital technologies in agriculture and supply
chains will be supported through 500 demonstration zones by 2025 and agricultural logistics hubs for cold
chain (State Council, 2021[7]).
The agriculture-specific policy plans issued in 2020 address a wide range of areas from developing agro-
food processing and the livestock sector to addressing food waste. In July 2020, MARA issued the National
Plan for Rural Industrial Development 2020-25, which focuses on scaling up agro-food processing and
developing rural services industries (MARA, 2020[8]). In addition, the State Council issued in September
2020 the “Opinion on Promoting the High-quality Development of the Livestock Industry”. The document
encourages imports for ensuring meat supplies, but also sets self-sufficiency targets for selected livestock
products without specifying a time horizon for their achievement: 70% for dairy; 95% for pig meat; 85% for
beef and mutton; and 100% for poultry. While the document aims to address environmental degradation
in these sectors, it nevertheless loosens the stringent agri-environmental regulations introduced in 2018
for delineating zones where livestock farms would be banned or limited (State Council, 2020[9]; GAIN
CH2019-0205, 2020[10]). Last, a new high-level campaign against food waste was launched in
August 2020, capping for instance the amount of food consumers can purchase in restaurants and food
outlets (Financial Times, 2020[11]).
The Regulation for the Prevention and Control of Crop Diseases and Insect Pests entered into force on
1 May 2020. The key provisions of the regulation concern the establishment of a nation-wide surveillance
system for diseases and pests (GAIN CH2020-0069, 2020[12]).
Starting 1 July 2020, farmers and agri-businesses transporting pigs are required to register transport
information through a programme on the WeChat mobile application. The programme is managed by the
national animal disease control authorities and aims to reduce the risks of African swine fever transmission
by increasing traceability (MARA, 2020[13]).
The Guangxi provincial government introduced a three-year action plan for the mechanisation of sugar
cane production.6 Farmers are provided up to CNY 403 (USD 63) per hectare for the purchase of
machinery (GAIN CH2020-0054, 2020[14]).
China allocated CNY 4.6 billion (USD 650 million) to pig meat producers in counties with pig herds of more
than 100 000 animal heads for the construction of waste treatment facilities and automatic feeding
machinery (Xinhua, 2020[15]).
In July and September 2020, the MARA and the Ministry of Finance jointly allocated CNY 730 million
(USD 117 million) to new disaster relief funds assisting agricultural producers in flood-hit regions (AMIS,
2020[16]).
On infrastructure, China allocated CNY 5 billion (USD 764 million) to build 14 000 on-farm cold storage
facilities in 16 provincial-level regions, with a total capacity for storing 6 million tonnes of agro-food
products (Xinhua, 2020[17]).
As regards agri-environmental measures, the Ministry of Finance allocated CNY 100 billion
(USD 15 billion) over five years to consolidating water reservoirs in rural areas in order to ensure water
supply for agricultural irrigation during drought periods (People Paper, 2020[18]). The Ministry of Water
Resources and the Ministry of Finance also allocated CNY 2.5 billion (USD 0.4 billion) to 55 pilot counties
to address water pollution in rural areas, including for agricultural activities (Xinhua, 2020[19])
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
China took a diverse set of measures relating to the agro-food sector in response to the COVID-19 crisis,
focusing on institutional measures, overall economic measures, supporting agricultural production,


 203

information and co-ordination measures, as well as trade easing and trade restricting measures affecting
the functioning of supply chains (Cheng, Zhu and Wu, 2021[20]). In support to agricultural production, the
NDRC raised in February 2020 the minimum purchase price for indica rice for 2020-21, the first time since
2014: from RMB 2 400 (USD 341) to RMB 2 420 (USD 343) per tonne for early indica rice and from
RMB 2 520 (USD 358) to RMB 2 540 (USD 361) per tonne for mid-late indica rice7 (State Council, 2020[21])
(Teller Report, 2020[22]).
The fiscal support policies put in place for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in February and
March 2020 also covered agri-businesses through: deferred tax payment; extended loans repayment
periods; tax and social contributions exemptions for SMEs in difficulty (China Banking and Insurance
Regulatory Commission, 2020[23]; MOFCOM, 2020[24]). In May 2020, China introduced a new economy-
wide stimulus package of CNY 4.8 trillion (USD 0.74 trillion, or 4.5% of GDP) to address the
consequences of COVID-19 on the economy. Key measures include extension of unemployment
insurance to migrant workers; tax relief and waived social security contributions; and investment in
infrastructure, including in the agricultural sector (IMF, 2020[25]).
In March 2020, MARA signed co-operation agreements with the China United Insurance Group and the
Agricultural Bank of China to ensure the availability of financial services for farmers and agribusinesses
(SNSJ Agri China, 2020[26]).
In February 2020, MARA, the NDRC and the Ministry of Transport supported the creation of domestic
“green channels” for transporting feed from feed producers to livestock farmers facing logistical bottlenecks
due to the COVID-19 quarantine restrictions (MARA, 2020[27]). Central and local governments also
supported e-commerce as an alternative channel for the purchase and distribution of agricultural inputs.
Platforms such as Pinduoduo or Alibaba’s Taobao marketplace facilitated this for seeds, fertilisers,
sprinklers, and other agricultural machinery (Reuters, 2020[28]).
In February 2020, China Energy, China Coal and Shaanxi Coal companies were requested to prioritise
supplies to coal-based fertiliser production, while companies including PetroChina, Sinopec and China
National Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) were asked to prioritise supplies to gas-based fertiliser
producers. China National Agricultural Means of Production Group Corp. (CNAMPGC) and Sinochem were
requested to build up domestic stocks of potash fertiliser (Argus Media, 2020[29]).
On 22 May 2020, the NDRC released a food security response plan to the COVID-19 pandemic (AMIS,
2020[30]). The plan first targets the stabilisation of the grains crop area and in this sense, the State Council
released in November 2020 a directive issued to all local governments restricting further shifts in farmland
to non-grain crops. Local governments are responsible for the monitoring of crop areas through satellite
remote-sensing technology (Bloomberg, 2020[31]).
The COVID-19 food security response also includes an improved management of grain reserves and
expanding warehousing capacity. Subsequently, in December 2020, China published a new draft law on
the management of its grain reserves, extending the central government’s oversight to stocks in regions
and provinces. The new law stipulates how the regional and provincial reserve volumes should be set and
the commodities to be included, as well as when they can be released. The Chinese Government indicates
that reserves should only be used in cases of grains shortage, significant price swings, or major natural
disasters (World Grain, 2020[32]).
In addition, the May 2020 response plan on food security focuses on rebuilding the pig herd affected by
African swine fever and diversifying imports of selected agricultural products and inputs, particularly
soybeans, meat, seeds and fertilisers.
As regards agro-food supply chain policies, since June 2020, farmers selling fresh products through e-
commerce platforms benefit from subsidised electricity prices for cold storage as well as from subsidies
for building storage equipment (China Daily, 2020[33]).


204 

China started to gradually close all live poultry markets as of July 2020 (Xinhua, 2020[34]). As regards
consumer measures, around 45 000 food emergency supply outlets were established throughout the
country since the onset of the pandemic (State Council, 2020[21]).
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
On 19 May 2020, the Ministry of Commerce (MOFCOM) introduced 80.5% anti-dumping and
countervailing (AD/CV) duties on barley imports from Australia. On 26 March 2021, China introduced anti-
dumping duties between 116.2% and 218.4% on Australian wine for a period of five years8 (Global Times,
2021[35]).
The three-year safeguard on sugar terminated in May 2020 and the out-of-quota tariff dropped from 85%
to 50%. The in-quota rate remains at 15% for the tariff rate quota (TRQ) amount of 1.954 million tonnes,
which covers less than half of China’s annual sugar imports. With the conclusion of the safeguard,
MOFCOM introduced in July 2020 automatic import licensing for out-of-quota sugar imports. Similar to
soybeans or palm oil, only approved companies (including both private and state-owned enterprises) are
now allowed to import sugar and must regularly report import volumes (GAIN CH2020-0132, 2020[36]).
In May, August and December 2020, China successively suspended imports from six Australian beef meat
plants, citing issues relating to labelling and health certificates (Reuters, 2020[37]). On 5 January 2021,
China imposed a ban on poultry and related products imports from France due to reported avian influenza
outbreaks in November 2020.
Starting on 5 April 2020, the General Administration of Customs of China (GACC) eliminated the
requirement for quality inspections of imported cotton. GACC continues to conduct phytosanitary
inspections as required by Chinese import regulations (GACC, 2020[38]).
On 6 November 2020, Sinograin signed a soybean purchase agreement with selected suppliers in
Argentina and Brazil for imports to China (OilCn, 2020[39]).
On 16 September 2020, the United States formally entered into consultations with China at the WTO
regarding the imposition of tariffs on certain goods originating from China (AMIS, 2020[16]). In the WTO
dispute settlement proceedings regarding China’s TRQ administration for wheat, rice and maize, China
and the United States have agreed to extend the compliance deadline to 31 March 2021 (WTO, 2021[40]).
In addition, on 28 September 2020, a WTO dispute panel was established to determine whether China
complied with an earlier ruling regarding the provision of support to wheat and rice producers (WTO,
2020[41]).
On 19 December 2020, China released rules on foreign investment security review to safeguard national
security. The rules, jointly released by the NDRC and MOFCOM, specify provisions on the security review
mechanism on foreign investment, including the types of investments subject to review, review scope, and
procedures. Agriculture, energy, and natural resources are among the sectors covered (Xinhua, 2020[42]).
On 15 November 2020, the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) was concluded9.
China’s schedule of tariff commitments10 foresees tariff reductions and phase-outs for selected agro-food
goods such as meat products, while other goods such as cereals are largely excluded. The Agreement
also provides a framework for strengthening co-operation among parties in the areas of standards,
technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures as well as for streamlining rules of origin and
border processes for perishable goods. The latter includes best endeavour provisions covering expedited
six-hour clearance times for perishable products, release of such goods outside normal business hours,
and at the importer’s storage facilities (ASEAN Secretariat, 2020[43]; AMIS, 2020[44]; China Briefing,
2020[45]).
On 26 January 2021, China and New Zealand signed the upgraded China-New Zealand Free Trade
Agreement, for which negotiations had been concluded in November 2019. The upgraded FTA includes a


 205

number of provisions with a direct impact on agro-food products. This concerns areas such as certificates
of origin (introducing the option for ‘approved exporters’ to self-declare the origin of their goods) as well as
simplifying administrative processes and trade documentation for goods in transit. Further operational
improvements cover expedited six-hour clearance times for perishable products, release of such goods
outside normal business hours, and appropriate storage. Tariffs on New Zealand dairy exports will be
phased out by 2024 (SCMP, 2021[46]).
On 14 September 2020, China and the European Union signed the Agreement on Cooperation on, and
Protection of, Geographical Indications (GIs). The agreement, which was concluded in November 2019,
protects 100 European GIs in China and 100 Chinese GIs in the European Union. The Agreement entered
into force on 1 March 2021. Within four years after its entry into force, the scope of the agreement will
expand to cover 175 additional GIs from each side.
On 30 December 2020, China and the European Union also concluded a deal in principle on investment
(Comprehensive Agreement on Investment). In the non-services sectors, China would make limited
investment liberalisation commitments in agriculture and fisheries. In addition, China would remove joint
venture requirements in environmental services such as solid waste disposal, nature and landscape
protection and sanitation (China Briefing, 2021[47]).
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
In February 2020, China introduced a ban on the trade and consumption of wildlife as food (IFPRI,
2020[48]).
On 20 March 2020, the State Taxation Administration (STA) and the Ministry of Finance increased the
rebate rate for the value-added tax (VAT) and consumption tax on exported products11 in support to
exporters affected by COVID-19. The rebate was increased from 6% to between 9% and 13% for
1 464 products, including 380 agro-food goods such as selected meat, fish, and fruit products12 (GAIN
CH2020-0051, 2020[49]).
Starting on 24 June 2020, China has requested that imports of soybeans originating from Brazil, Canada
and the United States be accompanied by a signed declaration guaranteeing that the shipment is not
contaminated with COVID-19 (AMIS, 2020[50]).
Following a COVID-19 outbreak in June 2020 linked to Beijing’s Xinfadi Wholesale Market, China
implemented a series of measures to test for infectious SARS-CoV-2 material in domestic and imported
food and food packaging. It also delisted several approved facilities in partner countries for products such
as pig meat, beef, poultry, fish or seafood, preventing these from exporting to China. Imports of frozen food
from 124 suppliers in 21 countries have been suspended since then (GAIN CH2019-0205, 2020[10];
Bloomberg, 2021[51]).
In December 2020, China introduced additional COVID-19 protocols at the border affecting agro-food trade
transactions, which include testing and disinfection at customs and regular nucleic acid testing for workers
in shipping. The new protocols involve multiple departments, including customs, transportation, health,
sanitary agency, market supervision, and local governments (Xinhua, 2020[52]).
In October 2020, as an effort to improve import traceability during the COVID-19 pandemic, all
businesses importing cold-storage meat and seafood sold in Beijing markets were required to upload data
on their products onto a platform supervised by the Beijing Administration for Market Regulation. Trace
codes were made available on the packages of the products or market shelves where they are placed in
order for consumers to scan and obtain information on the products, including their origin (China Daily,
2020[53]). This led to the set-up in December 2020 of an online national traceability platform managed by
the State Administration for Market Regulation (SAMR), currently operating in 13 provinces. Food
companies have to report the source of imported shipments, the amount, their current location and


206 

destination. Inspection and disinfection certifications must be transmitted with the shipment (State Council,
2020[54]).
Starting on 2 December 2020, imported frozen food products cannot be commercialised without an
inspection or quarantine certificate, COVID-19 testing report, disinfection certificate, or traceability
information (State Council, 2020[54]).
Contextual information
China has the world’s largest population and the second largest land area. It is an upper-middle income
economy, with a GDP per capita – adjusted by PPP – close to 76% of the average of countries covered
by this report (Table 8.3). However, while counting almost 20% of the world’s population, it has only 7% of
the world’s potable water and 10% of the world’s agricultural land. China is thus a resource scarce country,
which results in severe competition between agriculture and other users of land and water resources.
Agriculture accounts for 25.4% of employment, but its 7.4% share in GDP indicates that labour productivity
is significantly lower than in the rest of the economy. Even if rural incomes are growing at high rates, they
remain at around one-third of those in urban areas.
Crop production represents 67% of total agricultural output and its composition has changed significantly
over the last decades, driven by the shift towards higher value-added agricultural products such as fruit
and vegetables. While the average farm size remains less than one hectare, large-scale production has
been developing rapidly, including co-operative and corporate farms. North and northeast provinces have
seen more rapid farm consolidation than other regions, as increased labour mobility and transfer of land
among farmers over the past three decades have led to adjustments in the farm structure. Livestock
production originates mostly from larger-scale commercial units (OECD, 2018[2]).




 207

Table 8.3. China: Contextual indicators

China
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
3 688
23 605
9.2%
20.7%
Population (million)
1,291
1,434
30.0%
27.6%
Land area (thousand km2)
9 425
9 425
11.3%
11.1%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
523 731
528 529
17.1%
17.3%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
138
153
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
2 921
16 785
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
19
16
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
14.9
7.4
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
50.0
25.4
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
4.8
2.3
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
4.7
6.5
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
65
67
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
35
33
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
23
23
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
While real GDP growth averaged 6.5% in 2017-19, China continued to experience a gradual slowdown in
economic growth. The COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions then led to a steep drop in GDP growth
to 2% in 2020 (Figure 8.5). China is nonetheless the only major economy experiencing economic growth
in 2020, supported by the upturn in industrial activity and a boost of 3.6% in exports. Unemployment
remained stable at 4.4% in 2020, supported by the COVID-19 fiscal support policies. The inflation rate
increased to 3% in 2020, with food inflation largely driven by higher pig meat prices following the African
swine fever outbreak and related supply reductions.
China has consistently been a net agro-food importer since 2003, but agro-food exports have been growing
steadily over the last two decades. Primary products used as inputs in the domestic food industry dominate
China’s agro-food imports, representing 41% of the total in 2019. In turn, primary and processed products
for final consumption are key export categories, accounting for 70% of total agro-food exports (Figure 8.6).


208 

Figure 8.5. China: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 8.6. China: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural output growth in China averaged 2.8% in 2007-16, almost one-third above the world average
(Figure 8.7). This has been driven by strong growth in total factor productivity (TFP) at 3.2% per year, twice
the global average. TFP growth can be largely attributed to farm consolidation and increased
mechanisation of production.
However, the rapid and sustained growth in agricultural output has been exerting mounting pressures on
natural resources, most notably on land and water. This is reflected in the high nutrient surplus intensities
for nitrogen and phosphorus (Table 8.4). Agriculture remains the key user of water, accounting for 61.2%
of total water consumption, well above the OECD average. Water stress is more than twice as high as the
OECD average.
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
11
31
33
41
41
14
16
14
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


 209

Figure 8.7. China: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 8.4. China: Productivity and environmental indicators

China
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
4.2%
3.2%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
49.1
40.5
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
9.7
10.6
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.4
2.2
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
9.8
6.7
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
10.3
13.0
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
68.8
61.2
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
19.3
20.8
9.3
8.5
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.



0.4%
0.5%
-0.9%
0.05%
3.2%
1.6%
-1.5%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
4.0%
China
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


210 

References

AMIS (2020), AMIS Market Monitor Issue 79, June.
[30]
AMIS (2020), AMIS Market Monitor Issue 80, July.
[50]
AMIS (2020), AMIS Market Monitor Issue 82, October.
[16]
AMIS (2020), AMIS Market Monitor Issue 84, December.
[44]
Argus Media (2020), China’s Government Moves to Ensure Fertilizer Supply,
https://www.argusmedia.com/en/news/2074052-chinas-government-moves-to-ensure-
fertilizer-supply (accessed on 10 April 2020).
[29]
ASEAN Secretariat (2020), RCEP Legal Text, https://rcepsec.org/legal-text/ (accessed on
20 December 2020).
[43]
Bloomberg (2021), China’s Disputed Virus Theory Has Shoppers Shunning Foreign Food,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-01-21/china-s-disputed-virus-theory-has-
shoppers-shunning-foreign-food?sref=kl8fK3TMv (accessed on 21 January 2021).
[51]
Bloomberg (2020), China Seeks to Protect Farmland in Battle forFood Security.
[31]
Cheng, G., M. Zhu and X. Wu (2021), Background information for the 2021 Agricultural Policies
Monitoring and Evaluation China chapter.
[20]
China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (2020), Implementation of the Temporary
Extension of Principal and Interest Repayment for Loans to SMEs,
http://www.cbirc.gov.cn/cn/view/pages/ItemDetail.html?docId=892278&itemId=926 (accessed
on 10 April 2020).
[23]
China Briefing (2021), EU, China Reach Agreement on Investments in Principle: What Does it
Mean for Businesses, https://www.china-briefing.com/news/eu-china-reach-agreement-on-
investments-in-principle-what-does-it-mean-for-businesses/ (accessed on 20 January 2021).
[47]
China Briefing (2020), RCEP FTA Signed: What Can Foreign Investors in China Expect?,
https://www.china-briefing.com/news/rcep-fta-signed-what-can-foreign-investors-in-china-
expect/ (accessed on 20 December 2020).
[45]
China Daily (2020), Capital launches platform to trace imported cold-chain food,
https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202010/28/WS5f98a9bca31024ad0ba815ff.html (accessed
on 15 December 2020).
[53]
China Daily (2020), Guideline details measures to boost distribution of agricultural produce,
https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202006/16/WS5ee82b8aa31083481725350b.html
(accessed on 20 December 2020).
[33]
Climate Action Tracker (2018), “Countries: China”,
http://climateactiontracker.org/countries/china.html (accessed on  15 January 2019).
[4]
Financial Times (2020), China cracks down on waste to ensure food security.
[11]


 211

GACC (2020), Announcement No. 43 on Adjusting the Supervision of Imported Cotton,
http://www.customs.gov.cn/customs/302249/2480148/2928835/index.html (accessed on
15 December 2020).
[38]
GAIN CH2019-0205 (2020), Livestock and Products Annual, August.
[10]
GAIN CH2020-0051 (2020), China Increases Export Tax Rebate Rates Again.
[49]
GAIN CH2020-0054 (2020), Sugar Annual, April.
[14]
GAIN CH2020-0069 (2020), Regulation for the Prevention and Control of Crop Diseases and
Insect Pests, June.
[12]
GAIN CH2020-0132 (2020), Sugar semi-annual, October.
[36]
Global Times (2021), China Anti-dumping Duties on Australian Wine,
https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202103/1219535.shtml#:~:text=China's%20Ministry%20of%
20Commerce%20(MOFCOM,Sunday%2C%20will%20last%20five%20years (accessed on
29 March 2021).
[35]
IFPRI (2020), How China Can Address Threats to Food and Nutrition Security From the
Coronavirus Outbreak, https://www.ifpri.org/blog/how-china-can-address-threats-food-and-
nutrition-security-coronavirus-outbreak (accessed on 28 February 2020).
[48]
IMF (2020), Policy Responses to COVID-19: China, https://www.imf.org/en/Topics/imf-and-
covid19/Policy-Responses-to-COVID-19#C (accessed on 20 December 2020).
[25]
MARA (2020), China strengthens tracking of hog transport to control animal disease,
http://english.agri.gov.cn/news/dqnf/202006/t20200615_300471.htm (accessed on
5 December 2020).
[13]
MARA (2020), MARA Issues National Plan for Rural Industrial Development (2020-2025),
http://english.moa.gov.cn/news_522/202007/t20200721_300505.html (accessed on
20 December 2020).
[8]
MARA (2020), Urgent Notice on Addressing Practical Difficulties for Resuming Production in
Poultry and Other Livestock Sectors,
http://www.moa.gov.cn/xw/zwdt/202002/t20200215_6337140.htm (accessed on
30 March 2020).
[27]
MOA (2015), “National Agricultural Sustainable Development Plan (2015-2030)”,
http://www.moa.gov.cn/zwllm/zwdt/201505/t20150527_4619961.htm (accessed on  10
January 2019, in Chinese).
[6]
MOFCOM (2020), Guiding Opinions Responding to the Impact of the Epidemic,
http://www.mofcom.gov.cn/article/h/redht/202003/20200302940639.shtml (accessed on
10 April 2020).
[24]
NDRC (2017), “China’s Policies and Actions for Addressing Climate Change 2017”.
[5]
OECD (2018), Innovation, Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability in China, OECD Food and
Agricultural Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264085299-en.
[2]
OECD (2005), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: China 2005, OECD Review of Agricultural
Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264012615-en.
[1]


212 

OilCn (2020), Soybeans purchase agreement with Argentina and Brazil,
https://www.oilcn.com/article/2020/11/11_74968.html (accessed on 20 December 2020).
[39]
People Paper (2020), Accelerate the reinforcement of reservoirs,
http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2020-12/01/nw.D110000renmrb_20201201_1-03.htm
(accessed on 20 December 2020).
[18]
Reuters (2020), China suspends beef imports from sixth Australian beef supplier,
https://www.reuters.com/article/china-australia-trade-beef/update-1-china-suspends-beef-
imports-from-sixth-australian-beef-supplier-idUSL1N2IN0K2 (accessed on
15 December 2020).
[37]
Reuters (2020), Chinese Farmers Dodge Coronavirus and Go Online for Spring Seeds and
Supplies, https://fr.reuters.com/article/basicMaterialsSector/idUKL4N2AY2RF (accessed on
10 April 2020).
[28]
SCMP (2021), China-New Zealand relations: upgrade to free-trade agreement,
https://www.scmp.com/economy/china-economy/article/3119318/china-new-zealand-
relations-upgrade-free-trade-agreement (accessed on 27 January 2021).
[46]
SCMP (2020), What is China’s dual circulation strategy?, http://scmp.com/economy/china-
economy/article/3110184/what-chinas-dual-circulation-economic-strategy-and-why-it
(accessed on 20 December 2020).
[55]
SNSJ Agri China (2020), MARA and and China United Insurance Group Sign a Strategic
Cooperation Agreement, http://snsj.agri.cn/article-detail?id=3fee7dc4-6ff2-11ea-87c4-
0242ac120002&route=cockpit-index (accessed on 10 April 2020).
[26]
State Council (2021), 2021 No. 1 Central Document,
http://english.www.gov.cn/policies/latestreleases/202102/21/content_WS60324d11c6d07193
74af92ff.html (accessed on 1 March 2021).
[7]
State Council (2020), Joint Defense and Control Mechanisms of the State Council Press
Conference - 5 April 2020, http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/gwylflkjz81/index.htm (accessed on
14 April 2020).
[21]
State Council (2020), Opinions of the General Office of the State Council on Promoting the High-
quality Development of Animal Husbandry, http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2020-
09/27/content_5547612.htm (accessed on 10 December 2020).
[9]
State Council (2020), The national imported cold chain food traceability management platform
goes online, http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2020-12/03/content_5566576.htm (accessed on
15 January 2021).
[54]
Teller Report (2020), 2020 Minimum Rice Purchase Price Announced,
http://www.tellerreport.com/business/2020-02-28---2020-minimum-rice-purchase-price-
announced--130-yuan-per-50-kg-of-japonica-rice-.HJMQTJcLEU.html (accessed on
2 March 2020).
[22]
UNFCC (2015), “INDCs as communicated by Parties: China”, June,
http://www4.unfccc.int/submissions/indc/Submission%20Pages/submissions.aspx.
[3]


 213

World Grain (2020), China seeks to boost food security with new law, https://www.world-
grain.com/articles/14554-china-seeks-to-boost-food-security-with-new-law (accessed on
20 December 2020).
[32]
WTO (2021), China - TRQs for certain agricultural products, WT/DS517/17,
https://docs.wto.org/dol2fe/Pages/SS/directdoc.aspx?filename=q:/WT/DS/517-17.pdf
(accessed on 20 February 2021).
[40]
WTO (2020), WTO Dispute Settlement Body September 2020 - Minutes of meeting,
WT/DSB/M/445,
https://docs.wto.org/dol2fe/Pages/SS/directdoc.aspx?filename=q:/WT/DSB/M445.pdf&Open=
True (accessed on 20 February 2021).
[41]
Xinhua (2020), Central government allocates 2.5 bln yuan for rural water ecology,
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-05/05/c_139032664.htm (accessed on
20 December 2020).
[19]
Xinhua (2020), China improves farm produce cold chain facilities,
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-12/13/c_139586583.htm (accessed on
5 January 2021).
[17]
Xinhua (2020), China invests to quicken hog production recovery,
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-07/19/c_139224376.htm (accessed on
5 December 2020).
[15]
Xinhua (2020), China releases rules on foreign investment security review,
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-12/19/c_139603520.htm (accessed on
20 December 2020).
[42]
Xinhua (2020), China steps up prevention of COVID-19 via cold chain,
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-12/21/c_139608085.htm (accessed on
5 January 2021).
[52]
Xinhua (2020), China to close all live poultry markets gradually,
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-07/03/c_139186436.htm (accessed on
5 December 2020).
[34]






214 

Notes
1 Although ownership of land remained collective, control and income rights belonged to individuals under
the HRS, with a land contract term of 15 years. When this ended in the late 1990s, the second term was
extended to 30 years.
2 Interpreted to mean that China should produce 95% of its own grain requirements. The Chinese self-
sufficiency rate for grains is defined as the total production of wheat, coarse grains and rice divided by total
domestic consumption of these crops (OECD, 2005[1]).
3 The No. 1 Central Document is the most important policy document in China, issued jointly by the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China (CCCPC) and the State Council. This document determines
the most important policy issues and focus of the year. Issues related to agriculture, farmers and rural area
have consistently been selected as the topic of this document since 2004.
4 The quality grade standard is divided into five grades plus a sub-standard category.
5 The strategy of “dual circulation” was introduced in May 2020, placing an increased emphasis on the
domestic market (or “internal circulation”) while gradually decreasing reliance on an export-oriented
development model (or “external circulation”) (SCMP, 2020[55]).
6 Guangxi accounts for 70% of China’s total cane sugar production.
7 In February 2020, the National Food and Strategic Reserves Administration (NFSRA) also introduced a
ceiling on the volume of rice procured at the minimum purchase price at 50 million tonnes (20 million tonnes
for indica rice and 30 million tonnes for japonica rice).
8 On 27 November 2020, preliminary AD/CV duties between 107.1% and 212.1% were introduced on
Australian wines, following the anti-dumping investigation launched by MOFCOM in August 2020.
9 The list of signatories includes: Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Japan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, New Zealand, the Philippines, Singapore, South
Korea, Thailand and Viet Nam. RCEP will enter into force 60 days after the date on which at least three
non-ASEAN signatories and six ASEAN signatories have completed their necessary domestic procedures
and deposited their instrument of ratification
10 China’s Schedule of Tariff Commitments includes five sections applicable to ASEAN, Australia, Japan,
Korea, and New Zealand.
11 Companies can apply for a rebate, or refund of the VAT and consumption tax on eligible products
destined for overseas markets.
12 Includes breeding animals, fresh or frozen meat and offal, certain fresh or chilled fish products (such as
scabbard fish, yellow croaker, and butterfish), selected fruits (such as grapes, melon, fragrant pear) and a
variety of nuts (such as hazelnut, Brazilian nut, chestnut).



 215

Support to agriculture
Agricultural producer support in Colombia expressed as a share of gross farm receipts averaged 13.1%
during 2018-20, down from 24% in the early 2000s. Around 90% of transfers to producers are still in the
form of market price support (MPS), which continues to dominate the producer support estimate (PSE).
MPS for a range of agricultural products is driven by border measures. In consequence, support to
individual commodities (SCT) is particularly high for rice, maize, milk and pig meat. On average, prices
received by farmers were 14% higher in 2018-20 than those observed in world markets.
Budgetary transfers to farmers accounted for around 10% of the PSE in 2018-20, mostly based on variable
input use such as implicit credit, and subsidies for purchases of machinery and equipment, fertiliser and
seeds.
Budgetary allocations to general services to the sector as a whole (GSSE) were relatively small, accounting
for only 2.3% of agricultural value-added on average. Support for general services focuses on agricultural
research and knowledge transfer; infrastructure, particularly in irrigation; and farm restructuring (e.g. land
formalisation, rights and access). Overall, total support to the sector (TSE) corresponded to 1.2% of
Colombia’s GDP, pointing to the comparatively high cost of agricultural policies to the economy.
Recent policy changes
In 2020, the Ministry of Agriculture launched a policy framework called “Together for the Countryside”
(Juntos por el campo). It establishes policy programmes such as subsidies to compensate for high
domestic transportation costs, subsidies for machinery and equipment, and subsidies for the purchase of
variable agro-inputs (e.g. seeds, fertilisers, agricultural machinery, etc.). Underlying this framework, the
contract farming programme created in 2019 seeks to connect 300 000 producers to markets by linking
farmers directly to commercial partners. In 2020, around 120 000 smallholders benefited from the
programme by selling their product directly to 757 buyers.
Total public expenditures fell from 2019 to 2020 and several programmes were replaced by eleven
programmes launched in 2020 focused on production management, improving the sanitary quality of
agricultural products, initiatives for adaptation to climate change, institutional modernisation, and
innovation and development.
To offset the effects of COVID-19, Colombia implemented measures such as the creation of special credit
lines, of which 82% were used by small and medium-scale farmers; the distribution of food by creating a
transport centre in Bogota for the commercialisation of agriculture production; and the provision of basic
food products to poor and vulnerable households.
9 Colombia


216 

Assessment and recommendations

While Colombia’s agricultural sector continues to face structural challenges, support to general
services that would help overcome these challenges is limited. Short-term responses to problems
faced by agricultural producers, mainly in the form of input subsidies, divert scarce economic
resources from developing an enabling environment for sustainable growth of the sector.

Emphasis should be given to strategic investments such as off-farm irrigation systems; transport
infrastructure; research, development, and innovation capacity; animal and plant health protection
and control services; promotion of sustainable use of natural resources; and national and functional
extension, training and technical assistance systems that foster technology adoption. Public
investment in all these areas should contribute to improving productivity and competitiveness, and
ensure the sector’s sustainable development. A re-orientation of support from input subsidies to
general services would also help foster more inclusive and sustainable agricultural growth.

An inclusive land-access policy framework would promote rural and sectoral development.
Colombia faces a high concentration of land ownership and under-exploitation of arable land, while
40% of land ownership continues to be informal. Upgrading the cadastre system and accelerating
registration and assignation of land rights are crucial for the sector. Land rights contribute to long-
term growth in the agricultural sector by stimulating private investment and help promote the
development of rural areas.

The government should systematically assess the impact of policy instruments and agricultural
support programmes. Current programmes cover broad and varied areas, implemented through a
bundle of policy instruments with unclear combined impact. A review could redefine and re-
organise policy instruments based on evidence of costs and benefits of individual measures and
policy packages. Such a review should also consider equity, social and environmental outcomes.

Colombia’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) committed to reduce its
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 20% with respect to the projected Business-as-Usual (BAU)
scenario by 2030. Given agriculture’s role as a major contributor to the country’s GHG emissions,
it is likely to be significantly impacted by this commitment even though specific emission reduction
targets for the sector have not been set. Moreover, the sustainability performance of the sector,
including biodiversity, water use, and deforestation, is a key concern the country needs to address
more systematically.




 217

Figure 9.1. Colombia: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/2fgjo9
Figure 9.2. Colombia: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/nu9wym
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20
-6%
-4%
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD


218 

Figure 9.3. Colombia: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/0ca4sv


0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Coffee
Eggs
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Palm oil
Rice
Maize
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 219

Table 9.1. Colombia: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
10 565
25 859
28 975
25 494
23 108
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
80.7
73.4
66.8
73.3
80.2
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
7 938
20 737
21 814
20 883
19 513
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
2 546
3 439
3 977
3 232
3 108
Support based on commodity output
2 460
3 143
3 639
2 912
2 877
Market Price Support1
2 460
3 133
3 610
2 912
2 877
Positive Market Price Support
2 466
3 134
3 610
2 912
2 879
Negative Market Price Support
-6
-1
0
0
-2
Payments based on output
0
10
29
0
0
Payments based on input use
86
296
338
320
231
Based on variable input use
53
173
185
187
146
with input constraints
36
142
138
153
136
Based on fixed capital formation
16
73
110
67
43
with input constraints
3
41
63
31
30
Based on on-farm services
17
50
43
66
42
with input constraints
5
24
8
29
33
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
24.1
13.1
13.6
12.5
13.3
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.31
1.14
1.15
1.13
1.14
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.32
1.15
1.16
1.14
1.15
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
154
458
566
431
377
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
49
198
262
183
150
Inspection and control
9
41
52
36
35
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
95
197
230
189
174
Marketing and promotion
0
21
22
23
18
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
1
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
5.7
11.7
12.5
11.8
10.8
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-2 234
-3 819
-4 027
-3 852
-3 579
Transfers to producers from consumers
-2 003
-2 793
-2 771
-2 815
-2 792
Other transfers from consumers
-248
-1 055
-1 294
-1 065
-806
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
16
28
39
28
18
Percentage CSE (%)
-28.3
-18.4
-18.5
-18.4
-18.3
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.40
1.23
1.23
1.23
1.23
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.39
1.23
1.23
1.23
1.22
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
2 700
3 897
4 542
3 663
3 485
Transfers from consumers
2 251
3 848
4 065
3 880
3 598
Transfers from taxpayers
697
1 104
1 771
849
693
Budget revenues
-248
-1 055
-1 294
-1 065
-806
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
2.8
1.3
1.4
1.1
1.3
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
240
764
932
751
608
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.2
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
246
238
248
251
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
2 297.17
3 311.19
2 956.90
3 281.07
3 695.61
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Colombia are: maize, rice, sugar, milk, beef and veal,
pig meat, poultry, eggs, bananas, plantains, coffee, palm oil and flowers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




220 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
The agricultural sector has played an important role in Colombia’s economic growth. Until the beginning of
the 1990s, agriculture was the main productive sector of Colombia. By the 1960s, Colombia had entered
a period of fast expansion in commercial agriculture. Growth, especially in the 1960s and 1970s, was partly
a response to incentives to mechanise and intensify the use of modern inputs, and partly a consequence
of the sector’s protection from imports. The coffee booms of the 1970s and the 1980s coincided with strong
growth in agricultural and total GDP. During this time, import substitution policies were used, including
tariffs, quantitative restrictions, state marketing enterprise, subsided credit and minimum prices (Anderson
and Valdés, 2008[1]).
At the beginning of the 1990s, Colombia entered a decade of trade opening. The Colombian government
eliminated its monopoly in agricultural marketing and encouraged private banks to lend to farmers and
agricultural exporters. To diversify the markets for Colombian agro-food products, the government
negotiated a large number of trade agreements including with Mercosur, the United States, Central
America, Chile, Canada, and the European Union (OECD, 2015[2]).
This economy-wide programme of trade liberalisation accompanied deregulation of foreign exchange rates
and labour markets. Quantitative trade restrictions were abolished, and import tariffs reduced and replaced
by ad valorem tariffs. The role of IDEMA (Instituto de Mercadeo Agropecuario), the agricultural marketing
institute that had a monopoly over grain imports, was reduced and limited to poor, isolated areas. Minimum
guaranteed prices were established for some staple commodities, with international prices used as a
benchmark (Anderson and Valdés, 2008[1]).
However, this rapid liberalisation did not allow for necessary adjustments, putting the sector in crisis.
Pressured by famers, the government implemented policies to protect the sector and stabilised producer
incomes in the face of price fluctuations in world markets. To stabilise producer prices, the government
introduced a price band system for six agricultural commodities, and their substitutes and derivatives, and
ended up covering 112 products. This eventually evolved into the Andean Price Band System (SAFP).
Despite the stated purpose of this policy, the way price bands were constructed to fix the floor and ceiling
prices served as a protective device. Price stabilisation funds (FEP) were also expanded (OECD, 2015[2]).
After 56 years of conflict between the government, paramilitary groups and guerrilla groups, a peace
agreement was signed in 2016 by the government and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
(FARC). The negotiations resulted in an agreement with a common vision for rural development. It sets
out a long-term vision for the sector focusing on the use of land and water resources, increased productivity
and competitiveness, improved infrastructure and other public goods for the agricultural sector, and a
redefined institutional architecture to design and implement policy (OECD, 2015[2]).
Colombia’s support to agricultural producers relative to gross farm receipts changed little during 1992-
2013, but trended downwards before stabilising again in the last few years. Support is predominantly
provided through market price support. Since 2007, there was a clear trend towards increasing budgetary
support to the sector, particularly in 2013 when outlays more than doubled. This trend reversed since 2016,
and budgetary allocations have fallen considerably in both absolute and relative terms (Figure 9.4).




 221

Table 9.2. Colombia: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1990s
Import substitution policies
Agricultural input and output tariffs
Other border measures establish import rate quotas
Minimum prices
Export promotions and subsidies for traditional crops (coffee, sugar)
State marketing agency (government purchases of agricultural products)
Subsided agricultural credit
Export taxes
1990-2013
Back and forth changes to trade liberalisation
and measures to offset economic crisis
Changes to trade liberalisation and some
protection measures
Role of the state marketing company reduced and then increased for marketing
cereals and oilseeds
Reduction of agricultural tariffs for both outputs and inputs
Export subsidies
Several FTA signed
The price band system extend and becomes the Andean Price Band System
covering in total 154 products and by-products
Quantitative import restrictions created
Direct payments introduced
Import quotas for some products
Expansion of price stabilisation funds to other crops
2013-present
Peace negotiations and agreement
Focus on agricultural innovation and public goods
Rural development
Efforts to improve the land tenure system
Reduction in budgetary allocations
Figure 9.4. Colombia: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1992 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


222 

Main policy instruments
Agricultural policy aims for competitive, equitable and sustainable development of agricultural, forestry,
fisheries and rural development that contributes to improving quality of life for the rural population.
Implementation of this objective falls under the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and its
affiliated agencies.
Colombia has the Andean Price Band System, which aims to stabilise import prices for 13 commodities
including rice, barley, yellow maize, white maize, soya beans, wheat, unrefined soya bean oil, unrefined
palm oil, unrefined sugar, refined sugar, milk, chicken cuts and pig meat, as well as for their respective
related first-stage processed products.
Several programmes provide input support. Main measures include preferential interest rates for
agricultural credit, debt rescheduling, sporadic write-offs and insurance programmes. Subsidies are also
provided for the purchase of seeds and fertilisers, and for investment related to drainage and on-farm
irrigation infrastructure, among others.
Colombia has gradually directed more public expenditures to general services for the sector. This includes
investments in agricultural research and extension services, such as those for financing the agricultural
innovation institution (former CORPOICA and now AGROSAVIA).
The commodity Price Stabilisation Funds (FEP), financed and administered by producer associations,1
cover seven commodities, including cotton, cocoa, palm oil, sugar, beef, milk and (since 2019) coffee.
FEPs make payments to producers when the selling price of a product falls below a minimum. When the
sales price of a product is higher than an established maximum, producers contribute to the FEPs. The
ceiling and floor prices are based on international prices for each product, while transfers and
compensations take into account a reference indicator at which the products reach the market.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
In 2020, a new policy framework strategy was launched by the Ministry of Agriculture called “Together for
the Countryside” (“Juntos por el campo”). The policy has six pillars: 1) the organisation of the agricultural
production for ten priority products: cocoa, avocado, potato, dairy, forestry, rice, corn, onion, sugarcane,
fishing, and aquaculture, and five strategic crops such as flowers, palm, coffee, bananas, and sugar. Within
this pillar, there are two components: the phytosanitary protection and planning according to the suitability
of the soil. 2) Agricultural extension that aims at 550 000 producers. 3) Extending credit and better credit
conditions (i.e. more preferential rates) to farmers. 4) Financing rural public goods such as infrastructure,
transformation plants, storage and cold chains, and irrigation districts. 5) Technology and innovation.
6) Support for productivity through subsidies for the acquisition of agricultural inputs.
In 2020, several programmes were created such as subsidies for domestic transportation costs that
benefited 35 382 farmers, subsidies for machinery and equipment that reached 15 000 producers,
subsidies for the purchase of variable agro-inputs (e.g. seeds, fertilisers, etc.) that benefited
34 779 producers, Pacific Opportunities (a programme for rural women's associations that carry out
agricultural productive projects in the Pacific region), which registered 349 smallholders organisations,
commercialisation subsidies for potatoes, rice and maize.
The framework strategy has as transversal axis, the contract farming programme created in 2019 and
seeks to connect 300 000 producers to markets by linking farmers to commercial partners. In 2020, around
120 000 smallholders benefited from the programme, by selling their products directly to 757 buyers. The
value chains with the greatest participation in this programme were: fruits and vegetables (28%), coffee
(19%), fishing (15%), cocoa (13%), and milk and milk products (8%).
The contract farming has the objectives of: 1) reduce uncertainty and risks in agricultural marketing by the
advance selling of products to industry and final markets or consumers; 2) generate a stable supply of raw


 223

materials and agricultural products, with the characteristics and conditions required by industry and final
markets or consumers; 3) promote more efficient, cost-effective agricultural production processes and
products with higher quality and safety for the consumer; 4) encourage the formalisation of trade relations
between agricultural buyers and sellers, by reducing the volatility of agricultural prices; and 5) contribute
to the better use of land (zoning) for agricultural production, and thus to greater sectoral competitiveness.
Lastly, total public expenditures were reduced from 2019 to 2020 and several programmes were replaced
by eleven new programmes launched in 2020 focused on production management, strengthening sanitary
status, climate initiatives, institutional capacity, and innovation and development.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
In 2020, special credit lines of more than COP 1.5 billion (USD 406 million) were granted to farmers to
offset the effects of COVID-19, of which 82% were used by small and medium-scale farmers.
To assure the distribution of food, decree 482 of 2020 was adopted that facilitated transport logistics by
creating a transport centre in Bogota for the commercialisation of agriculture production.
As a response to COVID-19, the decree 507 was adopted in 2020, which main purpose was to help most
vulnerable households by providing basic food products, medicines and medical devices.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
Some border measures were removed to mitigate the effects of COVID-19, and the decree 523 of 2020
was adopted that applied 0% import tariff of commodities like yellow maize, sorghum, soybeans and
soybean cake during the months of April, May and June 2020.
In August 2020, the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with Israel came into force, which grants duty free quotas
to both countries. This is the first FTA that Colombia has signed with a Middle Eastern country. In 2020,
Colombia had sanitary and phyto sanitary access to 18 new products in 10 markets such as pineapples in
Uruguay, pork meat in Ghana, live bovine in Brazil, coffee beans in Ecuador, and papayas in Peru.
In 2019, Colombia concluded the free trade agreement negotiations with the United Kingdom that entered
into force in January 2021. Negotiations continue with Japan, Turkey, Singapore, Canada, New Zealand
and Australia, in order to deepen the current trade agreements with those countries.
Contextual information
Colombia has a surface of 1.1 million km2; it is the only South American country that borders both the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Colombia has abundant agricultural land and fresh water, is very biodiverse
and is rich in natural minerals and fossil fuels. Agriculture continues to be an important sector for the
economy – accounting for more than 16.6% of employment and 6.7% of GDP in 2019. Colombia has a
dualistic distribution of land ownership where traditional subsistence smallholders co-exist with large-scale
commercial farms. Even when the relative weight of agro-food exports in total exports have declined over
the years, the sector continues to make a significant contribution to the country’s exports, with agro-food
exports accounting for 18% of all exports in 2019 (Table 9.3).
Colombia saw its real GDP growth declined due to the global pandemic, while its unemployment rate
experienced a small increased and the inflation rate remained about the same as the previous year. The
country has been a net exporter of agricultural and food products with a net surplus of almost
USD 650 million in 2019. Colombia’s agro-food exports are almost equally split between those destined
for final consumption (54%) and those that are sold as intermediate inputs (46%) for use in manufacturing


224 

sectors in foreign markets. In contrast, the majority of agro-food imports (64%) are in the form of
intermediates for further processing in the country.
Table 9.3. Colombia: Contextual indicators

Colombia
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
265
787
0.7%
0.7%
Population (million)
39
49
0.9%
0.9%
Land area (thousand km2)
1 110
1 110
1.3%
1.3%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
44 859
49 492
1.5%
1.6%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
36
45
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
6 690
15 644
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
12
14
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
8.3
6.7
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
22.3
16.6
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
22.3
18.2
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
12.8
12.5
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
59
61
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
41
39
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
..
12
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Figure 9.5. Colombia: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate


 225

Figure 9.6. Colombia: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Low productivity undermines the sector’s competitiveness, largely driven by infrastructure deficiencies,
unequal access to land and land use conflicts. The growth rate of the Total Factor Productivity (TFP) was
-0.3% over the period 2007-16, far below the world average. Agriculture is the main water user with a share
of 59.6% total water use, above the OECD average. Furthermore, in 2016 agriculture contributed with
28.7% of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. In contrast, nutrient balances are comparatively low and have
slightly fallen since the early 2000s.
Figure 9.7. Colombia: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.


Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
8
37
29
17
36
35
28
11
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
1.3%
0.5%
0.5%
0.05%
-0.3%
1.6%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
Colombia
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


226 

Table 9.4. Colombia: Productivity and environmental indicators

Colombia
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.6%
-0.3%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
14.1
11.6
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
5.8
6.0
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)¹
6.0
0.9
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
34.1
28.7
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
..
2.6
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
..
14.4
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
..
..
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
1. Data are not directly comparable between time periods due to change in methodology in 2013.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.

References

Anderson, K. and A. Valdés (2008), Distortions to Agricultural Incentives in Latin America, World
Bank, Washington DC, https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/6604.
[1]
OECD (2015), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Colombia 2015, OECD Publishing,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264227644-en.
[2]



Note
1 Government provided the initial (seed) capital for the funds.



 227

Support to agriculture
Costa Rica’s agricultural policies generated average support for producers of 6.3% of gross farm receipts
in 2018-20, well below the OECD average. This support is almost entirely (92%) based on market price
support (MPS). MPS, one of the most trade- and production-distorting forms of support, is generated
through border measures (tariffs) and minimum reference prices. Products most supported through such
policies include rice, poultry, pig meat and sugar. Border protection and price interventions resulted in
producer prices 6.2% higher than international prices in 2018-20, on average.
The remaining producer support (8% of the total) comes through input subsidies for agricultural equipment
and machinery, payments for environmental services, and other subsidies.
Spending on general services (GSSE) accounted for 2.1% of total agricultural value added in 2018-20, up
from 1.3% in 2000-02. These expenditures were allocated to three main areas: (1) agricultural knowledge
and innovation system, particularly extension services; (2) development and maintenance of irrigation and
rural roads infrastructure; and (3) inspection and control. Overall, total support to the sector (TSE)
corresponded to 0.6% of GDP in 2018-20, down from 1.2% at the beginning of the century.
Recent policy changes
Most policy developments in 2020 addressed the COVID-19 emergency. The Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock (MAG) maintains a roundtable for development and implementation of policies in response to
the COVID-19 pandemic. The table includes all agricultural centralised and decentralised institutions, the
agro-industrial chambers and producer organisations.
In 2020, the Rural Development Institute (INDER) suspended re-payments to the Rural Credit Program for
four months. This debt was re-scheduled to the end of the loan term without any default fine. Due to the
closure of public schools, the National Production Council (CNP) distributed basic food packages to
students.
The Ministry of Finance offered a moratorium on VAT and select consumption tax payments, introduced a
VAT exemption on commercial leases, and exempted all economic activities, including agriculture, from
partial payments of income tax.
Assessment and recommendations

Producer support predominantly comes through border protection for several products, namely
rice, poultry, pig meat and sugar, and through reference prices for rice. This support distorts both
domestic markets and trade, constrains competition and, hence, productivity and competitiveness.
The government should consider phasing out this support and replace it with more targeted
payments to producers in need on a temporary basis when necessary.
10 Costa Rica


228 


Agricultural infrastructure is a significant bottleneck, preventing the sector from becoming more
efficient and responsive to market signals. Investments are required both to enhance productivity
(e.g. through irrigation and drainage) and facilitate access to markets (e.g. transportation,
distribution, cold-chain facilities, etc.).

Small-scale producers suffer low productivity, and poor access to credit and financial tools. In
addition, as private commercial banks lack incentives to provide loans to small-scale farmers,
stringent requirements impede small-scale farms from taking advantage of available credit sources.
While avoiding moral hazard, existing credit programmes provided by the national development
bank and agricultural organisations or cooperatives could expand to improve the financial
infrastructure for smallholders in particular.

Limited capacity and resource misallocations constrain the effectiveness and efficiency of Costa
Rica’s extension services, which account for around 20% of total public expenditures to the sector.
Given the importance of these services to the agricultural sector, major efforts should ensure that
funding is used efficiently, including providing training to extension services personnel on new
production systems and management, streamlining and reducing the administrative burden for
technical staff, and better co-ordination between research agencies, extension services and
farmers’ needs.

Costa Rica has a long history of environmental protection, sustainable development policies and
action on climate change mitigation. In 2019, a new plan outlined Costa Rica’s pathway towards
net-zero emissions by 2050. This includes strategies for all sectors, including agriculture, such as
improved farming practices and measures against food waste. Despite these efforts, opportunities
for improvement remain. In particular, the country should align adaptation and other agricultural
objectives to prepare for climate change. Farmers’ awareness could be enhanced through
strengthened co-ordination between R&D and technical assistance.
Figure 10.1. Costa Rica: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/mcyt1u
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.08
1.09
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%
1.0%
1.2%
1.4%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20


 229

Figure 10.2. Costa Rica: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/bjyr13
Figure 10.3. Costa Rica: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/7erxb8


-7%
-6%
-5%
-4%
-3%
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Pineapples
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Sugar
Rice
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


230 

Table 10.1. Costa Rica: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
2 209
4 990
5 024
4 988
4 960
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
79.2
91.7
90.2
90.1
94.7
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
1 114
2 446
2 434
2 440
2 463
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
175
318
255
344
354
Support based on commodity output
164
291
228
317
328
Market Price Support1
164
291
228
317
328
Positive Market Price Support
164
291
228
317
328
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
9
25
25
26
25
Based on variable input use
4
14
13
16
12
with input constraints
1
13
12
15
12
Based on fixed capital formation
1
6
6
4
7
with input constraints
0
2
3
1
2
Based on on-farm services
5
6
6
6
6
with input constraints
3
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
1
1
1
1
1
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
1
1
1
1
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
1
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
7.9
6.3
5.0
6.9
7.1
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.08
1.06
1.05
1.07
1.07
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.09
1.07
1.05
1.07
1.08
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
20
61
66
61
55
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
10
29
30
28
30
Inspection and control
3
11
11
11
12
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
7
19
24
21
13
Marketing and promotion
0
1
2
1
1
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
10.4
16.1
20.6
15.1
13.6
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-190
-339
-274
-364
-378
Transfers to producers from consumers
-156
-263
-200
-282
-305
Other transfers from consumers
-34
-76
-73
-82
-73
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-17.0
-13.9
-11.3
-14.9
-15.3
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.20
1.16
1.13
1.18
1.18
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.20
1.16
1.13
1.18
1.18
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
196
379
321
406
409
Transfers from consumers
190
339
274
364
378
Transfers from taxpayers
40
116
121
124
104
Budget revenues
-34
-76
-73
-82
-73
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.2
0.6
0.5
0.7
0.7
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
31
88
93
88
81
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
344
339
345
347
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
331.77
582.96
577.19
587.02
584.68
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Costa Rica are: rice, sugar, milk, beef and veal, pig
meat, poultry, bananas, coffee, palm oil and pineapple.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 231

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Costa Rica’s agricultural policy progressed through three distinct phases in recent decades. From the
1960s to the 1980s, Costa Rica’s agricultural sector followed an import substitution path, supported by
government market interventions, such as price control and agricultural import tariffs (Anderson and
Valdés, 2008[1]).
From the mid-1980s to the mid-2000s, agricultural support policies evolved in line with Costa Rica’s
outward-oriented growth strategy. Market intervention decreased significantly, combined with continued
reforms and increasingly open borders. Reforms involved elimination of price controls (except rice),
removal of export taxes and reduction of import tariffs. Costa Rica fully integrated into international
markets, and free trade agreements resulted in duty-free imports from many countries, though import tariffs
still apply to some agricultural products (Anderson and Valdés, 2008[1]; OECD, 2017[2]).
Since the food price crisis of 2007-08, which fuelled food security concerns in the country, specific
strategies aim to increase productivity of staple foods and focus on small-scale farmers, such as by
prioritising extension services to those farms. Reforms to the rice price system took place in 2015 with the
introduction of a minimum reference price, which works more as an indicative rice price. Still, Costa Rica’s
policies continue to emphasise export-oriented agriculture with emphasis on sustainability and
smallholders (Table 10.2) (OECD, 2017[2]).
Table 10.2. Costa Rica: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1980s
Closed economy
Import substitution approach; price interventions on agricultural products, particular
emphasis on guaranteed price for rice; high tariffs on agricultural product imports
Creation of the National Production Council (CNP) in the 1940s to promote
agricultural and industrial production, control agricultural prices and own public
infrastructure for the collection, storage, transport and distribution of grains
1980s-2007/08
Gradual shifts to open the
economy
Dismantling price interventions, but minimum price for rice continued
Reduction of trade barriers (import and export tariffs)
Reforms to CNP end most functions, keeping only the Institutional Supply
Programme (PAI), which purchases food from small and medium farms for
consumption in public institutions
Strengthening agricultural exports via product diversification and development of
destination markets; several FTAs signed; incentives (including in agriculture) to
domestic and foreign companies to attract FDI, such as the Free Trade Zone Regime
(FTZ) providing tax benefits and preferential port rates
Creation of agricultural institutions for animal health (SENASA), plant health (SFE),
agricultural innovation (INTA)
Creation of rural development institute (IDA/INDER)
2008-2020
Open economy with a focus on
food security
Emphasis on extension services on small-scale farms; promotion of good agricultural
practices
Small and limited payments to farmers for environmental services
Changes to rice price, from guaranteed price to a reference price in 2015
Continuing use of import tariffs
Producer support fluctuated between 7% and 12% of gross farm receipts over the last 20 years, based
predominantly on market price support. MPS concentrates mostly on rice and livestock products,
accounting for around 90% of the PSE. In contrast, budgetary support to producers is limited, with little
change over time (Figure 10.4). Around 80% of total budgetary allocations to the sector go to general
services. R&D, extension services, rural infrastructure, inspection and control account for 98% of total
expenditures on general services in the last ten years. Costa Rica does not provide budgetary transfers to
consumers.


232 

Figure 10.4. Costa Rica: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Costa Rica’s agricultural policy framework are the 2019-2022 Policy Guidelines for the Agricultural, Fishing
and Rural Sector. It seeks to: contribute to the social and economic well-being of the agricultural working
population; achieve mechanised, competitive, inclusive and sustainable agriculture with responsive,
modern and co-ordinated public institutions; and create a sector resilient to physical, biological, economic
and social impacts. The guidelines also have a crosscutting axis of climate actions and disaster risk
reduction in the production of goods and services by strengthening the capacities of public institutions and
farmers.
The country maintains a wide range of border measures, in particular tariffs for several agricultural products
(rice, poultry, pig meat, milk, sugar, etc.). Moreover, the country maintains a reference price for rice. This
reference price is based on domestic production costs, processing costs, international prices, and defined
by the National Rice Corporation (CONARROZ) with the supervision of the Ministries of Agriculture,
Economy and Industry. This reference price imposes a burden on consumers, as domestic prices are
higher than international prices.
Budgetary policy instruments predominantly focus on providing essential services to agriculture, including
extension services, R&D, and plant and animal health services, with a significant emphasis on
environmental protection.
The Agricultural Technology Research and Transfers Institute (INTA) manages agricultural R&D and
innovation. INTA also operates technology transfer and extension services to farmers with the MAG’s
National Directorate of Agricultural Extension. The National Animal and Health Service (SENASA) and the
National Phytosanitary Service (SFE) are in charge of animal and plant health services.
The country also provides minor subsidies. These include payments for environmental services such as
the use of green or living fences and terraces, organic production or soil condition improvements, implicit
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 233

subsidies through credit at preferential interest rates to all loans, and some subsidies for fixed capital
formation mostly directed to small-scale farmers.
In Costa Rica’s National Decarbonisation Plan 2018-2050, the agricultural sector has commitments in the
following areas: (1) promotion of highly efficient agro-food systems that generate low carbon products for
both domestic and international market, and (2) consolidation of an eco-competitive livestock model based
on productive efficiency and reduction of GHG emissions. Within this context, the sectorial office for climate
actions and decarbonisation was created in 2019 within the MAG. This office is in charge of Nationally
Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMA) for livestock, and of the development of banana, rice and sugar
cane NAMAs.
Two agricultural chains apply NAMAs: coffee and livestock. The coffee NAMA is more advanced and aims
to reduce GHG emissions and improve resource use efficiency. The main actions implemented by the
coffee NAMA are fertiliser reduction use, efficient use of water and energy, audits in coffee processing to
measure carbon footprint, developing strategies to promote specialty coffee, technical assistance for coffee
producers and processors, and planting forest trees for carbon capture.
During 2019, SEPSA developed the Climate Change Information Observatory,1 with information on climate
change and on the El Niño Southern Oscillations (ENSO).
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
The Water Supply Programme for Guanacaste was launched in 2019, administered by the National
Groundwater, Irrigation and Drainage Service (SENARA), which consists of an expansion of access to
water for irrigation in the lower area of Guanacaste, through the construction of a reservoir and
infrastructure for hydroelectric generation. In 2019, under this programme, 55 kilometres of canals and
distribution network for irrigation were constructed, benefiting more than 17 000 hectares.
The DESCUBRE Programme – an initiative linking farmers to markets – was created in 2019 as a public-
private alliance. Two fundraising events were held in 2020, raising USD 458 000 and benefiting
38 agricultural SMEs that will use the funds for agricultural innovation activities that boost productivity.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Most policy developments that occurred in 2020 were aimed at addressing the COVID-19 emergency. The
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) continues with a dialogue table for COVID-19 policy decisions.
The table includes all sectoral decentralised institutions, the agro-industrial chambers and producer
organisations. MAG co-ordinates prevention measures to control the spread of the virus within the farmers’
fairs. In the regional offices, face-to-face agricultural procedures (access to services) were suspended,
document expiration periods were extended and new virtual procedures were implemented.
The MAG, the Export Promotion Agency (PROCOMER), the Ministry of Economy and the Food Industry
Chamber (CACIA), created the virtual platform “La Finca Agropecuaria”. This smartphone application
allows producers, buyers and final consumers to negotiate directly price and production of agricultural,
livestock and fishery products. For farmers without internet access a text-messaging platform by SMS was
created to link farmers and buyers.
In 2020, the Rural Development Institute (INDER) suspended, for four months, the Rural Credit Program
re-payments. This four-month debt was re-scheduled to be paid at the end of the loan term without any
default fine. INDER also provided an extension of three months for land lease contracts, benefiting
3 825 farmers and farmer organisations.
Due to the closure of public schools and their dining rooms during 2020 due to COVID-19, the National
Production Council (CNP) main institutional procurement programme (PAI) was in charge of preparing and
distributing basic food packages to all students in 1 426 schools. INDER and CNP signed an agreement


234 

to buy beans from smallholders of the northern region of the country. This initiative was part of the broader
procurement programme operated by CNP.
The Ministry of Finance, under the Law No. 9830, offered a moratorium on VAT payments and on selective
consumption taxes, introduced VAT exemption on commercial leases, and exempted all economic
activities of the country, including agriculture, from partial payments of income tax.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
During 2020, different preparatory negotiations were undertaken for the entry into force of the Association
Agreement between the United Kingdom and Central America (AACRU) as of 1 January 2021. These
discussions were related to the implementation of the agreement, and took place between Central America
countries and the United Kingdom, as well as with national institutions involved in the process. Moreover,
work was carried out on answering inquiries (such as excluded products, tariff reductions, tariff rate quotas
(TRQs), etc.) from the companies regarding this new Association Agreement.
Additionally, in November 2020 the annual meeting of the institutional framework of the Association
Agreement between the European Union and Central America (AACUE) was held virtually, to discuss
aspects related to market access, regulations, etc. Also, the Free Trade Commission of the Free Trade
Agreement between Central America and Chile met in November 2020.
In 2020, Costa Rica opened three import quotas for paddy rice in order to supply local consumption. The
country also implemented a safeguard measure (for three years) under Article XIX GATT 1994 for sugar
in solid form of whatever origin, that increases the applied tariff from 45% to 72.7%.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Both the Animal Health (SENASA) and Plant Heath (SFE) institutions continued to perform their functions
at border posts while avoiding (due to COVID-19) any disruptions in imports and exports of agricultural
products. A new location was set up for a single export window (part of the single export window system)
with the sanitary conditions established by the Ministry of Health. Agricultural imports are allowed based
on printed documents as well as digitised documentation. The SFE created an online system for consulting
in real time the phytosanitary certificates for Costa Rican agricultural exports.
Contextual information
Costa Rica is a small country with a population of 5 million. The country’s long democratic tradition and
political stability have underpinned its important economic progress – including the development of its
agricultural sector. Agriculture still plays a relatively important role in the economy, contributing 4.6% to
the country’s GDP and employing 12.1% of its work force. Costa Rica has achieved higher standards of
living and lower poverty rates than other countries in the region, with a per capita income of USD 20 434
(PPP) in 2019 (Table 10.3).




 235

Table 10.3. Costa Rica: Contextual indicators

Costa Rica
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
31
103
0.08%
0.09%
Population (million)
4
5
0.09%
0.10%
Land area (thousand km2)
51
51
0.06%
0.06%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
1 840
1 783
0.06%
0.06%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
78
99
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
7 837
20 434
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
38
22
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
10.3
4.6
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
16.3
12.1
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
31.0
39.7
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.6
12.7
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
76
72
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
24
28
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
11
14
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
In 2020, GDP growth experienced an important declined due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Inflation has
significantly declined since 2008, while unemployment has increased in the most recent years
(Figure 10.5). Costa Rica has developed a successful and dynamic agricultural export sector in recent
decades. The country is a net agro-food exporter, with a share of agro-food exports in total exports of 40%
in 2019. Half of Costa Rica’s agricultural exports are primary crops for final consumption, such as bananas
and pineapples (Figure 10.6). The country is also an important exporter of processed products for final
consumption. Half of agro-food imports are processed products for final consumption.




236 

Figure 10.5. Costa Rica: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 10.6. Costa Rica: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth has decreased from the 2000s and has been slightly below the
world average over the last decade (Figure 10.7). Area expansion into less productive land, ongoing farm
fragmentation and limited financial and physical infrastructure were among the key contributing factors to
this decline. Agriculture is the main user of water resources. Environmental regulations have led to the
reforestation of large parts of the country, and 25% of Costa Rican territory is now under some form of
stricter environmental protection. However, the country continues to have relatively high nutrient balances
for nitrogen and phosphorus (Table 10.4).
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
9
50
50
31
25
11
17
8
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


 237

Figure 10.7. Costa Rica: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 10.4. Costa Rica: Productivity and environmental indicators

Costa Rica
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
3.0%
1.4%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
41.1
45.5
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
12.1
11.8
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
6.6
1.9
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
27.2
24.1
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
5.3
9.0
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
32.5
68.6
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
..
2.6
9.3
8.5
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


0.4%
0.5%
0.6%
0.05%
1.4%
1.6%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
Costa Rica
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


238 

References

Anderson, K. and A. Valdés (2008), Distortions to Agricultural Incentives in Latin America, World
Bank, Washington DC, https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/6604.
[1]
OECD (2017), Agricultural Policies in Costa Rica, OECD Publishing, Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264269125-en.
[2]



Note
1 www.infoagro.go.cr/CambioClimatico/observatorio/.



 239

Support to agriculture
Producer support in the European Union,1 measured by the Producer Support Estimate (PSE), is close to
the OECD average. After falling from the 1990s through the early 2000s, support to producers in the
European Union as a share of gross farm receipts stabilised at around 19% since 2010, compared to 18%
for all OECD members.
While trade protection measures, including import and export licensing, tariff rate quotas (TRQ) and special
safeguards, remain in effect for a number of sectors, support in the form of price distortions declined
substantially over time. In 2018-20, market price support (MPS) accounted for 18% of support to producers,
down from 46% in 2000-02.
Most support to producers comes from budgetary support – largely in the form of direct payments.
Production distortions from these payments declined since the early 2000s. As of 2020, nearly half of
budgetary support is decoupled from production; one third is based on current production and 18% is
based on input use. Moreover, nearly 60% of payments to producers are contingent on mandatory
environmental constraints, and an additional 14% of payments to producers come from voluntary agri-
environmental schemes with conditions beyond the mandatory requirements.
Expenditures for general services to the sector (GSSE) in 2018-20 averaged 10.4% of total support, or
4.7% of agricultural value-added – a slight increase compared to 2000-02 but still below the OECD
average. While the relative importance of GSSE is largely unchanged over the past two decades, the
composition of GSSE expenditures has shifted. Expenditures on agricultural knowledge and innovation
systems continued to predominate, as their share of total expenditures grew 12 percentage points to 54%
in 2018-20. Expenditures on marketing and promotion also rose (now responsible for 22% of GSSE), while
support for development and maintenance of infrastructure and public stockholding both declined.
Total support to the sector declined in relative terms over the past twenty years. In 2018-20, total support
was estimated at 0.6% of GDP, compared to 1.0% in 2000-02.
Recent policy changes
Much policy activity in 2020 focused on ensuring that the food and agricultural sectors could cope with the
impacts of COVID-19. A raft of measures was implemented on this front at the EU-level, including flexibility
under the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), exceptional market measures, and direct support to farmers
and rural areas. In this framework, Member States responded with their own policy packages, targeting
the most affected sectors. In particular, spending on state aid initiatives under the Temporary State Aid
Framework soared in 2020 and early 2021, with 22 countries implementing sector-specific aid packages
totalling nearly EUR 6.2 billion (USD 7.1 billion), equivalent to more than 11% of CAP expenditure in 2020.
The European Union also released the Recovery Plan for Europe, a long-term recovery initiative from the
COVID-19 emergency. In particular, the Next Generation EU initiative under this plan will fund some
11 European Union


240 

activities for the agricultural sector to support Member States in recovering, repairing and emerging
stronger from the crisis.
Other policy initiatives were either released or came closer to completion in 2020. In particular, on
27 November, the European Parliament and the Council agreed on transitional rules for the CAP in 2021-
22 (based on the principal of continuity of the current CAP) while negotiations continue on CAP reform. In
addition, in May, the European Commission released more details about proposed Green Deal initiatives
most relevant to the agricultural sector. Specifically, the Farm to Fork and Biodiversity strategies seek to
halt biodiversity loss in Europe, transform EU food systems into global standards for competitive
sustainability, protect human and planetary health, and safeguard the livelihoods of all actors in the food
value chain. The Farm to Fork Strategy outlines a 27-point action plan covering four primary policy
domains: (1) ensuring sustainable food production; (2) stimulating sustainable food processing, and
wholesale, retail, hospitality and food service practices; (3) promoting sustainable food consumption and
facilitating the shift towards healthy, sustainable diets; and (4) reducing food loss and waste. The strategy
includes several agriculture-specific targets, including reducing chemical pesticide use by 50%, reducing
nutrient loss by at least 50% and increasing the share of farmland under organic farming to at least 25%.
The Biodiversity Strategy is a long-term plan to protect nature, reverse the degradation of ecosystems and
build resilience to future threats. It also contains agriculture-specific targets, including reversing the decline
of pollinators and establishing biodiversity-rich landscape features on at least 10% of farmland.
On 31 December 2020, the United Kingdom left the EU Single Market and Customs Union, ending the free
movement of people, goods and services. The draft EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement agreed on
24 December 2020 lays down the rules governing trade and movement between the two. Of relevance to
agriculture, the trade component of the agreement includes duty and quota free imports on all goods that
comply with rules of origin provisions.
Several additional trade agreements were negotiated or came into effect in 2020. The Agreement on
Cooperation on, and Protection of, Geographical Indications (GI) between the European Union and the
People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”) was signed on 14 September. The EU-Viet Nam Free Trade
Agreement entered into force on 1 August. On 28 April, the European Union and Mexico finished
negotiations on a new trade agreement to supersede the EU-Mexico Global Agreement in force since
2000.
Assessment and recommendations

The Farm to Fork and Biodiversity Strategies outline a welcome ambition to improve the
productivity, sustainability and resilience of the European Union’s agricultural sector. At the same
time, it is unclear how the particular targets chosen as desired outcomes will affect overall
productivity and sustainability. Moreover, the strategies should place more emphasis on the need
to continue to improve water management as a prerequisite for improved sustainability and
resilience – an area that will become increasingly important under projections for a drier, hotter
Europe.

Current CAP proposals continue to support, within existing budgetary limits and regulations,
commodity-specific assistance (in the form of voluntary coupled support) which has been shown
to distort markets and may worsen environmental outcomes. Additionally, while the new national
strategic plans represent an opportunity to better target policies to national circumstances, they
risk increasing divergence in the national implementation of the CAP, including on coupled support.
Phasing out programmes known to contribute to negative environmental outcomes or effectively
addressing these impacts, could improve CAP coherence with Farm to Fork strategy. This
approach would be an important first step to consider in the national plans in order to achieve
current environmental ambitions.


 241


The European Union’s long-term COVID-19 recovery packages (in the form of Next Generation
EU and the reinforced budget) are a welcome development, attempting to leverage the crisis as
an opportunity to build a more resilient agricultural sector.

Numerous ad hoc assistance packages announced under the Temporary Framework for State Aid
indicate that either the current risk management policy toolbox is not appropriate for dealing with
catastrophic events, or the incentives to take up existing tools are misaligned. Policymakers should
discuss with sector stakeholders to determine what policies best address gaps in farm-level risk
management – keeping in mind that the prospect of undefined ad hoc assistance packages erodes
incentives to invest in risk management and resilience, particularly when such programmes are
susceptible to political objectives and do a poor job of delivering assistance where needed.

Despite huge disruptions in food and agricultural markets caused by the COVID-19 emergency,
European food and agricultural systems proved resilient in ensuring that consumers were able to
access food. The Green Lanes initiative and efforts to facilitate market information likely assisted
in these efforts. However, the crisis also increased calls for a reassessment of the preparedness
of the European Union in relation to food security crises. Policymakers should be cautious and
avoid adopting approaches that could undermine incentives to adapt and transform industries to
manage future shocks.
Figure 11.1. European Union: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers. EU12 for 1986-88, EU15 for 2000-02, EU28 for
2018-19 and EU27 plus UK for 2020.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/di9hv2
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
not applicable
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
TSE as % GDP
1986-88
2000-02
2018-20


242 

Figure 11.2. European Union: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Note: EU28 for 2019 and EU27 plus UK for 2020.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/t69ycm
Figure 11.3. European Union: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Note: EU28 for 2018-19 and EU27 plus UK for 2020.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/8ompwl


-4%
-3%
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Plants and flowers
Potatoes
Wine
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Rice
Maize
Barley
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 243

Table 11.1. European Union: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
233 558
225 093
457 423
466 823
452 697
452 748
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
75.0
73.3
73.4
73.7
73.6
73.0
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
212 900
226 789
448 379
464 115
435 556
445 464
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
95 385
79 781
106 077
108 994
104 698
104 538
Support based on commodity output
86 308
40 997
19 633
21 839
20 160
16 900
Market Price Support1
80 672
37 067
19 330
21 523
19 864
16 601
Positive Market Price Support
81 784
37 067
19 561
21 814
20 268
16 601
Negative Market Price Support
-1 112
0
-231
-290
-403
0
Payments based on output
5 637
3 930
304
316
296
299
Payments based on input use
5 056
6 833
15 115
14 745
14 780
15 821
Based on variable input use
960
3 047
6 412
6 284
6 286
6 667
with input constraints
0
0
38
31
42
41
Based on fixed capital formation
2 986
2 259
6 271
6 471
6 140
6 202
with input constraints
0
94
111
108
109
115
Based on on-farm services
1 109
1 527
2 432
1 990
2 354
2 952
with input constraints
90
274
10
10
10
10
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
3 587
31 196
27 899
27 529
27 053
29 115
Based on Receipts / Income
147
99
614
328
324
1 188
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
3 440
31 097
27 286
27 201
26 728
27 927
with input constraints
940
13 953
22 261
22 279
21 739
22 767
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
4
3
3
7
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
10
41 920
43 486
41 239
41 034
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
10
41 920
43 486
41 239
41 034
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
478
1 078
987
949
973
1 037
Based on long-term resource retirement
476
846
149
157
148
142
Based on a specific non-commodity output
2
176
769
739
776
792
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
57
69
53
50
103
Miscellaneous payments
-43
-334
519
443
490
623
Percentage PSE (%)
38.4
29.8
19.5
19.7
19.5
19.3
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.66
1.22
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.04
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.62
1.42
1.24
1.24
1.24
1.24
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
9 118
8 355
12 369
12 690
12 002
12 416
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
1 788
3 492
6 720
6 969
6 623
6 568
Inspection and control
194
281
1 177
1 180
1 170
1 180
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
1 331
2 222
1 719
1 895
1 577
1 684
Marketing and promotion
1 210
996
2 710
2 614
2 597
2 919
Cost of public stockholding
4 571
1 294
28
15
20
49
Miscellaneous
24
69
16
16
15
16
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
8.3
9.1
10.4
10.4
10.2
10.6
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-69 408
-33 000
-17 808
-20 344
-18 411
-14 668
Transfers to producers from consumers
-80 268
-36 084
-18 489
-21 260
-19 172
-15 036
Other transfers from consumers
-1 699
-717
-152
-65
-265
-128
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
4 992
3 537
469
511
400
496
Excess feed cost
7 567
264
365
470
626
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-33.4
-14.8
-4.0
-4.4
-4.2
-3.3
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.63
1.19
1.04
1.05
1.05
1.04
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.50
1.17
1.04
1.05
1.04
1.03
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
109 495
91 672
118 915
122 195
117 101
117 450
Transfers from consumers
81 967
36 801
18 642
21 325
19 436
15 164
Transfers from taxpayers
29 228
55 589
100 426
100 934
97 929
102 414
Budget revenues
-1 699
-717
-152
-65
-265
-128
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
2.5
1.0
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.7
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
28 824
54 606
99 586
100 671
97 237
100 849
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.6
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
152
191
189
193
..
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
0.91
1.09
0.87
0.85
0.89
0.88
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
EU12 for 1986-88; EU15 for 2000-02; EU28 for 2018-19; and EU27 and the United Kingdom for 2020.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for the European Union are: wheat, maize, barley, oats,
rice, rapeseed, sunflower, soybean, sugar, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, pig meat, poultry, eggs, potatoes, tomatoes, plants and flowers, and wine.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




244 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
The CAP has been the European Union’s agricultural policy framework since its institution in 1962,
although the mix of policy instruments has evolved substantially over time (Table 11.2). The Treaty of
Rome that established the European Community outlined the CAP in 1957 (OECD, 2011[1]; European
Parliament, 2021[2]). Agriculture made up a much larger share of Europe’s economy at the time, and the
income gap between rural and urban households was increasing. Moreover, the region was a net food
importer with concerns about securing adequate food supplies during the Cold War (Grant, 2020[3]). In this
context, the Treaty of Rome laid down five main objectives for the CAP:
1. To increase agricultural productivity by promoting technical progress and ensuring the optimum
use of the factors of production, in particular labour
2. To ensure a fair standard of living for farmers
3. To stabilise markets
4. To assure the availability of supplies
5. To ensure reasonable prices for consumers
Measures targeting these objectives were financed from the European Agricultural Guidance and
Guarantee Fund (EAGGF), split into separate Guidance and Guarantee sections. Different rules governed
the two: the Guidance Section financed operations related to structural policy and development of rural
areas, while the Guarantee section funded expenditures on market and price policies (European
Parliament, 2021[4]).
From the CAP’s institution until the 1990s, support prices were high compared to world market prices.
Combined with an unlimited buying guarantee, European farmers produced increasing surpluses. The cost
of these policies was large, however, such that by the 1980s the EU introduced quantitative production
restrictions in the form of quotas on milk and sugar production.
The CAP’s first major reform occurred in 1992, in conjunction with negotiations on the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The MacSharry Reform brought a major shift in how the public sector
delivered support to agriculture. Instead of supporting production (through intervention buying and export
subsidies), the regime shifted to supporting producer incomes directly, to close the gap between supply
and demand, and reduce overall expenditures (European Parliament, 2021[5]). This wide-ranging reform
included reducing cereal intervention prices, introduced compensatory payments per hectare for cereals
or per head for livestock, and introduced a mandatory set-aside scheme to take land out of production. In
conjunction with the reform of budgetary support measures through the MacSharry package, MPS also
declined thanks to EU commitments under the 1995 Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture. Namely,
bound tariffs were gradually reduced, and other border measures were tariffied (including replacing
variable import levies with ad valorem or specific tariffs and tariff rate quotas) (OECD, 2011[1]).
Subsequent reforms built on the foundation of the MacSharry Reform, reducing distortive support to the
agricultural sector or changing how support is delivered. The Agenda 2000 reform focused on aligning EU
and world prices, offsetting the reduction of price support with increased direct aid to producers (European
Parliament, 2021[5]). In addition, the Rural Development Regulation was introduced as Pillar 2 of the CAP.
Finally, this package instituted the first environmental cross-compliance conditions for granting aid.
The 2003 Fischler Reform2 further developed and consolidated these measures. It saw the introduction
of the single payment scheme (SPS), decoupling most support from production (European Parliament,
2021[5]). Furthermore, receiving the full payment required cross-compliance related to the environment,
animal welfare, plant protection and food safety. This package also introduced modulation, allowing
Member States to transfer funds between the two pillars to reinforce rural development objectives. The


 245

reform also prioritised financial discipline, freezing the budget of Pillar 1 and imposing annual compulsory
ceilings. This coincided with the splitting of the budget into the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund
(EAGF) to finance Pillar 1 and the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) to finance
Pillar 2 from 2007. Additionally, this round of reform introduced the single common market organisation
(CMO) in 2007, which codified the regulation mechanisms of the existing CMOs. Reform programmes for
specific commodities (cotton, hops, olive oil, tobacco, sugar, fruits and vegetables, and wine) were
introduced from 2003 to 2008, with the aim of reducing distortive payments and restoring market-based
incentives (OECD, 2011[1]).
Measures taken under the 2009 Health Check sought to continue the direction of the 2003 reform. Namely,
decoupling of aid continued and nearly all payments (with the exception of suckler cow, sheep and goat
premia) were consolidated into the SPS. It also further reduced market intervention for a number of
products, abolished set-aside and introduced phase-out of milk quotas. Additional flexibility for direct
payments was introduced as well (OECD, 2011[1]).
The 2013 Reform set out a more global, integrated approach to agricultural support, undertaken through
four lines of action (European Parliament, 2021[5]):
1. Converting decoupled aid into a multifunctional support system with aid directed toward specific
objectives. Accordingly, the SPS was replaced by a system of payments with seven components:
(1) a basic payment; (2) a greening payment for environmental public goods; (3) an additional
payment for young farmers; (4) a ‘redistributive’ payment for first hectares of farmland; (5) support
for areas with specific natural constraints; (6) aid coupled to production; and (7) a simplified system
for small farmers.
2. Consolidating the two CAP pillars, with direct aid and market measures funded through Pillar 1,
and rural development funded through Pillar 2 and co-financed by the Member States.
3. Consolidating CMO tools into safety nets in case of market disruption or price crisis, and ending
other supply control measures, namely the sugar and milk quotas.
4. A more integrated, targeted and territorial approach to rural development, including simplifying the
range of available instruments to focus on certain core objectives.
The instruments of the 2013 Reform remain in place, although the next round of reform is underway. All
told, through the rounds of CAP reform, the absolute budget figure for the CAP has more than doubled
over the past 30 years, partly related to additional Member States joining the European Union. At the same
time, CAP expenditures as a share of the total EU budget declined sharply, from 74% in 1985 to 37.4% in
2019 (EC, 2020[6]).




246 

Table 11.2. European Union: Agricultural policy trends
Years
Main Milestones
Key Policy Features
pre-1992
Coupled support phase:
CAP financed by the European
Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee
Fund (EAGGF), European Union
expansion to 15 members
Support prices greater than world prices
Unlimited buying guarantee
Production quotas for certain products, including dairy and sugar
1992-1999
MacSharry Reform:
CAP, EU Expansion 1995 (Austria,
Finland, Sweden), Uruguay Round
Agreement on Agriculture
Shift from product support through prices to producer support
through income-supporting measures, with the reduction in
intervention prices compensated by increased direct aid per hectare
or livestock headage payments
Establishment of set-aside payments to encourage land retirement
Tarrification of border measures and gradual reductions in bound
tariffs
2000-2002
Agenda 2000 CAP Reform:
CAP divided into Pillar 1 and Pillar 2
(Rural Development)
Further reduction of EU market support prices in closer alignment
with world prices, partly offset by direct aid to producers in the form
of increased area or headage payments
First introduction of compulsory environmental cross-compliance
Introduction of Rural Development Regulation as a second pillar of
the CAP
2003-2008
Fischler Reform:
CAP Pillars 1 (financed by EAGF) and 2
(financed by the European Agricultural
Fund for Rural Development EAFRD),
EU Expansion 2004 (Malta, Cyprus,
Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Hungary) and 2007 (Bulgaria and
Romania)
Decoupling much of CAP support from volume of production, with
fixed single farm payment (SPS) introduced based on historical
references
Cross-compliance for environmental and public health objectives
compulsory for receiving full payments
Single common market organisation (CMO) introduced
Reform programmes initiated for cotton, hops, olive oil, tobacco,
sugar, fruit and vegetable and wine regimes
2009-2013
Health Check:
CAP Pillars 1 and 2
Further reduction of EU market intervention for certain products
Phasing out of milk quotas initiated
Abolition of set-aside
Integration of nearly all payments into SPS
New cross-compliance requirements introduced
2013-present
2013 Reform:
CAP Pillars 1 and 2, EU Expansion
2013 (Croatia) and Contraction 2020
(United Kingdom)
Decoupled aid converted to multifunctional support (including basic
payment, greening payment, small farmer payment, etc.)
Consolidation of two pillars of CAP, with direct payments and
market measures under Pillar 1
Consolidation of CMO tools, abolition of supply control measures
(including ending milk and sugar quota schemes)
External and internal convergence, with payment envelopes
gradually adjusted to move toward a uniform minimum per hectare
payment
Source: (European Parliament, 2021[5]); (OECD, 2011[1]).
Total support to the agricultural sector as percentage of agricultural gross value-added in the European
Union largely comes from budgetary allocations (Figure 11.4). Market price support declined significantly
from 1986 through the 2000s, but remains mostly unchanged since around 2010. The most substantial
change to PSE composition began in the mid-2000s after the Fischler reforms decoupled most payments
to farmers from production.


 247

Figure 11.4. European Union: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
European Union refers to EU12 for 1986-94, EU15 for 1995-2003, EU25 for 2004-06, EU27 for 2007-13, EU28 for 2014-19, and EU27 and the
UK for 2020
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The Common Agricultural Policy is the agricultural policy framework of the European Union. In addition
to the CAP, Member States may implement measures funded from national or sub-national budgets that
target specific sectors (including agriculture) or objectives, as long as they comply with the European
Union’s state aid rules and do not distort competition within the common market (OECD, 2017[7]).
The CAP typically covers a seven-year period – currently 2014-20, but extended to the end of 2022 with
the passage of transitional CAP rules in 2020. It comprises two pillars: the European Agricultural Guarantee
Fund finances Pillar 1, and measures under Pillar 2 are based on Rural Development Programmes co-
financed by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and EU Member States.3 Member
States deploy RDPs over the seven-year CAP period. The CAP 2014-20, while in many ways the
continuation of the CAP 2007-13, offers a number of novel features (OECD, 2017[7]).
The implementation of the CAP 2014-20 started with measures under Pillar 1, followed in 2016 by
implementation in the Member States of 118 national and regional Pillar 2 RDPs.4 In 2018, the CAP
simplification took place within the revision of the EU financial rules, also known as the Omnibus regulation
(OECD, 2018[8]).
The budget for the CAP 2014-20 was EUR 408 billion (USD 465 billion), of which 76% were initially
allocated to Pillar 1 (covering market related expenditure and direct payments), and the remaining 24% to
Pillar 2 (rural development spending, including agri-environmental payments). The CAP 2014-20 allows
Member States to transfer up to 15% of each envelope5 between the two pillars. As of December 2018,
twelve transferred funds from Pillar 1 to Pillar 2 while five transferred funds from Pillar 2 to Pillar 1, with a
net result of EUR 3.76 billion (USD 4.28 billion), or less than 1% of expenditures transferred from Pillar 1
to Pillar 2 over the period (EC, 2019[9]).6
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


248 

Pillar 1 defines and funds market measures under the common market organisation, as well as direct
payments – mostly per hectare payments that do not require production (see next paragraph), but also
payments to a few specific sectors, such as fruits and vegetables. To this end, for the entire period of the
CAP 2014-20, entitlements to direct payments were assessed and allocated to those deemed to be active
farmers.
The Basic Payment Scheme (BPS) and the Single Area Payment Scheme (SAPS) – the BPS equivalent
that offers a uniform per hectare payment rate in all but three Member States that joined the European
Union after 20007 – make up 50% of the EU Pillar 1 direct payments envelope in Budget Year 2021
(Table 11.3). Wide variations across Member States reflect their spending choices on optional measures
under Pillar 1. Both the BPS and the SAPS require cross-compliance, though exceptions apply. Additional
conditions are attached to the per-hectare Greening payment that accounts for 29% of the Pillar 1 direct
payments budget. As of 2017, farmers who do not comply with all the requirements of greening may be
subject to new greening administrative penalties (equivalent to 20% of the farmer’s greening payment in
2017, rising to 25% from 2018 onward) in addition to forfeiting a share of the greening payment on the
non-compliant area.
Table 11.3. Direct payments budget under Pillar 1, 2020

Budget 2021
(EUR million)
Share in
direct payments
Share in decoupled
direct payments
Direct payments; of which:
37 432


Decoupled direct payments, of which:
31 545
84%

Basic Payment Scheme (BPS)
14 172
38%
45%
Single Area Payment Scheme (SAPS)
4 406
12%
14%
Greening
10 778
29%
34%
Voluntary Coupled Support
4 019
11%

Note: Other decoupled payments represent about 7% of direct payments under Pillar 1. The 2021 EU fiscal year (November to October) is
attributed to year 2020 in the PSE system.
Source: OECD calculations based on European Commission, EUR-Lex budget 2021.
In the ten Member States that apply the SAPS, commodity-specific payments may be granted from national
budgets within limited envelopes. Transitional National Aid (TNA) is mostly disbursed as decoupled
payments. In claim year 2018 (the most recent year for which this data is available), only 15% of TNA was
paid as coupled support (EC, 2020[10]). It may apply on a per area basis to arable land, hops and starch
potatoes; a volume basis to milk; and a headage basis to livestock. Member States may review TNA
budgets and supported commodities on an annual basis. The maximum TNA payments allowed decrease
gradually from 75% of the 2013 level of SAPS aid in 2015 to 50% in 2020.
As the CAP 2014-20 is implemented, the gap in per hectare payment rates of the BPS and the SAPS will
narrow, both between countries (external convergence) and between farmers and regions within
countries (internal convergence8). Internal convergence applies to BPS when a flat rate is not yet applied,
while under the SAPS a uniform payment rate at national level already applies to each hectare.
In the CAP 2014-20, Member States may choose to allocate part of their direct payments envelope to
commodity-specific payments within defined ceilings (up to 13%) and under defined conditions. The
voluntary coupled support (VCS) expands the coupled support scheme under Article 68 of the previous
CAP 2007-13, and lets Member States allocate a larger envelope to more sectors or regions and under a
wider set of specific conditions. Such support may be granted to create an incentive to maintain current
levels of production in the sectors or regions concerned. Choices of Member States on take-up of the VCS
vary greatly, both in terms of the level of support and the commodities supported. On several occasions,
Member States reviewed VCS budgets and commodity attributions, making some minor adjustments. All


 249

except Germany chose to offer VCS, using 10% of the EU direct payments budget on average from 2018-
20. This compares to 3% spent previously under Article 68 coupled support, as reported in the EU general
budgets.
A top-up payment to young farmers in addition to the BPS and SAPS applies in all Member States. In
2020, this payment accounted for 1.5% of the European Union’s direct payments envelope, as reported in
the general budget. Member States have chosen to implement this measure in different ways. Some offer
recipients a flat payment rate on a limited number of hectares, while others apply a payment proportional
to the BPS or SAPS received. In addition to this compulsory young farmer scheme, 25 Member States
chose to attribute a portion of their rural development envelopes to support young farmers, representing
4.5% of total planned rural development expenditures (ENRD, 2016[11]). The bulk of this spending is
directed toward business development and investments.
Fifteen Member States chose to offer small farms simplified payment attribution conditions – the Small
Farmers Scheme – that waives requirements attached to the greening payment and cross-compliance.
The payment cannot exceed EUR 1 250 (USD 1 424) per farm and, depending on the method chosen by
the member state, the overall envelope may be limited to 10% of national direct payments.9
Denmark and Slovenia implement the Pillar 1 direct payment to Areas with Natural Constraints (ANC).
Under this payment, ANC are defined based on eight biophysical criteria.10 Denmark uses 0.3% and
Slovenia 1.6% of their national direct payments envelope for ANC payments (EC, 2019[9]). A payment
targeted to areas with natural or other specific constraints can also be budgeted under the RDP, labelled
as the Less Favoured Areas payment in the previous CAP. It is implemented in 25 Member States and
accounts for 19% of Pillar 2 public expenditure funds (including Member States’ contributions from national
budgets) in 2020. In the past, Member States used up to 140 different criteria for assessing ANC status
for Pillar 2 payments. However, these were consolidated into the same eight biophysical criteria that apply
to Pillar 1 ANC payments.
Ten Member States or regions have chosen to grant higher payments to the first hectares11 under the so-
called redistributive payment, using 4% of the European Union’s direct payments envelope, as reported
in European Union’s 2020 general budget.
Member States that implement the redistributive payment may opt-out of so-called “degressivity” and six
Member States and regions did so.12 Under degressivity, BPS amounts above EUR 150 000
(USD 170 932) per recipient are reduced by a minimum of 5%. Funds deducted under this provision are
transferred to Pillar 2 and used to fund the member state’s RDPs. Fourteen13 applied the minimum
reduction. Ten used the option to increase the amount exempt from the 5% reduction by the value of
salaries paid. Ten have chosen to apply a full cap on the BPS at levels varying from EUR 150 000
(USD 170 932) to EUR 600 000 (USD 683 728).
A Crisis reserve is earmarked to be used in case of emergency. It is funded from the Pillar 1 direct
payments budget. If unused, the envelope reverts for distribution as Pillar 1 direct payments in the same
year. The crisis reserve is renewed each year and up to now has not been used as an emergency fund.
The POSEI scheme (Programmes dʼOptions Spécifiques à lʼEloignement et à lʼInsularité) supports farming
in the European Union’s outermost regions by using production-related payments. The scheme supports
access to food, feed and inputs for local communities, and the development of local agricultural production
with 1.2% of the direct payments envelope in 2020.
Pillar 1 also funds measures that support commodity markets, representing 4.7% of the overall
agriculture and rural development budget in 2020. Prices paid to EU domestic producers averaged 5%
above world market prices in 2018-20.
While the possibility for public intervention for cereals (namely common and durum wheat, barley, and
maize) exists, the last intakes of cereals into public storage occurred during the 2009/10 marketing year


250 

(EC, 2013[12]). Purchase at the cereal intervention price is limited to 3 million tonnes of common wheat,
beyond which purchase is by tender. Public intervention for durum wheat, barley and maize can be opened
under special circumstances by means of tendering. Public intervention also applies to paddy rice. Until
30 September 2017, sugar was supported with production quotas, coupled with a minimum price for sugar
beets. After the end of the sugar quota regime, provisions for agreements between sugar factories and
growers were maintained, and white sugar remained eligible for private storage aid. The support regime
for cereals and sugar also includes trade protection through tariffs and TRQs. No export refunds have been
granted since July 2013. Furthermore, since the WTO Ministerial conference in Nairobi in December 2015,
the European Union has committed not to resort to export subsidies.
Fruits and vegetables are eligible for voluntary coupled support and commodity specific payments; they
are also supported through various market measures. These include crisis intervention measures that may
be managed by producer organisations, an entry price system (minimum import price) for some products
and ad valorem duties, but no export subsidies. Support co-financed by Member States also applies to the
fruit and vegetables sector, and the olive oil and table olives sectors. These support a wide range of actions
from production planning, quality measures, market withdrawal and harvest insurance to training,
promotion and communication. Some measures apply at farm level while others are provided to producer
organisations or the sector at large. Private storage may be activated as an optional scheme for olive oil
and flax fibre. In the CAP 2014-20, recognition of producer and inter-branch organisations expands beyond
fruits and vegetables. Compensation may be greater when producers claim support via producer groups,
as was the case with compensation payments related to the Russian Federation’s embargo on imports.
Also targeting the fruit and vegetables sector, a consumer support system directed toward schoolchildren
covers consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables, processed fruits and vegetables, and banana products.
The scheme’s budget grew rapidly from EUR 29 million (USD 33 million), when it was implemented in
2010, to EUR 117 million (USD 133 million) in 2016. A similar scheme supported milk consumption for
schoolchildren, with a budget of EUR 64 million (USD 73 million) in 2016. In August 2017 both schemes
merged under the title “School Schemes” and the budgets combined into EUR 216 million
(USD 246 million) in 2020.
In the dairy sector, intervention prices are used together with import protection for butter and skimmed milk
powder (SMP). Intervention purchases cannot exceed 50 000 tonnes for butter, and 109 000 tonnes for
SMP, respectively representing 2% and 7% of production in 2020. Above those limits, purchase is made
by tender. Intervention purchases were opened for both products as a response to sector shocks due to
COVID-19, prior to which no intervention purchases were made for butter since 2009, while the last
intervention purchases for SMP took place in 2018.
Floor prices,14 tariffs and TRQs support the beef market. Import protection provides support for pig meat.
The market support regime for sheep meat comprises tariffs and TRQs, with most country-specific TRQs
subject to a zero customs duty. TRQs also support the poultry and eggs markets. Private storage may be
activated as an optional scheme for butter, SMP, certain cheeses, beef, pig meat, sheep meat and
goat meat. Indeed, private storage was opened for butter, SMP, cheese, beef and sheep meat in 2020 in
response to the COVID-19 emergency (see Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic).
Furthermore, specific provisions are made for milk and milk products.
A system of authorisations for new vine planting support the wine sector. Since January 2016, new vine
planting is limited to 1% of the planted vine areas per year. Authorisations would be automatically granted
to producers to replace grubbing of an existing vine area. Member States had until 31 December 2020 to
transition to the new system. The sector is also supported through promotional measures in both the
European Union and third countries, restructuring and conversion of vineyards; compensation for green
harvesting; setting up of mutual funds; investment in tangible and intangible capital; income insurance;
development of new products, processes and technologies; and distillation of by-products.


 251

Rural Development is part of the EU-level Common Strategic Framework covering all support from
European Structural and Investment (ESI) funds15 in Member States through partnership agreements. The
EAFRD finances Pillar 2 of the CAP 2014-20 to serve six priority areas: (1) fostering knowledge transfer
and innovation; (2) enhancing competitiveness of all types of agriculture and the sustainable management
of forests; (3) promoting food chain organisation, including processing and marketing, and risk
management; (4) restoring, preserving and enhancing ecosystems; (5) promoting resource efficiency and
the transition to a low-carbon economy; and (6) promoting social inclusion, poverty reduction and economic
development in rural areas (Table 11.4). Pillar 2 funds are implemented through national (or regional)
RDPs. RDPs also support projects that use the LEADER approach (Liaison Entre Actions de
Développement de l’Économie Rurale) relying on a multi-sectoral approach and local partnerships to
address specific local problems, and technical assistance for the implementation of Pillar 2 measures.
Table 11.4. CAP expenditure by source and use (estimated 2020)
CAP expenditure (EU funding), of which:
Share in EU funding:
Administrative expenditure
0.01%
Interventions in agricultural markets CMO
4.73%
Direct Payments
67.60%
Rural Development – EU funding
27.12%
Research and innovation – Horizon 2020
0.04%
Rural Development (total public expenditure) of which:
Share in total public expenditure:
Rural Development EU funding
66.8%
Rural Development national funding
33.2%
Priority 1: knowledge
Allocated through other priorities
Priority 2: competitiveness
20.9%
Priority 3: food chain organisations
9.6%
Priority 4: ecosystems
48.5%
Priority 5: resource efficiency
5.0%
Priority 6: social inclusion
13.6%
Source: OECD calculations based on European Commission, EUR-Lex budget 2021 (for EU funding) and EAFRD financial execution (for Rural
Development and allocation to priorities). Total public expenditure comprises EU funding and Member States national funding of Rural
Development.
The implementation of RDP 2014-20 was delayed, and by 2018 most payments for programmes within the
RDP 2007-13 had terminated. At the same time, payments for farm restructuring under CAP 2007-13 were
prolonged, including early retirement, conversion of arable land into grassland and afforestation of
agricultural land.
Member States participate in the funding of Pillar 2 payments (also called co-financing) in accordance with
RDPs that cover the entire duration of the CAP cycle. In their plans, Member States could choose from a
menu of 19 measures to meet the six priority areas of Pillar 2.16 Two conditions apply: (1) a minimum 30%
of rural development funding from the EU budget must be spent on measures related to the environment
and climate change adaptation, including forestry and investments in physical assets; and (2) another 5%
must be spent on the LEADER approach.
At the aggregate, the greatest share of the new RDP budget is allocated to three measures: Investments;
Agri-environment and Climate; and Areas with Natural Constraints. While Member States’ choices vary,
investment is one of the top three measures, receiving the highest shares of expenditure for the period
2014-20 in all but Austria, Germany and Sweden.
The launch of the European Innovation Partnership for Agricultural productivity and Sustainability (EIP-
AGRI) in 2012 was followed by integrating the Horizon 2020 programmes specific to research and


252 

innovation in agriculture into the CAP 2014-20. Horizon 2020 programmes relevant to agriculture focus on
securing sufficient supplies of safe and high-quality food and other bio-based products. The Horizon 2020
budget under the agriculture and rural development title increased substantially since it was initiated in
2013, from EUR 1 million (USD 1.1 million) to EUR 257 million (USD 293 million) in 2019. A total of
EUR 3.8 billion (USD 4.3 billion) is available for the period. Horizon 2020 is set to be replaced by Horizon
Europe for 2021-27.
Programming for CAP 2014-20 ended in 2020. However, its structure remains in place for 2021-22 under
transitional rules based on the principle of continuity while negotiations for the next CAP conclude (see
next section).
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
Overall spending
The EU budget for agriculture and rural development in 2020 declined 3% to EUR 55.4 billion
(USD 63.1 billion), reflecting the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union.17
Consequently, the share of total expenditures allocated to direct payments under Pillar 1 fell from 71% to
68%, the share spent on rural development measures under Pillar 2 rose from 24% to 27%, and the share
devoted to market measures was unchanged at 5%.
EU budget and the next CAP
On 10 November 2020, the Council and European Parliament reached an agreement on the next long-
term EU budget for 2021-27 (the multiannual financial framework, or MFF) of EUR 1.21 trillion
(USD 1.38 trillion) in current prices, with the Council adopting the regulation [Council Regulation (EU,
Euroatom) 2020/2093] on 17 December 2020 following the consent of the European Parliament. They also
agreed on an additional EUR 808 billion (USD 921 billion) funding package to support the European
Union’s recovery from the COVID-19 induced economic crisis, deemed NextGenerationEU (for further
details on NextGenerationEU, see Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic). With a view
toward building a greener, more resilient and digital-friendly Europe, more than 50% of the combined total
amount will be directed toward policies on research and innovation (Horizon Europe); fair climate and
digital transitions (Just Transition Fund and the Digital Europe Programme); and preparedness, recovery
and resilience (Recovery and Resilience Facility, rescEU and EU4Health).
Most of the budget for the future CAP is included in the MFF, with EUR 291.1 billion (USD 331.7 billion) in
current prices allocated for Pillar 1 activities under the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF) and
EUR 87.4 billion (USD 99.6 billion) earmarked for Pillar 2 through the European Agricultural Fund for Rural
Development (EAFRD). An additional EUR 8.1 billion (USD 9.2 billion) in funding for EAFRD will come
from NextGenerationEU (intended to help rural areas make the structural changes necessary to achieve
the goals of the European Green Deal and digital transition), bringing the total Pillar 2 allocation to
EUR 95.5 million (USD 108.8 million). Additionally, some budgetary flexibility for Member States to
implement the CAP is foreseen: Member States will have the option to transfer up to 25% of their CAP
allocations between income support and rural development, and will be able to apply additional flexibilities
for certain specific purposes, including supporting environment and climate objectives, supporting young
farmers, and in cases of countries with below-average direct payments.
On 21 and 23 October 2020, the Council and the European Parliament respectively agreed on their
negotiating positions on the reform of the CAP, based on the initial 2018 proposal from the Commission.
Accordingly, trilogue negotiations between the Council, the Parliament, and the Commission are underway.
Although the exact details of the final CAP 2021-27 are to be ironed out under the trilogue negotiations,
some features of the reform are already agreed (Box 11.1).


 253

Box 11.1. CAP 2021-27
The new CAP will feature changes in both the overall approach of the CAP, and the programming
through which assistance is delivered. With respect to the policy approach, the European Commission
has proposed to simplify and modernise how the CAP works, shifting the emphasis from rules and
compliance towards results and performance.
The framework of the policy will be based upon nine specific objectives,1 focusing on the social,
economic, and environmental goals of the CAP. In order to achieve these objectives, the Commission
will provide a toolbox of broad policy measures, which EU countries can shape around their own needs
and capabilities.
The Commission will also provide a common set of result indicators as part of a new performance,
monitoring and evaluation framework, which will be used to assess the progress of EU countries in
reaching the CAP objectives. The selected indicators will be presented visually and interactively in the
dashboard by theme, including farming income support, climate change and air quality, market
orientation and organic production.
A main new feature of the CAP 2021-27 is the leading role of the EU member countries in designing
and implementing their own national policy strategies. Each EU country will draw up its own CAP
strategic plan, setting out how they will direct CAP funding towards specific targets and how these
targets will contribute to the overall EU objectives. When drawing up their plans, each country will liaise
with the Commission, hold consultations with experts and stakeholders, and undertake an extensive
SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats) analysis of their specific needs. All strategic
plans will be submitted to the European Commission for evaluation and approval before they are
implemented. Additionally, EU countries will submit an annual performance report to show progress
towards the targets that have been set.
Note: 1. The nine objectives are to ensure a fair income to farmers; to increase competitiveness; to rebalance the power in the food chain;
climate change action; environmental care; to preserve landscapes and biodiversity; to support generational renewal; vibrant rural areas;
and to protect food and health quality.
Source: (EC, 2020[13]).
In December 2019, the newly elected EU Commission adopted the European Green Deal as a main
strategic policy document to transform the European Union into a zero net emissions economy. As part of
this effort, the Commission approved in May 2020 two documents with direct implications for the CAP: the
Farm-to-Fork (F2F) and the Biodiversity Strategies. While both strategies are multifaceted, they include
various specific outcome objectives relevant for agriculture. For example, the F2F fixes specific targets on
use of chemical pesticides, fertilisers and antimicrobials, and on nutrient losses and organic farming, while
the Biodiversity Strategy fixes specific objectives on protected land, chemical pesticides and share of
agricultural land under biodiversity landscape features (further details of the strategies are discussed below
in the section on agri-environment, climate and sustainability).
Policy initiatives undertaken by Member States in the future CAP will be defined through country-specific
strategic plans, which also provide the framework for countries to illustrate how they intend to work towards
achieving the objectives outlined in the F2F and Biodiversity Strategies. Toward that end, on 18 December
2020, the Commission provided each EU Member State with country-specific recommendations for their
CAP strategic plans. These recommendations are intended to assist in the drafting of the national plans
by identifying the key areas on which each EU country should focus in order to ensure the achievement of
the nine specific CAP objectives (i.e. environmental, social and economic challenges and a cross-cutting
objective on knowledge and innovation), as well as compliance with Green Deal ambitions (in the form of


254 

six Farm to Fork and Biodiversity strategy targets18). The Commission has asked Member States to
determine specific national values for these targets and align their CAP strategic plans accordingly. Once
plans are submitted by Member States, they will be subject to approval by the Commission according to
criteria to be laid down in the future CAP strategic plan regulation. This process of devising country-level
strategic plans was assisted by the 14 January 2021 publication of a list of potential agricultural practices
that the new eco-schemes under the next CAP could support. In order to be supported by eco-schemes,
these practices should cover activities related to climate, environment, animal welfare and antimicrobial
resistance; be defined on the basis of the needs and priorities identified at national/regional levels in CAP
strategic plans; have a level of ambition beyond the requirements and obligations set by conditionality; and
contribute to reaching EU Green Deal targets. Practices eligible for support under the eco-schemes include
agro-ecology practices such as crop rotation with leguminous crops; husbandry and animal welfare plans
such as providing and managing regular access to open air areas; carbon farming, including conservation
agriculture; protecting water resources by switching to less water intensive crops; and organic farming or
integrated pest management practices as already defined in EU legislation.
Various activities related to these strategic plans were initiated in 2020 in the Member States as well. For
instance, officials in the Czech Republic began to develop their plan in 2020, and public consultations on
Poland’s draft plan began in December 2020. Similarly, officials from the Ministry of Agriculture in Spain
conducted preparatory meetings with regional governments and stakeholders on the proposed National
Strategic Plan regulation.
While final provisions for the next iteration of the CAP have yet to be finalised, a political agreement
between the European Parliament and the EU Member States in the Council was reached on transitional
rules for the CAP for 2021-22 on 27 November 2020. These transitional rules are based on the principle
of continuity of the current CAP rules, while also including new elements to ensure a smooth transition.
This agreement also covers the integration of the European Recovery Instrument (ERI) funds into the
European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD), which is intended to facilitate the recovery
of farming and rural economies in the aftermath of the coronavirus pandemic and reinforce their resilience
toward future shocks. In addition, because trilogue negotiations between the Parliament, the Council and
the Commission on the next CAP are ongoing, the provisional start date of the next CAP reform has been
pushed back to 1 January 2023.
Markets and sector support
Much of the sector-specific support enacted in Member States in 2020 came as a result of market
disruptions due to COVID-19 (see section Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic), but
some Member States carried out sector-specific support programmes not exclusively related to COVID-
19. The government of Bulgaria increased their direct support levels for a variety of fruits, including
deciduous fruits, apples, pears and table grapes.19 Officials in Estonia announced that voluntary coupled
support would be re-implemented from 2021 for ewes and mother goats, having last been provided in
2015-16. In Italy, the government announced the establishment of a fund for the protection and relaunch
of the beekeeping, brewing, hemp and nut supply chains, with EUR 10 million (USD 11.4 million) allocated
for 2021.
Under the provisions of the European Union’s wine sector support programme, the government of Austria
extended sales promotions for Austrian wine to third-country markets, in line with the framework of the
national support programme. They also expanded investments in wine quality-enhancing measures that
are increasingly necessary due to changing climatic conditions, including fermentation control, cooling
investments, and conversion of vineyards (covering investments in irrigation, vineyard maintenance, and
re-cultivation of slopes and terraces). Similarly, 2020 wine support programme expenditures in Hungary
were dedicated to activities including restructuring and converting vineyards, carrying out information
campaigns within the European Union, and promoting Hungarian wine outside of the European Union.20


 255

On 31 March 2020, the European Commission published the budget for the EU school scheme for the
2020/21 school year.21 The scheme supports the distribution of fruits, vegetables and milk to
schoolchildren throughout the European Union. Under the budget, EUR 145 million (USD 165 million) was
allocated for fruit and vegetable distribution, and EUR 105 million (USD 120 million) for milk and dairy
products. These amounts can be topped up with national funds, however.
The implementation date of a new EU law on organics, originally published in 2018 (EU 2018/848), was
pushed back by one year, until 1 January 2022. The regulation is designed to ensure fair competition for
farmers, prevent fraud and maintain consumer trust by simplifying production rules, strengthening control
systems, and allowing group certification possibilities for small farmers, among other provisions. Member
States approved the delay in October 2020 in response to requests from MEPs grant additional time to
draft and adopt national-level implementing legislation. Also related to organics, the government of
Luxembourg took a number of actions in 2020 under its national action plan for the promotion of organic
farming. First, the aid rate per acre for conversion to organic farming was increased, effective in the
2020/21 crop year. Second, the government has announced that by 2025, 50% of products served in
collective catering establishments will come from Luxembourg – 40% of which will be organic, and the
remainder will prioritise farms that are undergoing organic conversion. Pilot projects for at least one
nursery, high school, hospital or elder care facility are foreseen for 2021.
Several food labelling initiatives were undertaken at EU and Member State level in 2020. On
21 December 2020, the European Commission launched the Food Labelling Information System (FLIS)
– an online tool that facilitates business compliance with EU labelling requirements. Through the tool, firms
can access mandatory labelling requirements by food product, with the information available in
23 languages. In August 2020 in Bulgaria, legislation was updated to reach compliance with EU regulations
on fresh meat labelling, distinguishing products sourced from disease-free farms in regions where a
contagious animal disease is detected from products sourced from disease-free regions. A new law came
into effect in France in May 2020 that prohibits the use of food product names commonly used to designate
animal origin from being used to promote foods containing vegetable proteins, including terms such as
“burger”, “sausage” or “cheese”; requires all the countries of origin for blended honey to be listed on the
label in descending order by weight; and mandates origin labelling for cocoa products. Spain approved a
similar decree on quality standards for honey, which require blended honey products to identify all countries
of origin on the label. Meanwhile in Italy, a new measure went into effect requiring country-of-origin labelling
on processed pig meat products, including the country of animal birth, rearing and slaughter.
On 25 November 2020, the Commission launched a new search database for geographical indications
in the EU (GIview22), which provides a single entry point for data on GIs registered in the European Union,
as well as information on non-EU GIs protected at EU level through bilateral and multilateral agreements,
and on EU GIs protected in non-EU countries.
Various quality promotion initiatives were launched in the Member States as well. Efforts in France
focused on the promotion of local foods. In November 2020, a new national charter promoting fresh and
local products was signed between the government and large national retailers. Activities covered under
the charter include promotional events, long-term work on territorial food plans that link consumers and
producers, and events educating consumers on food origins. Italy designated EUR 3 million
(USD 3.4 million) over 2021-23 to promote Italian agro-food products and the Mediterranean diet. A new
Grass Fed Beef Standard was launched for Irish beef producers through Bord Bia (the Irish Food Board)
in 2020, requiring, among other provisions, that a minimum of 90% of an animal’s diet during their lifetime
come from grass or grass-based forages in order to be eligible to use the “Grass Fed” logo.
Agri-environment, climate and sustainability
On 11 December 2019, the European Commission proposed a European Green Deal (EGD) to move
toward a cleaner, circular EU economy and stop climate change, revert biodiversity loss and cut pollution


256 

through a just and inclusive transition. The first climate action initiatives to be taken under the EGD,
foreseen for the coming years, include:

A European Climate Law to enshrine the 2050 climate-neutrality objective into EU law

European Climate Pact to engage citizens and all parts of society into climate action

2030 Climate Target Plan to further reduce net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by at least 55%
by 2030.
In addition, by June 2021, the Commission will also review and, where necessary, propose to revise all
relevant policy instruments to deliver additional GHG emissions reductions.
As part of the EGD, on 20 May 2020, the Commission released the EU Farm to Fork and Biodiversity
Strategies, outlining priority actions and commitments to halt biodiversity loss in Europe, transform EU food
systems into global standards for competitive sustainability, protect human and planetary health, and
safeguard the livelihoods of all actors in the food value chain. The Farm to Fork Strategy (F2F) adopts a
food systems approach, encompassing production, processing and consumption of food. The strategy
contains a 27-point Action Plan, with these initiatives divided into four primary policy domains:
1. Ensuring sustainable food production
2. Stimulating sustainable food processing, wholesale, retail, hospitality and food services’ practices
3. Promoting sustainable food consumption, facilitating the shift towards healthy, sustainable diets
4. Reducing food loss and waste.
Preparations and consultations on the F2F continue, including on the implications of the F2F for
international co-operation and trade policy. The F2F strategy includes several agriculture-specific targets
to achieve by 2030: reduce chemical pesticides use by 50% and also use of the most hazardous pesticides
by 50%; reduce nutrient loss by at least 50%; no more loss in soil fertility; reduce fertiliser use by at least
20%; reduce sales of antimicrobials for land and sea farmed animals by 50%; and increase the share of
farmland under organic farming to at least 25%.
The Biodiversity Strategy is the second key component of the EGD with the most direct linkages to the
agricultural sector. This strategy is a comprehensive long-term plan to protect nature, reverse the
degradation of ecosystems, and build resilience to future threats (including the impacts of climate change,
forest fires and disease outbreaks). Specific commitments to be delivered under the strategy by 2030
include reversing the decline of pollinators, establishing biodiversity-rich landscape features on at least
10% of farmland, and managing 25% of agricultural land under organic farming, while also promoting the
uptake of agro-ecological practices (EC, 2020[14]). In addition to this EU-wide initiative, at the country level,
Austria launched the Biodiversity Dialogue 2030 in 2019 with the intent of developing goals and measures
amongst all relevant stakeholders. Toward this end, a public consultation was held in 2020, which will help
inform the direction of future programming.
The F2F and Biodiversity Strategy targets are not yet codified in European regulations. Rather, Member
States will work towards the goals set out in these strategies through their individual CAP strategic plans.23
The Commission has analysed how the current proposals for CAP reform can contribute to the
achievement of the EGD and its component strategies, including identifying the steps needed to make
CAP fully compatible with these frameworks, such as a need to show increased ambition with regard to
environmental and climate objectives, mandatory eco-schemes, ring-fenced spending for the environment
and climate of 30% of the rural development budget, and assessment of coupled income support and
interventions in light of its consistency with the need for overall sustainability (EC, 2020[15]).
Member States also put in place action plans or measures intended to help address climate change, by
reducing emissions to meet obligations under the Paris Agreement or by mitigating the impacts of a
changing climate. By mid-2020, national or sectoral climate plans from all Member States had been
approved, with the Commission publishing a detailed EU-wide assessment of the final plans in


 257

September 2020 (EC, 2020[16]). Actions in Ireland were particularly noteworthy, as they released a climate
plan specific to the agricultural sector – the “National Climate & Air Roadmap for the Agriculture Sector.”
This roadmap sets a vision for a climate neutral Irish agricultural sector by 2050, including 29 actions with
specific targets aimed at reducing the environmental footprint of the sector. The approach contains three
prongs (reducing emissions, enhancing the development of sustainable land management, and
contributing to sustainable energy), and includes a mixture of immediate actions to be taken, as well as
more medium- to long-term initiatives. Specific actions outlined in the roadmap include reductions in
nitrogen fertiliser applications, phasing out applications of unprotected urea24 by 2023, and re-wetting
carbon rich soils to convert them from carbon sources to carbon sinks.
In addition to work on national climate plans, the government of Denmark allocated DKK 100 million
(EUR 13.4 million, USD 15.3 million) to establish the Danish Climate Forest Fund (private citizens and
companies are also able to donate to the fund). The fund will be used to plant forests and re-establish
natural hydrology on carbon-rich low-lying agricultural land. Donors to the fund will receive carbon dioxide
units indicating their contribution to the fund. Outside of the fund, the Danish government has allocated an
additional DKK 2 billion (EUR 268 million, USD 306 million) for setting aside carbon-rich low-lying
agricultural land to restore natural hydrology over 2020-29. In Greece, the importation from other EU
Member States of agricultural machinery that does not meet minimum engine emissions requirements was
banned from 1 January 2020. The government of Luxembourg planned additional measures for 2020 and
2021, including the introduction of investment aid for low ammonia emission spreading machines and for
covering outdoor slurry tanks. Spain spent EUR 8 million (USD 9 million) in 2020 on its “Plan Renove”,
which funds the replacement of old farm machinery with new machines that have lower emissions.
Other actions targeted improved overall environmental sustainability. In December 2020, the European
Commission announced that EUR 86 million (USD 98 million) – nearly half of the total EUR 182.9 million
(USD 208.4 million) EU budget for the promotion of agro-food products – would be dedicated to promoting
products in line with Green Deal objectives, including campaigns promoting consumption of food produced
under sustainable farming practices or organic production. In Belgium, the country’s dairy sector
implemented a sustainability monitor in 2020. The sustainability monitor follows sustainability initiatives
throughout the value chain, including on farms, during transport, and in milk processing companies, and
the industry has plans to develop it further in 2021. In June 2020, based on a midterm evaluation of the
main measures in the Danish water management plan 2015-2021, the government of Denmark introduced
more stringent measures in the country’s Nitrates Action Programme, including higher requirements for
nitrogen utilisation in organic fertiliser and lower nitrogen quotas on organic soils. France undertook several
actions intended to reduce pesticide use, including more transparency through the publishing of monitoring
indicators each year on their Ecophyto plan, a decree on supervising the use of pesticide products near
homes and imposing safety distances, and a new EUR 30 million (USD 34 million) support programme for
the purchase of pesticide-related equipment to reduce the risk of spreading pesticides outside of the field
or increase the precision of applications. In Greece, a joint decision was issued in 2020 by the Ministry of
Rural Development and Food, the Ministry of Health, and the Ministry of Environment and Energy regarding
updating the national action plan for the sustainable use of pesticides. The government of Italy announced
EUR 10 million (USD 11.4 million) in 2020 to improve the conditions of sustainability in livestock production
and meat processing companies.
In line with EU efforts on sustainability, various initiatives were undertaken with respect to both the
bioeconomy and circular economy in 2020. On 11 March 2020, the Commission adopted “A New
Circular Economy Action Plan for a Cleaner and More Competitive Europe” as one of the main blocks of
the EGD (EC, 2020[17]). While the action plan is economy-wide, “Food, water and nutrients” is one of the
strategy’s seven identified key product value chains. Actions in the strategy relevant to the agricultural
sector include a legislative initiative on re-use to substitute single-use packaging, tableware and cutlery by
reusable products in food services; the new Water Reuse Regulation, to encourage circular approaches
to water reuse in agriculture; and an Integrated Nutrient Management Plan, with a view to ensuring more


258 

sustainable application of nutrients and stimulating the markets for recovered nutrients (the Commission
will also consider reviewing directives on wastewater treatment and sewage sludge and will assess natural
means of nutrient removal such as algae). Then in October 2020, the European Investment Bank launched
a new European Circular Bioeconomy Fund, with a target size of EUR 250 million (USD 285 million). The
goal of the fund is to provide financing to early stage companies with proven technologies to help scale up
operations and expand into larger markets. Target investments for the fund include circular and
bioeconomy technologies, biomass/feedstock production to increase agricultural output or reduce
environmental footprint, and bio-based chemicals or materials. The Commission also published a factsheet
on 23 November 2020 outlining how the bioeconomy contributes to achieving the goals of the EGD (EC,
2020[18]). This publication emphasises how the bioeconomy, as a catalyst for systemic change, tackles the
economic, social and environmental aspects of the Green Deal, seeking new ways of producing and
consuming resources while respecting planetary boundaries and moving away from a linear economy
based on extensive use of fossil and mineral resources
In the Member States, plans to improve the circular economy are also underway. In the Flanders region of
Belgium, the Flanders Circular partnership set out in 2020 to develop a circular work programme for the
food chain. Guidelines of the work programme were defined in 2020, and implementation will begin in
2021. In addition, a bioeconomy policy plan was developed by the Flemish Department of Economy,
Science and Innovation and the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries in 2020. This plan includes a
series of actions ranging from stimulating research and innovation, guiding new collaborations between
industry and agriculture, and accompanying policy measures (such as monitoring, international co-
operation, training and education). The government of Estonia in 2020 included the circular bioeconomy
in the new Estonian Agricultural and Fisheries Strategy 2030 as a horizontal priority, with the strategy
implemented through the CAP. Additionally, the government announced that EUR 23.8 million
(USD 27.1 million) from the Recovery and Resilience Facility would be used for supporting the bioeconomy
in Estonia. The Netherlands continued to develop its “Circular Agriculture” vision in 2020, and plans to
announce more concrete measures and projects in 2021. In Portugal, the government introduced the
National Strategy against Agricultural and Agribusiness Waste in September 2020, and also put into action
the second phase of the Action Plan for the Circular Economy, targeting the revision of the waste
management framework with a focus on the management and prevention of bio-waste.
Although typically considered part of circular economy initiatives, various policy measures specifically
targeted food waste in 2020. At the EU-wide level, in December 2020, the European Food Safety Authority
(EFSA) released a new decision tool to help food business operators decide when to apply the “use by” or
“best before” date to their food products, as clear packaging information and appropriate date marking can
help to reduce food waste.25 In Austria, the “Food Is Precious” initiative was launched, including awareness
and information campaigns, encouragement of donating food that is still edible, and the promotion of
research activities. The government of France launched a new “anti-food waste” national label in 2020,
which aims to valorise efforts and initiatives to reduce food waste. In addition in France, in January 2020
the law against food waste was extended to all private collective caterers, requiring all operators to have
an agreement with an association authorised to accept food aid donations in order to donate all unsold
food still fit for human consumption. Germany continued to implement its National Strategy on Food Waste
Reduction by concluding an agreement with seven umbrella associations of the German agro-food industry
and the hospitality sector in March 2020, setting reduction goals and strengthening co-operation. In Italy,
social protection and food waste reduction were linked through an increase in funding of EUR 40 million
(USD 45.6 million) for that country’s Fund for the distribution of foodstuffs to vulnerable people for 2021,
including securing food that is still edible but no longer saleable. The government of Latvia implemented a
number of food waste-related regulations. In August 2020, a regulation on the requirements for the
distribution of food after the end of minimum validity entered into force, specifying what types of food can
be donated after having passed the “Best before” date, and for how long after said date. A second
regulation allowing retail companies to donate animal origin products such as eggs to charitable
organisations went into effect in March 2020. In Romania in July 2020, a new law clarified the country’s


 259

rules on food donations, including stipulating that donated food is not subject to VAT. Then in August 2020,
Romania issued an implementing regulation that offered other tax incentives to companies which donate
food products nearing their expiration dates. A number of activities took place under Spain’s strategic
framework “More Food, Less Waste” in 2020, including the first national quantification of waste from food
consumption away from home, and the publication of a new report on food waste in the food chain.26
In conjunction with activities on sustainability, several countries undertook policy actions related to water
quality and availability. Greece has several water-related actions planned for 2021, including completing
the sector development programme 2021-25 (in accordance with the national policy for water management
and the national strategy for adaptation to climate change, to include actions such as efficient usage of
water resources and plans for the reconstruction of agri-environmental infrastructure); completing the
second revision of river basin management plans according to the EU Water Framework Directive;
updating the adopted code of good agricultural practices for the protection of waters against pollution by
nitrates from agricultural sources; and signing Ministerial Decisions on sludge recycling from urban waste
water, bio waste management for compost in agriculture, and a code of good agricultural practices for
ammonia emissions control. In Hungary, the Act on Irrigation Farming came into force on 1 January 2020.
The law outlines new responsibilities for the state in the area of irrigation development, designating
irrigation districts as mid-level state planning units that must prepare irrigation development plans. The
regulation also contains rules for the establishments of irrigation easements to allow farmers to use the
lands of others for the purpose of water transfer. Italy announced in 2020 that it would dedicate
EUR 630 million (USD 718 million) over the next seven years for investments in irrigation infrastructure to
combat hydrogeological instability.
Animal health and welfare
Member States in particular enacted a variety of programmes in 2020 seeking to improve animal welfare.
In Austria, from 2021, EUR 120 million (USD 137 million) will be made available for investments in animal
welfare. In conjunction, the country will introduce new subsidy standards for piglet rearing, pig fattening
and cattle farming, and from 2022, the country will no longer provide subsidies for the construction of new
barns which meet only legal minimum standards. Instead, the subsidy rate for investments in animal-
friendly housing for pigs and turkeys will be increased from 25% to 35% of the investment cost. Other
foreseen animal welfare measures in Austria include a reduction in calf transports,27 the establishment of
the national-level Austrian Animal Health Service,28 and rapid implementation of research results in animal
husbandry practice by ensuring that research projects have a strong link to practical implementation
options. In Bulgaria, subsidy rates to cattle farmers demonstrating compliance with animal welfare
standards in their production practices were raised to EUR 20 (USD 23) per head for farms with up to
50 animals, and to EUR 30 (USD 34) per head for farms with more than 50 animals. Bulgaria also
amended its Veterinary Medical Act to introduce more stringent registration and operation requirements
for backyard farms.
On 28 January 2020, the Minister of Agriculture and Food of France announced 15 new measures for the
protection of animal welfare, including phasing out certain breeding practices such as live castration of
pigs and chick crushing, strengthening awareness and training in animal welfare, improving the quality of
life of farm animals,29 and improving animal transport conditions.30 The measures were developed in
consultation with the concerned sectors and animal rights associations, complementing and reinforcing
measures already in place. An extension plan to fight against the abandonment of pets was subsequently
presented on 21 December 2020. On 3 July 2020, the German Parliament agreed on a legislative proposal
that bans mating stalls for sows by 2029 and reduces the period of time sows are allowed to be kept in
farrowing crates by 2036. Farmers are supported in the transition. In Poland, 2020 marked the launch of
the animal welfare measure under that country’s Rural Development programme, beginning with financial
support for introducing practices to improve the welfare of cows and pigs. The country plans to extend the
measure to cover sheep in 2021. In line with this push towards animal welfare in Poland, on 26 June 2020,


260 

the country’s Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development appointed a special delegate (specifically a
Plenipotentiary) for the protection of animals. This Plenipotentiary is tasked with promoting positive
attitudes towards animals and with developing legal solutions concerning the protection of animals and the
conditions in which they should be kept. Foreseen roles include identifying the most serious problems
concerning the protection of animals and proposing appropriate solutions; co-operating with organisations
of farmers, animal breeders and organisations whose objective is to protect animals; and analysing,
evaluating and monitoring the functioning of provisions on the protection of animals. In Spain, the rules
related to intensive pork farms were modified in 2020, including stipulations on the maximum productive
capacity, minimum infrastructure conditions, equipment requirements, biosecurity and animal welfare.
Animal and plant disease
Member States faced an assortment of animal and plant disease outbreaks in 2020, and addressed them
with specific policy measures. Cases of African Swine Fever (ASF) continue to be identified in some
Member States, with subsequent policy responses. In response to the first case of ASF in wild boar
detected in Germany in September 2020, the government of the state of Brandenburg announced that
they would spend EUR 6 million (USD 7 million) to construct a permanent fence along the German-Polish
border to limit the movement of wild boar and decrease the risk that the disease would cross into domestic
pig populations. The State Veterinary Administration of the Czech Republic issued emergency veterinary
measures defining the area near the border with Poland and Germany as an area of intensive boar hunting
– from 16 November 2020, a hunting premium of CZK 2 000 (EUR 76, USD 86) will be paid for each wild
boar caught. Also in November 2020, officials from the Czech Republic, Germany and Poland announced
that they would create an African Swine Fever task force to more regularly exchange information and
ensure better co-ordination of containment measures (including hunting). Programmes to compensate for
ASF-related losses were put in place in some countries. The government of Bulgaria provided a support
package of EUR 17 million (USD 19 million) to compensate for losses due to mandatory culls from an
outbreak of ASF there in 2020. In addition, the Bulgarian Government launched two programmes with a
combined budget of EUR 31 million (USD 35 million) in the summer of 2020 that aim to repopulate small
farms affected by ASF by improving farm-level biosecurity and helping small farms to purchase new
animals. Farmers in Latvia also faced an outbreak, with pig farmers there receiving EUR 1.1 million
(USD 1.3 million) in compensation for culls in 2020. Exceptional assistance to pig producers as a result of
ASF was also provided in Lithuania. Support was also given to farmers in Poland – producers in the areas
covered by ASF restrictions were made eligible for compensation for lost income, with aid of up to
PLN 118 000 (EUR 26 559, USD 30 265) available. Finally, in December 2020, Belgium regained
ASF-free status from the OIE. Accordingly, the ban on repopulation of pig farms will be lifted from early
2021. At the same time, a variety of measures related to wild boar populations (including fencing,
monitoring and destruction) will remain in place over the coming months to prevent new outbreaks of the
disease.
Responses to other animal diseases were also noted. Different strains of avian flu were identified in
various Member States in late 2020, including Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands and
Poland. Bird culls were ordered in Denmark and Germany. In France, an adaptive strategy was followed,
allowing prefects to conduct preventative slaughters for all poultry species within 3 km of identified
contaminated hotspot areas – through January 2021, 61 such hotspot areas had been identified in the
Landes department. Officials in the Netherlands ordered bird culls for affected farms, banned transport of
animals for farms located within 10 km of affected properties, and ordered free range poultry producers to
move their birds indoors after the disease was discovered in wild bird populations. In May 2020, the
government of Bulgaria allocated EUR 3.3 million (USD 3.8 million) for bluetongue vaccines following the
last outbreak there in 2014. Meanwhile, poultry farmers in Latvia received nearly EUR 125 000
(USD 142 443) of compensation in 2020 in response to an outbreak of salmonellosis there.


 261

Measures were also taken to combat plant pests and diseases. In August 2020, the Commission
published a new plan to combat the further spread of xylella fastidiosa, a bacteria that attacks olive and
fruit trees and other plants, including through increased surveillance, awareness building and monitoring.
The plan also requires Member States to carry out annual surveys and develop contingency plans.
Separately, on 7 August 2020, the government of Italy approved a EUR 68 million (USD 77 million)
assistance package for olive farmers in the Puglia region who had been affected by xylella in 2016 and
2017. In addition, the Puglia region announced a further EUR 40 million (USD 46 million) to support
investments to plant new olive varietals more resistant to xylella. Italy also provided an assistance package
of EUR 80 million (USD 91 million) in 2020 to reimburse producers for damage caused by the Brown
marmorated stinkbug. The government of France released a sugarbeet action plan in August 2020, as that
country’s sugarbeet production faced an outbreak of jaundice virus. The plan includes provisions to prevent
pest infestation, research and development, de minimis compensation of losses, and plans for a bill to
allow the use of certain pesticides on seeds under certain conditions.
Livestock, plant health, and plant genetic resources
Some Member States introduced regulations related to livestock, plant health, and plant genetic resources.
The government of Poland passed a new Act on the Organisation of the Breeding and Reproduction of
Livestock, which establishes the principles for breeding species classified as livestock, and introduces
provisions for granting financial support for breeding livestock from the state budget. Poland also put in
place the Act on the Protection of Plants against Pests and the Act on the Main Inspectorate of Plant Health
and Seed Inspection (both of which are implementing statutes for EU regulations), which strengthen the
phytosanitary requirements for plant trade and plant health, including by requiring that imported plants
possess a phytosanitary certificate, and by distinguishing priority pests from quarantine pests. In Spain, a
new regulation on plant genetic resources was approved in March 2020, which regulates access to
Spanish genetic resources following the Nagoya Protocol. The regulation’s objective is to improve plant
genetics while also enhancing the participation and access of farmers to the management of these
resources. Estonia announced the launch of its “Collection, Conservation and Utilisation of Plant Genetic
Resources for Food and Agriculture in 2021-2027” programme in 2021, building on the country’s network
for the conservation of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture that was established in 2007.
Apiculture
Hungary reported various activities in support of apiculture in 2020. The Hungarian National Beekeeping
programme for 2019-2022 already offered support for the acquisition of equipment by beekeepers,
expansion of professional skills, initiatives to maintain bee health, and scientific research. In 2020, new aid
schemes were offered to facilitate market access to beekeeping products and to strengthen consumer
confidence. Further, support to maintain bee health was doubled in 2020. All told, in 2020 the government
raised support for beekeeping to the maximum level that can be provided under national authority.
Digitalisation
Certain Member States enacted actions to improve digitalisation in their agricultural sectors and policy
implementation in 2020. The Belgian region of Wallonia verified the validation of all farm payments using
data from Copernicus Sentinel Satellites in 2020 following the testing phase initiated in 2019, completely
replacing on-farm controls throughout the entire Wallonian territory. Similarly, the Belgian region of
Flanders applied the same verification method to the whole territory in 2020. Officials in Flanders also
began developing a geotagged photo app in 2020, in preparation for the implementation of the next CAP.
In Germany, fourteen sites, located on farm holdings all over Germany, were established to test digital
applications to protect the environment, improve animal welfare, promote biodiversity and reduce
workloads in both crop production and animal husbandry. In July 2020, Portugal launched the Smart Farm


262 

Colab – a collaborative laboratory for digital innovation in agriculture. The lab’s objectives include to
contribute to disseminating the use of digital technologies, as well as to generate innovative and automated
digital solutions for the agricultural sector along the whole value chain, with a focus on the Western region
of Portugal and products such as fruit, vegetables and wine. The laboratory covers the application of
sensors in soil or in harvesting machines, as well as data collection through satellites and drones. In Spain,
training and technical assistance were provided and improvements were made in the interoperability of
data in 2020, all in the context of the country’s 2019 strategy for the digitalisation of agro-food, forestry and
rural sectors and to reduce the urban-rural digital gap. Further, the country reported that a new regulation
facilitating the digitalisation of the monitoring and notification of emissions from livestock is forthcoming.
And in the context of the European EIP-AGRI initiative, the country also issued its third call for innovative
projects related to digitalisation under its National Rural Development Programme in 2020, with
EUR 17 million (USD 19 million) available.
Food safety and traceability
Regulatory changes inside Member States touched on a number of areas in 2020. Regulatory actions
related to food safety and traceability occurred at both the EU and Member State level. In January 2021,
the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) published its first opinion on insect-derived novel food
products, concluding that foods derived from dried yellow mealworm are safe for human consumption
(EFSA NDA Panel, 2021[19]). Also related to food safety, in October 2020, the European Commission
adopted the new EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability, which includes initiatives such as phasing out
the use of the most harmful substances (such as PFAS) in food contact materials and establishing a “one
substance one assessment” process for the risk and hazard assessment of chemicals (EC, 2020[20]). In
June 2020, the Bulgarian Parliament approved a revised Food Act that simplifies existing food legislation,
strengthens food traceability and improves consumer protection. Among other provisions, the Act
mandates the same labelling for food online as food sold in brick-and-mortar stores; bans advertisements
for foods and drinks which are high in trans-fats, salt and sugar; and requires food banks to be approved
and registered as non-governmental organisations.
Contracting
The government of Romania introduced several new regulations, including one in April 2020 that permits
direct partnerships between commercial retailers and agricultural co-operatives, producer associations,
and producers via 12-month contracts, and another in June 2020 that defines the conditions for natural
persons or companies to be able to acquire agricultural land (including requiring the person or firm to have
resided in or carried out agricultural activities in Romania for at least the past five years).
Risk management
Much of the risk management policy focus of 2020 was on putting in place measures to help producers
cope with the impacts of COVID-19 (see Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic). Several
countries also offered ex post assistance for natural hazards. In June 2020, the government of the
Belgian region of Flanders recognised the drought of the summer of 2019 as an agricultural disaster. In
Bulgaria in November 2020, two aid packages were offered to farmers affected by summer and fall drought,
totalling EUR 15.55 million (USD 17.72 million). In Croatia, the Ministry of Agriculture brought forward area
payments amounting to HRK 35 million (EUR 4.6 million, USD 5.3 million) in response to earthquakes and
floods in December 2020, and in January 2021, the ministry provided further area payments, bringing total
payments to earthquake-affected farmers to HRK 93 million (EUR 12.3 million, USD 14.1 million). In the
spring of 2020, the Czech State Agricultural and Intervention Fund received applications for assistance
intended to mitigate the damage caused by spring frosts in 2019, and financial support was paid out during
summer 2020 to eligible producers of affected fruit species. Due to the persistent drought, some German


 263

Länder permitted animal grazing on areas laying fallow or cultivated with catch crops declared as ecological
focus areas, or alternatively their use for fodder production. A variety of measures were put in place in
France in 2020 to respond to that country’s drought conditions. Throughout July, August and
September 2020, livestock producers in a number of departments were permitted to use fallow land for
animal grazing, while producers in other departments were permitted to report the planting of catch crops
and declare those under their ecological focus area. Advance CAP payments were also increased, tax
contributions for most affected farmers were postponed or reduced, a relief tax measure was instituted for
unbuilt land, and disaster relief was made available for producers who exceeded the designated threshold
of damages. Lithuania offered support in 2020 for horticultural and berry-producing holdings which suffered
losses as a result of frosts in 2019. The government of Romania offered direct assistance to producers
affected by drought, instituting a relief package of EUR 217 million (USD 247 million) for wheat and barley
producers. A financial aid package of EUR 0.87 million (USD 0.99 million) was put in place in Slovenia in
2020 to compensate producers who experienced yield reductions in 2019 due to adverse weather
conditions. Spain offered EUR 100 million (USD 114 million) in credit guarantees to farmers who had been
affected by drought in 2020.
Other Member States made changes in their risk management programming. In the Belgian region of
Flanders, the decree of 5 April 2019 removing the distinction between general and agricultural disasters
came into effect on 1 January 2020. With this change, all damage caused by recognised exceptional
weather conditions will be addressed through the Flemish Disaster Fund. The Czech Republic’s Support
and Guarantee Fund for Farmers and Forestry (SGFFF) set up insurance support rates for 2020, providing
subsidies for entrepreneurs in agriculture and forestry of between 50% and 65% of the premium. Hungary
announced various changes in risk management programmes. First, the Ministry of Agriculture there
announced that from 2021, the country’s risk management system would be expanded to include a mutual
risk management fund within the framework of the agricultural crisis insurance system. Participation in the
fund will be voluntary, but participating producers must sign up for a minimum term of three years.
Additionally, the annual budget for insurance premium support was increased from HUF 5 billion
(EUR 14.2 million, USD 16.2 million) in 2019 to HUF 7 billion (EUR 19.9 million, USD 22.7 million) in 2020.
In Italy, a budget of EUR 60 million (USD 68 million) was set for insurance interventions under the National
Solidarity Fund for the period 2021-23, and EUR 70 million (USD 80 million) was designated for
compensatory measures for farms damaged by weather and phytosanitary events under the National
Solidarity Fund for 2021. In addition, EUR 20 million (USD 23 million) was returned to the Regions to repay
advanced payment on relief credit to agricultural businesses damaged by disasters and adverse weather
events. In Poland, new procedures were put in place to determine eligibility for applying for public aid in
times of drought. These procedures involve the use of a designated public application to verify requests
for aid using the level of harvest losses and data on the climatic water balance from the Institute of Soil
Science and Plant Cultivation in Puławy. The application generates a protocol on quantifying the damage
for the farmer, and on that basis, the farmer can apply for aid. The application is intended to standardise
the process of quantifying damages caused by drought, eliminate errors, and reduce processing time for
aid applications.
Support to and regulations on specific groups of farmers
Targeted policy initiatives are underway in various Member States to support particular groups of farmers.
In Hungary, a new law on family farms entered into force on 1 January 2021. The law aims to develop a
family-based agricultural model relying on small and medium-sized farms, encouraging the establishment
of viable economic co-operation and supporting the strengthening of the agricultural middle class as one
of the key tools of increasing agricultural economic efficiency. Hungary also revised the permitted legal
organisations of family farms, which can now choose from three legal forms of operation: they can remain
owner farmers, establish a family farm of owner farmers, or set up a family agricultural company. In the
Belgian region of Flanders, two new producer organisations were officially recognised in 2020 – “milk.be”


264 

for dairy producers, and “belpotato.be” for potato growers. Similarly in the Belgian region of Wallonia, two
new producer organisations were recognised in 2020, both in the beef sector. In Spain, the Ministry has
indicated that one of their priority actions for 2021 is strengthening producer organisations and
associations, and in 2020 they supported activities to integrate farmers in co-operatives and associations,
providing EUR 37 million (USD 42 million) for more than 30 projects. Italy has been providing incentives to
young farmers in the form of the State paying social security contributions for the first 24 months for any
agricultural business opened by an operator under 40 years old. EUR 44 million (USD 50 million) was
designated for this programme in 2020, and EUR 55 million (USD 63 million) was budgeted in 2021.
Specific programmes to support women farmers were instituted in Italy and Spain. In Italy, a revolving
fund of EUR 15 million (USD 17 million) was established to guarantee zero-interest mortgages for female
agricultural entrepreneurs – including those in production agriculture and the processing and marketing
sectors – in 2020. An additional EUR 15 million (USD 17 million) was designated for the measure in 2021
for loans up to EUR 300 000 (USD 341 864) with a maximum duration of 15 years. The Ministry of
Agriculture in Spain is working on the implementation and improvement of the Law of shared ownership of
farms to ensure improved access of women to farm ownership as a means to strengthen the role of women
in agriculture. Additionally, the ministry organised an innovation excellence competition for women in
agriculture in 2020.
Taxation
Various Member States adjusted tax provisions relevant to their agricultural sectors in 2020. In Austria, the
sparkling wine tax was abolished in 2020. Major tax cuts, including social contributions and small business
taxes, were implemented in Hungary in 2020, with substantial implications for the country’s agricultural
sector. In addition, tax rates for cigarettes and smoking tobacco were increased in Hungary, bringing them
in line with the EU mandatory minimum tobacco taxes. Elsewhere, on 1 January 2020 in Latvia, the excise
tax rate on fuel for primary agricultural producers and aquaculture was raised from EUR 55.8 to EUR 62.1
(USD 63.6 to USD 70.8) per 1 000 litres of fuel, in line with an increase of the standard fuel tax rate.
Investment
Food and agriculture were supported through more targeted investment subsidies in some Member States
in 2020. In Bulgaria, the Ministry of Agriculture introduced a subsidy programme for investments in small
slaughterhouses amounting to EUR 1.28 million (USD 1.46 million). The programme will subsidise up to
50% of an eligible investment, up to a ceiling of EUR 45 000 (USD 51 280) per beneficiary. The Czech
Republic’s Support and Guarantee Fund for Farmers and Forestry (SGFFF) in 2020 focused on providing
support to small and medium-sized enterprises in the form of investment and operating loans, at a
concessionary rate of 2.5% annually. A new interest rate subsidy programme was introduced in Hungary
to incentivise investments in agricultural enterprises. The support will be made available for loans up to
HUF 100 billion (EUR 285 million, USD 324 million), with interest subsidies set at 80% of the nominal
interest rate, but not more than 2 percentage points annually. Other calls for investment were opened in
Hungary to increase the competitiveness of livestock farms (HUF 50 billion) (EUR 142 million,
USD 162 million), modernise horticultural farms (HUF 30 billion) (EUR 85 million, USD 97 million) and
support small farms with turnover of EUR 3 000 – EUR 6 000 (USD 3 419 – USD 6 837) to develop
production activities (HUF 2.5 billion) (EUR 7.1 million, USD 8.1 million). Italy enacted several agricultural
investment packages in 2020, including EUR 29.5 million (USD 33.6 million) to strengthen the
competitiveness of agro-food supply chains, EUR 30 million (USD 34 million) for wheat pasta supply chain
contracts, and EUR 30 million (USD 34 million) to eliminate the cost of guarantees for agricultural
entrepreneurs and to facilitate access to credit for investments in technological innovation, precision
agriculture and product traceability. An additional investment programme was set up in 2021, with
EUR 150 million (USD 171 million) designated for a Fund for the development and support of agricultural,


 265

fisheries and aquaculture sectors to promote supply chains, increase competitiveness, improve the quality
of products, and support quality employment, among other objectives.
Other investment packages were introduced with a specific focus on longer-term industry transformation.
At EU level, the “Next Generation EU” plan under the “Recovery Plan for Europe” was introduced, both in
response to COVID-19 and to orient longer-term strategic investment (covered in more detail in the
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic). One Member State likewise enacted a policy
package that contained long-term investment programmes not directly related to COVID-19. Ireland
proposed the Future Growth Loan Scheme, which makes up to EUR 800 million (USD 912 million) in
7-10 year loans available under favourable terms to support strategic long-term investment. This scheme
is available to eligible sectors in Ireland, including those in primary agriculture. Certain endeavours may
qualify for Future Growth Loans, including investment in tangible and intangible assets on agricultural
holdings linked to primary agricultural production (excluding purchases of livestock or of land other than
site costs, or investment in connection with the processing and marketing of agricultural products. The
programme is offered by the Government of Ireland, through the Department of Enterprise, Trade and
Employment and the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, and the Strategic Banking
Corporation of Ireland, supported by the EIB Group’s Guarantee Facility.
Innovation and knowledge
On 4 December 2020, the European Commission launched a new EU Soil Observatory (EUSO). The
EUSO aims to support policymaking in the European Union by providing the Commission and the broader
soil user community with the soil knowledge and data flows needed to safeguard soils; supporting EU
Research and Innovation on soils; and raising societal awareness of the value of soils. In order to carry
out this mission, the EUSO aims to collect high-resolution, harmonised and quality-assured soil information
to track and assess progress by the European Union in the sustainable management of soils and
restoration of degraded soils; support the outcomes of targeted research; foster networking, co-operation
and partnerships among users of soil data and information; and underpin policy development through
meaningful indicators and assessments (EC, 2021[21]). In particular, this work is expected to help with
tracking country progress in meeting sustainability objectives of the next CAP and the F2F Strategy. At the
Member State level, in January 2020, France launched their “Institut Agro” – the National Institute of Higher
Education for Agriculture, Food and the Environment. The Institute is the result of a merger between two
existing programmes (AgroCampus West and Montpelier SupAgro), with the joining of more institutions
envisioned in the coming years. The Institute’s goals include supporting the agricultural and food sectors
with research and innovations to facilitate agroecological, digital and climate transitions, and its work will
be closely linked to INRAE, the National Research Institute for Agriculture, Food and the Environment.
Portugal launched the Innovation Network under the Agricultural Innovation Agenda 2020-30 in
September 2020. The Innovation Network is composed of 24 research centres and focuses on products
such as fruit and vegetables, wine, olive oil, and cereals, and aims to address aspects of digitalisation and
sustainability in these agro-food sub-sectors, targeting in particular technology adoption.
Institutional changes
A handful of institutional changes were implemented at the country level. In Austria, in conjunction with a
re-organisation of ministries in January 2020, the new Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Regions and Tourism
(BMLRT) was established. BMLRT’s agenda includes agriculture, domestic food production, regional value
creation, forestry, water management, mining, tourism and regional policy. The Ministry will also be
responsible for broadband expansion, telecommunications, postal services and the agendas for civil
service. In Poland, inspection services for the merchantable quality of food were re-organised on 1 July
2020, consolidating the activities of the Trade Inspectorate and the Agricultural and Food Quality
Inspectorate under the sole responsibility of the Agricultural and Food Quality Inspectorate.


266 

Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic took place at various levels, with some measures
implemented for the whole of the European Union, while other initiatives were enacted within individual
Member States. The European Union implemented three main types of policies in the agricultural sector
in response to COVID-19: CAP flexibilities, exceptional market measures, and direct support to farmers
and rural areas. Within this framework, Member States chose which measures to implement, based on
their own specific circumstances. Member States also put in place their own regulatory flexibilities, tax
concessions and social contribution measures, investment assistance, and allowances to farm households
to help farmers and agro-food enterprises cope with the financial impacts of the COVID-19 emergency.  At
the same time, agricultural producers or firms in a number of countries were able to access more general
economy-wide assistance packages (which are not covered here), including in Austria, Belgium, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Hungary, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain and Sweden.
Response measures also responded to labour concerns within the sector, ensured minimal interruptions
to food supply chains, and helped to ensure that affected consumers had adequate access to food. Finally,
some policies were put in place to facilitate longer-term recovery and sector transformation.
CAP and regulatory flexibilities
Regarding CAP flexibilities, the deadline for CAP payment applications was extended by one month,
offering more time to farmers to fill in their application for both income support and rural development
payments. This measure was taken up by several Member States, including Czech Republic, France, Italy,
Luxembourg, Slovenia and Spain. Additionally, because it was necessary to minimise physical contact to
reduce the transmission of the virus, on 16 April 2020, farm spot check requirements (to ensure compliance
with eligibility conditions) were reduced as a means to reduce administrative burden and avoid
unnecessary delays.31
Other flexibilities were introduced with respect to rural development included postponement of the
submission of country-level annual reports by national authorities, lifting the requirement on seeking
amendments to partnership agreement, and allowing Member States to amend their rural development
programmes by using money still available under their rural development programme to finance relevant
actions to face the crisis.
Outside of CAP flexibilities, Member States also introduced some of their own regulatory flexibilities. For
example, in Belgium, the mandatory two-day collection period for AA milk was increased to three days. In
Estonia, the “no tax debt” requirement was waved for payment applications to the Agricultural Registers
and Information Board, and deadlines for the implementation of activities were extended. The government
of France allowed veterinarians to use telemedicine services on a trial basis for 18 months, beginning in
May 2020. The French Government also exceptionally authorised the remote sale of plants and plant
products without a plant sanitary passport. Romania introduced an ordinance in mid-April 2020 that
provided flexibility from biofuel mandates for local petroleum stakeholders. Poland put in place regulatory
flexibilities on certain plant protection regulations (such as postponing the periodic re-inspection of plant
protection product equipment) and organic farming inspections, and also put in place a possibility to
conduct tenders for the leasing of properties by electronic communications. Spain extended the
subscription period for agricultural insurance lines whose contract date ended before 16 April 2020, and
also adopted flexibilities for the documentation required for the transport of animals and the rules on driving
and rest periods for the transport of goods.
Exceptional market measures
Three exceptional market measures were adopted on 22 April 2020, allowing Member States to provide
assistance to certain targeted sectors (EC, 2020[22]). First, a private storage aid scheme was proposed (as
authorised in the Common Market Organisation (CMO) Regulation) for certain dairy (butter, cheese and


 267

skimmed milk powder) and meat products (beef, goat and sheep meat), which would allow the temporary
withdrawal of these products from the market for a period of between 2-3 and 5-6 months, depending on
the product. Second, the Commission introduced further flexibility in the implementation of existing market
support programmes for apiculture, fruits and vegetables, table olives and olive oil, wine and school
schemes (covering milk, fruit and vegetables). This flexibility aimed to limit available supply in each sector
to lead to a rebalancing of markets. In addition, it allowed the re-orientation of funding priorities towards
crisis management measures. Finally, the proposal included an exceptional derogation from certain EU
competition rules under Article 222 of the CMO regulation for the milk, flowers and potatoes sectors. This
derogation allowed operators to self-organise and implement market measures at their level for a maximum
period of six months.32 Storage by private operators was also allowed, and consumer price movements
were monitored closely to avoid adverse effects.
Member States uptake of these exceptional measures varied. The European Union reported in
November 2020 that while private storage aid had been opened for cheese, butter, skimmed milk powder,
sheep meat, and beef meat, quantities contracted in storage were in most cases less than half of initial
allowances (WTO, 2020[23]).33 Both Belgium and Latvia reported opening private storage aid (beef, butter
and cheese in the case of Belgium, and beef only in the case of Latvia). Belgium authorised market
stabilisation measures for potatoes, including encouraging free distribution, and use of potatoes for animal
feed and anaerobic digestion. The government of Wallonia also supported the donation of potatoes to food
bank platforms, encouraged supermarkets to extend the period of supply of local potatoes on supermarket
shelves, and supported a promotion campaign to stimulate the consumption of fresh potatoes and
processed products. The government of Spain put in place some operational flexibilities for fruits and
vegetables and the national beekeeping plan.
Several Member States implemented wine sector support measures after the COVID-19 emergency
substantially impacted wine demand – both due to a substantial decline in tourist arrivals, and due to
lockdown-related restaurant closures. These wine support measures were first made available in the
package of exceptional measures adopted on 22 April 2020, with additional wine sector support packages
adopted on 7 July 2020 and 28 January 2021.34 As provided for under these support packages, several
Member States chose to redirect funds under national support programmes for wine to crisis management
measures for the sector. These measures included crisis distillation of wine into other alcohols (reported
in Austria, France, Italy, Hungary, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia and Spain), providing storage aid (for
example, in Bulgaria, France, Italy, Portugal, Slovenia and Spain), and permitting green harvesting of
grapes (including in Bulgaria, Hungary, Slovenia and Spain). One specific example of a wine support
programme comes from Luxembourg. That country’s Viti-vinicole Institute developed and implemented a
wine distillation pilot project in close collaboration with Luxinnovation to obtain basic products used in the
manufacture of disinfectants thru wine distillation. The project aimed to both assist in the fight against the
pandemic by producing the disinfectants, and also provide economic assistance as an indirect aid
programme for wineries and distilleries.
Flexibility was also introduced into the school schemes programme. With the spring lockdowns and
widespread closures of schools, the implementation of the 2019/20 school scheme was severely impacted,
as perishable fruit, vegetable and dairy products could not be delivered as originally intended. In response,
the European Commission clarified that the crisis could be recognised as a case of “force majeure” to
reimburse suppliers for perishable goods (fruit, vegetables and dairy products) that were meant to be
distributed to schools participating in the scheme.
Direct support instruments
Various direct support instruments were permitted in response to COVID-19. The first of these was
flexibility in the use of financial instruments under rural development. These included allowing farmers or
other rural development beneficiaries to benefit from loans or guarantees to cover operational costs of


268 

up to EUR 200 000 (USD 227 909) at favourable conditions, such as very low interest rates or favourable
payment schedules. This provision was used in the Czech Republic, Estonia, and Poland, for example.
The second type of direct support was the development of a new temporary rural development measure
– Measure 2135 – introduced to allow countries with remaining rural development funds to pay farmers
and small agro-food businesses in 2020. The measure was intended to be a vehicle to provide immediate
relief to stakeholders most impacted by the crisis, allowing countries to offer support of up to EUR 5 000
(USD 5 698) per farmer and EUR 50 000 (USD 56 977) per small or medium enterprise. Through the fourth
quarter of 2020, nine Member States had utilised this measure – Bulgaria, Cyprus, Estonia, France,
Greece, Italy, Poland, Romania and Spain. In Romania, for example, funds under this measure were
disbursed to farmers as lump sum payments based on farm size for cattle farmers, sheep and goat farmers,
and fruit and vegetable producers. In addition to funds already disbursed in the countries mentioned above,
Slovenia allocated EUR 3.5 million (USD 4.0 million) to this measure in its November 2020 amendment of
that country’s RDP.
The third direct support initiative was in the form of higher advances of farm payments. To increase
farmer cash flow, the Commission allowed higher advances to farmers under CAP for income support
through direct payments (advanced payments raised from 50% to 70%) and also for certain rural
development payments (advanced payments raised from 75% to 85%). Countries taking advantage of the
direct payment advance included Italy and Poland, while advanced RDP payments were applied in Poland
and Spain.
The final direct support measure allowed higher state aid for farmers and food processing companies
through the State Aid Temporary Framework, adopted on 19 March 2020 (originally set to expire on
31 December 2020, in October 2020 the provision was prolonged for an additional six months to 30 June
2021 and recapitalisation support provisions were extended through 30 September 2021 (EC, 2020[24])).
Most prominently, this measure increased the payment limits for individual entities (to a maximum of
EUR 100 000 (USD 113 955) per farm, or EUR 800 000 (USD 911 638) for food processing and marketing
companies), and also raised the maximum total aid package limits for Member States. This amount can
also be topped up by ‘de minimis’ aid – that is, national support specific to the agricultural sector that can
be granted without prior approval from the Commission and has a ceiling of EUR 20 000 (USD 22 791)36
per recipient. Member States took full advantage of these relaxed State Aid provisions, releasing dozens
of support packages targeted toward agricultural industries whose sales had been most affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic (Table 11.5). All told, through 31 March 2021, announced State Aid measures
directed toward agriculture in response to COVID-19 totalled nearly EUR 6.2 billion (USD 7.1 billion)
– equivalent to more than 11% of the annual CAP budget for 2020 – although it is not yet known exactly
how much of the assistance has been paid out. Most of this additional support is coupled to specific
production.




 269

Table 11.5. State aid measures specific to agriculture in response to COVID-19
Member State
Date
Amount
Eligible Sectors
Aid Type
Belgium
(Brussels-Capital)
April 2020
(SA 57056)
EUR 200 000
Firms active in primary production of
agricultural products and in
aquaculture for the food sector
Direct grants
Belgium (Flanders)
July 2020
(SA 58014)
EUR 35 million
Potato growers (EUR 10 million);
Ornamental plant growers
(EUR 25 million)
Direct grants
Belgium (Wallonia)
September 2020
(SA 58649)
EUR 10 million
Producers and stockers active in the
potato sector
Direct grants

March 2021
(SA 62393)
EUR 6.5 million
Pig farmers with breeding sows
Direct grants
Bulgaria
August 2020
(SA 58328)
EUR 29 million
Farmers breeding large and small
ruminants; potato growers
Direct grants to cover
principal and interest on
loans provided by the
State Fund for Agriculture
Croatia
December 2020
(SA 59815)
EUR 9.3 million
Cattle and sow breeders; producers of
apples, mandarins and potatoes
Direct grants

March 2021
(SA 62105)
EUR 400 000
Farmers in the pig fattening sector
Direct grants
Cyprus
June 2020
(SA 57587)
EUR 1.8 million
Farmers active in primary agricultural
production (in particular, producers of
vegetables, strawberries, herbs,
Valencia oranges, flowers, producers
who participate in farmers’ markets,
and producers without access to
irrigation)
Direct grants

August 2020
(SA 58340)
EUR 500 000
Owners or managers of pig farms in
which breeding sows are reared
Direct grants

December 2020
(SA 60263)
EUR 560 000
Producer groups and producer
organisations active in the agricultural
sector
Direct grants

March 2021
(SA 62228)
(successor to
SA 57587, which
expired 31 Dec 2020)
EUR 1.8 million
Farmers active in primary agricultural
production (in particular, producers of
vegetables, strawberries, herbs,
Valencia oranges, flowers, producers
who participate in farmers’ markets,
and producers without access to
irrigation)
Direct grants
Czech Republic
June 2020
(SA 57475)
EUR 36.3 million
SMEs active in primary agriculture
Direct grants

July 2020
(SA 57848)
EUR 370 million
Firms active in primary agriculture,
food and feed production
Direct grants

November 2020
(SA 59336)
EUR 110 million
Firms active in primary agriculture and
food production
Direct grants

March 2021
(SA 62044)
EUR 110 million
Firms active in primary agriculture and
food production
Direct grants
Estonia
April 2020
(SA 57028)
EUR 200 million
Firms active in agriculture, fishery and
food processing sectors, as well as
companies in rural areas
Public guarantees and
loans

October 2020
(SA 58678)

EUR 1.5 million
MSMEs active in the food processing
sector
Direct grants


270 

Member State
Date
Amount
Eligible Sectors
Aid Type

March 2021
(SA 60666)
EUR 15.8 million
Farmers active in dairy cow, pig,
sheep and goat rearing, as well as in
the potato, quail, strawberry and
vegetable sectors (EUR 12 million);
Farmers active in the beef cattle,
organic cereals, and organic laying
hens sectors (EUR 3.8 million)
Direct grants
Finland
May 2020
(SA 57231,
SA 58794,
SA 61959)
EUR 30 million initially,
modified to EUR 78 million
Firms active in primary agriculture
Direct grants
France
March 2021
(SA 62255)
EUR 25 million
Horticultural producers
Direct grants
Greece
May 2020
(SA 57194)
EUR 10 million
Floriculture primary producers
Direct grants

July 2020
(SA 58029,
SA 58048,
SA 58069)
EUR 51.23 million
Farmers active in primary agricultural
and livestock sectors - primarily sheep
and goat producers (EUR 31.7
million), asparagus farmers
(EUR 4.7 million), and sellers in open
air markets (EUR 14.8 million)
Direct grants

October 2020
(SA 58929)
EUR 39.6 million
Producers in certain horticultural
sectors (Kalamon table olives, early
watermelon, spring potatoes,
greenhouse growers of tomatoes,
cucumbers and eggplants in Crete)
Direct grants

March 2021
(SA 62095)
EUR 26 million
Firms active in primary agriculture in
buffalo breeding, outdoor watermelon
production, greenhouse crops (with
the exception of Crete), and summer
and autumn potatoes
Direct grants
Hungary
May 2020
(SA 57198,
SA 61842)
EUR 283 million initially,
modified to
EUR 694.4 million, then to
EUR 972.2 million
SMEs in the agro-food value chain
Loan guarantees

May 2020
(SA 57329,
SA 61842)
EUR 99 million initially,
modified to EUR 198 million,
then to EUR 278 million
Firms in the agro-food, fisheries,
aquaculture, forestry and game
management sectors
Direct grants
Ireland
August 2020
(SA 58387)
EUR 50 million
Farmers and companies active in the
beef sector
Direct grants

March 2021
(SA 62293)
EUR 45 million
Farmers and companies active in the
beef sector
Direct grants
Italy
April 2020
(SA 57068,
SA 58033, SA 59447
SA 59978,
SA 61438)
EUR 100 million initially,
modified to EUR 350 million
SMEs in the agricultural, forestry,
fishery and aquaculture sectors
State guarantees on
investment and working
capital loans; direct grants

April 2020
(SA 57005)
EUR 50 million
Firms in the agricultural, forestry and
fishery sectors in the Friuli Venezia
Giulia region
Loans with subsidised
interest rates; direct
grants

May 2020
(SA 57185)
EUR 30 million
SMEs in the agriculture and fishery
sectors
Zero-interest loans

May 2020
(SA 57349)
EUR 70 million
Firms in the agricultural and fishery
sectors in the Campania region
Direct grants

May 2020
(SA 57439)
EUR 12 million
Firms in the agricultural sector
Direct grants


 271

Member State
Date
Amount
Eligible Sectors
Aid Type

July 2020 (modified
Dec 2020)
(SA 57947,
SA 59509)
EUR 1.2 billion initially,
modified to EUR 1.5 billion
Firms active in the agriculture, forestry,
fishery, aquaculture and related
sectors
Direct grants; loan
guarantees; repayable
advances; tax and
payment advantages;
reduction or cancellation
of social security and
welfare contributions; tax
deductions; debt write-
offs; other payment
facilities

October 2020
(SA 58418)
EUR 8.5 million
Agricultural co-operatives
Tax offset of up to 70% of
losses on VAT
calculations
Latvia
April 2020
(SA 56932,
SA 57125, SA 57802,
SA 58123, SA 58728,
SA 59305, SA 59865,
SA 62128)
EUR 35.5 million
Firms active in agriculture, fisheries,
food and school catering
Direct grants

May 2020
(SA 57287)
EUR 1.5 million
Primary agriculture producers
Zero-interest loans

March 2021
(SA 62195)
EUR 3 million
MSMEs active in primary agricultural
production
Direct grants
Lithuania
June 2020
(SA 57514,
SA 58344,
SA 60073))
EUR 30.5 million initially,
modified to EUR 49.7 million
Bovine animal (EUR 12 million) and
milk (EUR 37.7 million) producers
Direct grants

June 2020
(SA 57529,
SA 60073)
EUR 59 million
Firms in the agriculture, food, forestry,
rural development and fisheries
sectors
Direct grants; loan
guarantees

July 2020
(SA 57508)
EUR 20 million
Poultry and egg processors (estimated
25 firms)
Direct grants

July 2020
(SA 57823,
SA 60073))
EUR 47.5 million initially,
modified first to
EUR 90 million, then to
EUR 135 million
Firms active in the production and
processing of pig, vegetable and
aquaculture products
Direct grants; interest rate
subsidies

October 2020
(SA 58856,
SA 60073))
EUR 12 million
Poultry producers and poultry
processing firms
Direct grants

November 2020
(SA 59345)
EUR 5 million
Firms active in the fur farming sector
Direct grants
Luxembourg
December 2020
(SA 59726)
EUR 1.5 million
Beef, goat, pork and sheep meat
producers
Direct grants

December 2020
(SA 59945)
EUR 124 500
Winegrowers
Direct grants

December 2020
(SA 59944)
EUR 500 000
Firms active in the processing and
commercialisation of seed
Direct grants

March 2021
(SA 62239)
EUR 1 million
SMEs active in the pig production
sector
Direct grants
Netherlands
May 2020
(SA 57217)
EUR 650 million
Firms in the floriculture, horticulture
and potato sectors, of which
EUR 50 million is earmarked for potato
growers
Direct grants
Malta
September 2020
(SA 58306,
SA 60675)
EUR 1.5 million
Farmers
Direct grants

October 2020
(SA 58297,
SA 60675)
EUR 2.5 million
Animal farmers (Dairy, beef, swine,
sheep, goat, laying hen, broiler, bee,
and rabbit)
Direct grants


272 

Member State
Date
Amount
Eligible Sectors
Aid Type
Poland
June 2020
(SA 57568)
EUR 9 million
Firms active in primary agriculture
Interest rate subsidies

July 2020
(SA 58105)
EUR 95 million
MSMEs in the primary agricultural
sector
Direct grants

November 2020
(SA 59382)
EUR 40 million
Chrysanthemum flower producers
Direct grants

December 2020
(SA 60060)
EUR 39.2 million
MSMEs active in pig breeding
Direct grants
Portugal
August 2020
(SA 58423)
EUR 5 million
SMEs active in the agricultural and
agro-food sectors in the region of
Madeira
Subsidised interest rates
Romania
September 2020
(SA 58450)
EUR 24.7 million
Firms active in the pig breeding sector
Direct grants

September 2020
(SA 58452)
EUR 22.7 million
Firms active in the poultry breeding
sector
Direct grants

September 2020
(SA 58453)
EUR 7.4 million
Firms active in the bovine breeding
sector
Direct grants

November 2020
(SA 59520)
EUR 12.4 million
Winegrowers
Direct grants
Slovenia
October 2020

(SA 58887)
EUR 1.5 million
Farmers and SMEs active in the
processing of agricultural products
Direct grants

October 2020

(SA 59149)
EUR 378 million
Farmers and self-employed in
additional sectors
Direct grants

December 2020
(SA 60270)
EUR 197 000
Farmers and fishermen
Direct grants

March 2021
(SA 62332)
EUR 3.7 million
Wine producers and grape growers
Direct grants

March 2021
(SA 62223)
EUR 4 million
Apple growers
Direct grants

March 2021
(SA 62118)
EUR 1.5 million
Enterprises active in ancillary farming
activities (e.g. agro-tourism, catering)
Direct grants
United Kingdom
December 2020
(SA 60013)
EUR 1.1 million
A company active in Scotland in the
processing of agricultural products in
the poultry sector
Direct grant
TOTAL

EUR 6.16 billion


Note: Measures reported in this table represent assistance packages specific to the agricultural sector approved under Articles 107(2)b, 107(3)b
and 107(3)c TFEU, and under the State Aid Temporary Framework. Note that agricultural sector actors may also have benefitted from all-sector
“umbrella” schemes in some countries. The table includes all measures reported as of 31 March 2021.
Source: (EC, 2021[25]; EC, 2021[26]).
Some Member States reported assisting sectors heavily affected by COVID-19 by reallocating existing
support. In Denmark, authorities decided to boost the slaughter premium for producers of beef and veal
– available through voluntary coupled support – by EUR 8.706 million (USD 9.921 million) to
EUR 32.86 million (USD 37.45 million) in 2020, with the assistance financed by a transfer of funds from
the Basic Payment Scheme. Portugal instead chose to fund an assistance package to its producers
through an exceptional transfer of EUR 85 million (USD 97 million) from Pillar 2 to Pillar 1. The assistance
included higher support to small-scale farmers [increased from EUR 600 (USD 684) to EUR 850
(USD 969) per beneficiary] and higher payment rates for specific products under voluntary coupled support
– EUR 222 (USD 253) per hectare for rice producers, EUR 22 (USD 25) per animal for sheep producers,
and EUR 94 (USD 107) per animal for milk cows.
A number of countries instituted assistance measures for their agricultural sectors that were funded under
the state aid de minimis or other support mechanisms. Austria enacted the Hardship Fund Act on 27 March
2020 to partially compensate the economic losses of agricultural holdings significantly affected by the crisis


 273

through monthly lump sum payments of a minimum of EUR 1 000 (USD 1 140). Austria also instituted a
programme to reimburse fixed costs for Austrian enterprises if their turnover declined by at least 30% from
the previous year, with reimbursements up to EUR 100 000 (USD 113 955) per primary agricultural
enterprise. Belgium set up a nuisance premium programme, providing assistance of EUR 4 000
(USD 4 558) to companies whose physical facilities had to close due to COVID-19. Belgium also put in
place a compensation premium of EUR 3 000 (USD 3 419) for firms that did not have to close, but suffered
large losses in sales due to COVID-19 measures. France provided compensation for the destruction of
horticultural products due to the lack of markets during the lockdown, and also provided support for equine
services (principally pony clubs) that were also forced to close due to the crisis. Spain provided support in
response to the difficulties to the market goat and sheep sectors, to reduce the oversupply of Iberian pork,
and to assist the cut flowers sector.
COVID-related animal culls also took place in certain Member States. After a mutated strain of COVID
was identified on several Danish mink farms, 17 million mink were culled in Denmark. The Danish
Government was approved to pay out DKK 1.9 billion (EUR 255.5 million, USD 291.2 million) as
compensation. Mink culls were also ordered in Ireland, the Netherlands, and Spain – all due to
identifications of cases of COVID-19 in the animals, or as a preventative measure.
Taxation and social contribution measures
Some Member States used the tax system or amended social contribution schemes to reduce the impact
of the crisis on the agricultural sector. Austria put in place a large tax relief package, including reductions
of pension contributions; introduction of income smoothing; reduced tax rates for wage and income; and
abolition of the eligibility conditions for the full flat tax rate with regard to agricultural area, livestock units
and intensive orchards, with the last provision retroactive from 1 January 2020. In the Czech Republic, an
amendment was adopted extending the deadline to claim a refund from excise taxes on oil used for
agricultural primary production and forest management from 31 March 2020 to 12 May 2020. Lawmakers
in the Czech Republic also revised the Act on Excise duties in 2020 to allow beer released to immediate
storage (on which excise duty had already been paid) to be returned to conditional tax exemption status.
Germany made available a tax deferral programme for businesses affected by COVID-19. Hungary offered
reductions in outstanding tax liability by 20%, accelerated disbursement of the amount of reclaimed value
added tax, and extended tax return filing deadlines. In addition, agricultural firms in Hungary in sectors
particularly affected by the pandemic were exempted from paying certain employment-related taxes for a
given period. In Estonia, the diesel fuel excise duty was reduced by 25% from 1 May 2020 to 20 April 2022.
A variety of tax concessions were also enacted in Italy. Farmland and agricultural income were exempted
from the tax base for income tax purposes in 2020 (with a similar provision put in place for 2021); VAT
concessions for the sale of live animals, cattle and pigs, and a reduction on the VAT of ready and cooked
meals down to 10% were extended from 2020 into 2021; a tax credit was given to agricultural and agro-
food businesses belonging to the “Wine Roads” network; firms were given an exemption from paying the
minimum registration tax from agricultural land in 2021, among other provisions; and horticultural firms
were exempt from paying taxes, social security and welfare contributions through 15 July 2020. In Poland,
farmers subject to pension insurance were released from their obligation to pay pension insurance
contributions for the second quarter of 2020, with those contributions financed by the Agricultural Social
Insurance Fund from the state budget. Farmers in Slovenia could also apply for a deferral or exemption
from paying social security contributions.
Investment assistance
Other countries provided aid in the form of investment assistance, including loan guarantees, subsidised
loans, or investment grants. Loan guarantee programmes were set up in a number of Member States,
including Austria, Belgium, Germany, Greece, Ireland, and Spain. Other countries opened new credit lines
and loan schemes. In Hungary, the Széchenyi Agricultural Card Overdraft loan product was launched,


274 

providing flexible conditions and a credit line of HUF 200 million (EUR 569 395, USD 648 852) for working
capital loans. The loans have include a 100% interest and guarantee fee subsidy to agricultural enterprises
for the entire loan term, provided the loan was issued by 31 December 2020. Agricultural enterprises could
also apply to the economy-wide Széchenyi Investment Loan Plus scheme, which offered loans of up to
HUF 1 billion (EUR 2.8 million, USD 3.2 million) for terms of up to six years at concessionary interest rates
of 0.5% annually. Other schemes were opened to support working capital funding of agricultural
enterprises (through the MFB Hungarian Development Bank Ltd., MFB Agricultural Current Asset Loan
Programme 2020, MFB TÉSZ Loan Programme 2020 and MFB Food Industrial Working Capital Loan
Programme 2020). The country also launched the Crisis Agricultural Guarantee Programme through the
AVHGA Rural Credit Guarantee Foundation, which provided HUF 60 billion (EUR 171 million,
USD 195 million) for financing opportunities for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises for working
capital loans, overdrafts and investment loans. Portugal set up a EUR 20 million (USD 23 million) credit
line with interest rates subsidised at 80%, in order to cover losses faced by producers of cut flowers.
Other programmes provided support for existing loans. The Czech Republic’s SGFFF announced their
new “OPERATION 2020” programme in June 2020, which offered a reduction in loan principal for small
and medium-sized primary agriculture enterprises negatively affected by the pandemic. Italy established a
EUR 100 million (USD 114 million) fund under its “Cura Italia” Decree to cover interest on bank loans for
agricultural and fishing companies. In Poland, a facility was set up to allow a deferral for debt repayment
toward the Agency for Restructuring and Modernisation of Agriculture (ARMA).
Investment grants were offered in a few countries. Austria provided tax-free, non-repayable grants worth
7% of the cost of the investment in agricultural or forestry enterprises, with the maximum support raised to
14% of total costs for investments related to greening, digitalisation and health. The country also enacted
a EUR 58 million (USD 66 million) “Processing of Agricultural Products” programme to support 26 firms.
Poland offered up to PLN 1 500 (EUR 338, USD 385) specifically towards the purchase of a desktop or
laptop computer, both to ensure that farmers were able to submit applications electronically to public
administration entities, and to ensure that farm household children would be able to attend remote school.
Allowances to farms and farm households
Other allowances were provided related to the farm household. Farmers in the Czech Republic were
eligible for a nursing allowance for the self-employed from 1 April 2020. Farmers in France who either
suffered from COVID-19 or who were obliged to stay home due to their children not being in school could
apply to receive compensation for work support of up to EUR 112 (USD 128) per day from the Mutual
Agricultural Fund. In Poland, the right to receive a child-care allowance from the Agricultural Social
Insurance Fund was extended for insured farmers and their household members due to constraints in the
functioning of childcare and educational establishments. Also in Poland, a measure was established to
provide an allowance for farmers or their household members during a period of obligatory quarantine or
hospitalisation due to COVID-19. Farmers in Slovenia were also eligible to receive support for an inability
to work due to COVID-19 infection, with the amount equal to the actual loss of income per month, but not
more than 80% of the national minimum wage.
Labour
The bulk of policies put in place relevant to agro-food supply chains in the European Union and its Member
States were to facilitate or accommodate the agricultural labour force. One of the first actions taken in
response to border closures was the publication of practical guidelines to ensure the free movement of
critical workers, including seasonal agricultural workers, within the European Union (EC, 2020[27]).
Seasonal workers were considered critical to the agricultural sector if they were vital to harvesting, planting
and tending functions – particularly with respect to the crop season already underway when restrictions
were put in place.


 275

Indeed, securing labour became a huge concern for many countries, and a number of them put in places
measures to facilitate the recruitment of agricultural labour. In the Czech Republic, the Ministry of
Agriculture set up an information hotline to answer questions on agricultural labour, and also set up several
platforms to connect the supply and demand of seasonal workers (including by linking universities, labour
offices, and information services for chambers of commerce and labour unions). The Czech Republic also
put in place the priority processing of seasonal visas for the agriculture and food sectors, and programmes
were set up to invite university students to participate in work in the agricultural, food and forestry sectors
to address labour shortages. The government of Estonia provided support for the replacement of
agricultural workers who had contracted COVID-19. France set up a support plan to ease rules governing
access to employment for the agricultural and agro-food sector, including measures to simplify recruitment,
a platform to match employment supply and demand, and incentives to the unemployed to join the sector
temporarily. Finland doubled its quota of seasonal farm workers allowed into the country from outside of
the European Union to 9 000 workers in order to cover domestic farm labour needs in light of other EU
movement restrictions. Germany put in place a plan from April through June 2020 to ensure that seasonal
workers were able to travel to the country, provided that travel occurred by air and to/from dedicated
airports, under which employers paid all expenses for transportation, health checks and other costs due to
social distancing requirements. Germany also extended eligibility for contracts that do not involve
payments to the social security system to allow temporary workers to stay longer. Furthermore, several
online platforms helped to connect producers in need of seasonal workers with people eligible for
employment in planting and harvesting activities. Hungary extended the annual time limits for both
occasional and seasonal workers from 120 to 180 days in order to ease labour shortages. In May 2020,
Italy issued the “Relaunch” Decree, which addressed labour shortages in agriculture by encouraging
recipients of social safety net programmes to sign agricultural contracts, and allowed some foreign workers
to obtain a six month residency permit to increase the number of workers available for agricultural labour.
The government of Spain established extraordinary measures to encourage recruitment of seasonal
workers in the agricultural sector, including unemployed persons living near farms, migrants, and young
people from third countries.
Some Member States put in place programmes or measures intended to ensure adequate living and
working conditions for agricultural workers. France extended their accommodation plan for seasonal
agricultural workers, providing EUR 150 (USD 171) per month, up to a total of EUR 600 (USD 684) for
these workers. In the Netherlands, the COVID-19 pandemic brought to light the conditions of migrant
agricultural labourers in the country. In response, the Dutch government set up a “Protection of Labour
Migrants” Taskforce, which has recommended some actions to improve the labour conditions of
agricultural migrant workers. Spain put in place rules to ensure the safety in transport and accommodation
of farmworkers during the pandemic.
Food supply chains
At the national level, various initiatives were introduced that targeted the functioning of food supply
chains. In May 2020, the government of Bulgaria authorised a temporary market regulation (through
31 December 2020) mandating that most dairy products sold in retail chains with over ten shops be
produced from 100% Bulgarian milk. In a similar vein, in June 2020, the Bulgarian government adopted an
additional temporary market regulation mandating that retail chains allocate designated store shelf space
to locally-produced foods, including fruits and vegetables, through 31 December 2020. The Bulgarian
Government also allocated EUR 2.56 million (USD 2.92 million) under the COVID-19 de minimis scheme
to assist the marketing of greenhouse vegetables. The government of the Czech Republic prepared
emergency plans for possible food supply disruptions, and reported that the vast majority of food
businesses also had emergency plans in place. One preventative measure taken by Czech businesses,
for example, was the fragmentation of the operations of larger bakeries, such that they were less integrated
and could continue production in the event that one site needed to shut down operations due to quarantine.


276 

In Portugal, the Ministry of Agriculture launched a digital marketplace (Prove Viseu Dão Lafões) in
May 2020 for selected agro-food products (including wine, cheese, honey and jam) as part of the existing
Elimenta Quem o Alimenta campaign that directly connects small producers to consumers.
Other countries instituted measures to ensure smooth supply chain functionality. Agricultural industry
stakeholders in France held discussions with the government regarding measures to facilitate the
continuation of the logistics chain for the transport of goods, with the government agreeing to grant
regulatory derogations where needed to ensure the fluidity of transport operations, among other measures.
In Luxembourg, the government instituted a “Food Policy Council” made up of stakeholders from the entire
local/regional public and private food system to promote better co-ordination of local actors in the food
system, their networking and the sharing of information on the activities of each.
Domestic consumer policies
Several COVID-19 response policies attempted to assist consumers in need, although many of these
measures also benefitted producers. In both the Czech Republic and Poland, food originally intended for
the school scheme was diverted to food banks after schools were closed by lockdown, and Poland also
implemented a provision to make produce that would have been provided to schools available to pupils
attending remote lessons instead. Italy spent EUR 20 million (USD 23 million) purchasing olive oil and
EUR 21 million (USD 24 million) on Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) cheese using part of the
EUR 300 million (USD 342 million) set aside for a food aid emergency fund, which comes from the
European Fund for Aid to the Most Deprived. The olive oil was to be bought through public tenders and
distributed to those in need. Italy also allocated EUR 250 million (USD 285 million) for its Food Emergency
Fund, designed to ensure the distribution of food staples to destitute people. In Poland, the government
put in place provisions to set maximum wholesale prices or retail trade margins for goods and services
important for the protection of human health or safety or in terms of household living costs. These included
agricultural goods, and the Agricultural and Food Quality Inspectorate, among other government ministries,
was tasked with ensuring that enterprises adhered to the measure. Portugal put in place a payment of 40%
of the average market value obtained in the past five years to producers of selected fruits (raspberry,
blackberry, blueberry and strawberry) who delivered their products to social solidarity non-profit
associations or food banks in lieu of having the products go to waste.
Other measures were taken to improve consumer safety. In the Czech Republic, for example, new rules
were adopted in April 2020 allowing farmers’ markets to resume, provided that more space was provided
between stalls, hand sanitisers were available, and snacks for immediate consumption were prohibited.
Long-term recovery and transformation
Aside from the immediate crisis response and sector support measures, the European Union also
proposed a broad, longer-term response and recovery effort, which will have implications for agricultural
policy as well. This “Recovery Plan for Europe” is comprised of two major initiatives: “Next Generation EU”,
and a reinforced EU budget (the Multiannual Financial Framework or MFF), both approved in
December 2020 for 2021-27. Next Generation EU is a proposed temporary recovery instrument with a
budget of EUR 750 billion (USD 855 billion), with three primary objectives, each with their own supporting
initiatives:

Supporting Member States in recovering, repairing and emerging stronger from the crisis,
including:
o
The European Recovery and Resilience Facility [EUR 560 billion (USD 638 billion), of which
EUR 310 billion (USD 353 billion) will be available for grants and EUR 250 billion
(USD 285 billion) for loans]


 277

o
REACT-EU
recovery
assistance
for
cohesion
and
EU
territories
[EUR 55 billion
(USD 63 billion) of additional cohesion policy funding from 2020-22]
o
Supporting Member States in accelerating the green transition to a climate-neutral economy
through the “Just Transition Fund” of up to EUR 40 billion (USD 46 billion)
o
Reinforcing the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) with and addition
EUR 15 billion (USD 17 billion) in funding, to support rural areas in making structural changes
in line with the European Green Deal, Biodiversity and Farm-to-Fork strategies

Kick-starting the economy and help private investment:
o
An enhanced InvestEU Programme, [EUR 15.3 billion (USD 17.4 billion)], combined with a
new Strategic Investment Facility to be equipped with EUR 15 billion (USD 17 billion)
o
A new solvency Support Instrument to support the equity of viable companies [EUR 31 billion
(USD 35 billion)]

Learning the lessons of the crisis and addressing Europe’s strategic challenges:
o
The establishment of EU4Health, a new health programme to strengthen health security and
prepare for future health crises [EUR 9.4 billion (USD 10.7 billion)]
o
Reinforcing rescEU, the EU’s Civil Protection Mechanism, to better respond to large-scale
emergencies [EUR 3.1 billion (USD 3.5 billion)]
o
Reinforcing other programmes that aim to make the European Union more resilient in
addressing challenges brought along by the pandemic and its consequences, including Horizon
Europe, the Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation Instrument (NDICI),
Humanitarian Aid Instrument, Digital Europe Programme, Connecting Europe Facility, and the
Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA)
Individual countries also announced ambitious long-term sector recovery and transformation plans in
response to the COVID-19 crisis. In September 2020, France announced an agriculture and forestry plank
of the French recovery plan, allocating EUR 1.2 billion (USD 1.4 billion) to reinforce food sovereignty;
accelerate the transition to agro-ecological practices while ensuring consumer access to healthy,
sustainable and local food; and support agriculture and forestry’s adaptation to climate change. Specific
measures under the plan include:

A National Strategy on Vegetal Proteins to increase French production of protein-rich feeds (such
as soybeans) and pulses by 40% over the next three years, with EUR 100 million (USD 114 million)
in support, as a means to reduce import dependency for animal feed.

EUR 346 million (USD 394 million) to accelerate the agro-ecological transition.

EUR 200 million (USD 228 million) to improve access to healthy, sustainable and local food.

EUR 300 million (USD 342 million) to adapt French agriculture and forestry to climate change,
including by improving resilience to drought through investments in water resource management
and more drought-tolerant crop varieties.
In the same vein, Luxembourg set up an “Innovation Hub” to facilitate the networking of different actors
from different sectors to jointly develop innovative solutions to challenges related to agricultural policy, the
need for a sustainable production system and the climate emergency. The Ministry of Agriculture of
Luxembourg has also requested the building of a digital agricultural platform for information,
communication and data exchange for farms, to provide more holistic agricultural advice in the face of a
multitude of future challenges.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
The European Union’s simple average MFN applied tariff rate for agricultural products was 11.4% in
2019, down from 12% in 2018 (WTO, 2020[28]). This applied tariff rate for agricultural products remains


278 

nearly three times the average applied tariff rate for non-agricultural products, calculated at 4.2%. This
higher average for agriculture is partially a result of applied duties above 15% for a number of product
categories, including for animal products, dairy, sugars and confectionary, and beverages and tobacco.
EU import duties for durum wheat, common wheat, rye, maize and grain sorghum are based on the
difference between European reference prices and world benchmark prices. Duties on rye, maize and
grain sorghum were adjusted seven times in 202037 due to both changes in relative prices and exchange
rate movements, rising to a high of EUR 10.40 (USD 11.85) per tonne from 5 May 2020 to 22 June 2020.
From 27 August 2020, these duties were set at EUR 0 (USD 0) per tonne (EC, 2020[29]). Prior to the
fluctuations in 2020, duties on these products had been set at EUR 0 (USD 0) per tonne since 3 March
2018 (EC, 2020[30]).
During the 2019 calendar year and 2018/19 marketing year, the European Union administered 124 import
tariff rate quotas (TRQs). During that time period, nearly a third of the quotas (38) were filled at 80-100%,
including those for fresh or frozen chicken cuts, tomatoes, almonds, grain sorghum, cane or beet sugar
and pasta. However, nearly half of TRQs (60) had a fill rate of less than 10%, with 21% of quotas registering
no import volumes (WTO, 2020[31]).
The price-based special safeguard system was operationalised in marketing year 2019/20 for certain
frozen chicken carcasses, boneless chicken cuts, and some preparations of poultry meat. During the same
period, the volume-based special safeguard action was not invoked. However, the system was made
operational at the level of calculation of figures for the trigger volumes for some fruit and vegetable
products, including tomatoes, cucumbers, artichokes, courgettes, oranges, clementines, mandarins,
lemons, table grapes, apples, pears, apricots, cherries, peaches and plums (WTO, 2020[32]).
Duties on Indica rice imported from Cambodia and Myanmar were reduced from EUR 175 (USD 199)
per tonne to EUR 150 (USD 171) per tonne on 1 January 2020, and then further reduced to EUR 125
(USD 142) per tonne on 1 January 2021. These tariffs were introduced following a 2018 safeguard
investigation that determined that duty-free rice imports from the two nations under the European Union’s
“Everything But Arms” tariff preference regime caused economic damage to the rice sector in Europe.
These safeguard tariffs are scheduled to no longer be applied in 2022.
On 9 September 2020, EU tariffs on imports of certain husked rice were revised up to EUR 65 (USD 74)
per tonne from EUR 42.50 (USD 48.4)  per tonne as a result of EU imports of rice greater than
650 000 tonnes from 1 September 2019 to 31 August 2020. This tariff revision was carried out in
accordance with Commission Regulation No. 1549/2004 regarding the arrangements for importing rice.
Prior to this revision, rice tariffs were last adjusted in March 2020, after imports over the previous six
months fell below the triggering threshold, and duties were revised downward accordingly.
The European Union also undertook various additional trade policy initiatives in 2020. Related to trade
policy enforcement, the European Commission appointed its first Chief Trade Enforcement Officer,
(CTEO) created as a new Deputy-Director General within the Directorate-General for Trade on 24 July
2020. The CTEO will be tasked with ensuring that the provisions of EU trade agreements (including
sustainable development and labour rights commitments) are implemented and enforced. Then on
22 September 2020, the Commission undertook a new responsible business conduct initiative towards
more sustainable cocoa production, by establishing a new multi-stakeholder dialogue comprised of
representatives from Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, the European Parliament, EU Member States, cocoa growers
and civil society. This dialogue aims to deliver concrete recommendations to advance sustainability across
the cocoa supply chain through collective action and partnerships, and will be supported by technical
assistance for cocoa-producing countries. Finally, on 13 October 2020, the Commission launched a new
trade facilitation initiative in the form of a new Access2Markets portal designed to support trade by small
businesses either exporting from, or importing into, the European Union (EC, 2020[33]). The portal provides
product-by-product information on tariffs & taxes, customs procedures, rules of origin, trade barriers,


 279

product requirements and statistics for all EU countries and for more than 120 export markets around the
world.
Trade Agreements
The European Union released its fourth annual report on the implementation of EU Free Trade
Agreements on 12 November 2020 (EC, 2020[34]). The report noted that, in 2019, EU agro-food exports
and imports under FTAs grew 8.7% and 8.3%, respectively, rising in value and growing faster than overall
agro-food trade. In fact, EU agro-food trade with FTA partner countries as a share of total agro-food trade
has been rising over the past ten years, reaching 40% of total agro-food imports, and 30% of total EU agro-
food exports in 2019. The report also offered examples of how trade agreements have helped to provide
a forum to address potential or existing trade barriers due to sanitary and phytosanitary measures. The
European Union currently has 45 applied trade agreements in force, and negotiations are underway with
additional trading partners (EC, 2020[35]). In July 2020, the European Commission also published
Sustainability Impact Assessments for two additional agreements that have yet to be finalised – the
EU-Mercosur Association Agreement and the EU-Indonesia Agreement. Both assessments include
sectoral analyses and recommendations for agriculture.
On 31 January 2020, the United Kingdom left the EU Single Market and Customs Union, ending the free
movement of people, goods and services with the European Union. The rules governing trade and
movement between the two are laid down in the draft EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement, which
was agreed on 24 December 2020 and approved by the Parliament and Council on 30 December 2020.
The Agreement has three pillars: a free trade agreement; a partnership framework for law enforcement
and judicial co-operation; and a horizontal governance agreement. Terms of the free trade agreement
include duty and quota free imports on all goods that comply with rules of origin provisions (EC, 2020[36]).
Effective on 1 January 2021, EU trade preferences for the Western Balkans38 were extended for five
years (through 31 December 2025) (EC, 2020[37]). These preferences are in the form of Autonomous Trade
Measures (ATMs), including the suspension of customs duties otherwise applied to fruit and vegetables
exported to the European Union and an additional wine quota. These preferences have been in force since
2000.
The European Union and China signed the Agreement on Cooperation on, and Protection of,
Geographical Indications (GIs) on 14 September 2020. The agreement, which was concluded in
November 2019, commits both parties to protecting 100 of the other’s GI products upon entry into force,
with lists of an additional 175 GIs from both parties to be registered within four years. European products
gaining protection under the agreement include Cava, Gorgonzola, Irish cream and Prosciutto di Parma,
while the list of Chinese products includes Anhua Dark Tea, Cangshan Garlic, Xixia Mushroom and
Wuchang Rice (EC, 2020[38]). The agreement entered into force on 1 March 2021.
The EU-Viet Nam Free Trade Agreement entered into force on 1 August 2020. Under the terms of the
agreement, the European Union will progressively phase out duties for most products over a period of
seven years, while Viet Nam will reduce tariffs on EU goods over ten years. The European Union
established duty-free tariff rate quotas for a variety of Vietnamese agricultural imports under the
agreement: 30 000 tonnes of milled rice; 20 000 tonnes of husked rice and 30 000 tonnes of fragrant rice,
as well as quotas for sweet corn, garlic, mushrooms, sugar and manioc starch. The tariff on broken rice
will be phased out over five years, starting with a 50% cut. Viet Nam will progressively eliminate duties for
EU products –beef and olive oil will be liberalised over three years; dairy, fruit and vegetables will be
liberalised over five years; frozen pork meat, food preparations and wine will be liberalised over seven
years; and chicken and beer will be liberalised after ten years. At the end of the implementation period, an
average tariff of 1.1% will apply to agricultural goods originating in Viet Nam and 2.1% to processed
agricultural products while the average tariff for EU agricultural exports will be 2.6%. Viet Nam will also


280 

recognise and protect 169 EU GIs, while 39 Vietnamese GIs will be recognised and protected in the
European Union (EC, 2019[39]).
On 28 April 2020, the European Union and Mexico finished negotiations on a new EU-Mexico trade
agreement, which will supersede the EU-Mexico Global Agreement that has been in force since 2000.
The new agreement will fully liberalise more than 85% of the agricultural tariff lines that were left out of the
original accord. For the remaining lines (with the exception of sugars and sweeteners), market access was
negotiated in the form of TRQs. The European Union established TRQs for imports of various Mexican
products, including beef, chicken breast, egg yolks, and frozen ham. In turn, Mexico established TRQs for
imports of certain European products, including mature cheeses, fresh cheeses, skimmed milk powder,
pork and poultry. In addition to improved market access on agricultural products, the agreement promotes
co-operation on issues related to animal welfare and antimicrobial resistance (EC, 2018[40]). The
agreement is awaiting signature and conclusion from the European Council and Parliament.
Disputes
On 17 February 2020, the European Union requested that a panel be established in the dispute over anti-
dumping duties imposed by Colombia on imports of certain preserved or frozen potatoes originating in
Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany. Subsequently, a panel was composed to consider the dispute on
24 August 2020 (WTO, 2020[41]).
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The European Union put in place some trade measures in response to COVID-19, but most were unrelated
to agriculture.39 One measure that did impact agricultural supply chains was the designation of Green
Lanes to ensure that trans-European trade in goods under a functioning single market could continue even
in the presence of internal border controls erected to protect public health (EC, 2020[42]). These Green
Lanes, based on designated key border crossing-points, had border crossing checks not exceeding
15 minutes. Passage was granted for all goods, including agro-food products. Provisions were also made
to accept e-certificates or copies of original documents to facilitate trade, through 1 February 2021.40 For
example, authorities in Germany reported accepting these e-certificates.
Contextual information
The European Union is the largest economic region covered in this report, accounting for 21% of the
economic activity of all countries covered herein. While the contribution of agriculture to both GDP and
employment has declined since 2000, the share of agriculture in the region’s exports increased
(Table 11.6). More than 40% of the region’s landmass is dedicated to agriculture, accounting for nearly
60% of arable land use. Crops (including cereals, oilseeds, fresh fruit and vegetables, and plants and
flowers) predominate in agricultural output, accounting for 57% of total production. Livestock products
– including dairy, beef and veal, pig meat, sheep meat, poultry and eggs – account for the remainder.




 281

Table 11.6. European Union: Contextual indicators

European Union
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
9 928
24 082
24.9%
21.1%
Population (million)
378
513
8.8%
9.9%
Land area (thousand km2)
3 127
4 242
3.7%
5.0%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
140 572
181 102
4.6%
5.9%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
114
116
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
26 288
46 776
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
11
12
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
1.8
1.4
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
4.3
3.9
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
6.0
7.2
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.8
6.3
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
57
57
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
43
43
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
53
58
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year. EU15 for 2000 and EU28 for the most recent year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
GDP growth in the region fell 6.2% in 2020, reflecting the fallout of the COVID-19 emergency. Prior to
2020, GDP growth had been positive since 2013 (Figure 11.5). Despite the economic contraction, the
unemployment rate increased only marginally to 7.1% in 2020 – likely due to government rescue packages
intended to blunt the economic impact of the crisis. In fact, in spite of the crisis, the unemployment rate in
2020 was reported as more than three points lower than the 10.8% reported in 2013. Inflation declined in
2020 to 0.7%, remaining under 2% since 2013. While these indicators reflect the EU aggregate, economic
conditions vary widely among the different Member States.
The European Union has been the world’s largest agro-food exporter since 2013, and remains one of the
largest importers as well (Figure 11.6). The region is a net food exporter, with agro-food products
accounting for 7.2% of all EU exports and 6.3% of all EU imports. The region’s agro-food exports are
overwhelmingly comprised of processed goods for final consumption (63%), while imports are more evenly
distributed among the four categories, with primary goods for industry accounting for the largest share of
imports (29%).


282 

Figure 11.5. European Union: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Note: EU28. Information regarding 2020 refers to European Union – 27 countries, excluding the United Kingdom
Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; ILO estimates and projections and Eurostat.
Figure 11.6. European Union: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding. Extra-EU trade: EU15 for 2000-2003; EU25 for 2004-06; EU27 for 2007-13 and EU28
from 2014.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
At 0.5%, agricultural output growth in the European Union over the period 2007-16 was far below the world
average of 2.2% (Figure 11.7). Total Factor Productivity (TFP) grew over the period by 1.1% on average,
driven by a reduction in primary factor inputs including labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Rising TFP has been achieved in the sector along with a reduction of certain environmental pressures, as
illustrated through various environmental indicators (Table 11.7). From 2000 to 2019, the region’s nitrogen
balance fell by nearly one quarter, the phosphorous balance declined by more than 70%, and the share of
agriculture in water abstractions fell by 36%. At the same time, although the European Union has achieved
reductions in these indicators, some still remain high by comparison. For example, the region’s nitrogen
balance is nearly double the OECD average. And while the region achieved improvements in most
environmental indicators, agriculture’s contribution to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions worsened over
the period, rising by 14% from 2000 to 2019.
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
26
9
23
63
29
14
22
14
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


 283

Figure 11.7. European Union: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery. EU28.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 11.7. European Union: Productivity and environmental indicators

European Union
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.8%
1.1%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
71.7
54.2
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
7.5
2.0
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.0
2.5
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
9.0
10.3
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
..
..
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
41.3
26.5
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
..
..
9.3
8.5
Note: * or closest available year. TFP annual growth rate: EU28. Environmental indicators: EU15 for 2000 and EU28 for the most recent year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


0.05%
0.5%
-0.7%
0.05%
1.1%
1.6%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
European Union
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


284 

References

EC (2021), Coronavirus Outbreak - List of Member State Measures Approved Under Articles
107(2)b, 107(3)b and 107(3)c TFEU and under the State Aid Temporary Framework,
https://ec.europa.eu/competition/state_aid/what_is_new/State_aid_decisions_TF_and_107_2
b_107_3b_107_3c.pdf.
[25]
EC (2021), EU Soil Observatory - soil monitoring in EU, https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/eu-soil-
observatory/monitoring.
[21]
EC (2021), State Aid Cases Database,
https://ec.europa.eu/competition/elojade/isef/index.cfm?clear=1&policy_area_id=3.
[26]
EC (2020), 2020 Report on Implementation of EU Trade Agreements: 1 January 2019 - 31
December 2019, European Commission DG Trade, Brussels,
https://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2020/november/tradoc_159039.pdf (accessed on
19 January 2021).
[34]
EC (2020), A New Circular Economy Action Plan for a Cleaner and More Competitive Europe,
European Commission, Brussels, https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/resource.html?uri=cellar:9903b325-6388-11ea-b735-
01aa75ed71a1.0017.02/DOC_1&format=PDF.
[17]
EC (2020), Access2Markets Portal, https://trade.ec.europa.eu/access-to-markets/en/content.
[33]
EC (2020), “Agreement between the European Union and the Government of the People’s
Republic of China on Cooperation on, and Protection of, Geographical Indications”, Official
Journal of the European Union, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv%3AOJ.L_.2020.407.01.0003.01.ENG&toc=OJ%3AL%3A2020%
3A407%3ATOC.
[38]
EC (2020), An EU-wide assessment of National Energy and Climate Plans, European
Commission, Brussels, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?qid=1600339518571&uri=COM%3A2020%3A564%3AFIN.
[16]
EC (2020), Analysis of Links between CAP Reform and Green Deal, European Commission,
Brussels, https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/food-farming-
fisheries/sustainability_and_natural_resources/documents/analysis-of-links-between-cap-and-
green-deal_en.pdf.
[15]
EC (2020), Bringing Nature Back into our Lives: EU 2030 Biodiversity Strategy, European
Commission, Brussels,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/api/files/attachment/865560/factsheet-EU-
biodiversity-strategy_en.pdf.pdf.
[14]
EC (2020), CAP Expenditure in the Total EU Expenditure, European Commission, Brussels,
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/food-farming-fisheries/farming/documents/cap-
expenditure-graph1_en.pdf (accessed on 20 January 2021).
[6]
EC (2020), Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability Towards a Toxic-Free Environment, European
Commission, Brussels, https://ec.europa.eu/environment/pdf/chemicals/2020/10/Strategy.pdf.
[20]


 285

EC (2020), “Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/316 of 2 March 2018 fixing the
import duties in the cereals sector applicable from 3 March 2018”, Official Journal of the
European Union, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32018R0316&qid=1610970648318.
[30]
EC (2020), “Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/1221 of 26 August 2020 fixing the
import duties in the cereals sector applicable from 27 August 2020”, Official Journal of the
European Union, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32020R1221&qid=1610970648318.
[29]
EC (2020), Communication from the Commission on the Implementation of the Green Lanes
under the Guidelines for Border Management Measures to Protect Health and Ensure the
Availability of Goods and Essential Services, European Commission,
https://ec.europa.eu/transport/sites/transport/files/legislation/2020-03-23-communication-
green-lanes_en.pdf.
[42]
EC (2020), Coronavirus: Commission announces exceptional measures to support the agri-food
sector, European Commission, Brussels,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_20_722.
[22]
EC (2020), Coronavirus: seasonal workers included in new guideliens to ensure free movement
of critical workers, https://ec.europa.eu/info/news/coronavirus-seasonal-workers-included-
new-guidelines-ensure-free-movement-critical-workers-2020-marzo-30_en.
[27]
EC (2020), EU Trade Agreements: Delivering for Europe’s Businesses, European Commission,
https://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/press/index.cfm?id=2211#.
[35]
EC (2020), EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Protecting European Interests, Ensuring
Fair Competition, and Continued Cooperation in Areas of Mutual Interest, European
Commission, Brussels, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_2531.
[36]
EC (2020), Future of the common agricultural policy, https://ec.europa.eu/info/food-farming-
fisheries/key-policies/common-agricultural-policy/future-cap_en.
[13]
EC (2020), How the bioeconomy contributes to the European Green Deal, European
Commission, Brussels, https://op.europa.eu/en/web/eu-law-and-publications/publication-
detail/-/publication/66722c8d-2e03-11eb-b27b-01aa75ed71a1.
[18]
EC (2020), “Regulation (EU) 2020/2172 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16
December 2020 amending Council Regulation (EC) No 1215/2009”, Official Journal of the
European Union, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32020R2172&qid=1608547452287.
[37]
EC (2020), State aid: Commission prolongs and expands Temporary Framework to further
support companies facing significant turnover losses,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_1872.
[24]
EC (2020), Summary Report on the Implementation of Direct Payments (Except Greening):
Claim Year 2018, European Commission, Brussels,
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/food-farming-
fisheries/key_policies/documents/summary-report-implementation-direct-payements-claim-
2018.pdf.
[10]


286 

EC (2019), Direct payments 2015-2020 decisions taken by Member States: State of play as from
December 2018, European Commission, Brussels,
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/food-farming-
fisheries/key_policies/documents/simplementation-decisions-ms-2018_en.pdf (accessed on
20 March 2020).
[9]
EC (2019), Guide to the EU-Vietnam Trade and Investment Agreements, European Commission,
Delegation of the European Union to Vietnam,
https://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2016/june/tradoc_154622.pdf.
[39]
EC (2018), New EU-Mexico Agreement: The Agreement in Principle, European Commission,
https://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2018/april/tradoc_156791.pdf.
[40]
EC (2017), The Small Farmers Scheme, European Commission Directorate-General for
Agriculture and Rural Development, Brussels, https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/food-
farming-fisheries/key_policies/documents/small-farmers-scheme_en.pdf.
[44]
EC (2013), Public Storage Flash Report 1/10/2012-31/05/2013, European Commission,
Brussels,
https://www.fega.es/sites/default/files/imported/PwfGcp/imagenes/es/D_2773193_2013_EN.p
df.
[12]
EC (n.d.), Beef: Information on the role of market measures, market monitoring, and the legal
bases for the beef sector, European Commission, Brussels, https://ec.europa.eu/info/food-
farming-fisheries/animals-and-animal-products/animal-products/beef_en.
[43]
EFSA NDA Panel (2021), “Scientific Opinion on the safety of dried yellowmealworm (Tenebrio
molitor larva) as a novel food pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2015/2283”, EFSA Journal,
Vol. 19/1, https://doi.org/10.2903/j.efsa.2021.6343.
[19]
ENRD (2016), Focus Area 2B: Entry of skilled farmers into the agricultural sector, European
Network for Rural Development, Brussels, https://enrd.ec.europa.eu/sites/enrd/files/focus-
area-summary_2b.pdf (accessed on 20 March 2020).
[11]
European Parliament (2021), Financing of the CAP, European Parliament,
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/106/financing-of-the-cap.
[4]
European Parliament (2021), The Common Agricultural Policy - Instruments and Reforms,
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/107/the-common-agricultural-policy-
instruments-and-reforms.
[5]
European Parliament (2021), The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) and the Treaty, European
Parliament, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/103/the-common-
agricultural-policy-cap-and-the-treaty.
[2]
Grant, W. (2020), “The Common Agricultural Policy: An Overview”, EuropeNow 37,
https://www.europenowjournal.org/2020/11/09/the-common-agricultural-policy-an-overview/.
[3]
OECD (2018), Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2018, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr_pol-2018-en.
[8]
OECD (2017), Evaluation of Agricultural Policy Reforms in the European Union: The Common
Agricultural Policy 2014-20, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264278783-en.
[7]


 287

OECD (2011), Evaluation of Agricultural Policy Reforms in the European Union, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264112124-en.
[1]
WTO (2020), DS591: Colombia - Anti-Dumping Duties on Frozen Fries from Belgium, Germany
and the Netherlands, World Trade Organization,
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/cases_e/ds591_e.htm.
[41]
WTO (2020), European Union Tariff Profile, World Trade Organization,
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/daily_update_e/tariff_profiles/E28_E.pdf.
[28]
WTO (2020), Notification G/AG/GEN/159/Add.3 Updated Ad Hoc Report on Covid-19 Measures
Taken by the EU (Including by Its Member States) in the Agricultural Sector, World Trade
Organization, Geneva,
https://docs.wto.org/dol2fe/Pages/SS/directdoc.aspx?filename=q:/G/AG/GEN159A3.pdf&Ope
n=True.
[23]
WTO (2020), Notification G/AG/N/EU/57/Rev.1 on European Union Imports under Tariff Quotas,
World Trade Organization,
https://docs.wto.org/dol2fe/Pages/SS/directdoc.aspx?filename=q:/G/AG/NEU57R1.pdf.
[31]
WTO (2020), Notification G/AG/N/EU/62 on European Union Use of Special Safeguard, World
Trade Organization,
https://docs.wto.org/dol2fe/Pages/SS/directdoc.aspx?filename=q:/G/AG/NEU62.pdf&Open=Tr
ue.
[32]



Notes

1 For 2020, estimates include the United Kingdom. Although the United Kingdom withdrew from the
European Union on 31 January 2020, the UK budget for agricultural expenditures in 2020 continued to be
sourced largely from the European Commission, and the United Kingdom remained part of the Common
Market in 2020.
2 Also referred to as the June 2003 reform or the 2003 “Luxembourg” reform.
3 Co-financing rates vary by measure and by Member State.
4 Member States commonly have one national RDP, while some countries have regional RDPs. Belgium
and Finland each have 2 RDPs, France has 30, Germany 15, Italy 33, Portugal 3, Spain 19 and the United
Kingdom 4.
5 Member States with average direct payment per hectare below 90% of the EU average can transfer up
to 25% of rural development funds to direct payments.
6 The following Member States have opted for transfers of funds from Pillar 1 to Pillar 2 throughout the
CAP 2014-20 exercise: Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Greece,




288 


Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Romania and the United Kingdom. In turn, Croatia, Malta, Hungary,
Poland and the Slovak Republic chose to transfer funds from Pillar 2 to Pillar 1.
7 The SAPS applies to all Member States joining since 2004 except Slovenia, Malta and Croatia, which
implement the BPS with the EU15.
8 The BPS is “regionalised” in five Member States – Greece (3 regions), Spain (50 regions), France
(2 regions), Finland (2 regions) and the United Kingdom (separate regions within Scotland and England)
– meaning that a different payment rate per hectare applies depending on the region. In Germany,
regionalisation by Länder ceased to apply in 2019.
9 Member States can choose their preferred method to calculate their SFS payments: lump-sum payment
(an equal amount to all farmers in the scheme); payment due each year (individual farmers receive a single
payment equivalent to what would have been due under other payment schemes); and payment due in
2015 (individual farmers receive a single payment that depends on the amount that would have been due
in 2015). Member States that opt for the “payment due each year” method are not subject to the 10%
maximum, provided they do not round up lower payment amounts to EUR 500 (USD 570). For more
information, see (EC, 2017[44]).
10 The criteria are low temperature, dryness, excess soil moisture, limited soil drainage, unfavourable
texture and stoniness, shallow rooting depth, poor chemical properties, and slope.
11 Payments are granted on a maximum number of hectares, which varies by country or region: Belgium
(Wallonia), 30 ha; Bulgaria, 30 ha; Croatia, 20 ha; France, 52 ha; Germany, 46 ha with a higher per hectare
payment rate for the first 30 ha; Lithuania, 30 ha; Poland, from 3 to 30 ha (with no payment below 3 ha);
Portugal, 5 ha as from claim year 2017; Romania, 30 ha with a smaller per hectare payment rate for the
first 5 ha; and the United Kingdom (Wales), 54 ha.
12 Belgium (Wallonia), Croatia, France, Germany, Portugal and Romania.
13 The Czech Republic, Denmark, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Luxemburg, Malta, the Netherlands,
Slovenia, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom (England).
14 If the average market price in an EU country or in a region of an EU country drops below EUR 2 224
(USD 2 534) per tonne over a representative period, the European Commission may use public
intervention to support beef prices (EC, n.d.[43]).
15 In addition to the EAFRD, these include the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), Cohesion
Fund, European Social Fund (ESF), and the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund (EMFF).
16 In 2020, an additional measure was added, M21: Exceptional temporary relief to farmers and SMEs
active in processing, marketing and/or development of agricultural products particularly affected by the
COVID-19 crisis.
17 While the United Kingdom was included in PSE estimations for 2020, this section discusses only the EU
budget for 2020. Note that for PSE purposes, the Pillar 1 budget for budget year 2021 is counted in 2020.
18 These are quantified EU level targets on use and risk of pesticides, sales of antimicrobials, nutrient loss,
area under organic farming, high diversity landscape features and access to fast broadband internet.



 289


19 For fresh deciduous fruits, aid was raised to EUR 925 (USD 1 054) per ha for farms up to 30 ha and to
EUR 617 (USD 703) per ha for larger farms of apples and pears, while for table grapes, the rate was set
at EUR 448 (USD 511) per ha for farms up to 30 ha, and at EUR 354 (USD 403) per ha for larger farms.
20 Funds were also spent on green harvesting measures and crisis distillation of wine by-products. These
measures are covered separately in the section on COVID-19 response.
21 Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2020/467.
22 Available at: https://www.tmdn.org/giview/.
23 Indeed, the Agriculture and Fisheries Council’s Conclusions of 19 October 2020 reflected the overall
support of Agricultural Ministers for the F2F Strategy, and their endorsement of its goal of developing a
sustainable European food system while also stressing the importance of taking national specificities and
different starting points into account, in particular for the quantitative targets set in the strategy.
24 The strategy mandates that nitrogen fertiliser be applied in a form that is coated with a urease inhibitor
to reduce nitrous oxide losses – so-called “protected” urea.
25 See https://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/news/use-or-best-new-tool-support-food-operators.
26 Available (in Spanish) at https://www.menosdesperdicio.es.
27 Three measures are foreseen to achieve a reduction in calf transports, by fostering growth in regional
sales: a new quality standard to be included in the existing AMA quality label, including promotion and
marketing strategies; extension of support for quality beef to include calf fattening; and extension of the
support programme for animal welfare in stables to include calf fattening
28 Previously there had not been a national animal health service – only services available at the Länder
level.
29 Through conditioning CAP funding for investments in livestock buildings on meeting animal welfare
standards, and ensuring that state funding henceforth goes toward buildings that promote the natural
expression of livestock behaviour.
30 By increasing loading checks by officials and private veterinarians, strengthening sanctions for non-
compliance with EU regulations, and imposing a register and temperature recording conditions for
shipping.
31 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/532.
32 For example, the milk sector would be allowed to collectively plan milk production and the flower and
potatoes sector would be allowed to withdraw products from the market.
33 Specifically, 100 000 MT was offered for cheese, while only 43 669 MT was contracted; 140 000 MT
was offered for butter but only 65 004 MT was contracted; 90 000 MT was offered for SMP but only
18 300 MT was contracted; 140 MT was offered for sheep meat but only 15 MT was contracted; and
2 215 MT was offered for beef, but only 1 959 MT was contracted.
34 Provisions from the last package are applicable through 15 October 2021 and retroactive from
16 October 2020.



290 


35 M21: Exceptional temporary relief to farmers and SMEs active in processing, marketing and/or
development of agricultural products particularly affected by the COVID-19 crisis (art 39b).
36 This can be raised to EUR 25 000 (USD 28 489) in some specific cases.
37 See EU 2020/573 of 24 April 2020, EU 2020/615 of 4 May 2020, EU 2020/864 of 22 June 2020,
EU 2020/959 of 2 July 2020, EU 2020/1192 of 11 August 2020, EU 2020/1218 of 25 August 2020.
38 These preferences apply to products originating in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo,
Montenegro, North Macedonia and Serbia.
39 For example, exports of personal protective equipment such as masks, gloves and face shields were
temporarily subject to an export authorisation beginning on 15 March 2020.
40 Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/466.


 291

Support to agriculture
Iceland has seen limited reform to agricultural policies, and support remains among the highest in the
OECD. At 57% of gross farm receipts, the producer support estimate (PSE) was more than three times
the OECD average in 2018-20. Market price measures form most agricultural support, principally tariffs
that maintain high domestic prices relative to world prices and lead to a large transfer from consumers to
agriculture producers. Market price support is complemented by payment entitlements directly or indirectly
coupled with production factors. Market price support accounted for 51% of support to farmers in 2018-20.
Output payments for milk producers introduced in 1992 and largely decoupled payments to sheep meat
producers introduced in 1996 represent most of the remaining support to farmers. Consequently, 71% of
farm support is potentially most-distorting to production and trade.
Effective prices received by farmers declined over time on average, but remain almost twice as high as
world markets. Sectors with the largest divergence between domestic and world prices in 2018-20 are
poultry and eggs. Market price support accounts for more than 70% of single commodity transfers (SCT)
for milk and poultry. Overall, SCT represent 96% of the total PSE.
Expenditures for general services (GSSE) relative to agricultural value-added decreased from around 3%
in 1986-88 to 1% in 2018-20. Half of these are for inspection and control, with much of the rest devoted to
stockholding. Total support to agriculture (TSE) as a share of GDP declined significantly over time.
Recent policy changes
The main policy changes in 2020 stem from revised agreements on the operating environment for
horticulture and the framework agreement (horizontal support) for agriculture. For horticulture, the revision
promotes development and innovation, and sets the stage to achieve carbon neutrality by 2040. The
revised framework agreement includes the goal of carbon neutral agriculture before 2040 and emphasises
environmental issues along with other technical or minor changes. All revised changes of existing
agreements entered into force on 1 January 2021.
The Climate Action Plan was updated. Actions to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from
agriculture include reduction of the use of non-organic fertilisers and improvement of manure management.
Assessment and recommendations

With the continued application of multi-year agreements between the government and Farmer’s
Association, changes to overall agricultural policy are limited and Iceland’s support to farmers
remains well above that of most other OECD countries. Moreover, most support to farmers
continues to be in forms that are potentially most production- and trade-distorting, and contribute
to environmental degradation, soil erosion in particular.
12 Iceland


292 


Despite progress in reducing border protection of some agricultural products, tariffs on several
groups – particularly meat, dairy, plants and flowers – remain high, often applied in the form of
complex non-ad valorem duties. Slow progress in this area perpetuates the burden on consumers
and the distortions to markets associated with border protection.

Although the revisions of agreements on the operating environment for horticulture aim to promote
development and innovation, progress is needed to support innovation, including encouraging a
well-functioning agricultural knowledge and information system.

Agriculture plays a central role in Iceland’s climate policy and efforts to reach carbon neutrality.
Emphasis on environmental issues, including measures to gradually reduce GHG emissions from
agriculture are a welcome shift towards a low-carbon economy and will contribute to Iceland’s
challenging goal of carbon-neutral agriculture before 2040. However, support to producers that is
only partly conditional on meeting environmental performance standards should be reviewed.
Emissions from agriculture are high, reflecting the important role of sheep raising. Producer support
should be decoupled from agricultural production and favour less economically distorting and
environmentally damaging forms, linking support to sustainable land management and production
of environmental amenities.

The development of a food policy involving various stakeholders provides an opportunity to address
food security, productivity and sustainability of the agro-food sector in Iceland in a coherent and
integrated framework.

The new Agreement on the European Economic Area’s (EEA Agreement) changes to the
regulatory framework for agricultural trade – mainly in the system of tariff quota allocation and the
elimination of tariff duties on certain agricultural products – will reduce import costs and increase
transparency with regard to imports.

Establishment of the Antibiotic Immunity and Zoonosis Fund – based on an action plan on food
safety and protection of livestock, and a joint effort by the ministers to reduce the spread of
antibiotic-resistant bacteria in Iceland – is a welcome development towards a holistic and inter-
sectoral approach to antibiotic resistance.
Figure 12.1. Iceland: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/j3th2s
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
1.0%
2.0%
3.0%
4.0%
5.0%
6.0%
TSE as % GDP
1986-88
2000-02
2018-20


 293

Figure 12.2. Iceland: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/tg03yq
Figure 12.3. Iceland: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/9ac0ib


-8%
-6%
-4%
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Wool
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


294 

Table 12.1. Iceland: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
236
150
284
316
280
256
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
80.3
82.1
84.0
83.9
84.0
84.1
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
205
136
255
281
259
224
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
193
139
226
246
227
205
Support based on commodity output
180
113
159
181
155
140
Market Price Support1
179
72
116
133
114
102
Positive Market Price Support
179
72
116
133
114
102
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
2
40
42
48
41
37
Payments based on input use
13
4
23
16
28
26
Based on variable input use
3
0
3
3
2
3
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
6
2
16
8
21
19
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
4
2
5
5
5
4
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
-1
-3
11
13
12
10
Based on Receipts / Income
-1
-3
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
11
13
12
10
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
20
33
36
32
29
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
1
5
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
1
5
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
1
5
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
77.2
64.0
57.4
57.3
57.6
57.2
Producer NPC (coeff.)
4.16
2.44
1.94
1.99
1.93
1.91
Producer NAC (coeff.)
4.38
2.78
2.35
2.34
2.36
2.34
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
18
11
10
11
10
9
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
5
5
1
1
1
1
Inspection and control
1
2
5
6
5
5
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
2
1
1
1
1
0
Marketing and promotion
1
1
0
0
0
0
Cost of public stockholding
9
2
3
4
3
3
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
6.9
7.4
4.4
4.4
4.3
4.4
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-112
-65
-110
-126
-110
-94
Transfers to producers from consumers
-157
-66
-110
-126
-110
-94
Other transfers from consumers
-1
-2
0
0
-1
0
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
46
3
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-70.4
-48.3
-43.1
-44.9
-42.5
-42.1
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
4.38
1.98
1.76
1.82
1.74
1.73
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
3.38
1.93
1.76
1.81
1.74
1.73
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
257
153
237
258
237
215
Transfers from consumers
158
68
110
126
110
94
Transfers from taxpayers
100
87
126
131
127
121
Budget revenues
-1
-2
0
0
-1
0
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
4.9
1.7
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
78
81
120
124
124
113
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.5
0.9
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
263
580
556
582
603
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
40.94
89.37
122.10
108.27
122.64
135.38
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Iceland are: milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, wool,
pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 295

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Iceland’s agricultural policy focuses on food security, safety and quality; strengthening rural activity;
environmental sustainability; and maintaining farm income.
Iceland supports agriculture heavily; reforms over time have been limited. Support consists mainly of price
support sustained with border measures and quotas. Dairy producers receive payments based on output.
In 1996, support to sheep meat producers changed from price support to direct payments based on historic
entitlements. A regional scheme for sheep farmers implemented in 2008 provides additional direct
payments based on historic entitlements. Individual non-transferrable quotas for milk producers were
introduced in 1980 based and went through a number of reforms. In 1992, the current system of freely
transferable quotas was introduced, and production-based payments were linked to the quota, paid directly
to the farmer.
Since the mid-1990s, tariffs on agricultural products were reduced. However, tariffs on several agriculture
product groups, particularly meat, dairy and flowers, remain high and complex. A large number of
compound duties with both ad valorem and specific duties apply. Export subsidies for agricultural products
were not provided since the early 1990s.
Table 12.2. Iceland: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to mid-1990s
Closed economy
Minimum prices
Agricultural tariffs and non-tariff measures
Consumer subsidies
Mid-1990s-2016
Gradual reforms to open market
EFTA, EEA
Phase out of administered prices (except milk)
Decoupled payments introduced to substitute price support measures
Act Production, Pricing and Sale of Agricultural Products No. 99/1993
Act on Agriculture No. 70/1998
2017-present
Continuation of gradual reforms
Revisions of agreements for sheep and cattle farmers
Several FTAs signed
EEA agreement enhanced
Reduction of agricultural tariffs
The policy mix remains dominated by production- and trade-distorting measures. Iceland continues to
provide agricultural support through market price support maintained by border measures, and through
direct payments based on payment entitlements directly or indirectly coupled with production.
Support to producers declined since the mid-1980s. An important reduction in market price support took
place at the beginning of the 1990s. However, since the mid-1990s, around half of total support to
agriculture comprises market price support, the other half being budgetary support. More than two-thirds
of producer support continues to be provided through price support (Figure 12.4). TSE has declined over
time, averaging 1% of the country’s GDP in recent years, with PSE being the dominant component at 95%.
The remaining TSE is financing for GSSE, almost half of which comprises expenditures for inspection, with
public stockholding expenditures responsible for much of the remainder.


296 

Figure 12.4. Iceland: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The objective of Iceland’s agricultural policy is to maintain and strengthen a diverse agricultural sector to
the extent that physical and marketing conditions allow. The key goals are to: meet domestic demand
where realistically possible; maintain sustainable production of high-quality, healthy products; improve
efficiency and competitiveness; improve farmers’ incomes; improve creativity and create job opportunities;
and sustain livelihoods in rural areas.
Agricultural policies in Iceland are based on two legal instruments. First, the policy concerning production
and marketing of agricultural products (laid out in the Act on the Production, Pricing and Sale of Agricultural
Products No. 99/1993) establishes objectives for Iceland’s agricultural policy and provides the framework
for Icelandic agriculture and its regulation. Second, policies on the provision of support to farm construction
projects, livestock improvement and extension (advisory) service (laid out in Act on Agriculture
No. 70/1998).
The government negotiates with the Farmers’ Association concerning the general framework for support
and production control in the cattle, sheep and horticultural sectors. There is also an agreement on
so-called horizontal support, such as advisory services, breeding, animal welfare, environmental
protection, sustainable land management, organic farming and land cultivation. The current agreements
cover 2017-2026, with extensive reviews in 2019 and again in 2023. Changes in 2019 to the agreements
for sheep farming and cattle entered into force on 1 January 2020. In 2020, the agreements on horticulture
and the framework agreement (horizontal support) of agriculture were revised. All entered into force on
1 January 2021.
Iceland’s agricultural support comes through price support (maintained by border measures), and direct
payments based on payment entitlements coupled with production factors. Price support is provided for all
livestock products and some horticultural products. Direct payments are provided to cattle (mainly dairy)
and sheep producers, and on a smaller scale, to certain greenhouse producers.
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 297

For dairy, direct payments depend on the size of a producer’s quota and the current number of animals.
Headage payments are provided for up to 180 dairy cows and 260 beef cows per farm, with full payment
for each of the first 50 dairy cows and 200 beef cows, then at a declining rate for each additional cow. The
Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture sets a national dairy production quota divided among producers based
on their annual quotas for the preceding year. Annual dairy quotas also determine entitlements for direct
payments. Production in excess of quotas is permitted, provided all such production is for export.
Wholesale prices are regulated for approximately half of all dairy products based on the volume of raw milk
required. A government-chaired committee representing both the Farmers’ Association and the labour
union (acting on behalf of consumers) determines guaranteed minimum prices for milk delivered within
production quotas on an annual basis. Trade in support entitlements (basic payments to all active dairy
and cattle farmers) between entitlement holders is allowed with quantity limitations and takes place in a
market operated by the government. Dairy producers also benefit from support for breeding, land
cultivation and development programmes.
For sheep, direct payments link to entitlements based on historical production. However, eligibility to
receive full payments requires keeping a minimum number of winter-fed sheep on the farm. Additional
payments to sheep farmers relate to a quality-control scheme for lamb meat based on animal welfare,
product quality, traceability and sustainability criteria. Premium payments are provided at the wholesale
level for purchasers of wool, and to farmers to co-operate in increasing added value for sheep products.
Imports of meat, dairy products, and some vegetables that compete with domestic production are subject
to tariffs, often compound duties with an ad valorem component of 30% and a specific duty that varies from
ISK 5/kg (USD 0.04/kg) to ISK 1 462/kg (USD 2/kg). However, products originating in partner countries of
the European Economic Area (EEA) or in one of the 41 countries with which Iceland has free trade
agreements may carry lower tariffs. The agreement for the cattle sector includes a provision to change the
specific duties for certain cheese and milk powder products based on changes in the SDR/ISK1 exchange
rate from 1995 to 2016, effective 1 March. Since then, the specific component was adjusted annually to
the 12-month evolution of SDR/ISK.
Concerning Iceland’s commitments under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, according to its
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) submitted to the UNFCCC, Iceland aims to be part of European
countries’ collective 40% reduction in GHG emissions compared to 1990 levels by 2030. A precise
commitment for Iceland within this collective delivery is yet to be determined and depends on agreement
with the European Union and other countries. Iceland’s participation in the EU Emissions Trading System
will be key in this regard, considering that almost half of Iceland’s emissions would be regulated through
this scheme. In December 2020, Iceland’s prime minister introduced a new target of 55% reduction in GHG
emissions by 2030. The government plans to make the economy largely carbon neutral by 2040.
Iceland is a member of the European Economic Area (EEA) and of the European Free Trade Association
(EFTA). While the EEA Agreement does not apply to most trade in agricultural goods, it opens trade in
several processed agricultural products and encourages bilateral agreements on primary commodities.
As a member of EFTA, Iceland is also party to several free trade agreements, including with countries in
Southeast Europe, North Africa and the Middle East, Latin America, and Asia, as well as with the South
African Customs Union. In addition, Iceland has bilateral Free Trade Agreements with the Faroe Islands,
Greenland, and the People’s Republic of China.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
Revisions of the agreement on the operating environment for horticultural producers and the agricultural
framework agreement (horizontal support) of agriculture took place in 2020.
As part of the revision in the horticultural agreement, the government’s annual contribution has increased
by 29% or ISK 200 million (USD 1.6 million) in 2020 and is valid until the year 2026. Increased funding was


298 

secured for adaptation to organic production in horticulture and for subsidising electricity transmission and
distribution costs. Objectives were set that Icelandic vegetable production will increase by 25% over the
next four years to increase the market share of domestic production and that Icelandic horticulture will be
carbon neutral by 2040. In addition, an agricultural dashboard is to be established to provide an overview
of production, sales and supplies in the country.
The revision of the agricultural framework agreement includes a goal of carbon neutral agriculture by 2040
and increased emphasis on environmental issues and climate change. The agreement states that
elements of a new agriculture policy for the future would be the foundation for fundamental changes in the
next revision process anticipated in 2023.
In Iceland’s 2020 Climate Action Plan five actions are planned for agriculture. The actions include
improved utilisation and handling of fertilisers by reducing the use of mineral fertilisers, improved livestock
feeding to reduce enteric fermentation, increased domestic vegetables production, carbon neutrality in
cattle breeding and implementing a project called Climate-Friendly Agriculture where farmers receive
comprehensive advice and education with the aim of reducing GHG emissions from agriculture and from
land use. The project started in February 2020 and continues with new participants in 2021.
In October 2019, the European Union, Iceland and Norway formally agreed to extend, for the period 2021-
30, their climate co-operation by including the Effort Sharing Regulation and the Regulation on greenhouse
gas emissions (GHG) and removals from land use, land use change and forestry (the LULUCF-regulation),
into the EEA Agreement. According to the agreement, Iceland is to fulfil its respective GHG emission
reduction target for the period 1 January 2021 to 31 December 2030 in accordance with the ETS-directive,
LULUCF-Regulation and the Effort Sharing Regulation.
The Minister of Fisheries and Agriculture and the rector of the Agricultural University of Iceland signed an
agreement in February 2020 for the years 2020-23. According to the agreement, the university will work
on projects concerning research, development, and innovation in the field of agriculture and food
production. The university also advises the Ministry and conducts research, innovation and development
activities in agriculture and environmental sciences in the fields covered by the agreement.
The Minister of Fisheries and Agriculture and Matís (Icelandic Food and Biotech R&D) signed two new
agreements in 2020: i) a service agreement to ensure security services in the field of food research for the
benefit of Icelanders; and ii) an agreement to strengthen Matís operations in rural areas.
Matvælasjóður (The Food Fund) was established in 2020 by merging the Agricultural Productivity Fund
and the AVS Fisheries Research Fund. Its main objective is to strengthen development and innovation in
production and processing of food from agriculture and fisheries. The fund will support value creation in
the production, processing and marketing of food, with due emphasis to be placed on innovation,
sustainability and the competitiveness of Icelandic food sector. An amount of ISK 480 million
(USD 3.7 million) was allocated from the fund in December 2020 to 62 different projects.
Work is underway to formulate a comprehensive agricultural policy for Iceland for the years 2021-2040.
The agricultural policy will be formulated in collaboration between the government, farmers and other
stakeholders.
A ten-year food policy for Iceland was introduced in December 2020. The policy is intended to guide public
decision-making to promote increased value creation in food production in Iceland, strengthen
competitiveness of the Icelandic food sector, ensure food safety and security and increase people’s well-
being in harmony with the environment and nature.
The Minister of Fisheries and Agriculture and the Minister of Health established an Antibiotic Immunity and
Zoonosis Fund in 2020. The purpose of the fund is to provide financing for projects related to the fight
against antibiotic resistance. The fund is set up in accordance with an action plan on food safety and


 299

protection of livestock and is a joint effort by the ministers to reduce the spread of antibiotic-resistant
bacteria in Iceland.
Additional funding of ISK 500 million (USD 3.9 million) was provided to the Bjargráðssjóður Fund in 2020
due to unusual cold and fence damage during the winter of 2019-20. Its role is to provide financial
assistance to individuals and companies to compensate for direct damage caused by natural disasters,
including damage to fences and crop failure caused by unusual cold and drought.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
On 11 March 2020, the government presented an ISK 230 billion (8% of GDP) response package to the
COVID-19 pandemic. Key measures to support households and firms include tax cuts, tax deferrals,
increased unemployment benefits, one-off child allowances, support to companies whose employees have
been quarantined, and state-guaranteed bridge loans to companies. Most of the larger measures
presented by the government are applicable to the agro-food sector as well as other sectors.
More specific measures related to the agro-food sector include the following:

Increased funding for the development of the horticultural sector.

Specific one-time support for sheep farmers and cattle farmers during income decrease related to
fall in demand.

Increased advisory services provided to farmers to meet the challenges faced due to COVID-19.

Ensuring salaries for temporary workers to assist farmers who are unable to take care of their farms
due to COVID-19 illness.

Transfer of funds in accordance with existing agricultural agreements to specifically address
domestic food producers currently facing temporary difficulties due to COVID-19.

Development of a dashboard for agriculture to improve the presentation of data on agricultural
production, stocks and production forecasts.

Authorisation for cultivating industrial hemp in order to increase value creation in Icelandic
agriculture.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
Following the new Agreement on the European Economic Area (EEA Agreement) on trade in agricultural
products and the gradually increasing tariff quotas, the Minister of Fisheries and Agriculture appointed a
committee to work on proposals for changes of the regulatory framework for agricultural trade in order to
reduce costs for importers of agricultural products and to simplify the system. As a result, several legal
changes – mainly in the system of tariff quotas allocation and the elimination of tariff duties on certain
vegetables, flowers, wild game and fertile eggs for the year or a certain period during the year, depending
on the product – took effect at the beginning of 2020.
A Contingency Trade Agreement between Iceland and the United Kingdom entered into force on 1 January
2021. The aim of the agreement is to maintain current tariff preferences for trade in goods, including agro-
food between the parties as previously applicable according to the EEA Agreement and other related trade
agreements. The Contingency Agreement is intended to serve as a bridge arrangement until a new and
comprehensive Free Trade Agreement can enter into force between the parties. Iceland is currently
negotiating a comprehensive free trade agreement with the United Kingdom along with EEA EFTA partners
Norway and Liechtenstein. The negotiations are expected to be completed in 2021. As a member of EFTA,
Iceland is also engaged in negotiations with several other countries regarding free trade agreements.
Iceland and its EFTA partners revised their chapter on trade and sustainable development, which now
includes an article on trade and sustainable agriculture and food systems


300 

According to new legislation that entered into force on 1 January 2020 on the protection against animal
diseases, imports of fresh meat and meat products, raw eggs and raw egg products, and unpasteurised
milk and dairy products processed from unpasteurised milk from EEA member states, do no longer require
the permission of the Food and Veterinary Authority.
Contextual information
Iceland is a small, sparsely populated country with a GDP per capita above the OECD average. Agriculture
(excluding fish) is a relatively small part of the economy, representing 1% of GDP and of employment, and
it remains small compared to fishing and aquaculture. Conditions for agriculture in Iceland are limited by
the country’s geographical conditions. The growing season is short – around four months – yields are low,
and production and transport costs are high. The range of agricultural products is limited and meets
approximately 50% of total domestic food requirements. Approximately one-fifth of the total land area of
Iceland is agricultural land, mostly suitable for fodder production and livestock raising. Only around 6% of
agricultural land area is arable land.
Livestock-rearing is the main farm activity, with milk and sheep meat being the most important products.
Traditional livestock production is grassland-based and most farm animals are native breeds. The main
crops are hay, cereals for animal feed and vegetables – the latter are cultivated primarily in greenhouses
heated with geothermal energy. The main agricultural exports are pure-bred horses for breeding, sheep
meat products and fur skins. Iceland is a net importer of agricultural products (excluding fishery goods),
mainly for final consumption. Imports are more diversified than exports, and have increased steadily in
recent years.
Iceland’s economy is set to contract by almost 8% in 2020 (OECD, 2020[1]). The unemployment rate
remains low, at around 3%, and the country is one of the most egalitarian economies of the OECD.
Iceland’s prosperity has been built on the sustainable management of its abundant natural resources,
including the comprehensive fisheries management system based on individual transferable quotas,
renewable energy (geothermal and hydro) and carbon sequestration opportunities (afforestation,
revegetation).




 301

Table 12.3. Iceland: Contextual indicators

Iceland
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
8
22
0.02%
0.02%
Population (million)
0.3
0.4
0.01%
0.01%
Land area (thousand km2)
100
101
0.12%
0.12%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
1 889
1 872
0.06%
0.06%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
3
4
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
29 718
60 180
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
25
24
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
8.1
5.0
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
8.3
4.0
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
7.9
4.5
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.3
9.9
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
13
15
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
87
85
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
7
6
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Figure 12.5. Iceland: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate


302 

Figure 12.6. Iceland: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
While output growth in agriculture has been below the global average over the 2007-16 period, according
to the estimates on agricultural TFP, agricultural total factor productivity has grown by 2.8% per year –
higher than the global average rate of 1.6%. A harsh climate, lack of suitable land, small average farm
size, and the narrow genetic base for traditional livestock present significant constraints to the sector. Due
to relatively low livestock densities, Iceland’s nutrient balances show a comparatively low surplus of both
nitrogen and phosphorous. Iceland has the lowest pesticide sales per hectare in the OECD area and the
sector’s share of energy use has fallen over time. Agriculture continues to represent a significant share in
the country’s total GHG emissions – well above the OECD average – mainly due to the importance of the
livestock sector. Emissions of CH4 emissions from enteric fermentation and manure management, and
N2O emissions from manure management and fertilisers have historically accounted for over 99% of the
total emissions from agriculture, with less than 1% arising from CO2.
Figure 12.7. Iceland: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
18
0.2
55
28
8
13
20
59
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
-0.8%
0.5%
-0.4%
0.05%
2.8%
1.6%
-1.5%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
Iceland
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


 303

The sector’s share in water consumption has increased over the past twenty years and is higher than the
OECD average. The water stress indicator has also increased, but is substantially lower than the OECD
average. Water shortage is not a major concern and policy issue.
Table 12.4. Iceland: Productivity and environmental indicators

Iceland
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.1%
2.8%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
8.0
7.7
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
1.8
1.8
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
1.9
1.3
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
15.1
13.1
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
..
..
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
42.9
22.3
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
0.1
1.8
9.3
8.5
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.
Reference

OECD (2020), OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 2020 Issue 2, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/39a88ab1-en.
[1]


Note
1 SDR= Special drawing rights exchange rate.



304 

Support to agriculture
Support to producers in India comprises budgetary spending corresponding to 8.6% of gross farm receipts,
positive market price support (MPS) of +2.0% of gross farm receipts for supported commodities, and
negative MPS of -17% for those that are taxed. Overall, this led to negative net support of -6.4% of gross
farm receipts in 2018-20. Support to producers was negative throughout the last two decades but fluctuated
markedly. The negative producer support estimate shows that domestic producers on average have been
implicitly taxed, as budgetary payments to farmers did not offset the price-depressing effect of complex
domestic marketing regulations and trade policy measures. Virtually all gross producer transfers (whether
positive or negative) come in forms that are potentially most production- and trade-distorting, a consistent
pattern since 2000-02.
Single commodity transfers (SCT) follow the MPS pattern and vary by commodity. Most commodities were
implicitly taxed between 7.1% and 81.5% of commodity receipts in 2018-20. Commodities with positive
SCTs – ranging between 0.3% and 36% of commodity receipts in the same period – include wheat, maize,
sugar, chickpeas, other pulses and poultry meat.
Budgetary transfers to producers are dominated by subsidies for variable input use, such as fertilisers,
electricity, and irrigation water. However, budgetary allocations to the direct income transfer programme,
PM-KISAN, have increased since its implementation in 2018.
In turn, public expenditures financing general services to the sector (GSSE), principally for infrastructure-
related investments, are only half the level of subsidies for variable input use. At 4% in 2018-20,
expenditure for GSSE relative to agriculture value-added increased compared to 2000-02.
Mirroring the farm-price-depressing effect on producers throughout the period covered, policies provide
implicit support to consumers. Policies that affect farm prices, along with increased food subsidies under
the Targeted Public Distribution System during the COVID-19 pandemic, reduced the costs for consumers
with a consumer support estimate of 28.8% of expenditure on average across all commodities in 2018-20.
Total budgetary support (TBSE) is estimated at 3.3% of GDP in 2018-20, contributing to an overall positive
total support estimate (TSE) of 0.6% of GDP.
Recent policy changes
The most important new programmes and reforms came in the context of the COVID-19 economic support
package of May 2020. New programmes include several schemes to support credit, on-farm services,
infrastructure and other general services. The new Agriculture Infrastructure Fund supports farmers, farmer
producer organisations (FPO) and agri-businesses, mainly through interest subsidy to credits for the set-
up of post-harvest infrastructure such as cold storage, collection centres, and processing units.
Key reforms relate to three acts allowing farmers to sell their products outside of government-regulated
markets. These remove limits on private stocking, trading or buying of commodities to promote barrier-free
13 India


 305

inter and intra-state trade of agricultural commodities: (1) the Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act;
(2) the Farmers’ Produce Trade and Commerce (Promotion and Facilitation) Act; and (3) the Farmers’
(Empowerment and Protection) Agreement on Price Assurance and Farm Services Act. However, in mid-
December 2020, India’s Supreme Court suspended implementation of the acts and mandated the creation
of an expert committee to consult with farmer groups before proceeding.
Support to consumers in response to COVID-19 included distribution of an additional 5 kg of food grains
per person and 1 kg of pulses per household per month between April and November 2020, targeting
urban and rural poor, including migrant workers.
In May 2020, the state government of Haryana restricted cultivation of rice in eight district blocks with
severe water scarcity. Under a crop diversification programme, the state government decided to shift
100 000 ha of rice area to other crops, primarily maize, millet and pulses, to be procured at minimum
support prices.
India banned exports of all varieties of onions between 13 September and 31 December 2020 to curb
domestic supply shortages. In October 2020, India also imposed stock holding limits for retailers and
wholesalers until end-2020.
Starting in May 2020, the Animal Quarantine and Certification Services (AQCS) in the Ministry of Fisheries,
Animal Husbandry and Dairying, and in co-operation with the Customs authority, relaxed certain
requirements in sanitary certificates and promoted processing of trade documents through the trade Single
Window. This aimed to streamline border processes for imports of selected agro-food products, including
milk and dairy products.
Assessment and recommendations

Due to a combination of restrictive domestic marketing policies and border measures, for many
products and over most of the period reviewed, Indian farmers have been receiving prices lower
than those prevailing on international markets. The central government should work closely with
states and Union Territories (UTs) in implementing the domestic marketing reforms initiated in 2020
in the context of COVID-19. This can build on progress already made by many states through the
electronic National Agricultural Market (e-NAM) set up in 2016 and the 2017 model Agricultural
Produce and Livestock Marketing (Promotion and Facilitation) Act. Marketing reforms should be
adopted in a harmonised and consistent way across states and synchronise through coherent
plans with reforms to the minimum support price system. Marketing reforms can foster more
efficient markets and competitive agro-food supply chains across states. They need to be
complemented, however, with investments in infrastructure, marketing, training and other general
services to agriculture for farmers to reap the benefits in productivity and income. Several
programmes initiated during the COVID-19 pandemic, and the earmarked budgetary allocations
for rural infrastructure in the 2021 Union Budget, are positive steps in this direction.

The large share of employment in agriculture compared to its GDP contribution reflects the
persistent productivity gap with other sectors and translates into low farm incomes. In the short to
medium term, direct cash transfers to incomes of the poorest farmers can support their livelihoods
as well as the adjustment to new market conditions. Such developments were enhanced through
the direct income transfer programme PM-KISAN. In the long term, significant structural
adjustments need to occur in a post-COVID-19 environment, including the transition of farm labour
to other activities and consolidation towards sufficiently large farm operations to benefit from
economies of scale. Policies need to facilitate this transition and continued reforms in land
regulations need to be complemented by investments in key public services to the sector (such as
education, training and infrastructure) and the broader enabling environment (including financial
services).


306 


India is an important exporter in a number of agro-food markets. The Agricultural Export Policy
(AEP) framework adopted in 2018 was important to reduce uncertainty and transaction costs
throughout supply chains, as it helps avoid export restrictions on organic and processed agricultural
products. However, recent export restrictions on products such as onions directly affect India’s
reliability as a supplier and exacerbate farm revenue losses. An extension of the AEP to avoid
export restrictions on any agro-food products should be considered to create a stable and
predictable market environment.

Further reducing tariffs and relaxing other import restrictions is also key for a predictable market
environment, to exploit imports’ potential to contribute to diversification of diets, and to improve
food security across all its dimensions. Together with domestic marketing reforms, moving away
from export and import restrictions can provide farmers and private traders with incentives to invest
in supply chains.

India’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) includes an economy-wide emission intensity
reduction target, but no sector-specific targets. Policy efforts to mitigate greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions in agriculture concentrate around pilot projects for lower methane emission rice
production, increased fertiliser efficiency, and soil health improvement. Possible savings from
continued back-scaling of variable input subsidies (fertiliser, irrigation water and electricity) could
be applied to train farmers to use such inputs more efficiently and sustainably by ensuring that
extension systems focus on climate change, sustainability and digital skills. Rebalancing the
support portfolio towards more investments in the agricultural knowledge system and knowledge
transfer through FPOs is also needed to ensure sustained and sustainable productivity growth.

India made significant progress in recent years in eliminating inefficiencies in the food distribution
system, and these efforts should continue. The government of India should continue the
experimental replacement of physical grain distribution by direct cash transfers, and expand and
adjust in light of experiences gained.
Figure 13.1. India: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/9o34i7
-7%
-6%
-5%
-4%
-3%
-2%
-1%
0%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%
1.0%
1.2%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20


 307

Figure 13.2. India: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Note: The producer price change and the border price change are not calculated when the negative price gap occurs at the commodity level
for the current or previous year.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/czmitd
Figure 13.3. India: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/n7egi0


-120%
-100%
-80%
-60%
-40%
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
PSE change decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE
-100%
-50%
0%
50%
100%
Onions
Chick peas
Other pulses
Mangoes
Cotton
Potatoes
Tomatoes
Bananas
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Bovine meat
Milk
Sugar
Groundnuts
Rapeseed
Soybeans
Rice
Maize
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


308 

Table 13.1. India: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
112 282
444 342
451 265
451 094
430 666
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
64.8
72.8
69.6
72.7
76.1
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
109 060
365 980
372 836
372 928
352 176
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
-2 709
-31 021
-33 128
-23 460
-36 477
Support based on commodity output
-11 243
-71 569
-65 552
-64 676
-84 481
Market Price Support1
-11 243
-71 737
-65 606
-64 967
-84 639
Positive Market Price Support
3 583
9 286
7 871
13 092
6 896
Negative Market Price Support
-14 827
-81 023
-73 476
-78 059
-91 535
Payments based on output
0
168
54
292
158
Payments based on input use
8 519
34 776
31 324
33 922
39 082
Based on variable input use
8 519
34 277
30 766
33 457
38 609
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
0
432
450
426
419
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
0
67
107
38
54
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
5 285
178
6 930
8 747
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
5 285
178
6 930
8 747
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
15
487
923
364
174
Percentage PSE (%)
-2.3
-6.4
-6.8
-4.8
-7.6
Producer NPC (coeff.)
0.91
0.86
0.87
0.88
0.83
Producer NAC (coeff.)
0.98
0.94
0.94
0.95
0.93
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
3 526
16 405
16 260
16 110
16 846
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
402
1 310
1 326
1 354
1 251
Inspection and control
25
387
340
429
391
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
2 021
13 626
13 516
13 204
14 158
Marketing and promotion
14
80
85
59
94
Cost of public stockholding
1 044
994
989
1 049
945
Miscellaneous
21
8
4
14
6
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
..
..
..
..
..
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
14 692
95 848
79 094
76 040
132 410
Transfers to producers from consumers
10 856
64 804
60 792
58 570
75 050
Other transfers from consumers
-224
734
2 279
-78
0
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
4 222
30 380
16 061
16 932
58 148
Excess feed cost
-163
-70
-37
615
-788
Percentage CSE (%)
14.1
28.8
22.2
21.4
45.0
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
0.91
0.85
0.86
0.86
0.82
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
0.88
0.78
0.82
0.82
0.69
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
5 040
15 764
-807
9 581
38 516
Transfers from consumers
-10 632
-65 538
-63 071
-58 493
-75 050
Transfers from taxpayers
15 896
80 568
59 985
68 152
113 567
Budget revenues
-224
734
2 279
-78
0
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.0
0.6
0.0
0.3
1.5
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
16 283
87 501
64 799
74 549
123 155
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
3.3
3.3
2.4
2.6
4.9
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
272
266
274
278
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
47.26
71.56
69.85
70.48
74.37
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for India are: wheat, maize, rice, soybean, rapeseed,
groundnuts, chick pea, other pulses, potatoes, onion, tomatoes, mango, bananas, sugar, cotton, milk, bovine meat, sheep meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 309

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Food security was an important objective of agricultural and trade policy since India’s independence in
1947. Food shortages in the early 1960s made crop productivity and farm output a key policy ambition.
Although scope to further expand the area under cultivation was limited, the advent of the “green revolution”
in the mid-1960s raised crop productivity through improved technologies and seed varieties. This was
accompanied by expanded extension services and increased use of fertilisers, pesticides, and irrigation.
The government of India introduced several marketing regulations affecting the sale, stocking and trading
of agricultural commodities. The Essential Commodities Act (ECA) introduced in 1955 provided for the
control of production, supply, distribution, and pricing of essential commodities. During the 1960s and
1970s, most states also enacted and enforced Agricultural Produce Markets Regulation (APMR) Acts, with
the first point sale of agriculture produce occurring at regulated market yards (mandis) under the ambit of
Agricultural Produce Market Committees (APMC). Two institutions key to prices and distribution of wheat
and rice were set up in 1965, namely the Food Corporation of India (FCI) and the Agricultural Prices
Commission, later renamed the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP). The complex
domestic marketing regulations and border measures increasingly penalised producers through gaps
between international prices and those received by Indian farmers.
In the 1970s, government programmes encouraged increased production and processing of milk at three
different levels: (1) at the farm-level, dairy farmers were organised into co-operatives and provided with
advanced technologies, such as modern animal breeds that produced more milk; (2) at the district level,
co-operative unions formed, which owned and operated milk processing plants as well as storage and
transport equipment, and also provided animal health services; (3) at the state level, state federations
conducted and co-ordinated the nation-wide marketing of milk. Government funding for agricultural
research and extension increased, and many State Agricultural Universities (SAU) were set up. Institutional
lending to farmers expanded by directing commercial banks (nationalised from 1969) to provide credit to
agriculture. New financial institutions were established, such as the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development (NABARD) in 1982 and regional rural banks. Import competition was highly restricted in order
to allow domestic agricultural production to increase.
In the 1980s and 1990s, yield-enhancing “green revolution” techniques expanded to additional regions and
crops such as pulses, oilseeds and coarse grains. Policy reforms were carried out in the rest of the
economy, such as delicensing1 and deregulation in the manufacturing sector, but they largely bypassed
agriculture, partly because of the prevalence of state regulations in agriculture. From 1980 to 1999,
budgetary support to agriculture increased more than tenfold.
The National Agricultural Policy (NAP), formulated in 2000, set a priority on cropping intensity on existing
agricultural land, developing rural infrastructure that supports all rural activities and developing and
disseminating agricultural technologies. The National Policy for Farmers (NPF), approved in 2007,
identified a need to focus more on the economic well-being of farmers rather than just on production.
The eleventh five-year plan, covering 2007-12, focused on bringing technology to farmers, improving the
efficiency of investments, and improving access for the poor to land, credit and skills as well as addressing
water management concerns. The twelfth five-year plan, for 2012-17, was articulated around expenditure
on agriculture and on infrastructure along with an aim to improve the functioning of markets, more efficient
use of natural resources, and governance in terms of institutions delivering services such as credit and
animal health.
The 2012-17 plan took forward the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) reforms that started in
1997. The plan recognised the need to reduce TPDS leakages (the grain released from government stocks
for distribution under the PDS that did not reach beneficiaries) and suggested redirecting some food


310 

subsidies to other welfare schemes in order to achieve better targeting towards the poor, moving towards
policies that are specific to individual states or areas, and redefining “poor” for the purpose of the TPDS.
The 2013 National Food Security Act (NFSA) further addresses these concerns.
As of 2018, five-year plans were replaced by a framework of three-year action agendas, prepared by the
National Institution for Transforming India (NITI Aayog, the erstwhile Planning Commission of India) a
policy think-tank of the government of India). In 2016, the central government set the target of doubling
farmers’ income by 2022-23. The central government approved the Agriculture Export Policy framework in
December 2018 with the objectives of doubling agricultural exports by 2022-23 and boosting the value-
added of agricultural exports.
Concerns around highly fragmented markets, inadequate physical marketing infrastructure, insufficient
remuneration to farmers and high intermediation costs led the central government to suggest gradual
amendments to marketing regulations under the Agricultural Produce Market Committee (APMC) Acts in
2003, 2007 and 2017. While shared with state governments as a recommendation for adoption,
implementation of agricultural marketing reforms remained highly differentiated across India’s states. In
June 2020, the government initiated reforms to domestic agricultural marketing regulations as part of the
COVID-19 support package.
Table 13.2. India: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1950-1965
Expansion of agricultural area main
source of output growth
Agrarian reforms (abolition of intermediary landlordship, imposition of land ceiling acts)
Strengthening of co-operative credit institutions
Essential Commodities Act 1955
1965-1980
Increase in productivity main source
of growth

Develop pathways for the adoption of technological breakthroughs in rice and wheat
production
Policy support for marketing, research and credit
Introduction and formalisation of lending to priority sectors, including agriculture
New institutions, e.g. State Agricultural Universities, Food Corporation of India,
Agricultural Prices Commission
Programmes to increase production and processing of milk (support to breeds producing
more milk, producer organisations, and processing and transport equipment)
Minimum support prices
1980s
Widespread use of technology in
major crop areas

Some delicensing and deregulation
Increase in subsidies to agriculture
1990s
Economic and trade liberalisation in
agriculture lags behind general
economic reforms

Cautious relaxation of trade protection in some products, e.g. sugar, cotton, edible oils,
wheat, rice
Increases in input subsidies
Targeting of beneficiaries of public distribution system of food grains
2000s
Demand-driven shift towards
producing more fruit, vegetables and
livestock
Increasing price gaps between
international and domestic prices for
producers

Alternate tightening and loosening of market and trade regulations (including export
restrictions)
Agricultural marketing regulations influencing pricing, procuring, stocking, and trading of
commodities
Large increases in input subsidies, including credit
Support to high productivity seeds particularly cotton
Since 2010
Major participant in world markets for
some commodities
Remaining price gaps between
international and domestic prices
taxing producers
Increasing support to consumers

More structured interaction between central and state level authorities
Expansion of food subsidies
Agriculture Export Policy framework aimed at ensuring processed and organic products
are not subject to export restrictions
Direct income transfer programme PM-KISAN
Changes to domestic agricultural marketing regulations initiated as part of COVID-19
economic support package


 311

Over the past two decades, producer support was composed of negative market price support (MPS), and
budgetary allocations, including almost exclusively input subsidies. India’s percentage PSE fluctuated
markedly, registering a high of zero in 2000, a low of -31% in 2007, followed by large swings before
stabilising in recent years (Figure 13.4). These variations were driven primarily by changes in the relative
levels of domestic and international prices underlying MPS, while input subsidies followed a more steadily
increasing trend. The particularly large absolute size of negative MPS in 2011-13 (and to some extent in
2007 and 2008) coincides with periods of high international commodity prices not or only partially
transmitted to the domestic market, due at least in part to India’s use of export-impeding measures. (For
example, export restrictions or export bans applied in several of those years to wheat, non-basmati rice,
certain chickpeas, sugar and milk.) The negative value of the PSE reflects that, on average, domestic
producers were implicitly taxed, as the increasing budgetary payments to farmers did not offset the price-
depressing effect of complex domestic regulations and trade policy measures. Absolute levels of producer
support became less negative since 2018, largely driven by higher budgetary allocations to the direct
income transfer programme PM-KISAN.
Figure 13.4. India: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 2000 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Policies directly relating to agriculture and food in India consist of six major categories: (1) managing prices
and marketing channels for many farm products; (2) making variable farm inputs available at government-
subsidised prices; (3) providing general services for the agricultural sector as a whole; (4) making certain
food staples available to selected groups of the population at government-subsidised prices; (5) regulating
border transactions through trade policy; and more recently, (6) a farmer welfare focus through the income
support scheme PM-KISAN. In addition, environmental measures concerning agriculture have gained
prominence (OECD/ICRIER, 2018[1]; ICRIER, 2020[2]; Gulati, Kapur and Bouton, 2020[3]).
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


312 

States have constitutional responsibility for many aspects of agriculture, but the central government plays
an important role developing national approaches to policy and providing the necessary funds for
implementation of programmes at state level. The central government (Union Cabinet) is responsible for
some key policy areas, notably international trade policies, and for implementation of the National Food
Security Act (NFSA) of 2013.
Policies that have been governing the marketing of agricultural commodities in India – from the
producer level to downstream levels in the food chain – include the national Essential Commodities Act
(ECA) and the state-level APMC Acts. Through these acts, producer prices are affected by regulations
influencing pricing, procuring, stocking, and trading of commodities. Farmers bring their produce to sell in
regulated wholesale markets (or mandis). This infrastructure is also used by governments to procure under
the minimum support price system. Differences exist among states in the status of their respective APMC
Acts and in how these acts are implemented.2 The electronic portal (electronic National Agricultural Market,
e-NAM) set up in 2016 and the 2017 model Agricultural Produce and Livestock Marketing (Promotion and
Facilitation) Act were shared with state governments as a recommendation for adoption.3 In June 2020,
changes to domestic agricultural marketing regulations were initiated as part of the COVID-19 economic
support package.
Based on the recommendations of the CACP, the central government establishes a set of minimum
support prices (MSP) for 23 commodities each year. The CACP recommends the MSPs based on the
India average costs of production at two levels: actual paid out costs of production (A2); and the imputed
value of family labour. State governments can also provide a bonus payable over and above the MSP for
some crops. National and state-level agencies operating on behalf of the Food Corporation of India (FCI)
can buy wheat, rice and coarse grains as well. A number of other agencies can buy pulses, oilseeds and
cotton at MSP – including through the Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay Sanrakshan Yojna (PM-AASHA)
programme introduced in 2018 – and some horticulture commodities without MSP are also procured.
However, procurement under the price support scheme effectively operates mainly for wheat, rice and
cotton, and only in a few states.
The only payments based on output concern the sugar sector and were introduced in 2018. The payments
support clearing of arrears for sugar cane delivered and are directly provided to sugar cane farmers.
On the input side, major policies enable agricultural producers to obtain farm inputs at subsidised prices.
Policies governing the supply of fertilisers, electricity and water provide the largest input subsidies. Other
inputs are also supplied at subsidised prices, including seeds, machinery, credit, and crop insurance. In
recent years, state-level loan debt waivers increased significantly, with local governments compensating
lending institutions for forgiving debt to farmers. More than 70% of agricultural loans are from financial
institutions such as commercial banks, with the rest stemming from non-institutional sources
(e.g. moneylenders) (Reserve Bank of India, 2019[4]).
The Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) scheme provides an annual direct income
transfer of INR 6 000 (USD 84) per farmer to all farmers with land titles. The unconditional payment does
not require farmers to produce, and targets farmers’ broad needs, from the purchase of inputs to needs
unrelated to farming.
Programmes targeting the development and maintenance of infrastructure, particularly related to irrigation,
attract the largest financial support within general services to agriculture. Budgetary support is also
significant for public stockholding and for agricultural knowledge and innovation.
Public distribution of food grains operates under the joint responsibility of the central and state
governments. The Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) operates under the NFSA in all states and
UTs. Other Welfare Schemes (OWS) also operate under the NFSA. The central government allocates food
grains to state governments and the FCI transports food grains from surplus states to deficit states. State
governments are then responsible for distributing the food grain entitlements: allocating supplies within the


 313

state, identifying eligible families, issuing ration cards, and distributing food grains mainly through Fair
Price Shops.
India’s Foreign Trade Policy, formulated and implemented by the Directorate General of Foreign Trade
(DGFT), is announced every five years, but reviewed and adjusted annually in consultation with relevant
public agencies. Amidst the COVID-19 outbreak, in March 2020 the central government extended the
application of the current Foreign Trade Policy 2015-20. India’s Basic Customs Duty (BCD), also known
as the statutory rate, is agreed at the time of the annual budget approval.
For several decades, India managed its agricultural exports through a combination of export restrictions,
including export prohibitions, licensing requirements, quotas, taxes, minimum export prices,4 and state
trading requirements. The application or elimination of such restrictions can change several times per year,
taking into account concerns about domestic supplies and prices.
Regarding export subsidisation in agriculture, the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export
Development Authority (APEDA), under the responsibility of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry
(MOCI), in recent years provides financial assistance to exporters in the form of transport support.5
The 2018 Agriculture Export Policy framework includes three main areas for action. First, ensuring that
processed agricultural products and organic products not be subject to export restrictions. Second,
undertaking consultations among stakeholders and Ministries in order to identify the essential food security
commodities to which export restrictions could still be applied under specific market conditions. Third,
reducing import barriers applied to agricultural products for processing and re-exporting.
India ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change on 2 October 2016, with its Intended Nationally
Determined Contribution (INDC) submitted a year earlier becoming its NDC. The NDC includes a
commitment to reduce the emissions intensity of GDP by 33-35% below 2005 levels by 2030, but specifies
that this commitment does not bind India to any sector-specific mitigation obligation (Climate Action
Tracker, 2018[5]).
With regard to agriculture, India’s NDC has a strong focus on climate change adaptation, as addressed in
several of the central government’s main programmes for agriculture (entitled “missions”). These include,
among others, the National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture; the Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana
mission promoting organic farming practices; the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana mission
promoting efficient irrigation practices; and the National Mission on Agricultural Extension & Technology.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
The most important domestic policy development during 2020 relates to the reforms initiated to domestic
marketing regulations as part of the May 2020 COVID-19 economic support package (see details below
in ‘Domestic policy developments relating to COVID-19’).
The central government has been fast tracking the integration of the e-National Agriculture Market (e-NAM)
with Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs) and warehouses. Starting August 2020, e-NAM connects
farmers, FPOs, traders and warehouses with the mobile application Kisan Rath listing transporters
available for moving products from farm gate to wholesale markets. The new E Gopala app provides
livestock farmers with information relating to cattle health and diet (ICRIER, 2021[6]).
The government set up a high-level committee in September 2020 to prepare a roadmap for improving the
legal framework on land leasing, headed by the Secretary of the Department of Land Resources within the
Ministry of Rural Development. The roadmap focuses on formalising lease arrangements and addressing
ceiling restrictions on landholdings to allow small farmers to expand the size of their operational holdings.
In addition, it aims to ensure that direct income transfers and other welfare benefits reach farm workers
who do not own any land6 (Economic Times, 2020[7]).


314 

In June 2020, the central government increased the minimum support price (MSP) for several kharif
crops (spring sown, winter harvested): for instance, the MSP was increased by 3% for paddy rice to
INR 18 680 (USD 256) per tonne, by 5% for maize to INR 18 500 (USD 245) per tonne, and by 5% for
soybeans to INR 38 800 (USD 514) per tonne. The MSPs for cotton medium and long staple were also
increased by 5% to INR 55 150 (USD 756) per tonne and INR 58 250 (USD 798) per tonne, respectively.
In August 2020, the Fair and Remunerative Price for sugarcane was also increased for marketing year
2020/21 by 4% to INR 2 850 (USD 40) per tonne for a recovery rate of 10%. There was also an approved
premium of INR 28.8 (USD 0.4) per tonne for higher productivity7 (Government of India, 2020[8]).
In addition, in September 2020 the government raised MSPs for six rabi crops (winter sown, spring
harvested). To encourage planting of pulses and oilseeds, the highest increases in the MSP were
introduced for lentils by 6.3% to INR 5 100 (USD 70) per tonne, by 4.6% for chickpeas to INR 5 100
(USD 70), and by 5% for rapeseed and mustard to INR 4 650 (USD 64) per tonne. The MSP for wheat was
increased by 2.6% to INR 1 925 (USD 26) per tonne (Government of India, 2020[9]).
In November 2020, the Ministry of Finance earmarked an additional INR 1.34 trillion (USD 18 billion) for
fertiliser subsidies for 2020-218, in spite of a prior February 2020 government decision to reduce the
fertiliser subsidies (AMIS, 2020[10]).
The government of India allocated in 2020 INR 2.8 billion (USD 38 million) for the formation and training
of 10 000 FPOs. The 2021 Union Budget for the agricultural sector presented in February 2021 an
amplified focus on infrastructure, with a 33% increase in the allocation to rural infrastructure development
for 2021.
On agri-environmental policies, in May 2020, the state government of Haryana restricted the cultivation
of rice in eight district blocks with severe water scarcity. Under its crop diversification programme, the state
government decided to shift 100 000 hectares of rice area to other crops, primarily maize, millet and pulses
that will be procured at MSP. Farmers shifting their production are provided with a payment of
INR 7 000 per acre (USD 237 per hectare) of area under new crops (Down to earth, 2020[11]).
As of March 2021, 32 states and UTs implement the “One nation, one ration card” programme under the
Targeted Public Distribution System. The “One nation, one ration card” programme aims to address the
difficulties of migrant beneficiaries who often cannot access the subsidised food grain quota due to the
change in residence for employment purposes. Other objectives of the programme are to better target
beneficiaries and reduce leakage by biometric authentication of beneficiaries, as well as automation of Fair
Price Shops (FPS) (Government of India, 2021[12]).
The food subsidy allocation increased from INR 1.15 trillion (USD 13 billion) in the 2020-21 budget
estimate to INR 4.22 trillion (USD 48 billion) in the revised budget estimates, reflecting the additional cost
of free food grain distribution in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic (see details below), as well as the
government’s decision to pay the Food Corporation of India’s (FCI) loans9 and return to budgetary transfers
to fund the food subsidy cost. The 2021 Union Budget also proposes to discontinue the National Small
Savings Fund (NSSF) loan to FCI for food subsidy (The Hindu, 2021[13]).
On 30 November 2020, India announced it plans to achieve 20% ethanol-blending with gasoline (E20, i.e.
20% of ethanol mixed with 80% of gasoline) by 2025, five years ahead of its previous target set in 2019,
to reduce its dependence on oil imports. To meet the new 2025 target, the government announced that
12 billion litres of ethanol would be needed, with 7 billion litres of ethanol produced from 6 million tonnes
of surplus sugar and 5 billion litres of ethanol from excess grain. In addition, the government introduced an
interest subsidy scheme of INR 45 billion (USD 626 million) to enhance the domestic ethanol distillation
capacity from rice, maize, sorghum, wheat, and barley (Reuters, 2021[14]; AMIS, 2021[15]).


 315

The government of India is setting up a common data infrastructure with information on all farmers in the
country, integrating data from food subsidies recipients, the direct income transfer programme PM-KISAN,
and the Soil Health Card (ICRIER, 2021[6]).
The National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) earmarked INR 50 billion
(USD 683 million) for 2021 for transforming Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) into multi-service
centres or one-stop shops for receiving technical assistance (ICRIER, 2021[6]).
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
In March 2020, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare (MAFW) launched new features of the
electronic National Agriculture Market (e-NAM) platform to address difficulties with physically travelling to
APMC mandis markets for selling crops. The features included: (i) a warehouse-based trading module to
facilitate trade directly from warehouses based on e-Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (e-NWR); (ii) a
Farmer Producer Organisation (FPO) trading module whereby FPOs can trade their produce from their
respective collection centre without bringing the produce to APMC markets (Government of India, 2020[16]).
Several measures were aimed at limiting transportation disruptions and delays in supply chains. For
instance, on 25 March 2020, the Ministry of Home Affairs issued a notice information to states and UTs
that transportation of animal feed and fodder was considered an essential service and would thus be
exempted from any inter-state restriction under the 2005 Disaster Management Act (Government of India,
2020[17]). The relaxed norms for agriculture-related activities under the lockdown also allow for the inter-
state movement of harvesting and sowing machinery (Times of India, 2020[18]). In addition, Indian Railways
set up special railway parcel trains for the transportation of essential items, including food products, in
small parcel sizes (Government of India, 2020[19]).
Central and state level governments have been making efforts to maintain the operation of distribution
channels for fruit and vegetables. States such as Odisha set up ‘vegetable counters’ as an alternative
channel of distribution in addition to providing support to small farmers for selling their produce in district
and urban centres (Deccan Herald, 2020[20]).
In March 2020, the central government granted the 3% prompt repayment incentive (PRI) to all farmers for
all short-term crop loans of maximum INR 300 000 (USD 3 938) which are due up to 31 May 2020, even if
farmers fail to repay loans until this date (Government of India, 2020[21]).
Support to agriculture is also part of the May 2020 INR 18.3 trillion10 (USD 250 billion) special economic
package to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic and achieve a ‘self-reliant’ India. First, several of the
economy-wide measures within the package such as easing the liquidity pressure for small enterprises or
Non-Banking Financial Institutions (NBFI) also concern agri-businesses. Second, the specific agro-food
support package within the overall May 2020 package has several components:

fiscal support to migrant workers returning to rural areas

fiscal support to consumers

fiscal support to credit for farmers

fiscal support to infrastructure and other general services programmes

reforms to domestic agricultural marketing regulations to provide farmers with a better price
discovery mechanism and to enhance private sector investment in supply chains.
The fiscal support to migrant workers backs the creation of new public works for migrants returning to rural
areas from urban areas affected by the COVID-19 lockdown. The programme allocated INR 1.15 trillion
(USD 16 billion) to the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MNREG), including
payments covering working hours in rural infrastructure projects such as micro-irrigation systems.


316 

Fiscal support for enhancing financial services includes INR 300 billion (USD 4 billion) for 30 million
farmers, within the Additional Emergency Working Capital for Farmers implemented by the National Bank
for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). It also includes INR 2 trillion (USD 26.3 billion) of credit
for 25 million farmers under the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) scheme.
Funds destined to on farm services, agricultural infrastructure and other general services projects include
several programmes (Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare, 2021[22]):

The Agriculture Infrastructure Fund ten-year programme to support post-harvest infrastructure
such as cold storage, collection centres, and processing units. Support (INR 2.1 billion
(USD 29 million) in 2020) is to be provided as interest subsidy to credits for the set-up of these
types of infrastructure. Beneficiaries include farmers, farmer producer organisations (FPOs), and
agri-businesses.

INR 100 billion (USD 1.32 billion) scheme to assist 200 000 micro agro-food enterprises to
upgrade food standards and product marketing.

INR 133.4 billion (USD 1.75 billion) outlay for the National Disease Control Program to address
foot and mouth disease and brucellosis by vaccinating 530 million animals (cattle, buffalos, sheep,
goats, and pigs).

INR 150 billion (USD 1.97 billion) for the Animal Husbandry Infrastructure Development Fund to
support private investment in dairy processing and cattle feed infrastructure.
With the objective to avoid COVID-19 spread in mandis after India entered lockdown in March 2020, APMC
laws were suspended and transactions could be undertaken in places outside the mandi system. This
encouraged the central government to initiate reforms to domestic agricultural marketing regulations
in June 2020 as part of the May 2020 COVID-19 support package, under the strategy ‘One India, one
agriculture market’ (ICRIER, 2021[6]). The proposed reforms included a set of ordinances aiming to:
deregulate major food crops from the 1955 ECA; allow farmers to sell their agricultural products outside of
government-regulated markets; and allow barrier-free inter and intra-state trade of agricultural
commodities. The government also proposed providing a legal framework for farmers to facilitate contract-
farming schemes with processors and other market actors in supply chains in order to reduce price risk.
On 20 September 2020, the Indian Parliament passed the following Acts in support of the proposals:

The Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act, which would remove limits on private stocking,
trading or buying of several commodities, including cereals and oilseeds.

The Farmers’ Produce Trade and Commerce (Promotion and Facilitation) Act, which would allow
farmers to sell their produce in other places in addition to markets notified under state Agricultural
Produce Market Committee (APMC) Acts (mandis). The act proposes to set up an electronic
trading platform and a dispute resolution mechanism. It would also promote barrier-free inter-state
and intra-state trade.

The Farmers’ (Empowerment and Protection) Agreement on Price Assurance and Farm Services
Act, which would create a national framework for contract farming through an agreement between
a farmer and a private sector buyer (i.e. processor, wholesaler, retailer, exporter) for the sale of
future farm produce. The act provides for a three-level dispute settlement mechanism by the
conciliation board, Sub-Divisional Magistrate, and Appellate Authority as the highest level of
appeal.
Major protests of farmers from several states demanding the repeal of the bills11 led the central government
to consider potential amendments.12 In mid-December 2020, India’s Supreme Court suspended the
implementation of the bills and mandated the creation of an expert committee to consult with farmer groups
before proceeding with their implementation (Business Standard, 2021[23]).


 317

The central government introduced support to consumers in March and June 2020. On 18 March 2020,
the government of India decided to distribute a six-month quota of subsidised food grains in one go to
beneficiaries under the TPDS, with the objective to prevent eventual panic buying under the COVID-19
lockdown and potential price increases (Economic Times, 2020[24]). On 26 March 2020, the government
approved the free distribution of an additional 5 kg of food grains per person13 and 1 kg of pulses per
household (according to regional preferences) per month for three months under the programme Pradhan
Mantri Garib Kalyan Ann Yojana (Prime Minister’s Food Security Scheme for the Poor) targeting urban
and rural poor, including migrant workers (Government of India, 2020[25]). In June 2020, the programme
was extended until November 2020 (AMIS, 2020[26]).
In addition, in March-April 2020, specific state- or UT-level initiatives also targeted distribution of grains
and other food products. Some of these include the following (IFPRI, 2020[27]):

States such as Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Manipur,
Odisha, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, and West Bengal are providing additional
quantities of wheat and rice (between 1 kg and 10 kg per month for varying periods and for different
categories of households).

States such as Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Odisha, Punjab, and Tamil Nadu
are also providing other agro-food products such as pulses, oil, salt, or sugar.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
On 28 March 2020, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MOCI) extended the existing quantitative
import restriction for dried peas until end March 2021. Restrictions include an import quota of
150 000 tonnes per year, Minimum Import Prices (MIPs) of INR 200 (USD 2.7) per kg14 and a requirement
of clearing all pea imports only through the port of Kolkata. On 16 April 2020, MOCI fixed the quantity of
peas by type that can be imported under the quantitative restriction at 75 000 tonnes for green peas and
75 000 tonnes for other peas (but setting the quantity allowed for yellow peas at 0 tonnes, imposing a
de facto import ban) (DGFT, 2020[28]) (WTO, 2020[29]).
In turn, the most favoured nation (MFN) tariff for lentils,15 from all origins except the United States, was
reduced between June and December 2020 from 30% to 10%. The tariff on lentils from the United States
was reduced from 50%16 to 30%.
The government also allowed imports of 0.2 million tonnes of pigeon peas and other pulses from
Mozambique outside the quota limits for these pulses in 2020-21, under the existing Memorandum of
Understanding between the two governments.
In April 2020, India notified the WTO that it exceeded its limit on rice support for marketing year 2018/19,
invoking for the first time the ‘peace clause’.17
The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MOCI) banned exports of all varieties of onions between
13 September and 31 December 2020 to curb domestic supply shortages18 (Hindustan Times, 2020[30];
Economic Times, 2020[31]). In mid-October 2020, the MOCI also imposed stock holding limits, in place until
31 December 2020: 2 tonnes for retailers and 25 tonnes for wholesalers (Economic Times, 2020[32]). In
turn, to facilitate imports of onion and address domestic shortages, the government relaxed the
requirements for fumigation and related declarations on the Phytosanitary Certificate (PSC) necessary for
importation, for the period October 2020 to January 2021.
In May 2020, the central government launched the Rice Export Promotion Forum (REPF). The Forum
seeks to help traders boost rice exports under the supervision of the Agricultural and Processed Foods
Export Promotion Development Authority (AMIS, 2020[33]).
In October 2020, the Gujarat state government approved, export subsidies for skimmed milk powder (SMP)
until 30 April 2021. The programme provides a total of INR 1.5 billion (USD 20 million) for six months and


318 

for a maximum amount of 30 000 tonnes of SMP to the Gujarat Cooperative Milk Marketing Federation
Ltd. The export subsidy provides INR 50 (USD 0.7) per kg of SMP exported if the FOB price is above
INR 180 (USD 2.5) per kg (GAIN IN2020-0153, 2020[34]).
In December 2020, the central government approved a subsidy of INR 35 billion (USD 480 million) to sugar
mills for the export of 6 million tonnes of sweetener during the marketing year 2020/21, as part of the efforts
to help mills clear outstanding dues to sugar cane farmers (Times of India, 2020[35]).
In December 2020, the government launched a digital interface for foreign investors to connect directly
with farmers (Economic Times, 2020[36]).
The Union Budget 2021 presented early February 2021 introduces the Agriculture Infrastructure and
Development Cess (AIDC) (i.e. levy) on selected imported goods for financing agricultural infrastructure
programmes, including the following agro-food products: 17.5% on crude palm oil; 35% on apples; 5% on
cotton; 40% on peas; 20% on lentils; and between 30% and 50% on selected types of chickpeas. Also in
February 2021, the MFN tariff for cotton was raised from 0% to 5%.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The Ministry of Shipping issued specific guidelines to main ports applying from 22 March to 14 April 2020
on exemptions and reductions of penalties, demurrages charges, and other port fees for traders in relation
to any potential delay in cargo port operations (Government of India, 2020[37]). At the same time, port
protocols were adjusted, ranging from quarantine measures to additional documentation requirements and
examinations, while at the end of March 2020 ports were advised by the Ministry of Shipping that they
could consider the COVID-19 pandemic as grounds for invoking ‘force majeure’, a clause absolving
companies from meeting their contractual commitments for reasons beyond their control (Bloomberg,
2020[38]).
On 27 March 2020, the central government extended the 2015-20 Foreign Trade Policy that was due to
expire and be replaced by the Foreign Trade Policy 2020-25 (Business Standard, 2020[39]).
Starting May 2020, the Animal Quarantine and Certification Services (AQCS) in co-operation with the
Customs authority relaxed certain requirements in sanitary certificates and promoted processing of trade
documents through the trade Single Window. This has the objective of streamlining border processes for
imports of selected agro-food products (including milk and dairy products) (GAIN IN2020-0126, 2020[40]).
Contextual information
India is the seventh largest country by land area and the second most populous after the People’s Republic
of China with over 1.3 billion people (Table 13.3). While the share of urban population continued to
increase over the past decade, about two-thirds of the population still live in rural areas. At just 0.15 hectare
per capita, agricultural land is very scarce.
Agriculture accounts for an estimated 42.4% of employment, but its 16% share in GDP indicates that labour
productivity remains significantly lower than in the rest of the economy. The productivity gap is also
reflected in the evolution of farm incomes, which correspond to less than one-third of non-agricultural
income. Agriculture’s weight in the economy has gradually declined, mostly in favour of services which led
economic growth over the last two decades and played a more important role in India’s economic
development than in most other major emerging economies.
Indian agriculture is continuing to diversify towards livestock and away from grain crops. While grains and
milk remain dominant, there has been a gradual change in the composition of production to other crops –
such as sugar cane, cotton, fruit and vegetables – as well as certain meat sub-sectors. The livestock sector
has seen faster and less volatile growth than the crop sector. The agricultural sector continues to be


 319

dominated by a large number of small-scale farmers, as the national average operational holding size has
been in steady decline.
Table 13.3. India: Contextual indicators

India
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
2 214
9 612
5.6%
8.4%
Population (million)
1 057
1 366
24.5%
26.3%
Land area (thousand km2)
2 973
2 973
3.6%
3.5%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
180 975
179 674
5.9%
5.9%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
355
460
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
2 096
7 034
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
10
14
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
21.6
16.0
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
59.6
42.4
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
10.9
9.5
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.6
4.7
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
73
63
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
27
37
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
89
87
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Real GDP growth was decelerating prior to 2020 (5.8% in 2019), highlighting remaining structural
bottlenecks in areas such as labour markets or the business environment. The COVID-19 pandemic and
related restrictions led to a drop in GDP of about 10%. The low unemployment figures (averaging 5.4% in
2018-20) hide significant degrees of informal employment. Against the background of higher prices for
selected food items, inflation increased to 9% in 2019 (Figure 13.5).
India has consistently been a net agro-food exporter over the last two decades, but agro-food imports have
been increasing since 2007, while exports have declined from the peak of 2013. Products for direct
consumption – of low value, raw or semi-processed, and marketed in bulk – dominate agro-food exports,
representing 65% of the total in 2019. Processed products for further processing by domestic industry are
the main import category, accounting for 58% of total agro-food imports (Figure 13.6).


320 

Figure 13.5. India: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 13.6. India: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural output growth in India averaged 3% in 2006-15, well above the world average (Figure 13.6).
This has been driven mainly by a significant increase in total factor productivity (TFP) at 3% per year,
backed by technological progress in the form of improved seeds and better infrastructure (including
irrigation coverage, road density, and electricity supply).
However, the sustained growth in agricultural output has been exerting mounting pressures on natural
resources, particularly land and water. This is reflected in the nutrient surplus intensities at the national
level, which are much higher than the average for OECD countries. The share of agriculture in total
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions is also higher than the OECD average, partly due to the weight of the
agricultural sector in the Indian economy. Livestock rearing is the main source of GHGs (Table 13.3).
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
23
19
5
46
13
16
58
19
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


 321

Figure 13.7. India: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 13.4. India: Productivity and environmental indicators

India
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.0%
3.0%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
103.8
134.2
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
20.7
23.9
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
4.9
4.8
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
23.3
18.6
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
34.3
39.2
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
91.5
..
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
..
..
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.



0.2%
0.5%
-0.1%
0.05%
3.0%
1.6%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
India
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


322 

References

AMIS (2021), AMIS Market Monitor Issue 85.
[15]
AMIS (2020), AMIS Market Monitor Issue 79, June.
[33]
AMIS (2020), AMIS Market Monitor Issue 81, August.
[26]
AMIS (2020), AMIS Market Monitor Issue 84, December.
[10]
Bloomberg (2020), Indian Ports In Confusion as Virus Lockdown Hits Operations,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-03-25/indian-ports-declare-force-majeure-
amid-national-virus-lockdown (accessed on 10 April 2020).
[38]
Business Standard (2021), Supreme Court order on farm laws, https://www.business-
standard.com/article/opinion/supreme-court-order-on-farm-laws-none-to-praise-and-very-few-
to-love-it-121011500390_1.html (accessed on 18 January 2021).
[23]
Business Standard (2020), Foreign Trade Policy and Schemes to Be Extended for 6 Months,
https://www.business-standard.com/article/economy-policy/foreign-trade-policy-schemes-to-
be-extended-by-6-months-till-sept-30-120032701005_1.html (accessed on 31 March 2020).
[39]
Climate Action Tracker (2018), Countries: India,
http://climateactiontracker.org/countries/india.html (accessed on  15 January 2019).
[5]
Deccan Herald (2020), Coronavirus: Self-help Groups in Odisha,
https://www.deccanherald.com/national/east-and-northeast/coronavirus-self-help-groups-in-
odisha-manufacture-distribute-1-million-masks-821618.html (accessed on 10 April 2020).
[20]
DGFT (2020), Trade Notice No.6/2020-2021, https://content.dgft.gov.in/Website/TN%206.pdf
(accessed on 20 February 2021).
[28]
Down to earth (2020), Paddy or no paddy: Quest for equilibrium between water, livelihood in
Haryana, https://www.downtoearth.org.in/blog/agriculture/paddy-or-no-paddy-quest-for-
equilibrium-between-water-livelihood-in-haryana-71204 (accessed on 15 December 2020).
[11]
Economic Times (2020), Amidst protests, India launches digital facility for foreign investors to
connect with farmers,
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/agriculture/amidst-protests-india-
launches-digital-facility-for-foreign-investors-to-connect-with-
farmers/articleshow/79765931.cms (accessed on 15 December 2020).
[36]
Economic Times (2020), Centre sets up high-level committee to prepare roadmap for
regularisation of land leasing in agri sector, http://1.
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/agriculture/centre-sets-up-high-level-
committee-to-prepare-roadmap-for-regularisation-of-land-leasing-in-agri-
sector/articleshow/78176088.cms?utm_source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=text&utm_ca
mpaign=cp (accessed on 20 December 2020).
[7]
Economic Times (2020), Government imposes stock limit on onion traders to check prices,
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/agriculture/government-imposes-stock-
limit-on-onion-traders-to-check-prices/articleshow/78828664.cms?from=mdr (accessed on
15 December 2020).
[32]


 323

Economic Times (2020), India considers changing new farm laws after mass protests, http://1.
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/agriculture/india-considers-changing-
new-farm-laws-after-mass-
protests/articleshow/79569600.cms?utm_source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=text&utm_c
ampaign=cppst (accessed on 15 December 2020).
[41]
Economic Times (2020), Onion prices shoot up 28 percent after government announces easing
on export ban, https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/agriculture/onion-prices-
shoot-up-28-percent-after-government-announces-easing-on-export-
ban/articleshow/80019370.cms (accessed on 15 December 2020).
[31]
Economic Times (2020), PDS Beneficiaries Can Lift 6-month Quota of Grains in One Go,
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/pds-beneficiaries-can-lift-6-
month-quota-of-grains-in-one-go-ram-vilas-paswan-amid-coronavirus-
concerns/articleshow/74695460.cms?from=mdr (accessed on 30 March 2020).
[24]
GAIN IN2020-0126 (2020), Livestock and Products Annual, September.
[40]
GAIN IN2020-0153 (2020), Dairy and Products Annual, November.
[34]
Government of India (2021), Economic Survey 2020-21,
https://www.indiabudget.gov.in/economicsurvey (accessed on 1 March 2021).
[12]
Government of India (2020), Cabinet approves Fair and Remunerative Price of sugarcane.
[8]
Government of India (2020), Finance Minister Announces Several Relief Measures,
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=1607942 (accessed on 10 April 2020).
[16]
Government of India (2020), Government declares Minimum Support Prices (MSP) for Rabi
Crops for marketing season 2021-22,
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1657457 (accessed on
15 December 2020).
[9]
Government of India (2020), Government Gives Benefits to Farmers on Crop Loan Repayments
Due to Covid-19 Lockdown, https://pib.gov.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=200815
(accessed on 10 April 2020).
[21]
Government of India (2020), Indian Railways to Run Special Parcel Trains for Carriage of
Essential Items in Small Parcel Sizes,
https://pib.gov.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=200787 (accessed on 10 April 2020).
[19]
Government of India (2020), Ministry of Shipping issues Direction to All Major Ports,
https://pib.gov.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=200867 (accessed on 10 April 2020).
[37]
Government of India (2020), Rs 1.70 Lakh Crore Relief Package under Pradhan Mantri Garib
Kalyan Yojana for the Poor, https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=1608345
(accessed on 30 March 2020).
[25]
Government of India (2020), Transportation/Interstate Movement of Animal Feed,
https://pib.gov.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=200793 (accessed on 10 April 2020).
[17]
Gulati, A., D. Kapur and M. Bouton (2020), Reforming Indian Agriculture.
[3]


324 

Hindustan Times (2020), Government imposes ban on onion exports,
https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/govt-imposes-ban-on-export-of-onions/story-
XqKn0RiTl1DmRGYQLmCBPM.html#:~:text=The%20Union%20government%20on%20Mond
ay,coming%20weeks%2C%20as%20exports%20surged.&text=The%20government%20had
%20lifted%20the,a%20kg%20 (accessed on 14 December 2020).
[30]
ICRIER (2021), Background information for the India chapter - 2021 M&E report.
[6]
ICRIER (2020), Background Analysis for the 2020 Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation
Report.
[2]
IFPRI (2020), How India’s Food-Based Safety Net is Responding to the COVID-19 Lockdown,
https://www.ifpri.org/blog/how-indias-food-based-safety-net-responding-covid-19-lockdown
(accessed on 10 April 2020).
[27]
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare (2021), Assistance to Farmers affected by Floods
and Covid-19 Pandemic, https://pib.gov.in/Pressreleaseshare.aspx?PRID=1697514
(accessed on 25 February 2021).
[22]
OECD/ICRIER (2018), Agricultural Policies in India, OECD Food and Agricultural Reviews,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264302334-en.
[1]
Reserve Bank of India (2019), Report of the Internal Working Group to Review Agricultural
Credit, https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/PublicationReportDetails.aspx?UrlPage=&ID=942
(accessed on 10 January 2020).
[4]
Reuters (2021), India brings forward target of 20% ethanol-blending with gasoline,
https://www.reuters.com/article/india-ethanol-gasoline-idUSKBN29J2FF (accessed on
20 January 2021).
[14]
The Hindu (2021), Union Budget 2021 - Food subsidy budget set at almost INR 2.43 lakh crore,
https://www.thehindu.com/business/budget/union-budget-2021-food-subsidy-budget-set-at-
almost-243-lakh-crore/article33719802.ece (accessed on 2 February 2021).
[13]
The Hindustan Times (2020), Kerala Assembly passes resolution demanding withdrawal of farm
laws passed by Parliament, https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/kerala-assembly-
passes-resolution-demanding-withdrawal-of-farm-laws-passed-by-parliament/story-
AEciWT0mTmIfhxNuTm08vK.html (accessed on 15 January 2021).
[42]
Times of India (2020), Cabinet approves INR 3500 crore sugar export subsidy,
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/cabinet-okays-rs-3500-crore-
sugar-export-subsidy/articleshow/79761819.cms (accessed on 15 January 2021).
[35]
Times of India (2020), Govt Relaxes Norms for Agriculture and Farming Sector,
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/coronavirus-lockdown-govt-relaxes-norms-for-
agriculture-and-farming-sector/articleshow/74983439.cms (accessed on 10 April 2020).
[18]
WTO (2020), Compilation of questions for the Committee on Agriculture meeting of 28 July 2020,
https://docs.wto.org/dol2fe/Pages/SS/directdoc.aspx?filename=q:/Jobs/RD-
AG/78.pdf&Open=True.
[29]





 325




Notes
1 Under the industrial licensing policies in place until the early 1990s, private sector firms needed to secure
specific licenses to start operating.
2 In the seven states or UTs that do not have an APMC act, procurement can take place outside mandis.
3 Agriculture marketing also covers the futures market governed by the Securities and Exchange Board of
India (SEBI), with the largest value of agricultural commodity trade taking place through the National
Commodity Derivative Exchange (NCDEX). In addition, the Negotiable Warehouse Receipt System
(NWRS) – established under the Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA) – aims to
support farmers by storing products in warehouses. However, farmers, especially small and marginal, do
not directly trade in agri-futures market in India.
4 This represents the price below which exporters are not allowed to export a specific commodity. A
minimum export price is set taking into consideration concerns about domestic prices and supply of that
specific commodity.
5 A Ministerial Decision on Export Competition at the WTO Ministerial Conference held in Nairobi in 2015
put an end to the subsidisation of agricultural exports, which for India would occur at the end of 2023
(https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/minist_e/mc10_e/l980_e.htm).
6 Only landowners or farmers with legal rights to operate on land are eligible for nearly all of the existing
programmes for farmers, thus excluding tenant farmers from benefitting from such schemes. The average
India tenancy rate is approximately 10% of rural households, with wide regional differences.
7 INR 2.75 per quintal (USD 0.4 per tonne) for every 0.1% increase above the basic 10% recovery rate
(i.e. defined by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs as the amount of sugar produced by crushing
a given amount of sugarcane by weight).
8 Since 2015, the government has been postponing disbursements under food and fertiliser subsidies and
the steep increase in 2020 is linked to accounting clearance of past dues.
9 For several years, the budgetary allocation for PDS has not been sufficient to cover FCI’s subsidy costs,
forcing it to borrow from the NSSF at a rate of about 8%. Its outstanding loans are now above INR 2 trillion
(USD 23 billion) (The Hindu, 2021[13]).
10 The total economic package of INR 20 trillion (USD 263 billion) includes the INR 1.7 trillion
(USD 22.3 billion) relief package introduced in March 2020 and designed to provide a safety net to India’s
most economically vulnerable citizens affected by the COVID-19 lockdown.
11 The Kerala state Assembly passed a resolution on 31 December 2020 demanding the bills withdrawal
(The Hindustan Times, 2020[42]).




326 


12 One of such considerations is for applying the same taxes to the private wholesale markets outside
APMC as in the existing regulated markets. Under the Farmers’ Produce Trade and Commerce (Promotion
and Facilitation) Act, private players would be allowed to set up wholesale markets where transactions
would not attract any kind of tax. An additional consideration is that in case of a dispute between sellers
and buyers, the government could also allow farmers to appeal to a higher court than what would be
permitted under the new legislation (Economic Times, 2020[41]). On 21 January 2021, farmers’ unions
rejected a central government proposal to suspend the implementation of the bills for a period of 18 months
while the expert committee would conduct the consultations.
13 This is in addition to the regular food ration quota (5 kg of wheat or rice per person per month with wheat
at INR 2/kg, and rice at INR 3/kg) under the National Food Security Act (NFSA) 2013.
14 MIP is around six times higher than the domestic price.
15 HS code 07134000.
16 The Ministry of Finance introduced tariff increases in June 2018 on various products imported from the
United States, in retaliation to the duty increases introduced by the United States on steel and aluminium.
17 The peace clause protects a developing country against dispute action by WTO members in case it
exceeds its support ceiling because of acquisition at an administered price for public stockholding for food
security purposes. India informed the WTO that the value of its rice production was USD 43.67 billion in
2018-19 and that its non-exempt rice support amounted to USD 5 billion. India also noted that the
850 000 tonnes of rice stocks subsequently sold in the domestic market were not allowed for export.
18 Heavy rainfall in August damaged output by 40% to 50% in key growing states of Madhya Pradesh,
Karnataka and Gujarat.


 327

Support to agriculture
Indonesia’s producer support to agriculture increased significantly in the 2000s, from 7.5% of gross farm
receipts in 2000-02 to 21.3% in 2010. In the most recent decade, support as a share of gross farm receipts
was relatively stable, reaching 21.1% in 2018-20. The largest component of agricultural support in
Indonesia is market price support to producers, in line with the government focus on food sovereignty and
self-reliance, with programmes aimed at achieving self-sufficiency in a number of staple products (rice,
maize, soybeans, sugar and beef). Almost all producer transfers are potentially most-distorting, mainly
market price support (including negative price support for palm oil), but also payments based on
unconstrained variable input use.
Prices received by farmers were on average 25% higher than world prices, with large differences between
commodities. Sugar, maize, poultry and rice had the highest shares of single-commodity transfers in gross
farm receipts, all near or above 30%.
Indonesia has a large food assistance programme (BPNT) to support poor consumers based on electronic
vouchers. But it is smaller than total market price support and consumers are penalised by agricultural
policies with a negative Consumer Support Estimate of -26.7% of consumer expenditures at farm level.
Expenditures on general services for the sector (GSSE) focus mainly on infrastructure and public
stockholding, and are small compared to producer support, representing 6.1% of the Total Support
Estimate. Expenditures for GSSE relative to agricultural value-added were 1.3%, well below the OECD
average. Total support to agriculture as a share of GDP increased in the last two decades from 1.3% to
2.5%, mainly driven by additional support to individual producers (PSE).
Recent policy changes
During 2020-21, Indonesia maintained the main features of its agricultural policy adopted in 2012. The
government increased minimum purchase prices for paddy rice by 14% in 2020 after having kept them
constant in nominal terms since 2015. The government export levy of crude palm oil increased from
USD 50/tonne to USD 55/tonne.
Indonesia responded to the COVID-19 pandemic by expanding its food assistance programmes. In 2020,
the budget for the BPNT food voucher programme increased by 35% and the Ministry of Agriculture
dedicated additional funding for this programme. In addition, to increase the income of rural households,
including farm households, the Padat Karya (cash for work) programme of the Ministry of Agriculture
financed rehabilitation of rural infrastructures, such as irrigation canals and rural roads, land improvements,
and community pest control.
As part of policy responses to COVID-19, Indonesia launched a programme to increase production and
food reserves by turning potential farmlands in Central Kalimantan to production under a government
initiative in the so-called food estates. In 2020, the programme covered an area of 30 000 hectares in
14 Indonesia


328 

Central Kalimantan province. It finances infrastructure, input grants (fertiliser and seed), machinery, and
training and extension services. The programme is expected to cover 165 000 hectares by 2024.
Two new programmes called 1000 Horticultural Villages and 1000 Cattle Villages provide grants of high-
quality seeds, fertilisers, means of controlling pests and diseases, livestock breeds, equipment, and
technical advice to targeted farmers.
On 5 July 2020, the Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (IA-CEPA),
signed in 2019, entered into force. Australia eliminated all tariffs levied on imports from Indonesia, and
500 000 tonnes of Australian feed grains (wheat, sorghum, and barley) enjoy duty-free access to
Indonesia, to be increased over an 11-year implementation period.
Assessment and recommendations

Indonesian agricultural policy focuses on self-sufficiency and corresponding trade measures as a
tool to achieve food self-reliance. These create large price gaps between domestic and
international markets for imported products such as maize, poultry and rice. The impact on
incentives and prices is likely to work against objectives that underpin the Food Law of 2012. In
particular, these include affordable prices for consumers, who are penalised with negative support,
and diversification in production and diet, which is thwarted by the concentration of support on a
few staple commodities.

The ongoing reform of the food assistance programmes – gradually shifting from the Rastra
physical distribution system to the BPNT electronic food voucher system – is an important step to
improve their effectiveness. Its completion should allow better targeting and improved food
security, particularly if combined with a reduction in market price support.

Fertiliser subsidies are costly, with doubtful efficiency. Application of fertilisers must adapt to local
soil and production conditions to be effective and avoid negative environmental impacts.
Converting these subsidies into less coupled payments per unit of land would make the support
more efficient and be in line with those implemented in other countries, including the People’s
Republic of China (hereafter “China”). Additionally, investing in knowledge transfer to farmers
would contribute to allocation of inputs according to the needs of local production.

Policies should stimulate domestic productivity through investments in infrastructure, the
innovation system and by easing constraints on private investment in agriculture. Savings from
reduced input subsidies could be re-allocated to Indonesia’s Agricultural Innovation System and
improving farmers’ skills to manage production and natural resources on their farms, thus
contributing to long-term agricultural productivity growth and poverty reduction.

Administrative requirements on agro-food imports related to food safety, quarantine, product
standards and labelling have proliferated in Indonesia. Combined with uneven enforcement and
lack of transparency from changing rules, the requirements add to trade costs. To reduce these
costs, the scientific basis of these requirements needs to be clarified, and transparency and
consistency in their implementation improved.

Indonesia could improve the contribution of agriculture, forestry and land use to climate change
mitigation by implementing targeted measures, such as those identified in the National Plan to
reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in management of agricultural land without burning and
reforestation.

To design a more resilient policy framework for the period after the COVID-19 pandemic, measures
implemented in response to the crisis, such as those expanding agricultural land and input
subsidies, should be evaluated with respect to their impact on the livelihoods of those in need, and
on the environment.


 329

Figure 14.1. Indonesia: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/tkhqea
Figure 14.2. Indonesia: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Note: The producer price change and the border price change are not calculated when the negative price gap occurs at the commodity level
for the current or previous year.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/zu06dh
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
PSE change decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE


330 

Figure 14.3. Indonesia: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/lxktei


-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Rubber
Coffee
Cocoa beans
Bananas
Eggs
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Palm oil
Soybeans
Rice
Maize
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 331

Table 14.1. Indonesia: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
23 813
111 541
108 829
113 922
111 871
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
72.0
75.0
75.1
75.3
74.7
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
22 684
81 900
79 855
82 022
83 823
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
1 823
24 082
24 539
24 694
23 013
Support based on commodity output
1 730
21 454
21 585
22 033
20 745
Market Price Support1
1 730
21 454
21 585
22 033
20 745
Positive Market Price Support
2 328
23 656
23 687
24 177
23 104
Negative Market Price Support
-597
-2 201
-2 102
-2 143
-2 359
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
82
2 612
2 937
2 646
2 254
Based on variable input use
19
2 197
2 517
2 232
1 842
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
59
395
403
407
376
with input constraints
1
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
4
20
17
8
36
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
11
15
17
14
13
Based on Receipts / Income
11
15
17
14
13
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
7.5
21.1
22.0
21.2
20.2
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.08
1.26
1.27
1.26
1.24
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.08
1.27
1.28
1.27
1.25
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
382
1 661
1 060
2 082
1 840
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
45
80
74
84
84
Inspection and control
14
42
48
41
38
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
323
928
871
947
967
Marketing and promotion
0
3
2
5
3
Cost of public stockholding
0
606
65
1 005
749
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
15.7
6.1
3.9
7.4
7.0
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-1 967
-21 496
-20 868
-22 131
-21 488
Transfers to producers from consumers
-2 001
-18 619
-19 290
-19 853
-16 712
Other transfers from consumers
-316
-5 532
-4 211
-5 142
-7 242
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
328
1 399
1 349
1 432
1 415
Excess feed cost
22
1 256
1 284
1 432
1 051
Percentage CSE (%)
-8.7
-26.7
-26.6
-27.5
-26.1
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.11
1.42
1.42
1.44
1.40
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.10
1.36
1.36
1.38
1.35
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
2 534
27 141
26 948
28 207
26 268
Transfers from consumers
2 318
24 151
23 502
24 995
23 955
Transfers from taxpayers
533
8 522
7 657
8 354
9 556
Budget revenues
-316
-5 532
-4 211
-5 142
-7 242
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.3
2.5
2.6
2.5
2.5
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
803
5 687
5 363
6 174
5 523
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.5
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
348
344
350
349
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
9 322.08
14 325.42
14 232.88
14 150.28
14 593.09
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Indonesia are: maize, rice, soybean, sugar, milk,
beef and veal, pig meat, poultry, eggs, bananas, cassava, cocoa beans, coffee, palm oil and rubber.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




332 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Indonesia’s economy was relatively closed to trade for almost three decades from the 1960s to the 1980s.
Trade liberalisation started only in the 1990s with the signature of agreements that created the WTO and
the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA).
Over the past thirty years, the main priorities of Indonesia’s agricultural policy have been food self-
sufficiency, food diversification, value-added, competitiveness, and farmers’ welfare. Agricultural
producers benefit from a wide range of input subsidies for fertilisers, seeds, and credits, among others.
The number and cost of these grew rapidly since the mid-2000s. Targeted food (rice) assistance for the
poor (Raskin) introduced in 1998 allowed the government to increase the minimum producer price of rice,
but at the cost of increasing expenditure on food assistance programmes.
Raskin evolved in the last decade, eventually replaced by the food assistance programme Rastra. In early
2017, Indonesia started BPNT, a large-scale pilot programme to provide an electronic food voucher to
replace physical rice distribution. These consecutive programmes allowed the Food Logistics Agency
BULOG to distribute 10 kg of rice per poor family per month.
Tariffs fell significantly over the period. The average tariff on agriculture (excluding alcoholic beverages)
dropped from 20% in 1990 to 5% in 2010. Import monopolies, licensing requirements and export
restrictions on agricultural products were removed in 1997-98. However, quantitative import restrictions
were introduced, notably for rice, sugar and beef. Import requirements imposed for sanitary, phytosanitary
and religious/cultural reasons (i.e. halal certification) are significant and potentially stringent. They are often
implemented in a non-transparent manner and add to the cost of importing. Export taxes were introduced
in 1994 on crude palm oil and its derivatives, and on cocoa in 2010.
Indonesia’s current agricultural policies are framed in the 2012 Food Law, which establishes the objectives
of “food self-reliance and food sovereignty” (kemandirian pangan dan kedaulatan pangan). In practice,
self-sufficiency on staple and strategic commodities (rice, maize, soybean, sugar and beef) is the goal.
The country provides subsidies for input use, particularly fertilisers and seeds.
Table 14.2. Indonesia: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1960s to 1980s
Closed economy
Production expansion to avoid social unrest, rise in oil
prices and green revolution
Food Logistics Agency (BULOG) established in 1967 and its marketing
role expanded
Subsidised inputs such as fertilisers, pesticides and credit
Significant spending on infrastructure
Increased import tariff rates
Quantitative control of exports and imports
Export taxes on palm oil and its derivatives
1980s – 1996
Trade liberalisation
Abolishment of tariffs, general tariffs reduction programme
Trade agreements (URAA, AFTA, APEC)
New legislation on export tax on palm oil and its derivatives in 1994
Phase out of input subsidies
1997-1999
Market reform
Asian financial crisis
Reduction of BULOG’s monopoly powers, particularly in rice markets
Reduction of fertiliser subsidy
Introduction of targeted rice distribution programme (OPK/Raskin)
Tariffs replace import licensing arrangements for sugar
Abolishment of local content requirements for dairy and soybeans
Temporary removal of export taxes on palm oil and its derivatives


 333

Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
2000-2012
Measures to revitalise the agricultural sector in
response to poor productivity
Reinstated fertiliser subsidy
Increased expenditures in extension services R&D and irrigation
Increased tariffs on rice and sugar
Quantitative controls on trade in rice, sugar and beef
More stringent non-tariff measures
Variable export tax on palm oil and its derivatives, and on cocoa
2012-present
2012 Food Law, policy focus on self-sufficiency of
staple food (rice, maize, soybeans, sugar and beef)

Increased role of BULOG in rice imports and domestic market
Distribution of rice at low prices, first through Raskin programme, then
Rastra and finally BPNT electronic vouchers organising rice
distribution
More input subsidies for fertilisers, seeds and credit.
Grant for machineries to targeted farmers’ groups
New initiative on food estate
Indonesia’s producer support estimate was mostly positive over the past 30 years, except during the
financial crisis in 1998 and the food crisis in 2008. Support is mostly created by price interventions (tariffs
and minimum prices). On one hand, export taxes imposed on palm oil and cocoa result in negative support
for those commodities. On the other, import tariffs result in positive support to other commodities.
Budgetary transfers to producers (input subsidies) and consumers (food aid), are smaller than price
support, and have been stable over the past decade.
Figure 14.4. Indonesia: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1990 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The Food Law of 2012 shapes Indonesia’s current agricultural policy and set of core objectives. The Food
Law sets out the principles of food self-reliance (kemandirian pangan) and food sovereignty (kedaulatan
pangan) as the applied approach to food security. The law stipulates that domestic food demand be fulfilled
by imports if local food sources are insufficient (USDA FAS, 2019[1]). The Law confirms the principles of
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


334 

the Strategic Plan of the Ministry of Agriculture 2020-24: achieving self-sufficiency in the production of
selected staple-food commodities (rice, maize, soybeans, sugar and beef) to assure food security;
ensuring food prices are affordable for consumers across the archipelago; diversifying production and
consumption away from carbohydrates (rice and wheat) towards animal-based products, and fruits and
vegetables (particularly root vegetables); raising the competitiveness of agricultural production and value-
added processing; increasing the availability of raw materials for bio-industry and bioenergy; and improving
the welfare of farmers through higher incomes as a way to reduce the level of rural poverty (OECD, 2012[2]).
Indonesia pursues policy objectives through both domestic and trade measures. Domestic policy measures
include minimum purchase prices for rice and sugar; substantial budgetary allocations for inputs; and
provision of services to the agricultural sector as a whole, in particular related to irrigation, research and
development, and marketing and promotion.
BULOG manages public interventions in the domestic market and imports and has responsibility for market
operations aimed at stabilising domestic prices and managing the government rice reserve. BULOG can
only buy paddy or rice from farmers when the market price is lower than or equal to the minimum price and
must maintain a minimum year-end stock of 2 million tonnes, about 2.5% of annual consumption in
Indonesia (USDA FAS, 2019[3]). Only BULOG can import medium-quality rice with a maximum 25% broken
grains. However, private companies can import specialty rice such as jasmine rice and basmati rice (USDA
FAS, 2018[4]). In 2017, Indonesia introduced ceiling prices on medium- and premium-quality rice at the
retail level, which vary across regions. When the retail price exceeds the ceiling, BULOG also releases
rice from stocks to the market.
In May 2019, the Rastra food assistance programme was replaced by the BPNT, co-ordinated by the
Ministry of Social Affairs (Ministry of Social Affairs (Kementerian Sosial), 2019[5]). Under the BPNT, eligible
households receive IDR 150 000 (USD 10.3) per month on a purchasing card that can be used to buy rice
at the market price from selected retailers.
A wide range of input subsidies on fertilisers, seeds and credit support agricultural producers. The
percentage of subsidy varies across fertiliser types, with urea receiving the highest at 67.2% of the market
price (Sudaryanto, 2018[6]). Fertiliser manufacturers receive the subsidy, and then sell fertilisers to farmers
at a reduced price. Before the beginning of the planting season, the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) issues a
decree on the estimated demand for different types of fertiliser by provinces, along with the reference retail
price of fertilisers. Based on this information, governors of the corresponding provinces break down the
demand for fertiliser by district. The decree also serves as a reference for fertiliser companies to distribute
fertilisers in the corresponding regions. In addition to the subsidy, the MoA also directly distributes fertiliser
to food crop farmers in selected regions.
The government of Indonesia invests in irrigation infrastructure. According to the Ministry of Public Works,
approximately 84% of Indonesian harvested rice area is irrigated, while the remaining 16% is rain fed
(USDA FAS, 2019[3]). Facilitated by savings from reduced fuel subsidies since 2015, the government
pushes to improve the irrigation infrastructure, mostly for rice production. Investments in infrastructure
complement exemptions in place for water transportation costs: farmers are not charged for the cost of
delivering water from the source to the tertiary system via primary and secondary canals.
Indonesia restricts the importation of strategic commodities (those associated with self-sufficiency targets:
rice, maize, soybeans, sugar and beef). The Food Law sets out the principles that underpin food trade. It
contains provisions restricting staple food exports and imports such as “state food export can only be
implemented after fulfilling National Food Reserve and staple food consumption necessity” and “food
imports can only be implemented if domestic food production is not sufficient or cannot be produced
domestically” (Articles 34 and 36). Trade policy includes both tariff and non-tariff measures. The average
applied Most Favoured Nation (MFN) import tariff on agro-food products, excluding alcoholic beverages
and spirits, was just over 5% in 2017. Rice and sugar have higher specific tariffs. Import monopolies,
licensing requirements and export restrictions on agricultural products ended in 1997-98. However, in the


 335

2000s, quantitative import restrictions and licensing were reintroduced, notably for rice, sugar and beef.
Import requirements imposed for food safety and religious reasons are becoming more stringent. Variable
export taxes were introduced on crude palm oil and derivatives in 1994, then on cocoa (OECD, 2012[2]).
The MFN tariff schedule is updated every five years by the Ministry of Finance (BukuTarif dan Kepabeanan
Indonesia, BTKI or MoF). The latest tariff schedule was released in 2017.
Since 2008, companies must receive Ministry of Trade approval as registered importers for a range of
processed products manufactured from meat, cereal, sugar and cocoa. Similar restrictions were placed on
imports of animals in 2011. In line with the Ministry of Trade regulation on the Import and Export of Animals
and Animal Products issued in September 2011, these imports can only be carried out if the domestic
production and supply are not sufficient to meet consumer demand at an affordable price.
A variable export tax on cocoa and palm oil was put in place under MoF regulations 67/2010 and 136/2015,
respectively. The tax rate on Crude Palm Oil (CPO) depends on reference prices and is zero for prices
below USD 750 per tonne. When reference prices exceed this level, the tax is imposed on a sliding scale
between USD 3 and USD 200 per tonne. Since 2015, the government collects an additional export levy for
palm oil of USD 55/tonne on top of the variable export tax. During 2019, the export levy did not apply
because the world price of CPO was lower than the reference price. The Palm Oil Fund management
board manages the funds from the levy. These finance subsidies to biodiesel, infrastructure, R&D projects
on palm oil, replanting in small farms, market promotion and human resource development.
Indonesia is a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC), and World Trade Organization (WTO). It participates in trade liberalisation between
ASEAN members and their major trading partners in the region, including China, Japan, India, Korea,
Australia and New Zealand. The ASEAN economies committed in 2015 to complete the formation of the
ASEAN Economic Community by 2025. This is intended to develop a single market and production base,
a highly competitive economic region, a region of equitable economic development, and a region fully
integrated into the global economy (ASEAN Secretariat, 2017[7]).
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
The budget of the MoA has decreased in recent years, from IDR 32.8 trillion (USD 2.45 billion) in 2015 to
IDR 21.7 trillion (USD 1.53 billion) in 2019, and IDR 15.2 trillion (USD 1.04 billion) in 2020. The budget
reduction in 2020 was largely due to a budget reallocation to finance the COVID-19 policy response,
including in agriculture, and specifically an initiative to strengthen food availability. The total budget for food
security, administered by range of ministries concerned also decreased from IDR 125.9 trillion
(USD 8.4 billion) in 2015 to IDR 96.2 trillion (USD 6.8 billion) in 2019.
In 2020, the MoA launched a strategic programme to achieve a self-reliant and modern agriculture. This
programme supports investments in smart farming, greenhouses to produce off-season horticultural crops,
new government initiated food estates and farming ’enterprises. The MoA has also put in place a target to
increase exports by diversifying into processed products, promoting new exporter entrepreneurs, and
finding new export partners overseas (Ministry of Agriculture (Kementerian Pertanian), 2020[8]). The new
Local Food Diversification Action Programme (Gerakan Diversifikasi Pangan Lokal) promotes local food
utilisation (cassava, maize for consumption, sago, banana, potato, and sorghum) and its production in
home gardens, marginal land and urban farming.
To increase production and exports of horticulture, the MoA launched a programme called 1 000
Horticultural Villages covering an area of 10-20 hectares allocated to horticulture per village. This
programme provides a grant of high-quality seeds, fertilisers and means of controlling pests and diseases.
A similar programme was launched on cattle development, named the “1000 Cattle Villages” in five
provinces as a pilot project (Lampung, West Nusa Tenggara, East Nusa Tenggara, South Sulawesi and


336 

East Java). The programme provides assistance in the form of livestock breeds, supplies, equipment, and
technical advice to targeted farmers (Ministry of Agriculture (Kementerian Pertanian), 2021[9]).
The MoA has also implemented a pilot project of crop insurance (AUTP, Asuransi Usahatani Tanaman
Pangan) for flood and drought since 2015. In 2020, the total area covered by pilot projects was
681 951 hectares (about 1% of total agricultural land), with a premium subsidy of IDR 144 000 (USD 10.09)
per hectare. In addition, the MoA has implemented a pilot project of beef cattle insurance (Asuransi Usaha
Ternak Sapi/Kerbau (AUTS/K) with a premium subsidy of IDR 160 000 (USD 10.98) per head. The total
budget on insurance amounted to IDR 107.1 billion (USD 7.35 million) in 2020.
Following an initiative by the President in 2020, Indonesia aims to improve food security through developing
a government led food estate programme. The objective of this programme is to strengthen national food
reserves. In 2020, the programme covered an area of 30 000 hectares in two districts of Central
Kalimantan province, with a total budget of IDR 2.91 trillion (USD 0.19 billion). The designated farmland
will be used to produce national stocks of foodstuffs such as rice and maize. In case of emergency, those
stocks will be distributed domestically, and any excess will be exported. The budget is used to finance
infrastructure (irrigation canals and farm road), fund direct transfers to farmers in kind such as machinery,
training and extension services and to purchase inputs (fertiliser and seed). The programme will be
expanded to cover 165 000 hectares by the year 2024. Implementation of the programme will involve
central government, province government, and State Owned Enterprises (Ministry of Agriculture
(Kementerian Pertanian), 2020[10]; AMIS, 2020[11]).
Minimum purchase prices (Harga Pembelian Pemerintah, HPP) for rice have remained constant in nominal
terms since 2015 to 2019. In March 2020, the Ministry of Trade set higher minimum buying prices for rice
(Table 14.3), with an increase of 14% in both dried and milled rice prices (Regulation No. 24/2020 on
Reference Price).
Table 14.3. Minimum purchase price of paddy and dried rice
2015 to 2020 (IDR/kg)
Description
2015 to 2019
2020
% Increase
Wet Paddy (GKP) moisture content 25% and waste content 10% at rice mill
3 700
4 200
13.5
Wet Paddy (GKP) moisture content 25% and waste content 10% at BULOG
warehouse
3 750
4 250
13.3
Dried Paddy (GKG) at rice mill
4 600
5 250
14.1
Dried Paddy (GKG) at BULOG warehouse
4 650
5 300
14.0
Milled Rice at BULOG warehouse
7 300
8 300
13.7
Source: Inpres (President’s Decree), Inpres May 2015 and Permen (Ministry Decree) Ministry of Trade 2020.
The BNPT remains an important source of support for low-income households to buy sufficient food. In
early 2020, the government of Indonesia disbursed BNPT to 15.2 million households and increased to
20 million households in June 2020, with a total budget of IDR 28 trillion (USD 1.9 billion) (Tirto, 2020[12]).
Fertiliser subsidies remain by far the most important programme through which the government provides
budgetary support to agriculture. However, the value of the fertiliser subsidy declined from IDR 37.3 trillion
(USD 2.64 billion) in 2019, to IDR 24.5 trillion (USD 1.68 billion) in 2020. In total, fertiliser subsidies
accounted for 30.7% of total budgetary expenditures provided to support agriculture in 2019 (USDA FAS,
2019[3]).
During the period 2012-19 the reference price (HET) for fertiliser at the retail level was kept constant in
nominal terms. However, in 2020 the government increased these reference prices, with increases
between 10% for SP-36 and NPK, and 60% for organic fertiliser (granule).


 337

Table 14.4. Maximum retail price of fertiliser
2012 to 2020 (IDR/kg)
Fertiliser
2012 to 2019
2020
% Increase
Urea
1 800
2 250
25
SP-36
2 000
2 400
10
Za
1 400
1 700
17.6
NPK
2 300
2 300
0
NPK (special formula)
3 000
3 300
10
Organic (granule)
500
800
60
Organic (liquid)
-
20 000
-
Source: Permentan (Minister Decree) No.1/2020 and No.49/2020, Ministry of Agriculture.
To develop alternative energy sources to fossil fuels, the government continues to implement the biofuel
programme, in particular by utilising palm oil. Faced with market access restrictions for palm oil in the EU
market, this programme attempts to create a new demand for palm oil in the domestic market with a
biofuels mandate to blend 30% palm biodiesel (B30). On 18 May 2020, the government announced the
allocation of a USD 186 million subsidy to maintain its B30 biodiesel mandate in 2020 and 2021. The
Indonesian Sustainable Palm Oil (ISPO) standard is now regulated through Presidential Regulation
(Perpres) No. 44/2020, replacing ministerial-level regulations on the same subject. The regulation
mandates that all growers, including both large plantations and smallholders, be certified before 2025
(GAIN ID0016, 2020[13]).
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has slowed down economic growth in Indonesia from 2.97% in the first quarter
of 2020 to -3.49% in the third quarter. Agriculture has played a buffer role to prevent further downturn, and
continued to grow by 0.02% in the first quarter, increasing to 2.15% in the third quarter. However, the
pandemic has threatened food security, in particular downstream in the food supply chain due to limited
mobility of both people and goods.
At the national level, the government implemented a stimulus package in response to COVID-19, focused
on maintaining people’s purchasing power and facilitating export and imports. The additional spending for
the State Budget in 2020 was IDR 405.1 trillion (Ministry of Finance (Kementerian Keuangan), 2020[14]).
The main measures included: COVID-19 health intervention, namely incentives for medical personnel and
spending on health management (IDR 75 trillion); additional expanded social safety (IDR 110 trillion);
support for industry, with reduction in taxes and duties as well as micro credit programme (KUR) stimulus
(IDR 70.1 trillion); and budget financing support for handling COVID-19 related to the national economic
recovery programme (IDR 150 trillion).
Agricultural policy measures focused on food availability from domestic production. Specific action
programmes in 2020 sought to strengthen food availability by increasing production capacity, developing
a 165 000 hectare food estate in Central Kalimantan; expanding rice planting areas (PATB) with
250 000 new hectares of rice, maize, shallots, and chilies in deficit areas. Other measures to increase food
production included grants of seed, livestock breed, machineries, and extension services. In April 2020,
the government announced that it would provide IDR 600 000 (USD 38) to 2.7 million farmers to encourage
them to plant rice in the next season in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic. Half of the support will be
given as unconditional cash transfers and half in the form of agricultural production inputs (AMIS, 2020[15]).
To prevent the spread of the COVID-19, the government restricted the mobility of people and
transportation, except transportation of basic needs including food. The Ministry of Agriculture also
promoted the consumption of some commodities, particularly vegetables by making them available in


338 

Farmer’s Shops (TTI) owned by the Ministry, with the objective of ensuring that the food supply chain works
amidst the implementation of the large-scale social restriction (Rafani, 2020[16]). Due to this pandemic,
Farmer’s Shops developed an online sale service providing cheap fresh products from farmer groups in
the central producing areas (Kompas, 2020[17]). To stimulate recovery of the agro food supply chain, the
government also allocated credit (KUR) up to IDR 50 trillion (USD 3.4 billion) to agro-food enterprises at
subsidised interest rates (Ministry of Finance (Kementerian Keuangan), 2020[14]).
To raise the purchasing power of consumers, the government also implemented additional social safety
net programmes. The number of beneficiaries of the basic food card through the BPNT programme was
increased, entitling new recipients to buy food at subsidised prices, and providing direct assistance to the
poor in the form of cash money for basic food packages. The Ministry of Agriculture, allocated
IDR 985.77 billion (USD 67.63 million) to finance this programme in 2020 (Rafani and Sudaryanto,
2020[18]). To increase the income of rural households including farmers, the Padat Karya (cash for work)
programme of the Ministry of Agriculture prioritised work related to rehabilitation of rural infrastructure,
such as irrigation canals and rural roads, land improvements, and community pest control.
The total budget of the Ministry of Agriculture for COVID-19 in 2020 was IDR 3.5 trillion, including: COVID-
19 Control Measure (IDR 0.14 trillion); Food Availability Support (IDR 2.37 trillion); and Social Safety Net
(IDR 0.99 trillion). The control measure for COVID-19 includes provisions of medicine and medical
equipment for MoA employees, and for communities (Ministry of Agriculture (Kementerian Pertanian),
2020[19]).
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
In 2020, the export levy on crude palm oil (CPO) was increased from USD 50/tonne to USD 55/tonne. The
levy is paid only if the export price of CPO is below USD 670/tonne (Ministry of Finance Decree (PMK)
No. 191). The objective is to support the national biodiesel production programme with lower domestic
prices and to absorb excess supplies of palm oil. Export levies on other refined palm oil products were also
increased from USD 20-40/tonne to USD 25-45/tonne (AMIS, 2020[15]).
In July 2020, at the request of Indonesia, the WTO established a panel to review certain measures taken
by the European Union on palm oil and palm oil crop-based biofuels (DS593) (AMIS, 2020[11]). On related
matters, in December 2019, Indonesia formally requested WTO dispute consultations with the European
Union regarding measures adopted by the European Union and certain Member States in the renewable
energy sector relating to biofuels– notably the classification of palm oil as a ‘high indirect land use change
(ILUC)-risk’ biofuel feedstock (AMIS, 2020[20]).
On 15 November 2020, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)1 and the five states with
which ASEAN has existing free trade agreements – Australia, China, Japan, Korean and New Zealand –
signed the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP or ASEAN+5). RCEP combines
and deepens a number of existing bilateral and regional agreements, and once in force, it will be the largest
free trade agreement in the world covering around 30% of both the global population and its GDP. The
RCEP Agreement will enter into force 60 days after six ASEAN member states and three non-ASEAN
member states have ratified the Agreement.
Australia and Indonesia signed the Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
(IA-CEPA) in March 2019. IA-CEPA builds on an existing free trade agreement, the ASEAN-Australia-New
Zealand Free Trade Agreement (AANZFTA), further reducing tariffs and providing additional mechanisms
to guarantee the automatic issue of import permits for key product such as live cattle, frozen beef, sheep
meat, feed grains, citrus products, carrots and potatoes (Australian Government Department of Foreign
Affair, 2019[21]). However, importers will still be obliged to meet some import requirements. On 5 July 2020,
the IA-CEPA entered into force. All tariffs levied on imports from Indonesia were eliminated. Some
500 000 tonnes of Australian feed grains (wheat, sorghum, and barley) enjoy duty-free access in


 339

Indonesia. This volume will be progressively increased over an 11-year implementation period (AMIS,
2020[11]).
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
In April 2020, the Ministry of Finance launched a stimulus package-2 focused on maintaining consumers’
purchasing power and facilitating export-import. Additional budget funds were allocated to income tax
exemption to both government and private companies that carry out export, import, and re-import trade
activities in specific sectors. Other measures included restricting export on 749 HS codes, simplifying or
reducing a number of import restrictions on certain commodities including manufacturing, food, and
health/medical support, and accelerating export-import services through the National Logistic Ecosystem
(NLE). To facilitate the exports of processed food products, in June 2020, the Ministry of Trade adopted
measures to simplify the certificate of origin service and introducing automatic authentication procedures
in licensing processes (AMIS, 2020[22]).
Contextual information
Indonesia’s population is growing rapidly, representing the fourth largest in the world and a high population
density of 149 inhabitants per km2. Indonesia is also one of the world’s largest agricultural producers. The
weight of agriculture in the economy has been falling in the last two decades, but the sector still accounts
for almost 13% of GDP. The reduction in the share of agriculture in employment has been proportionally
much larger, declining from 45% in 2000 to 29% in 2019, with a significant increase in the average
production per employed person in the sector.
Indonesia is a net agro-food exporter and an increasing share of its total exports come from the sector
(18.4% in 2019). Nonetheless, the country is also a large importer. Total agricultural area in Indonesia has
increased by almost one-third in the last two decades and currently represents 2% of the agricultural land
in all countries covered in this report. While food crop production is based on small family farms, there are
large commercial farms producing perennial crops, in particular palm oil.




340 

Table 14.5. Indonesia: Contextual indicators

Indonesia
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
1 098
3 331
2.8%
2.9%
Population (million)
205
271
4.8%
5.2%
Land area (thousand km2)
1 812
1 878
2.2%
2.2%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
47 177
62 300
1.5%
2.0%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
117
149
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
5 352
12 302
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
26
15
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
15.6
12.7
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
45.3
28.6
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
6.8
18.4
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
12.7
11.7
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
84
77
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
16
23
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
43
42
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Indonesia’s economy has a solid growth record, at around 5% per year between 2000 and 2019, including
after the financial crisis. Real income per capita in 2019 was more than double its level in 2000. However,
in 2020 GDP decreased by 2.4% as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions.
Inflation has been stable at around 4% in the last four years and consistently below 6% in the last decade,
while the rate of unemployment is just below 5%.
The volume of agro-food exports and imports has oscillated around a stable average since 2011, with
USD 31 billion of exports and USD 20 billion of imports in 2019. Palm oil and rubber account for more than
60% of agro-food exports and contribute to a significant surplus in Indonesia’s agro-food trade.
Consequently, around 72% of agro-food exports are processed products to be further transformed by
industries in other countries, while a significant share of agro-food imports (39%) are primary products for
further processing in Indonesia.


 341

Figure 14.5. Indonesia: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 14.6. Indonesia: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Indonesia’s agricultural production has increased at an annual rate of 3.2% in 2007-16. Most of this growth
is productivity-driven: Total Factor Productivity (TFP) has increased by 2% per year, representing
technological improvements to combine different production factors. Additional primary factors, including
land, and intermediate inputs have contributed an additional 0.5 and 0.7 percentage points to the
production growth, respectively. Unlike in the 1990s, Indonesia’s growth in output and TFP has
outperformed the global averages during the last 10 years.
Indonesian agriculture accounts for an increasing share of water extractions, which was 85% in 2007-16.
However, the sector’s shares of energy used (1.2%) and GHG emissions (13.3%) have been reduced
compared to the 1990s. The country’s phosphorous balance has increased to levels above the OECD
average, while the nitrogen balance has decreased below OECD average.
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
13
8
17
14
39
6
31
72
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


342 

Figure 14.7. Indonesia: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 14.6. Indonesia: Productivity and environmental indicators

Indonesia
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.1%
2.0%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
31.6
20.2
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
1.5
6.3
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.4
1.2
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
19.8
13.3
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
10.3
..
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
79.3
85.2
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
..
..
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


0.7%
0.5%
0.5%
0.05%
2.0%
1.6%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
Indonesia
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


 343

References

AMIS (2020), AMIS Marke Monitoring No 80 July.
[22]
AMIS (2020), AMIS Market Monitor No.81 September.
[11]
AMIS (2020), AMIS Market Monitoring No 75 February.
[20]
AMIS (2020), AMIS Market Monitoring No 79 June.
[15]
ASEAN Secretariat (2017), ASEAN Economic Community Factsheet, https://asean.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/05/7c.-May-2017-Factsheet-on-AEC.pdf.
[7]
Australian Government Department of Foreign Affair (2019), IA-CEPA – Key Outcomes for
Australia, https://dfat.gov.au/trade/agreements/not-yet-in-force/iacepa/Documents/iacepa-
key-outcomes.pdf.
[21]
GAIN ID0016 (2020), Biofuels Annual, USDA FAS.
[13]
Kompas (2020), Impact of Covid-19, the Sales of Basic Necessity in the Farmer’s Shop Center
Increase by 100 Percent), Kompas.com, https://megapolitan.kompas.com/read/2020/04/03/1.
[17]
Ministry of Agriculture (Kementerian Pertanian) (2021), Opening the 2021 Horticulture
Development, Minister of Agriculture : This Year Must be Much Better, Ministry of Agriculture,
Jakarta, Indonesia.
[9]
Ministry of Agriculture (Kementerian Pertanian) (2020), Grand Design Pengembangan Kawasan
Food Estate Berbasis Korporasi Petani (Grand Design of Food Estate Development Area
Based on Farmer’s Corporation), Bureau of Planning (Biro Perencanaan). Ministry of
Agriculture. Jakarta, Indonesia.
[10]
Ministry of Agriculture (Kementerian Pertanian) (2020), Program Peningkatan Ketersediaan
Pangan di Era New Normal (Programme to Increase Food Availability in a New Normal Era),
Ministry of Agriculture, Jakarta, Indonesia.
[8]
Ministry of Agriculture (Kementerian Pertanian) (2020), Rekapitulasi Anggaran dan Realisasi
Pecegahan dan Penaggulangan Covid-19 Lingkup Kementerian Pertanian Tahun Anggaran
2020 (Summary of budget for Covid-19 response programme in 2020), Ministry of Agriculture,
Jakarta.
[19]
Ministry of Finance (Kementerian Keuangan) (2020), Some Steps to Strengthen Social
Protection and Economic Stimulus to Deal with the Impact of the Covid-19, Press Conference
1 April 2020, Ministry of Finance,Jakart.
[14]
Ministry of Social Affairs (Kementerian Sosial) (2019), “PedomanUmumBantuanPangan Non-
Tunai (General Guidance of the Non-Cash Food Assistance)”, Ministry of Social Affairs,
Jakarta, Indonesia.
[5]
OECD (2012), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Indonesia 2012, OECD Review of
Agricultural Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264179011-en.
[2]


344 

Rafani, I. (2020), Agricultural Market Initiative-Based Farmer’s Shop in Indonesia, Food and
Fertilizer Technology for the Asian and Pacific Region (FFTC-AP),
https://ap.fftc.org.tw/article/2576.pdf.
[16]
Rafani, I. and T. Sudaryanto (2020), Policy Response to Covid-19 in Indonesia, FFTC
Agricultural Policy Platform,, https://ap.fftc.org.tw/article/1865.pdf.
[18]
Sudaryanto, T. (2018), “An Overview of Indonesia’s Agricultural Policies in 2018”, FFTC
Agricultural Policy Platform, http://ap.fftc.agnet.org/files/ap_policy/903/903_1.pdf.
[6]
Tirto (2020), Juta Jiwa (Ministry of Social Affairs) Targeted that Recipient of Basic Necessity
Programme Will Reach 20 Millions Household, https://tirto.id-men.
[12]
USDA FAS (2019), “Food and Agricultural Import Regulations and Standards”, GAIN ID1841,
USDA FAS.
[1]
USDA FAS (2019), “Indonesia Grain and Feed Annual Report 2019”, GAIN ID1904, USDA FAS.
[3]
USDA FAS (2018), “Indonesia Grain and Feed Annual Report 2018”, GAIN ID1808, USDA FAS.
[4]



Note
1 ASEAN comprises Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.



 345

Support to agriculture
Despite efforts to introduce market-oriented reforms and temporary measures to lift trade restrictions at
the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, total support to agriculture in Israel continued to increase
from 2018 to 2020. This mostly reflects the persistence of regulations, price controls and border protection
targeting specific commodities. The total support estimate (TSE) amounted to 0.5% of GDP in 2018-20.
The share of producer support in gross farm receipts (%PSE) reached 18.3% in 2018-20, close to the
current OECD average and slightly below the 2000-02 level of 19%, but well above levels seen in the late
2000s and early 2010s. At the same time, the share of potentially most-distorting forms of support in Israel
(92%) remains much higher than the OECD average. This can be explained by the persistence of domestic
price support and border measures in favour of several meat and dairy products, and selected fruits and
vegetables. Poultry and milk producers benefit from the largest share of market price support, accounting
for 41% of the total producer support in 2018-20.
Single commodity transfers (SCT) represented 87% of the total PSE in 2018-20. Market price support is
the main component of SCT: tomatoes, bananas, milk, poultry and grapes have the highest share of SCT
in commodity gross farm receipts.
The share of general services support estimates (GSSE) in total support in 2018-20 amounted to 5.5% of
agriculture value-added, close to the OECD average, and a higher proportion than in 2000-02. These
expenditures focused mostly on agricultural innovation and infrastructure. Public spending to finance
general services increased 20% in 2020 due to additional expenditures mostly related to hydrological
infrastructure.
Recent policy changes
In 2020, the government of Israel undertook a number of measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic
and associated lockdowns. These include lockdown regulation exemptions for the agriculture and food
sector, measures to ensure the function of government services, easing restrictions on foreign agricultural
labour and encouraging volunteer workers to support agricultural activities, opening water quotas,
providing relief to affected agricultural exporters, encouraging the development of e-commerce, and
ensuring the supply and affordability of food in particular via temporary opening of import quotas for
selected products.
The pandemic and prolonged legislative challenges continued to delay agriculture reforms envisioned for
2019. A parliamentary election – the third in less than a year – and unsuccessful negotiations on the state
budget put any substantial changes in agricultural support policies on hold.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) reached an agreement with the Israel Land
Authority allocating ILS 21 million (USD 6.1 million) for each of the next three years to the implementation
15 Israel


346 

of sustainable eco-friendly farming practices for soil conservation, enabling the agricultural sector to take
a significant part in the global effort for greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction.
The FTA with Ukraine signed in 2019, a United Kingdom-Israel Free Trade Agreement, and a related
protocol for the mutual recognition of organic produce entered into force on 1 January 2021. The FTA with
Colombia signed in 2013, and the FTA with Panama signed in 2018, were ratified in 2020 and their
concessions apply.
Normalisation agreements (known as the “Abraham Accords”) were signed in the second half of 2020,
followed by Memorandums of Understanding on, inter alia, promoting bilateral agricultural trade, especially
with the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain.
Assessment and recommendations

Israel took swift, necessary and proportionate measures to respond to the COVID-19 crisis in the
agriculture and food sector in 2020. It should pursue the plan of its recovery package under the
Acceleration Plan, particularly by investing in research and development, digitalisation of markets
and infrastructure, and phase out relief measures that support the sector as it transitions out of the
crisis.

The level of support to agriculture in Israel continues to increase as selected commodities are
insulated from international markets. The focus on price support raises market distortions and taxes
consumers, and can harm the environment and impede adaptation to climate change.

The COVID-19 crisis and electoral challenges in 2020 should not discourage the Israeli
Government from finalising needed reforms in the milk and egg sectors. Even with the progress
they are expected to achieve, and the gradual tariff reform of the beef sector, commodities remain
subject to high border protection. Israel maintains high tariffs for goods such as poultry meat, sheep
meat, and certain fruits and vegetables. These could be gradually removed and, if necessary,
replaced temporarily by direct payments. The tariff system for agriculture should also be simplified,
avoiding non-ad-valorem tariffs.

Expenditures on agricultural knowledge and innovation systems have continuously increased,
following the trend of the OECD average, which should help the country remain at the cutting edge
of new agriculture technologies.

Israel’s skilled farmers, continued investments and comprehensive water management system
enable the country to sustain a productive agricultural sector under very intense water stress and
contribute to the sector’s adaptation to future water risks. Still, the system’s sustainability and
flexibility could be improved by ensuring that farmers are charged water prices in line with marginal
costs of supplying water, by facilitating further trading in water allocations among irrigating farmers
and other water users, and by the use of optional compensations for unused water quotas.

The government should build on recent initiatives to accelerate reduction of the sector’s negative
environmental impacts. It should ensure that GHG emissions generated by the sector’s activities,
energy and water needs are fully accounted for in its mitigation efforts. Improvements should also
reduce the high and increasing nitrogen surplus associated with agriculture production. Reforming
the most-distorting agriculture support policies would contribute to that effort. Regional agri-
environmental programmes should be scaled up and complemented by policies and regulations
targeted towards better environmental performance, potentially as part of the policy on ecologically
sustainable agriculture.




 347

Figure 15.1. Israel: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/hqtyb8
Figure 15.2. Israel: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/1aumh5
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.3%
0.4%
0.5%
0.6%
0.7%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD


348 

Figure 15.3. Israel: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/r4g8jo


-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Tomatoes
Grapes
Bananas
Apples
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 349

Table 15.1. Israel: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
3 337
8 678
8 461
8 639
8 933
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
55.3
54.7
54.6
53.2
56.4
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
3 666
11 361
11 344
11 023
11 716
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
681
1 629
1 442
1 485
1 961
Support based on commodity output
486
1 421
1 214
1 298
1 751
Market Price Support1
476
1 405
1 197
1 282
1 735
Positive Market Price Support
490
1 406
1 199
1 283
1 736
Negative Market Price Support
-14
-1
-2
-1
-1
Payments based on output
10
16
17
16
16
Payments based on input use
160
113
116
110
112
Based on variable input use
106
81
84
79
82
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
42
17
17
18
16
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
12
14
15
14
14
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
25
87
97
72
91
Based on Receipts / Income
21
67
77
52
73
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
4
19
20
20
18
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
8
9
14
5
7
With variable payment rates
5
9
14
5
7
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
2
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
1
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
19.0
18.3
16.6
16.8
21.4
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.18
1.20
1.17
1.18
1.25
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.24
1.22
1.20
1.20
1.27
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
100
258
226
245
304
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
51
105
99
106
109
Inspection and control
16
26
24
25
29
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
10
107
82
96
143
Marketing and promotion
11
1
1
1
2
Cost of public stockholding
12
11
11
9
12
Miscellaneous
0
8
8
7
9
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
12.9
13.7
13.5
14.1
13.4
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-613
-1 976
-2 008
-1 688
-2 231
Transfers to producers from consumers
-446
-1 372
-1 199
-1 247
-1 669
Other transfers from consumers
-172
-607
-813
-443
-565
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
5
3
4
3
3
Percentage CSE (%)
-16.5
-17.4
-17.7
-15.3
-19.0
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.20
1.21
1.22
1.18
1.24
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.20
1.21
1.22
1.18
1.24
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
781
1 887
1 668
1 729
2 265
Transfers from consumers
618
1 979
2 012
1 691
2 234
Transfers from taxpayers
335
516
468
482
596
Budget revenues
-172
-607
-813
-443
-565
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.4
0.6
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
305
482
470
447
530
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
137
134
137
138
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
4.34
3.53
3.60
3.56
3.44
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities. The use of such data by the OECD is without
prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms of international law.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Israel are: wheat, cotton, groundnuts, peanuts,
tomatoes, peppers, potatoes, avocados, bananas, oranges, grapefruit, grapes, apples, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




350 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Agriculture was a priority for the state of Israel during its early years for three main reasons. First, the state
needed to settle undeveloped areas of the country for geopolitical security. Second it wanted to avoid food
shortages, due in part to an inability to import agricultural products from surrounding countries. Third, it
needed to provide employment and livelihood for new immigrants to Israel (OECD, 2010[1]). Its objectives
are still to improve food supply and achieve self-sufficiency in agricultural products that can be produced
locally, expand existing export markets, and maintain the rural population, particularly in the peripheral
areas as part of the settlement policy.
Over the past thirty years, Israel implemented a number of reforms related to the provision of subsidies,
central planning of agricultural industries, and the allocation of production quotas, price controls and import
protection. Major reforms in the agricultural sector began in the early 1990s with trade and market reforms
limiting the role of the state in agricultural markets, including in central planning, consumer prices, and
export and import policies for specific commodities. Reforms continued into the 2000s with a focus on
competitiveness and gradual efforts to limit interventions in the dairy and beef sectors. Despite these, the
country continues to support its agriculture with price controls, import tariffs and payments to farmers.
(Table 15.2).
Table 15.2. Israel: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1985-1990
Trade liberalisation
General economic reforms
Economic stabilisation programme
Privatisation of state-owned enterprises
Dismantling of state grain trading (imports) agency
Dismantling of regional co-operatives
Debt restructuring and write offs
Fruit and vegetable production quotas abolished
1991-1994
Market and trade reforms (export
liberalisation)
Gradual abolition of state monopoly of fruits and vegetables exports
State meat trading replaced with the Kosher Meat Import Law
Consumer price controls removed (except milk, eggs and flour)
Reform of agricultural production and marketing boards (diminishing functions)
Changes in water pricing
Uruguay Round Agricultural Agreement
1995-1999
Trade reforms (import liberalisation)
Non-tariff barriers removed and ceiling binding
Broiler sector reformed
Reduction of 40% of fresh water use for agriculture
FTAs signed
2000- 2010
Focus on competitiveness
Foreign exchange controls abolished
Dairy sector reform
Abolished minimum prices and surplus removal for fruit and vegetables
Abolition of broiler production quotas
Farmers’ agreement on water charges and water supplies
FTAs signed
2010-present
Continued efforts to reform key sectors
Reform agreement in the beef sector opening import quotas
Dairy sector planning law 2011, dairy and eggs reforms discussed
Measures to improve the agriculture marketing systems
Water price reforms for equity reasons
FTAs signed
Over the last 20 years, trends in producer support in Israel, expressed as percentage of gross farm
receipts, encompassed three main phases: (1) a steady reduction until the food crisis of 2007-08; (2) a
rapid rebound in support with this crisis, leading to a plateau in 2008-11; then (3) a fall and new increase


 351

in support since 2012. Fluctuations in agricultural support are largely attributable to market price support
(and to input support early-on), as budgetary support to producers remained stable. The market price
support results largely from guaranteed minimum prices and import tariffs, while budgetary support is
mostly provided based on current production and input use (Figure 15.4).
Figure 15.4. Israel: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The government is involved in allocating key factors of production, including land, water and foreign
labour. Land and water resources are almost entirely state-owned. Land is allocated to farmers for a
nominal fee and is not tradeable. Water is allocated to farmers through a quota system; all water
consumption is metered and charged. The government also applies a yearly quota of foreign workers with
permits to work in agriculture. Both the overall quota and the allocation of workers to individual farmers are
strictly regulated.
Some commodities are supported by guaranteed prices and production quotas. Guaranteed prices for
milk are based on the average cost of production and, while updated regularly, they diverge considerably
from the level and evolution of prices on international markets. Minimum prices are also guaranteed for
wheat, based on the Chicago market price, adjusted for quality and transportation costs. Egg production
quotas and recommended prices, which serve as the basis for calculating maximum retail prices, are
applied together with border protection as an instrument to provide price support to producers. On the
other hand, consumer price controls are applied for a range of basic food products, including bread, milk
and dairy products, eggs and salt. Egg and poultry producers in “peripheral areas” at the northern border
receive payments, based on output levels for eggs, and encompassing a mixture of payments decoupled
from production and output payments for poultry producers (OECD, 2010[1]).
Capital grants provide support to investments. Farmers who participate in the investment support
scheme also receive income tax exemptions and accelerated depreciation. Since 2009, an investment
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


352 

support programme was implemented to partly replace foreign workers in the agricultural sector, but
budgetary allocations for this programme declined strongly in recent years.
The Insurance Fund for Natural Risks in Agriculture (Kanat) provides subsidised insurance schemes. The
share of support in the total insurance premium is 80% in the case of the multi-risk insurance schemes
and 35% in the case of the insurance schemes against natural hazards. Since 2010, revenue insurance is
applied to rain-fed crops to protect against a loss of revenue caused by price falls, low yields or both.
In 2015, a credit fund launched with the goal of establishing or expanding small farms that specialise in
crop production. The government serves as the guarantor for bank loans with an 85% guarantee to ensure
that small farms with insufficient collateral can access loans.
Israel’s economy is supported by a transparent and open trade regime overall. However, border tariff
protection on agro-food products remains an important tool to support agricultural producers. Israel’s
average applied Most Favoured Nation (MFN) tariff on agricultural goods (WTO definition) amounted to
19.1% in 2018, down from 27.7% in 2012, still much higher than the 3% average for non-agricultural goods
(WTO, 2018[2]). Israel has tariff rate quotas (TRQ) for wheat, fats and oils, walnuts, prunes, maize, citrus
juices, beef and sheep meat, and various dairy products. Most of Israel’s preferential trade agreements
also include tariff-quota commitments for agricultural products, often with reduced out-of-quota tariffs. In
total, Israel implements over 500 preferential TRQs for agricultural goods.1
Despite reforms that began in 2014, Israel’s tariff profile for agricultural products remains uneven, with
very high – sometimes prohibitive – tariffs for goods such as dairy products, eggs, and certain fruits and
vegetables, and low, sometimes zero, tariffs for other commodities such as specific coarse grains, sugar,
oilseed and frozen beef. The tariff system on agriculture is complicated, involving specific, compound or
mixed duties (WTO, 2018[2]); in 2019, 21.1% of imported agricultural products were subjected to non-ad-
valorem rates, compared to 3.6% for all goods (OECD, 2019[3]). At the same time, some 50.6% of
agriculture imports entered Israel duty-free, mostly through MFN access and preferential agreements
(notably with the European Union and the United States) (OECD, 2019[3]). With the exception of beef,
poultry (including turkey), and mutton and products thereof, there is no legal requirement that imported
food and agricultural products be kosher, although imported, non-kosher agro-food products are rarely
accepted by local marketing channels.
Budgetary allocations for research and development regularly increase and account for over 20% of the
total agriculture-related budget in recent years. During 2018-20, ILS 366 million (USD 104 million) were
allocated annually to agriculture research and development, of which almost ILS 84 million
(USD 24 million) were used for a competitive research fund. Together with effective transmission of
innovation to the farm level through a public extension service, this allowed Israel to become a world leader
in agricultural technology, particularly for farming in arid and desert conditions.
Israel has no sector-specific mitigation policy for GHG mitigation in agriculture because agriculture
accounts for a limited share of the country’s total greenhouse gas emissions (2.7% in 2018). However, the
government introduced and applied a number of programmes to support climate change adaptation. In
addition to its forward-looking water resource management – in which irrigation relies on recycled
wastewater and desalinated water, flexible quotas, and irrigation charges – the government supports
research and development of improved agronomic practices, breeding, soil conservation and efficient use
of resources. The programme also maintains the Israel Plant Gene Bank to conserve indigenous plant
species. Efforts to develop a national quantitative assessment of climate change risks for agriculture are
ongoing (OECD, 2019[3]).
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
A parliamentary election, which was the third in less than a year, and unsuccessful negotiations on the
state budget put on hold any substantial changes in agriculture and food government policies.


 353

Nevertheless, ongoing projects continued, some even extended and ad-hoc solutions to cope with the
COVID-19 crisis were implemented.
Despite a large number of discussion, no consensus was reached on the next phase following the 2011
Dairy Sector Planning Law. At the end of October 2018, an outline for a new reform was signed between
the government and the representatives of the dairy farmers.  The outline of the reform included a reduction
of target prices, a reduction of customs tariff, and subsidies for increasing the efficiency of dairy farms, and
support for dairy farmers leaving dairy production. The reform process aims to lead to structural change in
the sector, increasing the average size and enhancing the efficiency of dairy operations. However, the
reform agreement requires a change in legislation to be implemented; a memorandum of law was issued
on the subject but the examination of the law was postponed. Instead, and accounting for 2020
circumstances, the current law has been extended until mid-2021. Discussions will continue, in order to
find a solution that will be accepted by all parties.
A law memorandum on Fruit and Vegetable Marketing Standards (related to “the Law for Inspection of
Plant Production and Marketing – 2011”) was published for a second time in view of gathering public
comments. The 2011 Law was found to be unable to delineate authorities of the relevant bodies, and did
not provide authority on implementing regulations to enable the traceability of fresh agriculture products.
While waiting for the law to be amended and for regulations to be introduced, the Ministry of Agriculture
and Rural Development (MARD) called on retailers to separate food products by sources and label their
country of origin, even for produce sold loose (which are not legally required to be labelled as such). The
majority of the retailers responded to this request and started voluntary labelling fresh produce sold loose.
In mid-2020 a tender was published for a contractor to develop fruits and vegetables quality standard
brochures and an internet application. The quality standard brochures present most of the quality
parameters typical to fruits and vegetables using images, in accordance to different degrees of damage
and in accordance with the various quality definitions. The internet application will facilitate the
development of quality brochures and ease the inspection of fresh agricultural produce, using Automatic
Quality Control and a cloud-based data analytics platform (artificial intelligence) for the Fresh Produce
industry. The application will not be used mandatorily under the Standardization Law, but will be an integral
tool for determining quality standards.
The Veterinary Inspection Corporation, a legal entity, owned by the government, started to operate in
March 2020. It was established for hired publically accredited veterinarians and inspectors to conduct a
number of public services. This encompasses conducting inspection at plants that process animal food,
including slaughterhouses and meat processing plants as well as at points of sale and food supply sources.
The Corporation employs 380 workers, including 250 veterinarians, with the remaining employees working
as inspectors at slaughterhouses, with an annual turnover of ILS 160 million (USD 46 million). Activities
are funded by charging fees from the plants at which it provides veterinary supervision. The fees are
approved and regulated as specified by the Israeli Knesset (Parliament).  Its activities are framed by
regulations prescribed by officials at the Ministry of Health and by MARD. In addition, it operates as a
licensed business which helps minimise its costs as much as possible, in relation to the charges that it is
authorised to collect. All veterinarians and inspectors engaged in activities of the Corporation are operating
under regulators at the Ministries of Health and Agriculture, who determine inspection rates for each
slaughterhouse as well as the inspectors expected workloads.
In 2020, MARD began forging an updated policy for the implementation of ecologically sustainable
agriculture. A designated committee was appointed by MARD’s DG. The committee defined the overall
vision and began working with dedicated task teams on four priority action areas: agricultural wastes
(organic and inorganic); pesticides and plant protection; the effect of agriculture on rural infrastructure and
local communities; the effects of agriculture on soil and water. The four teams will identify objectives and
offer recommendations for action, which will be assessed by policy makers in 2021. A comprehensive


354 

strategic plan is being developed on the basis of these recommendations, whose implementation will
depend on available resources pending approval of the Budget Law.
MARD reached an agreement with the Israel Land Authority allocating ILS 21 million (USD 6 million) for
each of the next three years for the implementation of sustainable eco-friendly farming practices for soil
conservation, enabling the agricultural sector to take a significant part in the global effort for greenhouse
gas reduction. This agreement follows a survey conducted by MARD finding that 13% of the cultivated
farmlands in Israel were farmed by soil conserving practices, which is similar to the worldwide average.
On climate change adaptation, MARD, in co-operation with the Israel Meteorological Service (IMS), has
advanced in the development of databases associated with the 54 identified critical climatic indices
relevant to agricultural activities. Activities undertaken included the control and homogenisation of climatic
data (temperatures, precipitation, and humidity in the last 30 to 70 years); performing the quality control of
climatic model datasets according to different climate change scenarios (temperature, precipitation,
humidity until 2050); and the calculation of daily and hourly indices based on past measurements and
future projections using the above datasets. The collected data are beginning to be used to assess the
main agricultural implications of climate change in the agriculture sector, encompassing risks and potential
opportunities for diverse agricultural activities. In 2020, the quantitative analysis of climate change
implications on dairy production and energy expenditure by 2050 have been initiated, and a mapping
exercise predicted regions for growing deciduous trees by 2050 based on chill hour requirements.
Four regional agri-environment schemes are approaching the mid-point of their 5-year budget allowance
(ILS 1.5 million- USD 0.4 million) as outlined in Table 15.3. The four schemes aim at co-ordinating plant
protection based on integrated pest management (IPM) or integrated crop management, reducing conflicts
between agriculture and wildlife and enhancing ecosystem services. A conference was organised to
discuss progress made thus far. The Megiddo and Negev Mountain schemes have been instrumental in
initialising co-operative processes with farmers of the region. All schemes targeted better communication
between all stakeholders within the region to achieve sustainable agriculture goals. The government
intends to renew the schemes beyond 2022 and expand the regional agri-environment schemes in the
future.
Table 15.3. Regional agri-environmental schemes
Region
Co-ordinator
Area under IPM (hectares)
Main objectives
West Negev mountain
Regional council
Small scale pilot – about 100
IPM, control of invasive alien
species, re-use of abandoned
greenhouses
Hefer Valley
Regional council
630
IPM, agro-ecological services
Binyamina Farmers
Local farmer association
590
IPM, agro-ecological services,
conflicts with wildlife
Megiddo
Regional council
600
IPM, agro-ecological services,
conflicts with hikers
Source: MARD.
Water supply and allocation decisions for the sector continued to adapt to fluctuations in precipitation.
In 2020, Israel’s annual precipitation rate continued to exceed the multi-annual average. The Sea of Galilee
reached its maximum level (the last time this occurred was in 2004), salinity decreased and water quality
improved. Water supply in northern rivers remained high during the summer months and aquifer levels
rose. Due to this, there was a decrease in the amount of water supplied by desalination plants. However,
2021 forecast estimates that total precipitation will only be 80% of the multi-annual average quantity.
Consequently, water allocations for 2021 have remained at the 2020 level (without the special, one-time
allocation due to COVID-19). It should be noted that, with the exception of the Galilee region, all remaining


 355

consumers will receive their full allocation at the beginning of the year, regardless of quantities of rain.  In
the Galilee and the Golan, special attention will be paid to rain levels and, once the total volume is known,
only then will the full water allocation for those regions be approved.
Water infrastructure investments continue to progress. The plan to connect remote regions to the
national water system by connecting the Sea of Galilee to the national water system is progressing. Some
of the infrastructure has already been constructed, and a number of alternatives are considered for the
future. The Sorek Desalination Plant is being developed, while the location of the new desalination plant
in the Western Galilee was decided and the tender process is underway.
During 2020, water prices did not increase - staying at ILS 1.54/m3 (USD 0.44/m3) for consumers of the
national company Mekorot in areas lacking alternative water sources and at ILS 1.84/m3 (USD 0.53/m3)
for the rest of the country - no increase is expected for 2021, in accordance with the 2018 Farmers’
Agreement, which will end in July 2022. Support for peatland farmers will continue in 2021. Financial
support continued to be allocated to private producers in the Hula Valley area to ensure that the peatlands
are irrigated for ecological reasons and will continue to be provided in 2021.
In 2017, in preparation for the religious sabbatical year (Jewish Shmita), which will take place from
September 2021 to September 2022, MARD and the Ministry of Finance signed an agreement for
ILS 18 million (USD 5.2 million) per year to be saved over four years (2018-22) to double2 the savings of
farmers deciding not to cultivate their land. According to the procedure, interested farmers are required to
submit requests to stop activity and establish saving accounts, which the State will double. As of end 2020,
more than 600 Sabbatical requests had been submitted and more were being processed, exceeding the
government’s initial budget. A proposed additional budget of ILS 125.5 million (USD 36 million) was made
by the government in 2020, pending the 2020 budget approval.3
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Following the spread of the COVID-19, the government of Israel issued emergency regulations, including
various restrictions, on commercial activities in order to reduce the infection and the virus spread.
Agricultural production and related industry and services (such as carcass clearances, veterinarians, or
agricultural machinery manufacturers) have been considered essential and are therefore excluded from
these regulations.
To reduce the activities of government ministries and their autonomous units, a limited number of
“essential” employees have been allowed to continue their work activities. In the Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development (MARD), as in the majority of the public sector, 35% of employees were originally
considered essential, a proportion that declined to 20% in early April. Services in farms and ports of entry,
such as plant protection inspectors and veterinarians, have continued, even if teleworking and focusing on
urgent work were encouraged.
MARD worked with the Water Authority to increase the water quota for agriculture, so local food production
could guarantee fresh agricultural products supplies for Israel population during the crisis. The Water
Authority board approved an increase in the maximum quota for agricultural purposes in several regions.
In total, an additional 71 million m3 were authorised for agricultural use, including 20 million m3 for the
Upper Galilee and 20 million m3 for the Sea of Galilee area (Sovev Kineret). The remaining 31 million m3
was divided equally amongst all water using farmers.
Due to the spread of the epidemic, the entry of foreign workers and Palestinian workers into the State of
Israel has been restricted, and the following measures have been taken:

Foreign workers. MARD requested and obtained from the Population Authority the extension of
work visa to Thai workers whose visas expired their maximum five years and cannot be replaced
in the near future. The Population Authority has also issued a special mobility procedure for the
overall crisis period, so that, with his or her consent, a worker can be moved for a short period of


356 

less than one month to another farm without the need for prior approval, even if the movement is
not carried out within the same village. This flexibility was introduced as some industries, such as
the flower sector, reduced their activity significantly while other industries greatly increased their
need for workers, due to unavailable workers or increased consumer demand.

Activating volunteers. In agreement with the Ministry of Finance, a special fund of ILS 6 million
(USD 1.7 million) was granted to support public institutions recruiting volunteers to replace absent
agricultural workers. The procedure only supports the logistical expenses associated with volunteer
workers, such as transportation, food, accommodation and management of the recruiting system.
Furthermore, MARD participated in funding non-profit organisations that coordinated the
engagement of volunteers during the first COVID-19 wave (March 18-June 30) at a budget of
ILS 12 million (USD 3.5 million). Thanks to these efforts, and due to the interest in leaving
lockdown for open air, and to the role of youth community groups, a significant increase in
volunteers in agriculture was recorded during the crisis. In particular, about 12 000 volunteers
participated in 87 000 workdays on farms during the first COVID-19 wave.
The outbreak of the epidemic and the isolation guidelines have accelerated the launching of e-commerce
platforms, under the auspices of MARD and the Innovation Authority.
The Economy Ministry is taking action against business owners who have taken advantage of the
coronavirus crisis to raise the cost of foods above government fixed prices (just before Passover holidays),
with increased enforcement followed consumer complaints. Criminal fines of up to tens of thousands of
Israeli shekels are given to business owners found to have broken the law by raising the cost of these
specific foods. As of 7 April infractions had been found concerning eggs, milk, cheese, and challah bread
(Jean, 2020[4]).
To improve food resilience and for the purpose of contending with the economic effects on farmers
associated with COVID-19, an Acceleration Plan is being developed, aimed at promoting agriculture in
Israel, by dedicating efforts and budgets to a range of fields. This includes: agriculture R&D funding, capital
investments in precision agriculture and yield improvement technologies, the development of and
investments in vertical agriculture, the building of central and regional markets, the development of digital
trade areas to improve competition, infrastructure improvements in peripheral villages, soil preparation and
improvement in the Arava region, agricultural water networks rehabilitation in the villages, converting
rainfed areas into irrigated areas, and building regional reservoirs for catching marginal water, flood water,
effluents, etc.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
Amendments to the Free Export Order were published in May 2020 in order to reduce the regulatory
burden, facilitate the export procedure and to regulate the export of Medical Cannabis.
The revised free trade agreement (FTA) with EFTA, signed in 2018, has yet to be ratified. The FTA with
Ukraine signed in 2019 and a United Kingdom-Israel Free Trade Agreement, as well as a related protocol
for the mutual recognition of organic produce, entered into force on 1 January 2021. The FTA with
Colombia signed in 2013 and the FTA with Panama signed in 2018 were ratified in 2020 and their
concessions started to apply. Negotiations on new FTAs with the Republic of Korea, the People’s Republic
of China, Viet Nam, the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) and Guatemala are at varying stages of
progress. A revised FTA with MERCOSUR is under negotiation.
The normalisation agreements (known as “Abraham Accords”) that were signed in the second half of 2020,
followed by Memorandums of Understanding on, inter alia, promoting bilateral agricultural trade —
especially with the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain— have a high potential for developing intensive
trade flow of fresh produce.


 357

Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
During the lockdown period, MARD conducted daily assessments of the supply situation of fresh
agricultural produce, to identify missing items and allow their importation when needed. In particular, a
marked shortage of some basic consumer products, such as eggs and certain canned and other preserved
goods was observed during March – April 2020. As a response, MARD put in place incentives to encourage
imports of these products as quickly as possible and used different import channels in order to compensate
for the shortage. For example, WTO quotas were increased to import onions, cucumbers and eggs.
The plant protection and inspection services (PPIS) and veterinary and animal health services (IVSAH)
have also facilitated imports by accepting copies of original phytosanitary or health certificates for specific
products and under certain conditions.
An aid package was provided by MARD together with the Ministry of Finance for agriculture activities
affected by export constraints. This includes fresh produce affected by declining air transportation, caused
by travel restrictions, and produce affected by the closing of the Flower and Plant Auction in the
Netherlands, cancellation of orders from global markets in addition to niche product for local markets.  The
package aims to assist growers of fresh agriculture produce and fresh herbs for export and the local market
in the ornamental industry. The aid is provided for crops sold fresh and is based on the sales gap between
this year and a reference period. A participation coefficient, calculated for each grower according to
estimated economic damages (difference in turnover minus COVID-19 aid grants) is used as a weighting
factor so growers that were mostly affected will receive a higher rate of assistance. The total aid is restricted
to maximum ILS 0.6 million (USD 0.17 million) per applicant and is only offered once..
Contextual information
Israel’s economy is relatively small but has been growing rapidly and its GDP per capita more than doubled
over the last two decades, even as the population increased by 50%. The share of agriculture in total
employment and in GDP has fallen to around 1%. Israel is unique among developed countries in that land
and water resources are nearly all state-owned. Jewish rural communities, principally the kibbutz and
moshav, dominate agricultural production, accounting for about 80% of agricultural output. Partly due to
this structure, total agricultural area has moderately increased over the past twenty years, despite the
country’s continued development. While the agricultural sector is relatively diversified, most of the value of
production and exports is generated by high value fruits and vegetables.




358 

Table 15.4. Israel: Contextual indicators

Israel
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
157
382
0.4%
0.3%
Population (million)
6
9
0.1%
0.2%
Land area (thousand km2)
22
22
0.03%
0.03%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
566
623
0.02%
0.02%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
290
415
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
24 938
42 160
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
25
17
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
1.4
1.2
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
2.2
0.9
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
3.1
3.8
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.3
8.1
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
58
60
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
42
40
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
60
62
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Figure 15.5. Israel: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Israel has maintained a highly performing economy among OECD countries, with robust GDP growth until
2019, exceeding 3% per year and close to full employment in 2018-19. Its economy contracted in 2020
due to the COVID-19 pandemic and associated lockdown measures, but unemployment remained
relatively low. At the same time inflation fluctuated around zero from 2017-20 (Figure 15.5).
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate


 359

The agriculture trade balance of Israel continued to decline in 2019, with the value of imports of mostly
processed food products exceeding the value of exports of mainly primary commodities (Figure 15.6). This
gradual shift may partly reflect the relative appreciation of the Israeli currency compared to the US dollar
and the Euro since 2015.
Figure 15.6. Israel: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
The productivity of Israeli agriculture is generally high but its increase has been slowing in recent years.
The relatively low estimated growth rate in agriculture total factor productivity (TFP) in 2007-16 may be
partially attributed to the moderate increase in the value of output (Figure 15.7).
Figure 15.7. Israel: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
While agriculture’s water resource use has improved, the environmental performance of Israel’s agriculture
has degraded since 2000. During 2000-19, despite a 55% increase in irrigation area, agriculture’s share
of freshwater abstraction has halved, largely due to changes in water management, encompassing the use
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
12
46
47
34
26
14
15
6
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
-0.04%
0.5%
-0.6%
0.05%
1.3%
1.6%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
Israel
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


360 

of other water resources, efficient irrigation technologies and rigorous water demand policies. At the same
time, nutrient surpluses have grown significantly, with nitrogen balances increasing by 25% to reach a level
eight times the OECD average levels (Table 15.5).
Table 15.5. Israel: Productivity and environmental indicators

Israel
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
3.5%
1.3%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
188.8
236.2
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
65.7
68.9
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
1.2
1.6
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
3.3
2.8
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
43.4
67.3
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)¹
64.0
35.9
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
61.0
39.3
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
1. Share of agriculture fresh water abstraction in total fresh water abstraction.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.




 361

References

Jean, C. (2020), “Business owners exploit coronavirus crisis to raise food prices”, Jerusalem
Post, https://www.jpost.com/Israel-News/Business-owners-exploit-coronavirus-crisis-to-raise-
food-prices-623949.
[4]
OECD (2019), “Israel”, in Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2019, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/c68c69f3-en.
[3]
OECD (2010), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Israel 2010, OECD Review of Agricultural
Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264079397-en.
[1]
WTO (2018), “Trade Policy Review: Israel”, Secretariat Report, World Trade Organization,
Geneva.
[2]


Notes
1 Including the Ukrainian and British TRQs approved as part of their respective FTAs with Israel.
2 Or triple in the case of a few crops.
3 Of note, the majority of farmers’ acts according to the Jewish law solution of a sale permit (in the
Sabbatical year the land “is sold” symbolically to whoever is not Jewish and thus it can be farmed on similar
to a normal year). The Chief Rabbinate Office will handle the sale permit in the coming Sabbatical year
and its cost is estimated at ILS 8 million (USD 2.3 million).



362 

Support to agriculture
Japan reduced its support to agriculture over the past decades, but agricultural support levels have
stabilised more recently. Support to agricultural producers (PSE) remains high as a share of gross farm
receipts at 41.1% in 2018-20, more than twice the OECD average.
The share of market price support (MPS) decreased only moderately and remains the main element of
agricultural support, accounting for about 80% of PSE in 2018-20. It is largely sustained by border
measures, in particular for rice, pork and milk. Protection for producer prices also decreased but, overall,
farmers received prices on average about 60% above international market levels in 2018-20. Payments to
producers increased between 2019 and 2020 due to direct payments for beef and support for crop farms
to cushion the impact of COVID-19. Most remaining budgetary support to producers was mostly delivered
as payments based on area and income.
The share of expenditures for general services provided to agriculture (GSSE) relative to total support
estimate to agriculture (TSE) was 20.7% in 2018-20, higher than the OECD average but less than in the
1990s. Relative to the size of the sector, GSSE declined from 19% of agricultural gross value-added in
2000-02 to 16% in 2018-20, but remains well above the OECD average. The majority of GSSE financed
the development and maintenance of agricultural infrastructure, predominantly of off-farm irrigation
systems, representing 85.9% of GSSE in 2018-20. TSE represented 1% of Japan’s GDP in 2018-20, most
of which went to PSE.
Recent policy changes
The Basic Plan for Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas, which sets Japan’s overall agricultural policy
direction for the next 10 years, was revised in March 2020. The Basic Plan envisions continuous sectoral
reforms but also increased support to rural communities. It also revised Japan’s food self-sufficiency goals
and by-commodity production targets to account for projected domestic consumption. The 2030 production
targets for all commodities except rice are higher than current levels.
To alleviate economic losses and damage associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, Japan implemented
an economic support package of JPY 234 trillion (USD 2.1 trillion) for fiscal year (FY) 2020. Equivalent to
more than 40% of GDP, this is the largest supplementary budget ever implemented. The package supports
both the agricultural sector and consumers through various activities, such as finding alternative sales
channels, securing agricultural labour and disseminating information.
Promotion of agricultural products and food exports continues to drive Japanese agricultural policy. In April
2020, Japan introduced the Act on Facilitating the Export of Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery Products
and Food, which streamlines export policies for these products. Japan also set targets for agricultural and
food products exports to reach JPY 1.3 trillion (USD 11.2 billion) by 2025 and JPY 3.3 trillion
(USD 30.9 billion) by 2030. The Strategy to Realize Export Expansion of Agricultural, Forestry, Fishery
16 Japan


 363

Products and Food designates key products to prioritise resources and actions for agricultural export
expansion.
Developments related to agri-environmental policies include an October 2020 pledge to achieve economy-
wide carbon neutrality by 2050. The Green Growth Strategy published in December 2020 establishes
greenhouse gas (GHG) emission mitigation targets while pursuing economic growth. Further, the
sustainable food system strategy formulated in May 2021 calls for the greening of agricultural policies,
including a shift of measures towards supporting decarbonisation in agriculture, forestry and fisheries, and
an increased proportion of subsidies linked to cross-compliance in order to reduce environmental impact.
In November 2020, Japan signed the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) with
14 countries in the Asia-Pacific region. Japan’s sensitive agricultural products such as rice, wheat, beef,
pork, dairy products, and sugar and starch are exempted from tariff reduction. At the same time, the RCEP
provides trade facilitation frameworks for non-tariff measures such as Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures, Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment Procedures and Intellectual
Property. The Japan-United Kingdom Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (Japan-UK
CEPA) entered into force on 1 January 2021. Japan-UK CEPA replicates most of the market access and
tariff commitments for agricultural products provided under the Japan-EU Economic Partnership
Agreement.
Assessment and recommendations

Japan made efforts to reform agricultural support policies since the early 2000s. But support to
agricultural producers as a percentage of gross farm receipts remains more than twice the OECD
average and continues to be dominated by MPS, among the potentially most-distorting forms of
support. The new Basic Plan envisions increased food self-sufficiency and production, but these
should not translate into additional distorting support to production, or reverse agricultural reforms.
The government should develop a transparent and reliable pathway to reduce MPS and eventually
eliminate measures that impede market signals.

One of the main payments, the continued support provided for the crop diversification payment
programme is likely to help reduce abandonment of paddy fields. However, other policies should
be aligned with the ambition to reallocate rice area to other crops, implying in particular a reduction
of high market price support for rice.

Increased competition in the domestic market may contribute to structural change and further
productivity growth in Japanese agriculture, but the exclusion of key products from trade agreement
including RCEP limits the economic gains of opening international trade, both for consumers and
for agriculture.

There is significant room to improve the environmental performance of agriculture. Japan is among
the OECD countries with the highest nitrogen and phosphorus surpluses. Even though agriculture
accounts for a small share of Japan’s GHG emissions, it produces 78% of methane emissions.
Recent policy developments in agriculture and environment, including increased cross-compliance
and decarbonising supports, are expected to incentivise farmers to adopt more sustainable
production practices and improve agricultural environmental performance.

Although the share of expenditures for general services provided to agriculture relative to total
support is higher than the OECD average, the level decreased since the 1990s. Moreover, these
were programmed mostly for irrigation-related infrastructure development and maintenance, which
includes restoring damaged infrastructure from large-scale natural disasters. Climate-related
hazards, often detrimental to infrastructure, are expected to become more frequent and intense.
More attention should be paid to making infrastructure more hazard-resilient. Progress is also


364 

needed to support agricultural knowledge and innovation in order to enhance the sector’s
productivity, sustainability and resilience.
Figure 16.1. Japan: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/k39acv
Figure 16.2. Japan: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/54bgt9
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
TSE as % GDP
1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
-4%
-3%
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD


 365

Figure 16.3. Japan: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/0g7j5l


-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Welsh onions
Strawberries
Spinach
Pears
Mandarins
Grapes
Cucumbers
Cabbage
Apples
Eggs
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Soybeans
Rice
Barley
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


366 

Table 16.1. Japan: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
72 767
76 354
84 015
81 999
84 162
85 884
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
68.4
63.8
66.6
67.0
66.3
66.6
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
94 458
107 904
120 948
118 356
122 303
122 185
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
44 611
43 955
37 788
36 816
37 619
38 928
Support based on commodity output
40 996
40 828
31 723
31 247
32 044
31 879
Market Price Support1
39 458
38 471
29 886
29 568
30 378
29 712
Positive Market Price Support
39 458
38 471
29 886
29 568
30 378
29 712
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
1 539
2 358
1 837
1 679
1 666
2 167
Payments based on input use
1 434
976
865
877
949
768
Based on variable input use
403
85
10
8
10
10
with input constraints
403
85
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
890
724
578
611
656
466
with input constraints
403
85
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
142
167
278
258
283
292
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
621
613
2 397
1 950
1 875
3 367
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
222
261
222
183
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
621
613
2 175
1 689
1 653
3 183
with input constraints
0
0
1 714
1 235
1 194
2 714
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
1 560
1 538
2 803
2 743
2 752
2 914
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
1 560
1 538
2 803
2 743
2 752
2 914
with commodity exceptions
1 560
1 257
2 565
2 510
2 515
2 669
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
57.4
53.6
41.1
41.3
41.2
40.9
Producer NPC (coeff.)
2.24
2.07
1.61
1.62
1.62
1.59
Producer NAC (coeff.)
2.35
2.16
1.70
1.70
1.70
1.69
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
8 769
12 141
9 868
8 872
10 114
10 617
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
514
861
1 018
984
1 059
1 010
Inspection and control
55
66
112
73
89
174
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
7 747
10 620
8 484
7 565
8 748
9 138
Marketing and promotion
152
248
134
134
116
152
Cost of public stockholding
301
345
120
116
102
143
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
16.3
21.7
20.7
19.4
21.2
21.4
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-53 525
-49 474
-43 062
-42 940
-43 324
-42 922
Transfers to producers from consumers
-38 964
-38 460
-30 604
-30 255
-31 116
-30 440
Other transfers from consumers
-14 520
-11 100
-13 027
-13 287
-12 767
-13 027
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
-108
35
6
5
6
7
Excess feed cost
68
51
563
597
554
539
Percentage CSE (%)
-56.7
-45.8
-35.6
-36.3
-35.4
-35.1
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
2.31
1.85
1.56
1.58
1.56
1.55
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
2.31
1.85
1.55
1.57
1.55
1.54
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
53 272
56 130
47 661
45 694
47 739
49 551
Transfers from consumers
53 485
49 559
43 631
43 542
43 883
43 467
Transfers from taxpayers
14 308
17 670
17 057
15 438
16 623
19 111
Budget revenues
-14 520
-11 100
-13 027
-13 287
-12 767
-13 027
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
2.1
1.3
1.0
0.9
0.9
1.0
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
13 814
17 659
17 775
16 126
17 361
19 839
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.4
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
105
96
96
96
97
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
147.09
118.19
108.75
110.44
109.05
106.76
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Japan are: wheat, barley, soybean, rice, sugar,
milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry, eggs, apples, cabbage, cucumbers, grapes, mandarins, pears, spinach, strawberries and welsh onions.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 367

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Agricultural land reform was implemented immediately after World War II, transferring farmland ownership
from landlords to previously tenanted farmers in order to improve their economic and social position. It
restricted sales of farmland to non-farmers and strongly protected farmers’ rights. This policy applied until
2009, when the Agricultural Land Act was revised to allow non-agricultural companies to lease farmland.
Japan also invested in agricultural research and extension, and land infrastructure to recover from the
devastation of the war. At the same time, the government kept controls on rice procurement – from
production to distribution to consumers – under the Food Management Law in order to secure food supply.
To address the rising disparity in living standards and productivity between agriculture and other sectors,
Japan implemented the Agricultural Basic Act in 1961 to increase farmers’ incomes by increasing farm
size, improving farmland, adopting agricultural machinery and technology, and shifting from rice and
wheat-based production to livestock, vegetables and fruits. From the mid-1950s to the mid-1990s,
agricultural policies focused on price and marketing control, including tariffs for key products, particularly
rice, to ensure affordable food prices for consumers while increasing farm income in rural areas.
In 1993, at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round trade negotiations, Japan agreed to a preferential quota
on rice imports. The Food Management Act was repealed in 1995, introducing market mechanisms to rice
distribution. Following the replacement of the GATT with the WTO in 1999, Japan converted non-tariff
border measures to tariff rate quotas (TRQs) for 28 commodities, including rice.1
Rapid globalisation of the economy, together with the continued decline in farming population and farmland
area adversely impacted Japanese farming communities. In response, the Agricultural Basic Act was
replaced by the Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas Basic Act in 1999 to establish four basic principles:
(1) a stable food supply; (2) the desired multifunctional roles of agriculture; (3) sustainable development of
agriculture; and (4) development of rural areas. Under the act, ten-year agricultural policy plans, named
Basic Plan for Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas, have been formulated since 2000 (Box 16.1).
Agricultural policy reforms took place in recent years to help the sector become more competitive. These
packages2 aim to increase farm productivity through farmland consolidation and organisational
restructuring of agricultural co-operatives, which play a central role in the Japanese agro-food system.
Japan also introduced the revenue insurance programme to diversify farmers’ risk-management tools.
Moreover, Japan abolished the government-administered rice production quota system in 2018. Further,
to capture increasing demand for Japanese food products overseas, agricultural and food exports became
a key policy goal.
In parallel, Japan improved market access through large-scale trade agreements in recent years, including
the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) in 2018, the
Japan-EU Economic Partnership Agreement (Japan-EU EPA) in 2019, and the Japan-US Trade
Agreement in 2020.




368 

Table 16.2. Japan: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Policy directives
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to1960

Eradication of rural poverty and
securing food supply

Agricultural land reform implemented to help farmers own farmland
Arrangements to increase food production (Agricultural Co-operatives Act of 1947,
Agricultural Disaster Compensation Act of 1947, Agricultural Land Act of 1957)
Policy priority given to increasing rice production to solve serious food shortage (Food
Management Law of 1942, Five Year Food Production Increase Plan of 1952)
1960-1980
Reduction of income disparities
between agriculture and other
industries

Basic Agricultural Act (1961) to increase farmers’ income by increasing farm size,
improving farmland, adopting agricultural machinery and technology and shifting from rice
and wheat-based production to livestock, vegetables and fruits.
Rice policy goal changed from increasing rice production to managing quantity as full self-
sufficiency achieved in 1967
Rice production adjustment control introduced in 1971
1980-2010
Adjusting towards
internationalisation, bringing
market principles to the
agricultural sector, and
integrating concepts of ‘rural
area’ and ‘food’ into agricultural
policies

Agricultural Management Framework Reinforcement Act (1993) systematises support for
qualified farmers
Act on Stabilization of Supply, Demand and Prices of Staple Food (1994) changes the role
of government in rice state trading; government only purchases for stockpiling purposes
Quantitative quotas of rice replaced by tariff rate quota (1999)
Act on Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas (1999) aims to establish stable agricultural
structure in the new economic and social conditions; food self-sufficiency goal and direct
payments for farmers in mountainous areas introduced
2010-Present
New agricultural reforms to
enhance competitiveness
Farmland reforms (2009 revision of Agricultural Land Act to allow leases, 2013 Act on
Promotion of Agricultural Land Intermediary Management to facilitate agricultural land
consolidation)
Amendment of Agricultural Co-operatives Act (2015)
Abolition of rice production quota system (2018)
Introduction of the revenue insurance programme (2019)
Large-scale trade agreements (CPTPP, Japan-EU EPA, Japan-US Trade Agreement) and
export promotion of agricultural and food products
Support to farmers declined from close to 57% of gross farm receipts in the mid-1980s to less than 38%
in 2015, but stabilised around 41% in recent years. The share of market price support also declined but,
while Japan provides a range of budgetary forms of producer support, higher domestic prices continue to
provide the majority of transfers to producers, accounting for close to 80% of PSE in 2018-20 (Figure 16.4).




 369

Figure 16.4. Japan: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Japan maintains a system of high border protection and domestic price support for key agricultural
products. In general, Japanese tariffs on agricultural products are higher than those on non-agricultural
products. On average, tariffs on agricultural products amounted to 15.5% in 2019,3 compared to 2.5% for
non-agricultural products. However, agricultural tariffs vary considerably, with over 35.8% of tariff lines
duty-free and 3% of them above 100% (ad valorem equivalent), while 13.2% of agricultural tariff lines have
non-ad valorem tariffs (WTO, 2020[1]). Tariff rate quotas with high out-of-quota tariffs apply to some
commodities, like starch and dairy products.
Rice import happens through state trading, fulfilling Japan’s minimum-access commitment under the
WTO Agreement on Agriculture. A TRQ of 682 200 tonnes (milled) applies. The maximum mark-up
(collected by the government when importing and selling on domestic markets) for rice imports is set at
JPY 292 (USD 2.7) per kg, and the out-of-quota tariff-rate is JPY 341 (USD 3.0) per kg.
A revenue-based payment is available for farmers meeting certain requirements, in particular certified
farmers,4 producing rice, wheat, barley, soybean, sugar beet and starch potato if revenues from these
crops drop below historic average revenues. Ninety per cent of the difference between current revenue
and the past average is compensated by the government (75%) and the farmers’ reserve fund (25%).
The direct support payment for upland crops (wheat, barley, soybean, sugar beet, starch potato,
buckwheat and rapeseed) is based on the combination of area and output. The government provides area
payments based on current planting, and output-based payments according to the volume of sales and
the quality.
A crop diversification payment goes to farmers who switch their use of paddy fields from table rice
production to other crops (wheat, soybeans, or rice for feed and processing). This payment is area-based,
but output is also taken into account for rice for feed and flour. Within this crop diversification programme,
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


370 

a payment is also provided to municipal governments if the production area employs high-yield rice variety
for feed and processing, or cultivates buckwheat or rapeseed.
The Livestock Stabilisation Programme for beef and hog, known as Marukin, provides support
payments to beef cattle and hog producers when the average sales price falls below the average
production cost, which for beef cattle is calculated at regional level. Ninety per cent of the difference
between costs and sales prices are paid to producers, to which the government contributes 75% and the
rest are provided by the producers’ reserve fund. Output-based compensation also goes to producers of
raw milk used for dairy processing.
Commodity insurance covers yield losses and damage to production facilities from pests and natural
disasters. Degradation of crop quality is also insured for certain commodities (rice, wheat, barley and fruit).
Commodity insurance is voluntary and available for a range of commodities (rice, wheat, barley, livestock,
fruit and field crops)5 and horticultural facilities. Government support covers around 50% of the insurance
premium.
The revenue insurance programme launched in January 2019 provides a safety net for farmers in case
of revenue loss. The programme compensates the loss of farm revenue stemming from both market and
natural causes, relative to a benchmark based on the previous five years’ revenues. The government
supports 50% of the insurance premium and 75% of the reserve fund. Farmers can participate in either
revenue insurance programme or commodity insurance to avoid duplicate payments by these government
programmes.
Japan offers three types of support programmes to encourage young farmers (under 50 years old) to
enter the agricultural sector. First, a maximum of JPY 1.5 million (USD 14 050) per year is available to new
young farmers during a training period (maximum of two years). Second, JPY 1.5 million (USD 14 050) is
granted annually to eligible young farmers during the initial operation period (maximum of five years). Third,
funding for a maximum of JPY 1.2 million (USD 11 240) is available annually to subsidise agricultural co-
operation for the training cost of young farmers (maximum of two years).
A certified farmer programme exists since 1993 to foster farmers (both individuals and corporations) who
actively engage to improve farm management. The programme grants certified status to these farmers
with a management plan approved by national or local municipal authorities. Certified farmers receive
several benefits, including income support payments, tax breaks and support for pension premiums.
The Agricultural Land Act establishes Agricultural Committees in municipalities to manage agricultural
land use in Japan. Purchasing, selling and leasing of agricultural land need to be approved by the
Committee. Based on the Act on Establishment of Agricultural Promotion Regions, municipalities can
prohibit conversion of agricultural land to other uses. Farmland Banks6 were established in 2014 to
facilitate consolidation of farmland. These intermediary institutions exist in each prefecture. The banks
improve the conditions and infrastructure of farmland if necessary, and lease the consolidated farmland to
business farmers (e.g. corporations, large-scale family farmers, new farmers). Subsidies are provided to
landowners and regional authorities that lease farmland to the Farmland Banks.
Public investment in rural and agricultural infrastructure is a core agricultural policy, including farmland
(e.g. enlargement of land plots), roads, dams and irrigation, and drainage facilities. The government also
invests in the prevention of natural disaster and restoration of farm infrastructure, and in construction of
public health and recreational facilities associated with agriculture.
Hilly and mountainous areas represent about 40% of both total agricultural land and total agricultural
output in Japan. Area-based direct payments go to farmers in these areas to compensate for the production
disadvantage (e.g. steep slopes and smaller cultivation plots), to avert the abandonment of agricultural
land, and to contribute to environmental protection, landscape preservation and community engagement.


 371

Direct payments for environmentally friendly agriculture are provided to farmers who conduct activities
effective in preventing global warming or conserving biodiversity, in conjunction with reducing the use of
synthetic fertilisers and pesticides by more than half relative to conventional farming practices in the region.
Examples of supported activities include cover-crop planting, compost application and organic farming.
Farmers must comply with Good Agricultural Practices to receive these payments. Other payments are
available to support community engagement to manage and maintain agricultural land and related
resources (agricultural roads, water courses, reservoirs etc.) that help the performance of agricultural
multi-functionality.
Having ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, the agricultural mitigation plan of 2017
addresses carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions reduction through decreasing fuel consumption for horticultural
facilities and agricultural machinery. It also describes measured for adjusting agricultural land use, such
as disseminating water management methods for paddy fields to lower methane emissions and improving
fertiliser use efficiency to reduce N2O. The agricultural adaptation plan established in 2015 and revised
in 2017 and 2018, with a road map until 2025, looks at managing climate risk (e.g. development and
utilisation of new plant varieties and natural disaster resilient infrastructure) and envisions taking advantage
of opportunities that may arise.
Japan currently has 20 Economic Partnership Agreements (EPA) and other trade agreements in force
or signed with Singapore, Mexico, Malaysia, Chile, Thailand, Indonesia, Brunei Darussalam, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Philippines, Switzerland, Viet Nam, India, Peru,
Australia, Mongolia, CPTPP, the European Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and RCEP.7
These EPAs accelerated structural reforms and increased necessary support for the agricultural sector to
counter market competition. Such efforts include the implementation of the Comprehensive TPP-related
Policy Framework, which provides programmes to increase productivity in the sector. In addition, Japan is
engaged in EPA negotiations with Colombia and Turkey, and the People’s Republic of China (hereafter
“China”) and Korea for the plurilateral free trade agreement.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
Japan revised its Basic Plan for Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas (hereafter the Basic Plan) in March
2020, which sets the next decade’s agricultural policy directions. The new Basic Plan aims to continue
necessary agricultural policy reforms both to make the sector competitive and manage the challenging
environment, including the decline of farming population. The Basic Plan, however, now puts an increased
emphasis on rural communities, for instance by strengthening the agricultural production base regardless
of farm size (including small-scale family farms). The Basic Plan also aims at ensuring a stable food supply
and improving food self-sufficiency (Box 16.1).
Box 16.1. The 2020 Basic Plan for Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas
The Basic Plan is updated every five years and this is the fifth revision since it was first published in
2000. The previous 2015 Basic Plan prioritised agricultural sector reforms in order to make the sector
competitive and withstanding to the expected new trade environment (e.g. implementations of large-
scale EPAs). These reform initiatives resulted in some positive outcomes, including an increase in
average net farm income from JPY 2.8 trillion (USD 26 billion) in 2014 to JPY 3.5 trillion
(USD 33 billion) in 2018.
However, rapid decline of farming population and farmland area have raised concerns over further
weakening of the agricultural production and rural agricultural communities. In addition, the surge of
large-scale natural disasters due to climate change and livestock disease infections, such as classical


372 

swine fever, are increasing the vulnerability of the sector. The 2020 Basic Plan thus offers eight key
visions to respond to these challenges:
Key Visions
1. Conduct demand and needs-based policies
2. Calls for the public to support agriculture, food security and rural areas
3. Secure and develop agricultural labour capital
4. Accelerate the implementation of Smart Agriculture and digitalisation
5. Promote more integrated regional policy and maintain the multi-functionality in agriculture
6. Strengthen risk management to natural disasters, livestock infectious diseases, and climate change
7. Increase income in agricultural sector and rural areas
8. Support sustainability in line with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
The Basic Plan also sets several quantitative policy targets for 2030 including several self-sufficiency
rates defined for agricultural production overall and subsets of it, as well as production targets for
individual commodities. All these targets are set at levels higher than current ones, with the exception
of the production target for rice, and serve as guides for the next decade’s policy formulation.1
1 These include three targets related to self-sufficiency rates for:
(a) all agricultural production, called  food self-sufficiency, set to increase from 38% and 66% in 2019 when expressed on a calorie and
value base, to 45% and 75% in 2030, respectively.
(b) feed production, called feed self-sufficiency, set to increase from 25% in 2019 to 34% in 2030.
(c) food (i.e. agriculture net of feed) production, called national food production, set to 47% and 69% in 2019 when expressed on a calorie
and value base, to 53% and 79% in 2030, respectively.
(d) Production targets are also set for individual commodities.
In addition, a simulated projection of the potential domestic food production capacity is included, dubbed food self-sufficiency production
potential, which considers land and labour availability and technological advancement in production and is used in stakeholder dialogues.
Source: (MAFF, 2020[2]).
In October 2020, MAFF published a new policy document, the Smart Agriculture Comprehensive Policy
Package, to advance the development and the implementation of emerging technologies for the
agricultural sector. In particular, the document identifies necessary measures over the next five years
achieve smart agriculture in particular to reach the goal of having “most of key agricultural producers in
Japan practice data-driven agriculture by 2025”. In March 2021, , a new policy blueprint for the use of
digital technologies in the agricultural sector named the Conception and Projects for DX of Agriculture
was set up. It addresses corresponding to the needs and providing new values to consumers through data-
driven agriculture, which are called FaaS (Farming as a Service).
A number of plant varieties bred in Japan have been transferred abroad without authorisation. To enhance
the plant breeders’ rights, (PBR) the Plant Variety Protection and Seed Act was amended in
December 2020 and came into force in April 2021. Under the amended act, the holder of PBR can restrict
their protected varieties from being brought to foreign countries without authorisation. The Act also
requires, from April 2022, that farmers receive authorisation from right holders for propagating protected
varieties on their own farm. The amended act makes it possible for the holders of PBR to take appropriate
action against unauthorised or unintentional use of their protected varieties.
An amended Act on Improvement and Increased Production of Livestock was enacted in April 2020
and became effective in October 2020. It defines “designated semen and embryo”8 of livestock and aims
to prevent fraudulent transaction and unauthorised distribution of these genetic materials by ensuring
traceability.9 “Designated semen and embryo”, for which the scope of users and the purpose of use are
limited based on contract, are protected as intellectual property by the Act on Prevention of Unfair
Competition on Genetic Resources of Livestock which was also enacted in April 2020 and came into
force in October 2020. The act defines “unfair competition” and authorises civil remedies such as seeking


 373

injunctions and damage. For acts deemed to represent “unfair competition”, it imposes criminal penalties
including imprisonment, fines or both.
The first case of classical swine fever (CSF) was confirmed in Japan in September 2018, 26 years after
the last known case, while the African Swine Fever (ASF) continued to spread outside Japan. As a
response, Japan amended the Act on Domestic Animal Infectious Diseases Control in April 2020
offering the means to take effective preventative measures in case of disease outbreak in Japan. The
amended act added ASF to the list of targeted diseases, which allows preventative culls of healthy livestock
if outbreak occurs. The act also established stricter farm sanitation standards and clarified roles and
responsibilities for each actor involved (national and local governments, farmers). The amendment also
gives legal authority to animal quarantine officers to question inbound passengers and inspect their
belongings for illegal animal products.
Organic food production and labelling is regulated under the Japanese Agricultural Standard (JAS)
system. JAS for organic livestock products (e.g. beef, eggs) and organic processed food products
containing livestock ingredients sold (e.g. hams, cheese, chocolate) changed from a voluntary standard to
a mandatory standard from 16 July 2020. All these products need to be certified and labelled with the JAS
organic logo if they are to be sold as organic in Japan.
Japan has actively pursued the inclusion of disabled people in the agricultural sector. MAFF’s initiative on
disability-inclusive agricultural development, named Nou-Fuku Renkei – a collaboration (Renkei) with
agriculture (Nou) and social welfare (Fuku), was accelerated in March 2020 with the establishment of a
consortium with participation from the business sector. One activity launched by MAFF and the consortium
is the disability-inclusive agricultural development award, to exhibit best practices of inclusivity in the
agricultural sector. Also, the JAS system allows special labelling for agricultural products produced by
those with disabilities and ten entities have been approved for the use of labelling as of March 2020.
Further, in 2020, MAFF created guidelines and provided subsidies as well as training to form specialists to
support the employment and participation of the disabled in the agricultural sector. Additionally, Japan
published a policy vision for promoting agricultural and welfare co-operation in 2019 and aims for an
additional 3 000 entities to undertake the collaboration of the agriculture and welfare sector by 2024.
A series of large-scale natural disasters hit Japan in 2020. In July, a week of torrential rain triggered
severe flooding and landslides especially in the Kumamoto prefecture in southern Japan, with rivers
breaking banks and washing away bridges, forests, and homes. Floods and landslides caused extensive
damage to agriculture, forestry and fisheries (e.g. orchards, paddy fields and tobacco farms, greenhouse
facilities and machinery). Total estimated damages amounted to JPY 221 billion (USD 2 billion). In
September, typhoon Haishen led to JPY 12.5 billion (USD 117 million) of agricultural damage. The record
snowstorm in 2020-21 also caused damage worth JPY 11.9 billion (USD 111 million) to the sector. 10 The
government earmarked supplementary budgets of JPY 105.4 billion (USD 1 billion) for the restoration
efforts in the sector, mostly intended to support the recovery of farmland and agricultural facilities and to
conduct work to rehabilitate damaged roads and land subject to landslides.
Japan established all-sector the Progressive Innovative Environmental Strategy in January 2020 to
accelerate the achievement of national greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction target through the use of
technology. Employment of farmland carbon sequestration using cutting-edge biotechnology, reduction of
fuel consumption through smart agriculture (e.g. using robotics and information and communication
technologies (ICT)) and the development of farm and livestock management tools and plant variety to
reduce methane emissions from agriculture are addressed in the strategy.
In October 2020, Japan strengthened its GHG reduction target to achieve economy-wide carbon
neutrality by 2050. Along with this decision, the country published the Green Growth Strategy in
December 2020, an all-sector action plan for achieving net zero GHG emissions by 2050 while projecting
economic annual growth of JPY 90 trillion (USD 843 billion) by 2030 and JPY 190 trillion (USD 1.8 trillion)
by 2050 through greening efforts. The strategy specifies 14 priority sectors that are considered to have


374 

high GHG reduction potential which include agriculture. To achieve net zero CO2 emissions, a reduction
of fossil fuel use in the agricultural, forestry and fishery sector by 2050 is envisaged, including via a shift
of horticulture to fossil fuel free facilities.
In March 2020, MAFF published its Environmental Policy Basic Directions, a document that outlines
basic principles for planning and implementing agriculture and environment policies. The principles
envisages (1) implementing policies that improve both environmental and economic performance,
(2) greening policies throughout the whole supply chains and promoting research and development to
support the greening, and (3) reducing its own environmental impact. To advance these efforts, in
October 2020, MAFF and the Ministry of Environment agreed to strengthen co-operation in 14 policy areas.
Based on policy discussions with multiple agricultural actors and stakeholders, MAFF formulated the
Strategy for Sustainable Food System in May 2021 (officially called the Measures for Achievement of
Decarbonisation and Resilience with Innovation (MeaDRI) Strategy). The Strategy embodies the principles
described in the above Green Growth Strategy and the Environmental Policy Basic Directions and aims
for building a sustainable food value chain with innovations. The strategy addresses several agriculture-
related objectives to be achieved by 2050: (1) zero CO2 emissions from agriculture, forestry and fisheries
sectors, (2) 50% reduction in overall use of chemical pesticides by disseminating the Integrated Pest
Management and newly-developed alternatives, (3) 30% reduction in chemical fertilisers use,
(4) increasing the area of organic farming to 1 million hectares, which is equivalent to 25% of total cultivated
land area, (5) enhancing by at least 30% the productivity of the food manufacturing industry by 2030, and
(6) sustainable sourcing for imported materials by 2030.11 In parallel, the strategy also mentions an
approach to greening agricultural policies which would require major policy shifts via: (1) decarbonising
support measures for agriculture, forestry and fisheries, (2) subsidies with cross-compliance, and
(3) disclosing information on companies engaged in environment-related activities and promoting
Environmental, Social and Governance investment.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
In April 2020, Japan announced an economic support package totalling JPY 117.2 trillion (USD 1.1 trillion).
To scale up measures aimed at mitigating the economic and social impacts, in June 2020, the second
supplementary budget for FY202012 was enacted, the largest supplementary budget ever implemented.
Combined, it totalled JPY 234 trillion (USD 2.1 trillion), equivalent to more than 40% of its GDP. In
December 2020, an additional economic support package of JPY 73.6 trillion (USD 675 billion) was
announced, of which JPY 57.7 trillion (USD 529 billion) was directed to prevent the spread of the
coronavirus as well as shifting towards building a post-coronavirus. Due to these measures, the national
government expenditure budget has grown to a record high of JPY 175.7 trillion (USD 1.6 trillion) in
FY2020, relying on government bonds for 64.1% of revenue (MOF, 2020[3]).
In February 2021, the government enforced the revised Act on Special Measures for Pandemic Influenza
and New Infectious Diseases Preparedness and Response to allow the Prime Minister to announce the
target area for intensive measures against the spread of pandemics. Local governments in the target area
can request business operators to change their business hours with enforcement measures such as on-
site inspections and non-criminal fines against businesses that do not comply. The act also states that the
government takes the necessary financial measures to support the affected businesses.
MAFF received a total of JPY 610 billion (USD 5.7 billion) as of March 2021 to fund a variety of
programmes for the agro-food sector as well as consumers, such as business continuity programmes.
Additionally, general policy directions for COVID-19 were also addressed in the 2020 Basic Plan such as
securing agricultural labour and providing relevant information to consumers on food supply. Specific
support measures were implemented to tackle different consequences of the pandemic.
A range of support measures aimed to compensate farmers for finding alternative sales channels, where
product inventories have accumulated due to reduced demand as a consequence of the pandemic and


 375

related restrictions. In particular, these measures supported sales for school lunches, through internet,
through take-out and delivery services, through regional and local sales promotion activities and events,
through other new or re-developed domestic and international sales channels, or, when other markets
could not be served, donations to food banks, the recycling of food for feed or fertilisation. Support
compensated costs for transportation, packaging, in certain cases the food value was compensated as
well. Finally, beef wholesalers with a sales promotion plan could receive grants and storage cost
compensation.
Support was also provided to ensure continued agricultural production. Payments were provided to
vegetable farmers to mitigate the impact of price declines. Other supported activities by farmers of
vegetables, fruits, tea and flowers included the purchase of seedlings, rental of agricultural machinery, use
of new plant varieties. Lastly, conversion of production or sales methods and sales channel, facilitation of
consensus building in producer groups, and preparation of measures to prevent COVID-19 infections by
producers, all of which aim to make farmers more resilient, were also supported.
Livestock and dairy producers were also supported in order to continue their operation. In particular, beef
cattle and calf producers received support for adjusting shipment schedules and improving livestock
production management. When monthly average price of calves fell below the designated standard
threshold, grants were provided to calf producers to support business improvement activities such as barn
condition improvement, business operation analysis, disease prevention, or nutritional improvement of
breeding cows and calves. Producers’ contributions for the Livestock Stabilization Programme for Beef
were practically exempted. Support was also provided for the diversion of excess milk to further processing
(skim milk powder, butter) and non-fat dry milk used for other purposes such as animal feed.
In the case livestock operators were infected by the COVID-19, the government provided support for
additional expenses such as costs for hiring substitute labour.
To secure and maintain labour in the agricultural sector in light of, among others, international travel
restrictions, additional childcare requirements, support covered expenses for recruiting and hiring
alternative on-farm labour, the provision of training for those who wished to work in the farming sector, and
the implementation of artificial intelligence and other new technologies by farmers, local governments and
agricultural high school. The government also supported employers in the agro-food sector who were
forced to reduce their business but wished to maintain their employees, or who granted special paid leave
to their employees when these needed to care for their children whose school or childcare provider was
temporarily closed due to COVID-19.
In order to stabilise incomes and secure cash flow, agricultural producers having difficulties to continue
their operation due to pandemic benefitted from access to unsecured loans, and loans which are essentially
interest-free for the first five years of lending, provided by the government owned Japan Finance
Corporation and private financial institutions. Similarly, restaurant owners and small to medium scale food
distributors also gained access to unsecured loans with a maximum five years of deferment, and loans
which are essentially interest-free for the first three years. For private loans, the guarantee fee to the
Agricultural Credit Fund Associations was exempted for the first five years. Besides, MAFF extended the
premium payment deadlines for commodity insurance and revenue insurance programme.
As a part of an economy wide stimulus (Go-To-Campaign) designed to boost consumer spending, the
Go-To-Eat-Campaign was launched in October 2020. The programme supported restaurants with proper
sanitary protocols by encouraging people to start eating at restaurants again. The campaign has two
components: (1) meal discount vouchers and (2) point-based rewards. The vouchers issued by prefectures
offer discounts (or savings) of up to 25% at specified restaurants. By making online reservations for specific
restaurants, point-based rewards allow earning points that can be used for meal payments.
Different public information measures aimed to enhance transparency and public trust in the food system.
Basic operation guidelines for farmers and food business operators in the case of COVID-19 infection were


376 

made available online. In order to recover falling demand for agricultural products (e.g. beef, dairy,
vegetables, flowers), MAFF promoted the purchase of fresh domestic products via press conferences,
websites and social media. The government also monitored food supply chains for any food shortages,
provided information of food supply and availability online to the public, and ensured that staple food (rice
and wheat) was stocked. Citizens were asked to avoid panic buying, and simple guidelines for grocery
shopping and eating out were provided.
Table 16.3. Agricultural policy responses to the COVID-19
Policy responses
Agricultural Producers
Agro-food supply
chain
Consumers
1) Finding alternative sales channels
X
X

2) Continuation of agricultural production
X


3) Continuation of livestock and dairy production
X


4) Securing labour
X
X

5) Stabilising income and securing cash flow
X
X

6) Support for restaurant

X

7) Information measures
X
X
X
8) Export Promotion
X
X

Note: As of January 2021.
Source: Authors.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
Japan’s tariff rate-quotas continued to be under-filled in FY2020 for some products, including butter and
butter oil, prepared whey for infant formula, and skimmed milk powder for school lunches. Japan issued
special safeguard measures in FY2020 for some products, including cream and corn starch. Japan decided
to import up to 14 000 tonnes of butter under state trading in FY2020 in order to meet domestic demand
(MAFF, 2020[4]).
The Japan-United Kingdom Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (Japan-UK CEPA)
entered into force on 1 January 2021. For agricultural products, Japan-UK CEPA replicates most of the
market access and tariff commitments provided under the Japan-EU EPA, which entered into force on
1 February 2019. As in the Japan-EU EPA, Geographical Indication products of both countries are listed
for protection in the CEPA.
Japan signed the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) on 15 November 2020 with
14 countries in the Asia-Pacific region. RCEP is the first EPA that Japan has with China and South Korea.
The agreement will take effect 60 days after it has been ratified by at least six countries of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and three non-ASEAN signatories. Overall, the Agreement will
reduce tariffs on goods among the 15 participating economies by 90% over 20 years from entry into force,
in accordance with each party’s Schedule of Tariff Commitments. On agricultural goods, Japan will
eliminate tariffs on 56% of imports from China, 49% from Korea, and 61% from ASEAN, Australia and New
Zealand respectively (MAFF, 2021[5]). Japan’s sensitive agricultural products such as rice, wheat, beef,
pork, dairy products and sugar and starch are exempted from tariff reduction. On non-tariff measures
however, RCEP provides trade facilitation frameworks for non-tariff measures such as Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures, Standards, Technical Regulations, Conformity Assessment Procedures and
Intellectual Property.
A number of policies to promote exports of agricultural products and food were implemented. The
revised Basic Plan mentioned the export target for agricultural and food products for the first time since
the first Basic Plan, at JPY3.3 trillion (USD 30.9 billion by 2030. 13 In its July 2020 annual economic policy


 377

plan (the Basic Policies for Economic and Fiscal Management and Structural Reform 2020), Japan set an
intermediate export value goal of JPY 1.3 trillion (USD 11.2 billion)14 by 2025, which represents twice the
current level of agricultural products and food exports.
In April 2020, the Act on Facilitating the Export of Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery Products and Food
came into force. The new act streamlines and centralises the management of operations related to the
export of agriculture, forestry and fishery products and food, and created the headquarters (the Export
Headquarters) within MAFF for the facilitation of the exports of these products. The newly established
Export Headquarters provides export procedure guidance to producers and exporters, and conducts
negotiations of food safety requirements set by importing countries. The act also provides a legal basis to
develop an annual action plan relating to certifying export facilities as well as market access negotiation
schedules with foreign governments. Furthermore, it allows the government-owned Japan Finance
Corporation to extend long-term, low interest rate loans and loan guarantees to companies whose export
project plans are certified by the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries to install and maintain their
equipments or facilities.
In December 2020, Japan established the Strategy to Realize Export Expansion of Agricultural, Forestry,
Fishery Products and Food, a key component of the national economic plan. To achieve the export targets,
the strategy designates twenty-seven products with export potential. The strategy addresses a course of
specific action for each product designated. Specifically, steps for fostering production areas for export,
improving export facilities and developing sales channels are considered. The strategy also calls for a
market driven approach and greater collaboration throughout the supply chain and across the government
institutions.
Japan signed Organic Livestock Equivalency Arrangements with Australia, Canada, Switzerland and the
United States. Under these arrangements, Japan recognises their standards for organic livestock products
as equivalent to JAS organic regulations, and certified products produced in these four countries can be
imported and labelled as organic. In turn, the four countries also recognise JAS-certified organic livestock
products as equivalent to their certified organic livestock products in their territories (see Domestic policy
developments in 2020-21).
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The government supported the installation and maintenance of agricultural equipment or facilities that
produce agricultural and food products for overseas markets as well as domestic markets. Similarly,
expenses associated with the development of new processed food or menu directed to both exports and
domestic consumption were also supported. Online events and meeting opportunities such as online trade
fairs as well as information of overseas market conditions were provided by the government-related
organisations. In addition, the government improved the online database of Japanese agricultural products
for overseas buyers (JETRO, 2020[6]; MAFF, 2021[7]).
Given the disruption in trade and global supply chains due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Japan continued
to address the importance of open and transparent international trade through conferences such as the
September G20 Agricultural and Water Ministerial meeting.
Contextual information
Japan is the world’s third largest economy after the United States and China with relatively small land area
and high population density (Table 16.4). Agriculture constitutes 1.2% of GDP and 3.1% of employment in
2019 (Table 16.4), yet the sector accounts for 10% of GDP if all food-related industries are considered15
(MAFF, 2021[8]).


378 

Two-thirds of the country area is covered by mountains, leaving only 12% of the total land area for
agriculture, more than half of which are rice paddy fields (MAFF, 2020[9]). The average farm size was
2.5 hectares in 2019, which is small compared to other OECD countries, but over twice the average size
(1.1 hectares) in 1987 (MAFF, 2020[10]; OECD, 2019[11]). Nevertheless, total agricultural land has
decreased from 6 million hectares in 1960 to 4.4 million hectares in 2020 (MAFF, 2021[12]), due to the
abandonment and conversion of farmland to non-farm uses (e.g. residential, industrial, or commercial
uses).
The agricultural workforce declined by more than half since 1980 to 2 million in 2019, with an accelerated
pace of decline in the last decade (MAFF, 2021[12]). There are 1.03 million commercial farm households,
which is less than half the number in 1990. The average age of farmers is 67.8 years in 2020 and about
70% of farmers in Japan are over 65 years old (MAFF, 2021[13]).
The country’s geography offers a variety of landscapes and climatic patterns, leading to diverse agricultural
production. In 2019, livestock accounted for more than one-third of total agricultural output, followed by
vegetables (24%), rice (20%) and fruits (9%) (MAFF, 2021[14]). Total agricultural output gradually increased
since 2014 after declining in the years before.
Table 16.4. Japan: Contextual indicators

Japan
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
3 404
5 459
8.5%
4.8%
Population (million)
127
126
2.9%
2.4%
Land area (thousand km2)
365
365
0.4%
0.4%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
4 830
4 420
0.2%
0.1%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
340
338
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
26 841
43 279
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
9
14
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
1.5
1.2
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
5.0
3.1
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
0.3
0.8
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
9.7
8.4
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
72
65
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
25
35
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
93
94
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
The country has experienced slow economic growth and deflation for most of the past two decades.
Nonetheless, the unemployment rate is one of the lowest in OECD countries. In 2020, GDP contracted by
5.3% due to the impact of COVID-19 while the unemployment rate remained below 3% (Figure 16.5).
Japan is one of the world’s largest importers of agro-food products, and the United States is the biggest
source of agricultural imports (FAO, 2020[15]). Forty-six per cent of imports are processed products for
consumption (Figure 16.6). The food self-sufficiency rate was 38% in 2019 on a calorie basis (MAFF,
2021[16]), meaning that more than 60% of Japanese calorie supply depended on imports.


 379

The share of agricultural exports in total exports, on the other hand, constitutes only 0.8% in 2019
(Table 16.4). Most Japanese agricultural exports are directed at final consumers (Figure 16.6). Processed
food products such as alcohol and beverages, snacks, sauces and seasonings account for the majority of
Japan’s agro-food exports. Among the unprocessed products, apples and beef are the most exported
products (MAFF, 2021[17]). Against the trend of falling overall exports, exports of agricultural and food
products in 2020 increased by 11.6% from the previous year, reaching its highest level at JPY 656 billion
(USD 6.1 billion), which is about three times higher than that of 2000 (MAFF, 2021[18]; MAFF, 2021[19]).
Figure 16.5. Japan: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 16.6. Japan: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural output declined during 2007-16, due to the reduction of primary factor use (land and labour)
and limited total factor productivity. Total Factor Productivity grew by only 0.4% per year during2007-16
period, half the rate estimated for the 1990s and well below the global average (Figure 16.7, Table 16.5).
Japan’s nitrogen and phosphorus balance are among the highest in OECD countries (Table 16.5). The
high and increasing nitrogen balance is due to a combination of high fertiliser use, and livestock production
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
19
11
46
71
22
7
13
10
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


380 

on limited pasture land (Shindo, 2012[20]). The high phosphorus balance, in contrast, is partly a result of
soil characteristics: the reaction of soil in Japan, particularly Andosols, with inorganic phosphate render
the phosphate almost insoluble and unavailable for uptake by plants, requiring more intensive phosphorus
use by the agricultural sector (FAO, 2015[21]).
In line with its small role in the economy, agriculture’s share in total energy use, 1.2% in 2019, is below the
OECD average. GHG emissions from agriculture were 2.7% of the total emissions in Japan – the lowest
among OECD countries (Table 16.5). However, the agricultural sector is responsible for 78.3% of total
methane (CH4) emissions, mainly due to livestock enteric fermentation and rice cultivation and for 46.6%
of the national Nitrous Oxide (N2O) emissions due to manure and fertiliser application (GIO, 2021[22]).
The volume of agricultural water use remains stable for the past few decades. In 2018, the Japanese
agricultural sector used 67.6% of water of which 94% was directed for paddy field irrigation (MLIT, 2019[23]).
Figure 16.7. Japan: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 16.5. Japan: Productivity and environmental indicators

Japan
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.8%
0.4%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
170.8
179.3
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
72.0
57.3
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
1.2
1.2
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
2.6
2.7
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
54.7
54.4
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
65.8
67.5
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
21.0
19.2
9.3
8.5
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.
0.3%
0.5%
-1.5%
0.05%
0.4%
1.6%
-2.0%
-1.5%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
Japan
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


 381

References

FAO (2020), FAOSTAT (major import partners), http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/TM
(accessed on 3 April 2020).
[15]
FAO (2015), World Reference Base for Soil Resources 2014, update 2015 International soil
classificationn system for naming soils and creating legends for soil maps. World Soil
Resources Reports No. 106, http://www.fao.org/3/i3794en/I3794en.pdf.
[21]
GIO (2021), Japan’s GHG emissions data (FY1990ｰ2019 latest figures),
https://www.nies.go.jp/gio/en/aboutghg/index.html.
[22]
JETRO (2020), World Trade and Investment Report 2020 (in Japanese),
https://www.jetro.go.jp/ext_images/world/gtir/2020/no1.pdf.
[6]
MAFF (2021), Agricultural land and acreage statistics,
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kouhyou/sakumotu/menseki/index.html#r (accessed on  2021).
[12]
MAFF (2021), Agriculture and Forestry Census 2020,
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kouhyou/noucen/index.html.
[13]
MAFF (2021), Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Import and Export Statistics (in Japanese),
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kouhyou/kokusai/index.html.
[17]
MAFF (2021), Cumulative export record (in Japanese),
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/kokusai/kokusei/kaigai_nogyo/k_boeki_tokei/ex_ruinen.html
(accessed on  2021).
[18]
MAFF (2021), Export promotion of agriculture, forestry and fishery products and food (in
Japanese), https://www.maff.go.jp/j/shokusan/export/e_action/attach/pdf/index-13.pdf
(accessed on 13 April 2021).
[19]
MAFF (2021), Food Supply and Demand Statistics,
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kouhyou/zyukyu/index.html.
[16]
MAFF (2021), For farmers, foresters and fishers and food related business affected by Covid-19,
January 2021 (in Japanese), https://www.maff.go.jp/j/saigai/n_coronavirus/pdf/shiensaku_n-
cov.pdf.
[7]
MAFF (2021), GDP calculation for agriculture and food related sector,
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kouhyou/keizai_keisan/attach/pdf/index-5.pdf.
[8]
MAFF (2021), RCEP, outline of agreement on agriculture, forestry and fishery products (in
Japanese), https://www.maff.go.jp/j/kokusai/renkei/fta_kanren/f_rcep/attach/pdf/index-17.pdf.
[5]
MAFF (2021), Total agricultural output (national estimate) (in Japanese),
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kouhyou/nougyou_sansyutu/index.html (accessed on  2021).
[14]
MAFF (2020), Agricultural structure statistics 2019,
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kouhyou/noukou/index.html (accessed on 26 March 2020).
[10]
MAFF (2020), Arable land area as of 15 July 2020 (in Japanese),
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kekka_gaiyou/sakumotu/menseki/r2/kouti/index.html.
[9]


382 

MAFF (2020), The Basic Plan for Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas (in Japanese),
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/keikaku/k_aratana/attach/pdf/index-13.pdf.
[2]
MAFF (2020), Verification of import quota quantity of butter and skim milk powder, 2020 (in
Japanese), https://www.maff.go.jp/j/press/seisan/c_gyunyu/200925.html.
[4]
MLIT (2019), Water resources in Japan,
http://www.mlit.go.jp/mizukokudo/mizsei/mizukokudo_mizsei_tk2_000014.html.
[23]
MOF (2020), Financial condition in Japan,
https://www.mof.go.jp/budget/budger_workflow/budget/fy2021/seifuan2021/04.pdf.
[3]
OECD (2019), Innovation, Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability in Japan, OECD Food and
Agricultural Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/92b8dff7-en.
[11]
Shindo, J. (2012), “Changes in the nitrogen balance in agricultural land in Japan and 12 other
Asian Countries based on a nitrogen-flow model”, Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems,
Vol. 94/1, pp. 47-61, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10705-012-9525-x.
[20]
WTO (2020), World Tariff Profiles 2020,
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/booksp_e/tariff_profiles20_e.pdf.
[1]



Notes
1 Since FY 2018, the number of commodities with TRQs has been reduced to 27.
2 The Vitality Creation Plan for Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries and Rural Communities, first created in
2013, revised in 2014, 2016, 2017, 2018; the 2015 Basic Plan for Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas; the
Comprehensive Policy Responses for Trans-Pacific Partnership created in 2015, revised in 2017; and the
Programme for Enhancing of Agricultural Competitiveness created in 2016.
3 Simple average MFN applied.
4 The certified farmer system is based on the Agricultural Management Infrastructure Reinforcement
Promotion Law. The system certifies agricultural management improvement plans created by farmers in
line with a plan formulated by municipalities that includes goals for efficient and stable agricultural
management based on conditions of the region.
5 Covers approximately 60% of agricultural output. Excludes vegetables planted several times a year (leaf
vegetables, etc.) due to the difficulty of damage assessment.
6 The official name of Farmland Bank is the Public Corporations for Farmland Consolidation to Core
Farmers through Renting and Subleasing.
7 Ordered according to effective date.




 383


8 Japanese Black, Japanese Brown, Japanese Shorthorn, Japanese Polled, and hybrids of those four
breeds.
9 From the production to the artificial insemination and embryo transfer.
10 As of February 2021.
11 Two other objectives relate to forestry and fishery; (7) use of superior varieties for forestry seedling to
be 90% or above; (8) artificial seedling rates in aquaculture to be 100%.
12 1 April 2020 to 31 March 2021.
13 JPY 5 trillion (USD 46.8 billion) for agriculture, food, forestry and fishery products total.
14 JPY 2 trillion (USD 19 billion) for agriculture, food, forestry and fishery products total.
15 Food related industry here includes agriculture, forestry and fisheries, agricultural material supply, food
manufacturing, food related distribution and merchandising, and food service.


384 

Support to agriculture
Support to producers in Kazakhstan was estimated at 4% of gross farm receipts (GFR) on average in
2018-20. The share of potentially most-distorting gross producer transfers (based on output, including
market price support and variable input use without input constraint) fell from an average 98% in the early
2000s to 75% in 2018-20. Support to fixed capital formation accounts for the majority of budgetary transfers
to producers. Domestic prices were lower than world prices for several crops, generating negative market
price support (MPS) worth 4% of GFR, but higher than world prices for livestock commodities, with MPS
at just over 1% of GFR. Overall, average prices received by farmers were 2% below world prices.
Reflecting individual commodity price gaps, single commodity transfers in 2018-20 were negative for rice,
sunflower, maize, barley and cotton, but slightly positive for wheat and livestock products.
Support to general services (GSSE) accounted for 20% of budgetary expenditure for agriculture in 2018-
20. Of this, spending on inspection and control made up close to 44% and spending on infrastructure 36%.
Total support to agriculture (TSE) declined to 0.9% of GDP, but the corresponding share of the total
budgetary support estimate (TBSE) increased to 1%. The share of GSSE in TSE increased slightly, from
19% in 2000-02 to 20% in 2018-20.
Recent policy changes
Kazakhstan’s main recent policy changes were amendments to agricultural legislation and an update of
the 2021 State Programme. The focus now is orienting agriculture towards import substitution, and
developing exports of high value-added products, particularly for the beef sector.
The process of rationalising production subsidies continues: farmers’ access to credit is more transparent
and their applications for subsidies are made publicly available.
The mandatory crop insurance system was transformed into a voluntary insurance scheme with a view
towards expanding crop and livestock insurance markets in the country. The government subsidises half
of insurance premiums.
The COVID-19 crisis-response package entailed support of KZT 5.4 trillion (USD 13 billion) or 9% of GDP.
Immediate policy actions include trade restrictions and regulated prices for socially-important goods, cash
transfers to vulnerable households, and targeted assistance to hard-hit sectors and small and medium-
sized enterprises, including a deferral of loan payments.
Assessment and recommendations

While total support to agriculture is small relative to the overall economy, most producer support is
highly distorting, thus likely to influence farm management decisions, increase pressure on natural
resources and distort markets.
17 Kazakhstan


 385


Within the framework of import substitution, government support to dairy farmers increased
substantially in 2020. The policy focus on import substitution should be assessed carefully as it
might lessen producers’ exposure to international competition and divert resources to rent-seeking
activities.

Implementation of the Sustainable Livestock Development Programme is an opportunity to develop
a competitive, high-value, export-oriented beef sector. The programme could promote green
growth and sustainability policies with climate-smart practices for beef cattle production, reduced
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and improved agro-environmental outcomes of beef support.
The programme is particularly important with the COVID-19 environment affecting employment
countrywide.

The subsidies for inorganic fertilisers and chemical inputs, and for industrial feed should be re-
assessed in light of potential negative environmental impact.

Lifting restrictions on food exports introduced under the state of emergency is welcome. They
create an unpredictable trading environment that could disrupt the global food supply, adversely
affect international food security and impact Kazakhstan’s trading partners, particularly in Central
Asia. Emergency measures related to agriculture and agro-food products in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic should be targeted, proportionate, transparent and temporary, and not create
unnecessary barriers to trade or disrupt global agro-food supply chains.

Agriculture is among the most risk-prone sectors in the country. Production shocks from weather,
pests and diseases, and adverse movements in agricultural product and input prices impact
farmers and agro-business firms, and can strain government finances. Kazakhstan could manage
risks better by reducing potential losses and increasing productivity sustainably, thus improving
overall resilience in the sector. Kazakhstan should adopt a broader, more integrated approach to
risk management than the current system of ex ante public-sector activity associated with crop and
livestock disease, and ad hoc, ex post emergency responses to local disasters.

Reform of the crop insurance system is welcome and should increase the role of private insurers,
reduce farmers’ costs and make the system more transparent.

Efforts to provide more stable policy, streamline support to fewer measures, and create a national
digital cadastre database for agriculture increase the transparency and credibility of reform, and
should be continued.

Establishing secure property rights for land, including simplified procedures for land acquisition,
are necessary to improve the economic incentives for sustainable resource management. Farm
decision-making could be improved by incorporating environmental concerns into agricultural
policies.

Agriculture is the second largest emitter of GHGs after the energy sector, and Kazakhstan should
specify how much and how to reduce agricultural emissions to meet the country’s reduction
commitments. Moreover, the lack of a co-ordinated and systemic approach hinders the country’s
ability to increase its resilience to the effects of climate change, and steps should be taken to
enhance agriculture’s adaptation to the impacts of climate change.




386 

Figure 17.1. Kazakhstan: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/4jkf9b
Figure 17.2. Kazakhstan: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Note: The producer price change and the border price change are not calculated when the negative price gap occurs at the commodity level
for the current or previous year.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/4hofiu
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
1.1
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%
1.0%
1.2%
1.4%
1.6%
1.8%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20
-60%
-50%
-40%
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
PSE change decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE


 387

Figure 17.3. Kazakhstan: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/a1ocz6


-150%
-100%
-50%
0%
50%
100%
Cotton
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sunflower
Rice
Maize
Barley
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


388 

Table 17.1. Kazakhstan: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
3 367
13 809
12 937
13 418
15 072
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
76.6
60.1
61.0
62.4
56.9
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
2 933
9 760
11 779
11 545
5 957
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
286
653
434
1 017
509
Support based on commodity output
268
-345
-377
-74
-583
Market Price Support1
268
-426
-460
-179
-640
Positive Market Price Support
369
197
164
285
142
Negative Market Price Support
-101
-623
-623
-464
-781
Payments based on output
0
82
83
105
57
Payments based on input use
18
953
746
1 036
1 078
Based on variable input use
8
509
206
632
690
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
10
439
534
400
384
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
0
5
6
4
5
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
42
57
55
14
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
42
57
55
14
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
2
7
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
8.5
4.4
3.1
7.0
3.1
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.09
0.98
0.97
0.99
0.96
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.09
1.05
1.03
1.07
1.03
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
67
312
313
286
335
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
3
50
39
57
53
Inspection and control
29
138
155
106
154
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
28
112
108
110
116
Marketing and promotion
0
5
4
6
5
Cost of public stockholding
5
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
1
8
7
7
8
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
19.0
20.5
24.6
15.5
23.4
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-313
833
818
596
1 084
Transfers to producers from consumers
-288
282
313
61
474
Other transfers from consumers
-21
-5
-4
-10
0
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
555
524
549
590
Excess feed cost
-4
0
-15
-4
20
Percentage CSE (%)
-10.7
9.3
7.3
5.4
20.2
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.12
0.97
0.97
1.00
0.93
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.12
0.91
0.93
0.95
0.83
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
353
1 520
1 271
1 853
1 435
Transfers from consumers
309
-278
-309
-51
-474
Transfers from taxpayers
65
1 802
1 584
1 914
1 908
Budget revenues
-21
-5
-4
-10
0
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.6
0.9
0.7
1.0
0.8
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
85
1 946
1 731
2 032
2 074
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.4
1.1
1.0
1.1
1.2
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
743
715
770
..
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
147.38
380.38
344.90
382.87
413.36
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Kazakhstan are: wheat, rice, maize, barley,
sunflower, potatoes, cotton, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, sheep meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 389

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
In the late Soviet era, all sectors of Kazakhstan’s economy, including agriculture, were regulated by central
planning. Production, the marketing of agricultural inputs and outputs, and processing and distribution of
food were controlled by state enterprises. Agriculture was supported by high, administered prices and
considerable input and output price subsidies, in addition to policies such as cheap energy and transport,
which were not agriculture-specific. After the mid-1990s price liberalisation removed the benefit of output
prices above world levels and key input prices below them. From the early 2000s, Kazakhstan vacillated
in trade liberalisation. It was not until its accession to the WTO in 2015 that the country implemented more
liberal measures.
Kazakhstan became an independent country in 1991 following the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Stabilisation and transition to a market economy were its main economic challenges. During the transition,
the agricultural sector was affected by economic shocks, land reform and reduced government support.
The main agricultural policies were geared towards decreasing food import-dependency and increasing
domestic food production (Baubekova, Tikhonova and Kvasha, 2021[1]).
Table 17.2. Kazakhstan: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1992
Soviet era
Closed economy
Government control of the agricultural economy through regional trade controls,
input supply controls, and the continuation of soft budget constraints
Taxation of the agricultural sector to support the industrial sector
Tariffs
Low administrated prices on energy and transport
1992-1997
Initial structural reforms towards an open
economy
Price liberalisation of agricultural products and inputs
Emergence of new policy institutions
1998-2002
Economic crisis
Stabilisation measures
Debt rescheduling
Limited support to the sector
Agrarian Credit Corporation created as main agricultural lender (credit at
preferential rates)
Restructuring agricultural enterprises
2003-2015
Agriculture as part of economic
diversification
Price support
Support for import-competing products
Tariff protection for meat
Taxation of agricultural exports
2015-present
Reforms to trade liberalisation
WTO accession 2015
EAEU membership in 2015
Elimination of payments per hectare for priority crops
Promotion of producer co-operatives
Increase in land tax rates
Debt restructuring programme
Introduction of investment subsidies
Introduction of interest concessions
Agricultural insurance reform
Source: (OECD, 2013[2]; Baubekova, Tikhonova and Kvasha, 2021[1]).
Producer support in Kazakhstan reveals no distinct long-term trend. The %PSE fluctuated considerably
between 1995 and 2020. In some years, negative support provided through depressed market prices for
some products offset budgetary allocations and positive support provided through higher domestic prices
for others. However, overall policies are supportive of domestic producers (Figure 17.4). Net producer
support was positive in most years, due also to increasing support related to the use of production inputs,


390 

in particular credit, over the past ten years. Overall, total budgetary support to agriculture increased relative
to the size of the economy, now representing about 1% of GDP. As market price support was estimated
as strongly negative in 2016, net TSE shows a substantial drop in that year. However, in addition to
budgetary support to producers, support to consumers was also significant in recent years.
Figure 17.4. Kazakhstan: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The State Programme of Agro Industrial Complex Development for 2017-2021 (hereafter, the 2021 State
Programme) provides the agricultural policy framework in Kazakhstan. While maintaining the principles of
the previous framework (Agribusiness-2020 Programme), the 2021 State Programme puts stronger
emphasis on the development of, and support to, individual household plots and small farms, agricultural
producer co-operatives and agriculture supporting services and infrastructure. In addition, some input
subsidies including on seed, fertiliser and pesticides will be increased.
Kazakhstan applies a range of border and domestic price intervention measures. Border measures are
implemented within the Customs Union of the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) and include tariff rate
quotas (TRQ) and non-tariff measures. TRQs apply to imports of lower-grade beef and of poultry products.
Intervention in domestic markets is twofold. The State Commission for the Modernisation of the Economy
undertakes intervention purchases of grains to support domestic producer prices. At the same time,
consumption price stabilisation is in place for 29 commodities. Purchase occurs after harvest at market
prices and commodities are stored and released at below-market prices later in the year.
For crops, per tonne payments go to oilseeds, rice, sugar beet and cotton to be used for processing.
Headage and output payments support the livestock sector. Large commercial livestock producers receive
most of these. Other forms of support to livestock are silage and fodder subsidies, support to artificial
insemination and to the purchase of young cattle for feedlots.
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 391

Purchases of mineral fertiliser and high-quality seeds receive subsidies. Administered prices below market
prices apply to diesel fuel sold to agricultural producers; total volumes supplied at these prices during
sowing and harvesting periods are pre-determined as well.
Investment subsidies, together with concessional credit, represent the principal forms of support to
agriculture. Concessional credit comes through numerous channels. Several credit agencies provide loans
at reduced interest rates under the umbrella of the state company KazAgro Holding. Along with agricultural
producers, food processors benefit from concessional credit and leasing of machinery and equipment from
credit agencies of KazAgro Holding.
A complex approval system provides investment support. It applies to 39 priority groups, conditioned on
compliance with a number of technical specifications and regulations, and has to be approved by regional
authorities and in some circumstances by the Ministry of Agriculture.
Agricultural enterprises and individual farms benefit from special tax regimes with substantial concessions.
For example, corporate and family farms enjoy a 70% discount on all business taxes applied in the country
(property tax, social tax, VAT, profit tax and tax on vehicles). Since January 2016, primary processors and
procurement organisations receive 100% subsidy of VAT on agricultural products from individual farms.
The land tax applies since 2015. Individual farms of less than 3 500 hectares are eligible for a Single Land
Tax set as a percentage of the cadastre value of land owned or used, which replaces the land tax and the
five business taxes mentioned above. Since 2015, individual farms pay a 10% income tax for physical
persons on income above KZT 150 million (USD 0.4 million).
Harnessing information technologies is part of Kazakhstan’s long-term strategy to simplify, facilitate
control, and improve the transparency and effectiveness of government support to agriculture. An
electronic system of subsidy payments applies to most subsidy programmes. Applicants to KazAgro credit
and leasing can apply electronically.
Work continues by the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Digital Development, and the Defence and
Aerospace Industries on the creation of the National Spatial Data Infrastructure project, which includes a
section on agricultural land.
The Law on the Regulation of the Agro-Industrial Complex, signed by the President in October 2019, allows
using the results of space monitoring to identify unused lands and return them to state property. A new
digital cadastre for agricultural land stores 6.5 million data inputs on land plots, including soil, geobotanical
and agricultural lands.
The President’s Edict dated 6 May 2016 imposes a moratorium until 31 December 2021 on the introduction
of private ownership of agricultural land and on the extension from 10 to 25 years of the maximum period
of agricultural land rent to foreign entities.
Kazakhstan is a party to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. Through its Intended Nationally
Determined Contribution, Kazakhstan set an economy-wide target to reduce its total GHG emissions by
15% in 2030 compared to 1990, over a period starting in 2021. This target covers all emissions, including
from agriculture. Specific targets or reduction plans for the agricultural sector were not defined.
Kazakhstan, together with Armenia, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan and the Russian Federation, is a member of the
Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) established in 2015. Kazakhstan’s border measures are
implemented within the Customs Union of the EAEU and a number of national responsibilities in the area
of custom regulations are transferred to the EAEU, including SPS and technical regulations.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
The main changes were amendments to agricultural legislation and an update of the 2021 State
Programme. The principal priorities of the updated 2021 State Programme include: explicit focus on import


392 

substitution and export development; sustainable land use conditions in provision of concessional credit;
shift the focus of investment support to priority areas; continued organisational reform of KazAgroHolding;
focus on bringing land into productive use; establishment of land cadastre, land evaluation, preparations
for considerable changes to the land taxation, including increased taxes for unused land.
The changes in the 2021 State Programme primarily affected the programme indicators, as well as some
institutional changes following the creation of the new Ministry of Ecology, Geology and natural Resources.
In this regard, several responsibilities and functions of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of
Kazakhstan were transferred to the new ministry, including sustainable management of water resources.
Furthermore, the updated State Programme aims to strengthen the agro-industrial complex towards import
substitution and the development of exports of high value-added products. To achieve this the capacity
utilisation rate of processing enterprises is to be increased through:

subsidising farmers for products delivered for processing

subsidising the costs of processing enterprises for the purchase of agricultural products

providing investment support for the creation and expansion of processing enterprises

subsidising the interest rate on loans issued to replenish fixed and circulating assets

subsidising value-added tax to procurement organisations
In 2020, the government launched the preparation of a new State Programme for the period 2022-26. Key
objectives of the planned State Programme include self-sufficiency of socially important food products,
stable income for rural populations, a 2.5-fold increase of farm labour efficiency, and a doubling of
agricultural exports. A ministerial commission has been formed to start working on the plan.
In 2020, the World Bank approved a USD 500 million loan for the Sustainable Livestock Development
Programme to support the development of environmentally sustainable, inclusive and competitive beef
production in Kazakhstan. The borrowed funds will support the implementation of the State Programme in
improving veterinary services and animal recording systems, scaling-up a farmer-centric service delivery
model and improving agro-environmental policies for the sector. Over a period of five years (2021-25), the
programme aims to achieve a 10% increase in the share of public expenditure for sustainable beef
production and processing, and a three-fold increase in the value of beef exports. In addition, around
20 000 small and medium-scale farmers are to be connected to export value chains. The funds will be
disbursed on the basis of Programme-for-Results (PforR) – a financing instrument that links the
disbursement of funds directly to the achievement of specific programme results.
In 2020, the Food Contract Corporation JSC (a subsidiary of KazAgro) carried out a forward purchase of
350 000 tonnes of grains. The purchase prices for wheat were set in the range of KZT 83 000-KZT 87 000
(USD 201-USD 210), depending on the quality. The price for barley of the second class was KZT 50 000
(USD 121).
In July 2020, a number of changes were introduced to the rules for the development of livestock breeding,
including:

increased subsidies rates for the purchase of domestic breeds (from KZT 8 000 to KZT 15 000)
(USD 19 to USD 36) and imported sheep (up to KZT 150 000 per head) (USD 363 per head)

changed collateral policy for lending for the purchase of livestock

reduced cost of diagnostic tests during quarantine from KZT 23 500 to KZT 4 271 per cow (USD 57
to USD 10 per head), and from KZT 28 500 to KZT 8 741 (USD 69 to USD 21 per head) for a bull
imported from the countries of the European Union

increased support on dairy cattle breeding – the subsidy rates for the purchase of imported
breeding stock were increased from KZT 225 000 to KZT 400 000 per head (USD 544 to USD 968


 393

per head) and for domestic from KZT 150 000 to KZT 200 000 per head (USD 363 to USD 484 per
head) – as well as the subsidy rate per kilogramme for reducing the cost of milk trial.
Regional governments are expected to increase subsidies for pesticides to KZT 30.8 billion
(USD 68 million). Under this subsidy, farmers can receive funds covering up to 40% of the cost of eligible
pesticides. Previously only herbicides were approved, but in October 2019 the Ministry of Agriculture
changed its regulation to allow farmers to purchase insecticides and fungicides under the programme as
well.
In 2020, the single land tax was amended and all income received by the farmer from the sale of
agricultural products will be subject to a single land tax at a rate of 0.5% of the sales revenue per calendar
year. Previously, the single land tax was calculated on the assessed value of land plots rented or owned
and was not tied to the turnover from the sale of agricultural products. Small business farmers are
exempted from the single land tax from this year until 2023.
In 2020, in the context of the government’s efforts to shift away from subsidising credit to a credit guarantee
system, a mechanism for guaranteeing loans from second-tier banks through the Fund for Financial
Support of Agriculture JSC (FFCA) was created. The new form of support for farmers is aimed at reducing
the credit risks of commercial banks and increasing the attractiveness of financing the agricultural sector.
The guarantee will be used for the implementation of investment projects in all types of activities in
agriculture, as well as in the field of food production. Priority investment areas within the framework of the
guarantee include: dairy farms; meat poultry farming; intensive gardening; greenhouses; cultivation of
sugar beet and production of beet sugar; production of cereals; processing of vegetables and fruits;
production of vegetable oil and fat and oil products. The fund provides guarantees up to 50% on loans up
to KZT 3 billion (USD 7 265) at a rate of no more than 17% per annum, for a period of up to ten years. The
commission for guaranteeing is 30% of the amount of the guarantee, of which 29.9% is paid by the local
executive body and 0.1% is paid by the agricultural producer himself.
In April 2020, a special programme of concessional financing for agricultural producers leasing equipment
of Kazakh production “Made in Kazakhstan” was launched. Eligible producers can obtain loans with a 6%
per annum interest rate for up to ten years with a grace period of lease payments up to one year.
Kazakhstan is also making progress on its plan to design “BidayCoin”, a new crypto currency to help
traders and producers make payments directly. This is to avoid costly and delayed banking services. This
system will be connected with electronic warehouse receipts and other payments; for instance, for
subsidised fuel, fertilisers, insurance and other services.
In 2020, the method of calculating the regional allocation of payments for subsidising agriculture was
changed. Now the regional allocation of payments is calculated based on the region’s share in gross
agricultural output instead of its share in population. Moreover, in order to avoid diverting funds for other
purposes of the region's development, minimum expenditures will be set for supporting agriculture. In
addition, in order to avoid frequent changes to policy settings, the Ministry of Agriculture considers
introducing a law to retain the rules of the support measures included in the WTO classification in the
Green Box unchanged for five years.
Starting from June 2020, Kazakhstan reformed its crop insurance system from obligatory to voluntary
with a view to expand crop insurance markets in the country. The obligatory crop insurance, introduced in
2004 to provide producers of grain, oilseeds and other field crops with a minimum level of protection against
catastrophic climatic events, had not performed well and farmers complained that insurance payments did
not cover even minimal production costs (Broka et al., 2016[3]). The new voluntary insurance system is
established for both crops and livestock production and 50% of the insurance premium are subsidised by
the government. Moreover, the insurance policy will be accepted as additional collateral for loans. The
insurance contract, payment and other details will be administered electronically.


394 

Until 2020, insurance in animal husbandry was practically absent in Kazakhstan and livestock was insured
as property. Taking into account the current epizootic situation, so-called multi-risk insurance products
have been developed together with foreign reinsurers. Farmers can insure livestock against diseases and
other risks on the territory of their farm, as well as on the territory of neighbouring farms within a 5 km
radius. The risks include infectious and especially dangerous diseases, fire, malicious acts of third parties,
dangerous natural phenomena, as well as accidents – explosion, lightning strike, strangulation, animal
attack, snake or insect bite, traumatic injuries. In 2020, KZT 2.5 billion (USD 6 million) was allocated from
the state budget for livestock insurance support.
Within the framework of updating the 2021 State Programme, changes in the organisation and structure
of the government-owned financial institution KazAgro have been implemented in 2020 to address its poor
performance and duplicative functions between its subsidiaries. KazAgro has reduced the number of its
subsidiaries from seven to three: i) the Agrarian Credit Corporation (ACC) is in charge of loan programmes,
lending to commercial banks, credit and microcredit unions, and leasing companies; ii) the Fund for
Financial Support in Agriculture (FFSA) serves small and medium agribusiness and agricultural co-
operation; and iii) KazAgroFinance focuses on the leasing of machinery and equipment and no longer
provides credits. Within the framework of the Address of the President to the people of Kazakhstan on
1 September 2020, the two state financial development institutions “Baiterek” and “Kazagro” will be merged
in March 2021.
Kazakhstan continues to reform land use legislation towards providing more transparency to agricultural
land use and several amendments were made to the land regulations and laws in 2020. Some procedures
for the provision of land plots were simplified and new amendments would provide monthly public updates
of available land plots, which will be “sold” (i.e. the lease rights will be granted) at auctions or through
electronic bidding.
Also the regulation on unused land was updated. The updated law provides for: an accelerated process
for returning unused agricultural land into production; a 20-fold increase of base tax rates on unused
agricultural land; and the introduction of preventive monitoring of land use based on satellite data and
remote sensing. So far, unused land can be seized only through the courts and the procedure takes
between two and three years.
In 2020, the Ministry of Agriculture completed the creation of soil maps for 26 million hectares, geobotanical
maps for 25 million hectares and agricultural maps for 6.5 million hectares (or 3% of agricultural land). In
2021-22, coverage will be increased to 40 million hectares for soil and geobotanical maps and to
33.2 million hectares for agricultural maps. As part of the 2022-26 State Programme for the development
of the agro-industrial complex of the Republic of Kazakhstan it is planned to convert all the prepared maps
to digital form.
In 2021, Kazakhstan launched a large-scale programme to modernise the irrigation system,
KZT 274 billion (USD 663 million) were allocated for this purpose. Over the next two years, the
reconstruction of 6 785 kilometres of canals, 4 reservoirs, 4 hydroelectric complexes, 239 vertical drainage
wells and 23 000 other water facilities is foreseen. The implementation of the project will increase the
irrigated area by a total of 500 000 hectares (about 24% of land equipped for irrigation) in Almaty, Zhambyl,
Turkestan, Kyzylorda and Aktobe regions.
On the agricultural innovation system, the structure of subsidiaries of the National Agrarian Research
and Education Center NJSC was transformed in 2020 to make it more responsive to business needs.
Twenty-two centres for the dissemination of knowledge have been created and permanent consulting
centres have also been organised. Also, work is underway to ensure sufficient funding for agricultural
science. Funding of KZT 50.4 billion (USD 122 million) was approved to develop 36 scientific and technical
programmes in 10 priority areas of research (crop production, animal husbandry, veterinary medicine,
processing of agricultural raw materials, etc.) over the next three years.


 395

Starting from January 2020, the Ministry of Agriculture established a new type of subsidy to compensate
80% of the farmer’s expenses for purchasing services from Kazakhstani scientific and research
organisations. This subsidy is expected to facilitate the implementation of new and innovative technologies
in agriculture.
To modernise and increase productivity in agriculture, new technologies are introduced into the work of
agricultural facilities. For example, 49 “smart” farms have been created and projects are being
implemented to label agricultural products and create an electronic trading platform for selling agricultural
products.
In 2020, the Ministry of Agriculture carried out a large-scale work on digitalisation of public services and
industry-specific business processes. By the end of 2020, 94% of the public services and industry-specific
business processes are automated, and 34% of the Ministry’s services are provided in electronic format.
All application and distribution procedures of subsidies are 100% automated, as well as the processes of
registration of agricultural machinery, accreditation of procurement organisations and the work of the
commission to guarantee microcredits. Also, the Ministry of Agriculture has digitised the registration of
animals and farmers who participate in the breed transformation, carry out the selection and pedigree work.
An Import Substitution Council was set up in 2020 by the National Chamber of Entrepreneurs
(Atameken). Its main goal is to analyse the best practices used by the successful enterprises in the
manufacturing and agricultural sectors and to develop and submit to the government proposals for import
substitution. The Council will also focus on local content development, regulated procurement practices,
customs and tariff policies, technical regulations, mineral resources base expansion, infrastructure
development, government support mechanisms, industrial co-operation, sub-contractor development, and
other issues relating to development of the manufacturing sector. The Import Substitution Council consists
of representatives of the Kazakhstani business community and government agencies and organisations.
On food safety, due to the outbreak of bird flu, temporary restrictions on the import and transit of live
poultry and poultry products from the Russian Federation were introduced in early August and
September 2020. Also an amount of KZT 295.3 million (USD 0.7 million) was paid to compensate poultry
farmers for the cost of seized and destroyed sick birds.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The anti-crisis package entailed support of KZT 5.4 trillion (USD 13 billion) or 9% of GDP. Immediate policy
actions have included trade restrictions and regulated prices for socially-important goods, cash transfers
to vulnerable households, and targeted assistance to hard-hit sectors and small and medium-sized
enterprises, including a deferral of loan payments. Near- to medium-term plans include improving public
administration through civil service reform, enhancing competitiveness in priority sectors such as
agriculture, manufacturing and pharmaceutical, and adopting social policies to support the welfare of the
population.
In order to help carry out spring sowing in a timely manner, KZT 170 billion (more than USD 411 million)
worth of loans was allocated for farmers. Credit will be repayable at rates of 5-6% per annum, as opposed
to the 13-15% rates usually available on the open market. Furthermore, the government has pledged to
buy the output of agricultural producers six months in advance.
Agricultural producers were also eligible for new tax concessions, including 15% discounts on diesel fuel
and exemption from the land tax for agricultural land.
As part of its COVID-19 response, the value added tax (VAT) rate for food products was reduced (from
12% to 8%) and certain customs duties were eliminated through October 2020. Also payment of VAT tax
on imported cattle and breeding chicken was deferred.


396 

The government created a panel to set ceiling prices for socially important food products, such as flour,
bread, pasta, buckwheat, rice, beef, eggs and sunflower oil. Prices were set separately for each region
and a fine of up to KZT 530 200 (USD 1 283) was imposed if the maximum permissible level of retail prices
was exceeded.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
In 2020, a draft law on the ratification of the Agreement on measures aimed at unifying the selection and
breeding work with agricultural animals within the EAEU was presented to the Parliament. For the
development and implementation of innovative technologies in the field of livestock breeding and genomic
selection in the EAEU states, the Agreement provides for the establishment of a unified procedure for co-
ordination and analytical support of selection and breeding work in the field of livestock breeding.
In 2020, an agreement on a veterinary certificate for the export of meat, raw meat and offal of horses from
the Republic of Kazakhstan to Japan was reached.
As a member of the EAEU, efforts are on-going to harmonise veterinary and phytosanitary standards
with several export destinations, including the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”), Iran and
Saudi Arabia. Veterinary requirements are being harmonised for beef, sheep and camels, various varieties
of honey, and fish. In turn, work on phytosanitary requirements concerns flax, beans, peas, safflower,
melon seeds, alfalfa and oil cake. To date, protocols have been signed for the export to China of 19 types
of crop and livestock products, including wheat, flax seeds, barley, alfalfa, corn, wheat bran and feed,
rapeseed meal, wheat flour, honey, wool, dairy products, beef, lamb and pork.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
In late March 2020 Kazakhstan implemented a number of temporary export restrictions and bans for a
range of food commodities. In particular, wheat and wheat flour were subject to export quotas, while
buckwheat and many vegetable and oilseed products were prohibited for export while Kazakhstan
remained under an emergency situation related to COVID-19. The country’s state of emergency ended on
11 May and the restrictions were lifted on 1 June 2020. Also, there was a ban on exports of live cattle from
January 2020 until November 2020.
Contextual information
Kazakhstan has the ninth largest land area in the world and is one of the least densely populated countries.
It has the second-highest per-capita availability of arable land in the world. Kazakhstan is also an important
exporter of mineral fuels. The country is an upper middle-income economy and the richest country in
Central Asia, but its economy remains highly dependent on fluctuations in the oil and commodity markets.
An important bottleneck to Kazakhstan’s economic development is the state of infrastructure systems,
particularly in transport. The share of trade in GDP (26%) is substantially higher than the corresponding
value for all countries analysed in the report.
Although the contribution of agriculture to the economy has declined sharply over time, agriculture remains
an important pillar of economic development, contributing to about 4% of GDP and to 15% of total
employment. Approximately 75% of the country’s territory is suitable for agricultural production, but only
about 30% of the land is currently under agricultural production. Kazakhstan is one of the top ten grain
exporters in the world, exporting to over 70 countries. The country’s major crops are wheat, barley, cotton
and rice, with wheat exports a major source of foreign currency. Farmers raise sheep and cattle, and
livestock products include dairy goods, leather, meat and wool.


 397

The farm structure is dualistic: large-scale and often highly integrated operations dominate the grain sector,
while rural households produce the majority of beef and milk. Kazakhstan’s agriculture and mining sectors
are particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change, as increasingly frequent hot weather and severe
droughts threaten the availability of water.
Table 17.3. Kazakhstan: Contextual indicators

Kazakhstan
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
115
508
0.3%
0.4%
Population (million)
15
19
0.3%
0.4%
Land area (thousand km2)
2 700
2 700
3.2%
3.2%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
215 393
216 037
7.0%
7.1%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
6
7
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
7 734
27 444
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
37
26
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
8.1
4.5
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
36.6
15.8
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
2.0
5.8
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
0.7
9.9
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
56
55
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
44
44
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
14
14
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
The COVID-19 pandemic has hit the economy more than the crises in 2008 and 2015. In 2020, the
economy contracted by 3% and domestic demand fell sharply because of job losses and lower disposable
income (Azamat, 2020[4]). But unlike past recessions, the pandemic has hit severely retail, hospitality,
wholesale and transport sectors, which account for about 30% of total employment. Inflation has increased
during the coronavirus lockdown, primarily driven by a rise in food prices. Hoarding, driven by a fear of
supply disruptions associated with restrictions on movement, likely caused higher demand and boosted
food prices. Kazakhstan’s poverty rate are estimated to have increased up to 4% in 2020 from, equivalent
to 1.5 million additional poor people, with the most significant increase in the number of the poor expected
to be in rural areas (Azamat, 2020[4]).
Kazakhstan has been a net agro-food importer since the mid-2000s, yet is one of the world’s largest wheat
exporters. More than 60% of agro-food exports are in primary commodities, most of which go to processing.
More than 60% of agro-food imports are in processed commodities, the bulk of which are for final
consumption.


398 

Figure 17.5. Kazakhstan: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI and “Kazakhstan Economic Update”; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 17.6. Kazakhstan: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
The average annual TFP growth rate (the difference between the growth rate of total output and the growth
rate of total inputs) of 0.9% between 2007 and 2016 underscores the remaining gap to achieve productivity
growth rates similar to the world average. Output grew by 2.5% per year. Although the use of intermediate
input such as fertilisers and machinery increased faster than the output, the reduction of primary factors,
particularly the amount of labour employed in agriculture led to a small positive TFP growth.
Moreover, the negative average nutrient balances suggests that in the long term such trend could lead to
a decline in both soil fertility and productivity growth. Agriculture’s share of energy use declined
considerably between 1991-2000 and 2007-16. Agriculture’s share of GHG emissions remained
unchanged during the period and above the OECD average, a comparison that should be qualified by the
higher contribution of agriculture to the country’s GDP than the OECD average. The share of irrigated land
remains low at 0.9%. The share of agriculture in abstracted water has declined, but still remains much
higher than the OECD average.
-5
0
5
10
15
20
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
27
11
55
11
8
59
10
19
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


 399

Figure 17.7. Kazakhstan: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 17.4. Kazakhstan: Productivity and environmental indicators

Kazakhstan
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
6.1%
0.9%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
-14.4
-13.4
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
-2.7
-2.4
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
4.0
3.9
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
12.4
9.1
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
0.5
..
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
68.1
61.8
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
..
..
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


2.5%
0.5%
-1.3%
0.05%
0.9%
1.6%
-2.0%
-1.0%
0.0%
1.0%
2.0%
3.0%
4.0%
Kazakhstan
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


400 

References

Azamat, R. (2020), A Slow Recovery Through the COVID-19 Crisis in 2020: Kazakhstan-
Economic-Update, Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group,
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/792601609750238730/Kazakhstan-Economic-
Update-A-Slow-Recovery-Through-the-COVID-19-Crisis.
[4]
Baubekova, A., A. Tikhonova and A. Kvasha (2021), “Evolution of Agricultural Policy in
Kazakhstan”, in Kazakhstan’s Developmental Journey, Springer Singapore,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-6899-2_3.
[1]
Broka, S. et al. (2016), Kazakhstan Agricultural Sector Risk Assessment,
http://www.worldbank.org.
[3]
OECD (2013), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Kazakhstan 2013, OECD Review of
Agricultural Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264191761-en.
[2]



 401

Support to agriculture
Korea reduced its support to agriculture over the past thirty years. Producer support declined from 62.3%
of gross farm receipts in 1986-88 to 46.7% in 2018-20, still well above the OECD average. Potentially
most-distorting transfers dominate producer support, due to tariff rate quotas (TRQ) with high out-of-quota
tariffs. Since 2015, all import restrictions on agricultural products apply in the form of tariffs and TRQs.
Transfers to specific commodities, mainly due to market price support (MPS), represented 90% of total
support to farmers in 2018-20.1 MPS is also the main component of single commodity transfers (SCT).
The share of SCT in commodity gross farm receipts is over 60% for soybeans, red pepper, garlic, barley
and rice.
Most remaining producer support goes towards direct payment programmes, agricultural insurance
scheme and subsidies based on input use. Initial expenditure in 2020 on a new direct payment programme
affected the level of support.
General services expenditures (GSSE) amounted to 12% of agricultural value-added in 2018-20, well
above the OECD average. Of this, 80% went to the knowledge and innovation system, and the
development and maintenance of infrastructure. Total support to agriculture (TSE) declined from 7.6% of
GDP in 1986-88 to 1.5% in 2018-20, a proportion that remains much higher than the OECD average.
Recent policy changes
A new direct payment scheme that integrates former direct payment programmes for rice, upland crops
and less-favoured areas began in 2020. Due to this reform, rice payments are now based on historical
entitlements and decoupled from current production. The scheme also reinforces environmental cross-
compliance requirements.
The 2050 Carbon Neutral Strategy of Korea, a long-term plan for greenhouse gas (GHG) emission
mitigation, was released in December 2020. It includes a national vision for GHG emission reduction and
a strategic plan for agriculture, such as transition to smart farming, development of low-carbon agricultural
practices and scaling-up of eco-friendly energy deployment.
Policy measures were implemented to attract young people to rural areas and to foster female farmers.
These include facilitating the application of digital technology to the sector, providing education and training
services, and expanding rural infrastructure. The 5th Master Plan for Fostering Female Farmers 2020-25
was also announced in 2020.
The government continues to promote advanced technologies to improve competitiveness in the
agricultural sector. The Smart Agriculture Project includes construction of the Smart Farm Innovation
Valleys that implement related policies including education for youth and demonstration of technology and
equipment.
18 Korea


402 

In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the government provided emergency loans with concessional
interest rates to farming households to address liquidity problems. Leasing fees for agricultural machinery
and equipment were also subsidised on a temporary basis. To address the shortage of seasonal migrant
workers in rural areas, the government alleviated visa regulations and increased the number of local job-
matching centres. Also, efforts were made to respond to shifts in consumer demand, such as finding
alternative distribution channels, launching nationwide promotion campaigns (for horticultural and
floricultural products), and providing vouchers for local market purchases.
Assessment and recommendations

The agricultural sector faces a declining and ageing farm population, and pressures to improve
productivity and meet societal demands such as the preservation of natural resources and the
environment. Despite reforms, some agricultural policies still do not align with these objectives.
The high level of support to producers, 2.6 times the OECD average, is dominated by market price
support that distorts producers’ decision-making, has potential to harm the environment and natural
resources, and hinders agricultural innovation and the sector’s capacity to adapt to climate change.

Reforms of direct payments were finalised in 2020 and integrated the rice income compensation
programme, which had been the most significant direct payment in Korea, into a new scheme. This
is important to reducing market distortion through less commodity-specific support and
diversification of agricultural production. Detailed policy measures and monitoring systems at the
local level are required to facilitate farm-level implementation of the new scheme.

Environmentally-friendly agriculture and preserving the ecosystem should become priorities to
assure agricultural sustainability. The 2050 Carbon Neutral Strategy (2020) and the Climate
Change Response Plan 2020-40 (2019) establish roadmaps for GHG emission reduction and
climate change adaptation. Specific policy instruments need to be developed for the agricultural
sector to achieve these targets. Further efforts are needed to reduce nutrient surpluses by
improving animal waste management, and to manage irrigation water use in a sustainable way.

Despite the latest policy measures to attract more people to the rural sector, the lack of young and
skilled workers in agriculture, and the widening income gap remain key obstacles. Further efforts
to develop rural infrastructure, create employment opportunities, facilitate social security payments
for aged farmers wanting to exit the sector, and diversify income sources are needed to address
labour shortage and low-income issues.

Korea continues to promote digital technology through its “Smart Agriculture project”. Although
public investment in agricultural research and development (R&D) has grown over time, the
government-led R&D scheme could still address the various needs of stakeholders. Private-sector
investment and participation need to be strengthened to establish a more competitive, demand-
driven R&D system.

With swift policy responses to COVID-19, Korea avoided extensive lockdowns and limited
economic damage to the agro-food industry. Nevertheless, economic recession and weaknesses
in demand are likely to affect production, investment and employment in the sector. Furthermore,
as this pandemic may bring long-term changes in production and consumption of agro-food
products, the focus of policy or budget expenditure will need to change with market trends.


 403

Figure 18.1. Korea: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/v5ie1m
Figure 18.2. Korea: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/0mbicg
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
1.0%
2.0%
3.0%
4.0%
5.0%
6.0%
7.0%
8.0%
9.0%
TSE as % GDP
1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
-4%
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD


404 

Figure 18.3. Korea: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/9qu0vt


0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Red peppers
Garlic
Chinese cabbage
Eggs
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Soybeans
Rice
Barley
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 405

Table 18.1. Korea: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
16 985
26 360
43 495
45 493
42 633
42 357
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
74.3
63.3
60.9
60.4
60.8
61.7
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
17 247
33 199
60 191
63 367
59 280
57 928
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
10 682
14 461
21 383
23 038
19 616
21 495
Support based on commodity output
10 562
13 500
19 096
20 837
17 772
18 679
Market Price Support1
10 562
13 500
19 096
20 837
17 772
18 679
Positive Market Price Support
10 562
13 500
19 096
20 837
17 772
18 679
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
90
470
574
603
571
547
Based on variable input use
29
207
222
278
193
196
with input constraints
4
34
45
46
44
46
Based on fixed capital formation
57
246
175
185
198
142
with input constraints
0
18
37
34
37
41
Based on on-farm services
4
17
176
141
180
209
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
29
490
564
813
540
338
Based on Receipts / Income
29
292
76
70
78
80
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
198
488
743
462
258
with input constraints
0
160
35
41
37
28
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
1 150
785
733
1 931
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
1 150
785
733
1 931
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
1
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
1
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
62.3
52.6
46.7
48.3
44.1
47.6
Producer NPC (coeff.)
2.50
1.97
1.68
1.72
1.62
1.71
Producer NAC (coeff.)
2.65
2.11
1.88
1.93
1.79
1.91
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
1 066
2 676
3 754
4 025
4 001
3 236
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
67
243
883
912
869
868
Inspection and control
26
126
320
355
316
289
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
467
1 811
2 133
2 354
2 314
1 730
Marketing and promotion
0
26
38
40
37
38
Cost of public stockholding
505
471
380
364
465
311
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
8.9
15.6
14.9
14.9
16.9
13.1
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-10 147
-15 369
-24 791
-26 948
-23 597
-23 829
Transfers to producers from consumers
-10 015
-12 809
-17 402
-18 973
-16 375
-16 859
Other transfers from consumers
-205
-2 653
-7 424
-8 012
-7 257
-7 003
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
73
93
35
37
35
33
Excess feed cost
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-59.0
-46.1
-41.2
-42.6
-39.8
-41.2
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
2.45
1.86
1.70
1.74
1.66
1.70
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
2.44
1.85
1.70
1.74
1.66
1.70
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
11 821
17 230
25 172
27 100
23 653
24 764
Transfers from consumers
10 220
15 462
24 826
26 985
23 632
23 862
Transfers from taxpayers
1 805
4 421
7 770
8 127
7 278
7 905
Budget revenues
-205
-2 653
-7 424
-8 012
-7 257
-7 003
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
7.6
2.9
1.5
1.6
1.4
1.5
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
1 258
3 731
6 076
6 264
5 881
6 084
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
209
294
294
292
295
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
812.03
1 224.03
1 148.54
1 100.19
1 165.29
1 180.13
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Korea are: barley, garlic, red pepper, Chinese cabbage,
rice, soybean, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




406 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Korea’s agricultural sector experienced a number of structural changes in a short period, concurrent with
rapid industrialisation and associated economic growth. From the 1950s to the 1970s, the government
concentrated primarily on increasing crop productivity and achieving self-sufficiency in staple foods,
particularly rice.
Through the late 1980s and the 1990s, policy objectives were to restructure the sector and improve its
competitiveness, in line with the opening of agricultural markets. With progressive liberalisation of
agriculture and food markets, agricultural policies in Korea adopted more diverse objectives, ranging from
enhancing productivity to improving long-term agricultural sustainability. Rapid growth and industrialisation
led to income disparity between farm and urban households.
Since the first post-2000 decade, emphasis shifted to a broader set of objectives, such as vitalising the
rural economy, expanding the export market, enhancing the environmental performance of agriculture and
promoting the food industry. Moreover, multilateral and bilateral trade agreements required progressive
structural adjustments in the agricultural sector. During the late 1990s and 2000s, non-tariff trade measures
on agricultural products gradually converted to tariffs and TRQs, except for rice as agreed in the Uruguay
Round Agreement on Agriculture. In January 2015, by a tariff scheme also replaced non-tariff measures
on rice (OECD, 2018[1]).
Table 18.2. Korea: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1970s
Relatively closed economy
Policy focus on productivity and self-sufficiency
Price supports and government procurement programme for crops
Subsidies for inputs (including fertiliser, seeds)
1980-1990
Exposure of domestic producers to open market
Structural adjustment programmes
Tariff and non-tariff measures replaced by tariffs and tariff rate quotas (except
for rice)
Government procurement programme for crops
Direct payment programmes (early retirement payments from 1997)
Agricultural insurance scheme (from 1997)
2000-present
Responding to changing market demands
Diversified policy objectives
Tariffs and tariff rate quotas
Tariff concession through Free Trade Agreements
Public stockholding scheme for major staple crops
Direct payment programme for rice (2005-2019)
Direct payment scheme reformed (from 2020)
Environment-friendly agricultural programmes
Despite a decline in support to farmers as a share of gross farm receipts, Korea’s level remains much
higher than the OECD average. Market price support is a dominant component of total support to
agriculture. The share of the MPS in total support shows only a moderate decrease during the last three
decades (Figure 18.4). The share of support for general services slightly increased over the same period.


 407

Figure 18.4. Korea: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The Framework Act on Agriculture, Rural Community and Food Industry enacted in 2007 sets Korea’s
agricultural policy framework. It requires the government to establish a national policy plan every five years.
The most recent plan, for 2018-22, includes four main policy objectives: (1) strengthening farmers’ income
safety net; (2) promoting innovation for sustainable agriculture; (3) enhancing food safety in the supply
chain; and (4) improving rural welfare.
The public stockholding scheme for rice, known as the Public Storage System for Emergencies, was
established in 2005. One of its objectives is to guarantee food security in times of natural disaster, or during
a temporary shortage due to mismatching supply and demand. Under the scheme, the government
purchases rice from farmers at market price during harvest season and releases the stocks at market
prices when necessary. The government has a similar purchasing programme for soybeans.
Several direct payment programmes operate in Korea, including the early retirement payment, a payment
scheme to promote environment-friendly production and payments for rural landscape conservation. The
income compensation scheme for rice, which had been the main payment scheme in Korea, was integrated
into a new direct payment scheme.
An agricultural disaster insurance scheme protects farmers against losses in crop yield and livestock in
the form of insurance premium subsidies. The government also implemented a pilot project for agricultural
revenue insurance for specific crops.
To promote rural development and sustain livelihoods in rural areas, the government provides support for
people who move to farm villages and join agriculture activities. Support services assist with relocation or
housing, and education and training programmes for farming. Also, incentives attract the younger
population to rural areas.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


408 

The government increased investment in information and communication technologies (ICT) via its “Smart
Agriculture Project”. The programme emphasises the use of digital technologies at farm level, including
use of big data, artificial intelligence technology and real-time monitoring of crop growth information. The
government expects digital technology to improve predictability and mitigate volatility, increasing
agricultural productivity and reducing production costs.
Tariffs and TRQs continue to be the main trade policy measures applied to agriculture in Korea. In-quota
rates range from 0% to 50% with out-of-quota rates between 9% and 887%. A TRQ volume of rice
(408 700 tonnes, corresponding to about 10.7% of annual rice consumption) is maintained at a 5% tariff
rate (the out-of-quota tariff is 513%).
Korea engages in seventeen bilateral and regional Free Trade Agreements (FTA). Some include significant
tariff concessions for livestock and fruit products, but rice is excluded from tariff concessions in existing
FTAs. Import tariffs on beef from the United States, Australia and Canada are being eliminated over a
15-year period since the entry into force of their respective FTAs (March 2012 with the United States,
December 2014 with Australia, and January 2015 with Canada). Tariffs on pork meat from the European
Union, the United States and Chile are being phased out over 10 years, and on pork meat from Canada
over 13 years. Tariffs on chicken meat from the United States and the European Union are being abolished
by tariff line over a period of 10 to 13 years after the respective FTAs came into effect.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
A new direct payment system, which combines the direct payments for rice, upland crops and less
favoured areas into one scheme, was launched in 2020. The income compensation scheme for rice was
turned into a decoupled payment programme primarily based on historical entitlements and accompanied
by environmental cross compliance regulations through a reform. The action plans, legislation and budget
allocation, which accompanied the launch of this new scheme, were finalised during 2019-20. The
reformed scheme entered into force and was applied to farmers in 2020 (Korean Government, 2021[2]).
Given the labour shortage in Korea’s rural areas, strengthening capacity of youth and women is one of the
key policy concerns. To attract young labour force, financial support (targeted loan or fund), and farmland
lease are provided to young farmers. At the same time, the government expands investment in education
and training services. In December 2020, a five-year action plan for fostering women farmers was
announced. Its objective is to enhance women’s empowerment in rural community by promoting
participation in business and leadership (Korean Government, 2020[3]).
The coverage of the agriculture insurance has been expanded in 2020 adding walnuts, red beans,
barley, spinach, and apricots. To better deal with damages caused by natural disasters and to reduce the
fiscal and administrative burden of the increased coverage, efforts to develop various insurance products,
adjust the insurance subsidy rate, and avoid moral hazard of farmers are ongoing.
The government has focused on preventative measures and monitoring on animal diseases since the first
domestic outbreak of African Swine Fever (ASF) in 2019. Government measures include culling of animals,
restrictions on transportation of pig and excreta, extensive disinfection around affected areas, strengthened
inspection of animal farms, and nationwide informational campaigns.
The Smart Agriculture Project aims at improving the application of advanced technologies in the sector,
as well as attracting young and innovative farmers. Young farmers can benefit from leasing of agricultural
facilities and farmlands in the smart farm complexes. Furthermore, the government plans to conduct a
cross-sectoral research and development (R&D) to develop future technologies available for these smart
farms.
In December 2020, the government released the 2050 Carbon Neutral Strategy of the Republic of
Korea representing a long-term plan for greenhouse gas (GHG) emission mitigation. This plan includes a


 409

national vision and strategic initiatives for achieving the GHG emission reduction target.2 The strategy sets
out four tasks for the agricultural sector: transition to smart farming; development and deployment of low-
carbon agricultural practices; promotion of participatory policies for farmers and consumers; scaling-up of
eco-friendly energy deployment (Korean Government, 2020[4]).
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The government has offered emergency funding to farming households to address liquidity problems. As
part of this initiative, farm households may benefit from low interest loans at favourable payment schedules.
Leasing fees for agricultural machinery and equipment also temporarily decreased. Farmers and
wholesalers in horticulture and floriculture, which have been among the most affected, benefitted from
additional budgetary support, for instance, via the lowering wholesale transaction fees or rents, and
increasing public procurement.
To address shortages of migrant seasonal workers, the government implemented policy measures to
increase the sector’s attractiveness and reduce short-term mismatch of the labour force. Visa regulations
were temporarily alleviated so that foreign visitors or migrant workers from other industries could work in
the agricultural sector. The number of local agriculture job-matching centres increased to attract more
seasonal workers and volunteer workers.
Restaurants, food service providers and catering companies have been severely affected by social
distancing and school closures. To facilitate the purchase of agro-food products and ease companies’
liquidity constraints, the government expanded funds for these companies with further lowered interest
rates. The companies are also encouraged to maintain employment through salary and expense subsidies.
As public catering companies were key consumers of organic products, organic producers have been
encouraged to find alternative distribution channels. Efforts have been made to sell directly to final
consumers via online and other channels. Active co-operation with local governments and agricultural co-
operatives have also been undertaken. In addition, the government purchased organic products and
provided packaged fruits and vegetables to self-quarantined people, pregnant women, and low-income
families.
To recover the consumption level of horticultural and floricultural products, promotion campaigns have
been rolled out at the national level through online and offline platforms. Both private and public sectors,
including large companies, the central and local governments and public institutions, participated in the
campaign.
In addition, various measures have been taken to promote domestic consumption and assure food
security: providing vouchers for local market purchases; monitoring food stocks; and ensuring food
accessibility for low-income households.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
The WTO verification procedures regarding a tariff on imported rice were finalised in January 2020. As a
result, the tariff rate of 513% on rice was confirmed, and a TRQ of 408 700 tonnes is maintained with a 5%
tariff rate. Taking imported volumes during the 2015-17 reference period, 388 700 tonnes were allocated
to five countries in 2020 (157 195 tonnes for the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”),
132 304 tonnes for the United States, 55 112 tonnes for Viet Nam, 28 494 tonnes for Thailand, and
15 595 tonnes for Australia). Korea Agro-Fisheries and Food Trade Corporation, a state trading enterprise,
is in charge of managing the rice TRQ.
A new FTA with the United Kingdom has entered into force in January 2021. FTAs with Israel, Indonesia,
and RCEP,3 which were concluded in 2019-20, are under domestic ratification process. RCEP is the
world’s largest FTA and will lead Korea to further open up its agricultural sector. This could pose both a


410 

challenge and also an opportunity to the sector. It is expected to improve market access for some Korean
agricultural products (for example, apples, strawberries, and some liquor).
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19
Given constrained air freight services and increase in transportation cost, the government maintained the
existing export subsidies in 2020 and also helped exporters to find alternative export markets by providing
market information.
Contextual information
Korea’s economy has been growing rapidly over the last two decades led by growth in international trade.
Trade represented 32% of GDP in 2019, twice the average of the countries covered in this report. In
contrast, the share of agriculture in GDP fell from 4.3% to 1.8%, and the share of agricultural employment
declined from 10.6% to 5.1% during the period of 2000-18. Although the proportion of the agricultural sector
in total exports slightly increased, Korea still remains a large importer of agricultural products.
Crop production accounted for 60% of the total value of agricultural production in 2019. There has been a
significant change in its composition since 2000, due to a change of dietary pattern and diversification of
production towards livestock and high value products (Table 18.3).
Table 18.3. Korea: Contextual indicators

Korea
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
872
2 231
2.2%
2.0%
Population (million)
47
52
1.1%
1.0%
Land area (thousand km2)
96
98
0.1%
0.1%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
1 973
1 652
0.1%
0.1%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
473
521
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
18 551
43 143
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
29
32
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
4.3
1.8
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
10.6
5.1
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
0.9
1.3
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.2
5.5
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
75
60
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
25
40
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
87
83
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and related disruptions, GDP in Korea, while less
affected than in many other countries, declined by 1% in 2020. Nonetheless, both the level of
unemployment and inflation have remained low. As an export-oriented economy, Korea is vulnerable to
weaknesses in foreign demand and to disruptions in global value chains. In response to COVID-19, a


 411

range of policy measures limited the damage to domestic economy, but further global recession is likely to
affect investment and employment (OECD, 2020[5]) (Figure 18.5).
Korea is one of the largest net agro-food importers in the world. While over 85% of agro-food exports are
products for final consumption, about half of imports are destined for further processing by the Korean
industry. Key imported agricultural commodities include maize, soybeans and wheat for animal feed
(Figure 18.6).
Figure 18.5. Korea: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 18.6. Korea: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
At 1.2% per year, total factor productivity (TFP) growth in Korea was slightly lower than the global average
over the period of 2007-16. TFP growth offset the declining use of primary factors, resulting in output to
remain largely unchanged (Figure 18.7).
The level of nutrient surplus per hectare has declined over the past two decades. However, average
nitrogen and phosphorus surpluses are still well above OECD averages, partly due to intensive livestock
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
9
21
45
65
25
5
20
9
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


412 

production. The share of agriculture in water withdrawal remains high compared to the OECD average,
related to the fact that rice paddy fields account for more than 50% of agricultural land area, and water
stress has been increasing and remains high compared to other OECD countries (Table 18.4).
Figure 18.7. Korea: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 18.4. Korea: Productivity and environmental indicators

Korea
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
3.5%
1.2%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
254.0
212.2
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
50.3
45.9
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.9
0.9
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
4.2
2.9
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
45.4
42.8
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
53.4
50.3
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
27.1
30.8
9.3
8.5
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


0.1%
0.5%
-1.2%
0.05%
1.2%
1.6%
-1.5%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
Korea
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


 413

References

Korean Government (2021), 2021 policy plan of MAFRA.
[2]
Korean Government (2020), 2050 Carbon Neutral Strategy of the Republic of Korea,
https://www.mofa.go.kr/www/brd/m_4080/down.do?brd_id=235&seq=370841&data_tp=A&file
_seq=3.
[4]
Korean Government (2020), Basic plan for women farmers 2021-25.
[3]
OECD (2020), OECD economic survey: Korea (Overview),
https://www.oecd.org/economy/surveys/korea-2020-OECD-economic-survey-overview.pdf.
[5]
OECD (2018), Innovation, Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability in Korea, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264307773-en.
[1]



Notes
1 The method for extrapolating total MPS for the agricultural sector from commodity-specific estimates was
revised for Korea this year, as for other countries in the 2020 edition of this report. Commodities are now
split in two groups: those for which imports are governed by TRQs, and those to which no TRQs apply.
Consequently, time series for total MPS and PSE were revised.
2 The National Roadmap for the reduction of GHG emissions (October 2019) set a target to reduce the
GHG emissions by 37% from the BAU level by 2030, which is 24% lower than the 2017 level.
3 Korea, 10 ASEAN member countries, China, Japan, India, Australia, New Zealand.



414 

Support to agriculture
Mexico’s average producer support estimate for 2018-20 was 10% of gross farm receipts, about half the
OECD average. Around 50% of total transfers to producers were in the form of market price support (MPS)
through price regulations and border measures. Sugar and poultry meat had the highest MPS at 44% of
total MPS. While trade liberalisation and domestic policy reforms in the 1990s led to considerable reduction
in the most production- and trade-distorting support, MPS increased again after 2016.
Other important forms of support are based on electricity use, direct payments based on area and
payments for afforestation and agroforestry.
General services expenditures (GSSE) represented 1% of agriculture’s value-added and 8% of the
agriculture’s total support estimate (TSE), lower than the OECD average. Most of those expenditures are
directed to agricultural technical institutes and vocational agricultural schools (50%), and inspection and
control activities (20%).
Total support to agriculture in Mexico was 0.6% of GDP in 2018-20, similar to the OECD average.
Taxpayers provide 65% of these transfers, the remaining 35% coming from consumers.
Recent policy changes
In June 2020, the Mexican government published the Sectoral Programme for Agriculture and Rural
Development 2019-2024, which guides implementation of the National Development Plan during those
years. The Sectoral Programme focuses on three objectives: (1) improve agricultural productivity for food
self-sufficiency, (2) reduce poverty rates in rural areas and (3) increase small-scale agricultural producers’
incomes.
The Mexican Ministry for Agriculture and Rural Development (SADER) targeted beneficiaries of area-
based payments (Production for Wellbeing) to focus on producers with less than 20 hectares and those in
marginalised indigenous communities in the country’s south-eastern states. The guaranteed minimum
prices programme now includes medium-size maize producers with 5 to 50 hectares.
The Marketing Support Program of the Agency for Marketing Services and Market Development
(ASERCA), which provided support for the purchase of financial instruments related to price volatility and
contractual agricultural schemes, was dismantled. Support for financial instruments (price hedging,
insurance and contractual agriculture) was suspended. Several programmes supporting livestock
production and rural development were also dismantled.
SADER and the Ministry of the Environment and Natural Resources (SEMARNAT) are developing the
National Strategy for the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Pollinators (ENCUSP) to promote
conservation of pollinators and valuate the ecosystem services they provide.
19 Mexico


 415

Policy responses to COVID-19 included:

Expanding by 200 000 the number of beneficiaries of the Sowing Life programme that distributes
payments, plants and inputs for agroforestry projects to producers with incomes below the poverty
line.

SADER collaborated with the members of productive chains to make sure food supply, inventories
and distribution are not disrupted. Particular attention was given to key chains such as grains,
horticulture, poultry, beef, fisheries and aquaculture. Digitalisation services were expanded to
speed up food imports. Up to 60% of administrative import is now done remotely by the Centre for
Documentation and Judgement (CDD) of the National Service for Health, Safety and Agri-food
Quality (SENASICA).

Government recommendation to reinforce hygiene inspection systems in food production units and
encourage consumers to follow hygiene practices when handling and preparing food.
Assessment and recommendations

Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, Mexico made progress in reducing the most-distorting forms of
support, including market price support, and payments based on outputs and on the unconstrained
use of variable inputs. Nevertheless, these forms of support have increased since 2016, accounting
for 62% of total support to producers and 6% of gross farm receipts by 2018-20. These measures
keep farmers in uncompetitive activities, harm the environment, stifle innovation, slow structural
and inter-generational change, and weaken resilience. Mexico should consider phasing out price
regulations for sugar cane, border measures and payments based on electricity consumption, and
continue efforts to re-orient payments to schemes targeting those in need.

Mexico has advanced on reorienting its payment schemes to focus on those in need and on the
provision of public goods. In particular, modifications made to area-based payments (Production
for Wellbeing), focused on producers with less than 20 hectares and those in marginalised
indigenous communities in the south-eastern states, are useful for improved targeting. The Sowing
Life programme was implemented in 2019 to support agroforestry projects led by small farmers
(with 2.5 hectares of available land) located in poor municipalities.

Despite these efforts, improvements to current programmes are needed to ensure they deliver on
their intended objectives. Eligibility for the Sowing Life programme needs to be reviewed so as to
reduce farmers’ incentives to deforest their parcels in order to be considered for the programme.

The majority of strategic programmes introduced by the current government in 2019 – in-kind loans
to livestock producers, guaranteed minimum prices for small-scale producers and transfers to
fertiliser consumption – target poor farmers. These can become costly and inefficient measures for
helping small-scale and poor farmers, and have negative effects on the environment. For example,
distributing fertiliser without consideration for soil needs can threaten water and air quality if applied
beyond what is required.

Transitioning to schemes that promote agrobiodiversity by using local plant genetic resources (one
of the main ecosystem services that small-scale farmers in poor areas provide) could be more cost-
effective for helping poor farmers and increase the resilience of agricultural systems and the
genetic diversity of plants. More broadly, conditioning payments on the implementation of
sustainable farming could reduce the sector’s environmental impact.

Investments in general services, mainly related to infrastructure, remain low, at 1.4% of
agriculture’s value-added. These are crucial for improving the sector’s performance and creating
an enabling environment. In particular, the sector would benefit from investments in price and
weather information systems, agricultural knowledge transfer and research and development.


416 

Support to promote producer associations, market promotion, and access for small-scale and poor
farmers could also help overcome barriers related to scale.

While the share of agriculture in Mexico’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions has decreased since
2000, it remains high relative to other OECD countries. Mexico’s agriculture GHG emissions target
of 8% below business-as-usual in 2030 (compared to an overall reduction target of 22%) can
improve the sector´s environmental performance and contribute to global mitigation efforts.
However, support and financing have been reduced since 2018 for the main strategies to achieve
the target, such as increased use of biodigesters in livestock farms as well as conserving and
restoring grasslands.
Figure 19.1. Mexico: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/k2ptur


0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
TSE as % GDP
1991-93
2000-02
2018-20


 417

Figure 19.2. Mexico: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/apveqt
Figure 19.3. Mexico: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/3fpdbh


-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Coffee
Dried beans
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Soybeans
Rice
Sorghum
Maize
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


418 

Table 19.1. Mexico: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1991-93
2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
28 112
31 345
58 059
56 971
60 121
57 086
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
68.3
66.3
61.1
61.7
60.8
60.8
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
28 196
34 362
68 469
67 620
71 930
65 858
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
9 144
8 539
6 161
6 377
6 374
5 731
Support based on commodity output
7 698
6 282
3 330
3 294
3 563
3 134
Market Price Support1
7 646
5 967
3 178
3 208
3 321
3 006
Positive Market Price Support
7 693
5 999
3 178
3 208
3 321
3 006
Negative Market Price Support
-47
-32
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
52
315
152
86
242
129
Payments based on input use
1 443
953
1 481
2 287
1 391
766
Based on variable input use
746
349
507
565
544
413
with input constraints
0
0
1
0
3
0
Based on fixed capital formation
545
362
753
1 411
636
213
with input constraints
0
4
252
611
122
23
Based on on-farm services
152
241
221
311
211
139
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
3
137
116
266
81
0
Based on Receipts / Income
0
59
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
3
78
116
266
81
0
with input constraints
0
0
29
84
3
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
535
531
577
499
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
1 167
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
1 167
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
698
0
762
1 332
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
698
0
762
1 332
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
30.9
25.2
10.1
10.6
10.1
9.6
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.41
1.26
1.06
1.06
1.06
1.06
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.45
1.34
1.11
1.12
1.11
1.11
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
1 048
621
523
535
485
549
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
288
304
348
359
355
331
Inspection and control
0
102
83
108
80
60
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
284
112
82
44
46
157
Marketing and promotion
83
103
10
25
5
0
Cost of public stockholding
392
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
9.5
6.5
7.5
7.2
6.8
8.5
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-7 013
-5 520
-2 129
-1 824
-2 099
-2 463
Transfers to producers from consumers
-7 668
-5 893
-2 434
-2 305
-2 374
-2 622
Other transfers from consumers
-396
-124
0
0
0
0
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
852
348
305
481
275
158
Excess feed cost
199
149
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-25.6
-16.3
-3.1
-2.7
-2.9
-3.7
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.40
1.21
1.04
1.04
1.03
1.04
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.35
1.19
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.04
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
11 044
9 508
6 989
7 394
7 134
6 438
Transfers from consumers
8 064
6 017
2 434
2 305
2 374
2 622
Transfers from taxpayers
3 376
3 616
4 555
5 089
4 760
3 817
Budget revenues
-396
-124
0
0
0
0
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
2.6
1.3
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
3 398
3 541
3 811
4 186
3 813
3 432
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.8
0.5
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
GDP deflator (1991-93=100)
100
396
946
918
948
973
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
3.08
9.49
19.93
19.18
19.22
21.40
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Mexico are: wheat, maize, barley, sorghum, coffee,
dried beans, tomatoes, rice, soybean, sugar, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




 419

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Significant reforms to price support began in the late 1980s and continue to the present. In 1988–89,
guaranteed prices for wheat, sorghum, barley, rice and oilseeds were eliminated, but maintained for maize
and beans.
After the enactment of NAFTA in 1994, guaranteed prices for maize and beans were phased out and
replaced by a new system of direct income support payments (PROCAMPO) based on historic cultivated
crop area. The government withdrew from procurement and marketing except for beans and maize
(although the government sharply reduced its involvement in these crops). Input subsidies for seeds,
fertiliser, pesticides, machinery and diesel fuel were reduced, but the input subsidy for electricity to pump
groundwater still remains. During trade liberalisation, subsidies for financial instruments to reduce financial
risks (price hedge instruments) were also put in place.
Another shift took place in 2018 to re-direct most payments to small- and medium-scale farmers located in
poor rural areas. Some programmes that operated before the 1990s were reinstated, such as minimum
guaranteed prices for staple crops and fertiliser subsidies. The PROCAMPO programme was renamed
Production for Wellbeing and reformed to provide support only to small- and medium-scale farmers with
particular focus on those located in poor communities. Furthermore, price hedge subsidies were
dismantled.
Table 19.2. Mexico: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1990s
Import substitution model
Agricultural tariffs and import quotas
Minimum prices for staple food (maize, rice, beans, wheat, etc.)
State food marketing enterprise (CONASUPO)
Subsidies for inputs (fertilisers, seeds, electricity for water pumps)
Preferential credit
1990-2018
Trade liberalisation
Dismantling of tariffs on agricultural products (except sugar)
Dismantling of state marketing enterprise
Elimination of input subsidies (except electricity for water pumps)
Elimination of minimum prices
Reforms to land tenure
NAFTA and other FTAs signed
Creation of direct payment to farmers (PROCAMPO)
Insurance and price hedge subsidies
2018- present
Reforms
Guaranteed minimum prices on staples (maize, beans, wheat)
Direct payment to small- and medium-size producers
Preferential credit
Electricity subsidies
Fertiliser subsidies
Until the early 2000s, producer support comprised mostly market price support. The share of market price
support then declined while that of budgetary support grew, until 2016 when market price support and
input-based support again became the largest components of producer support.


420 

Figure 19.4. Mexico: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2020

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Five-year sectoral programmes guide agricultural support policies in Mexico. The strategic guidelines of
the Sectoral Programme for Agriculture and Rural Development 2019-2024 focus on three objectives:
(1) improve agricultural productivity for food self-sufficiency, (2) bring down poverty rates in rural areas and
(3) increase small-scale agricultural producers’ incomes.
Mexican agricultural policy focuses on three main programmes: (1) guaranteed prices for small-scale
farmers, (2) payments based on area and (3) fertiliser programmes. Except for payments based on area,
the programmes are new and covered in the “Domestic policy developments 2020-21” section.
Guaranteed minimum prices are granted to maize, beans, wheat, milk and rice producers. Guaranteed
prices are set at levels above market prices. Eligibility criteria vary by commodity but mainly support small-
and medium-size producers of maize (up to 5 or up to 30 hectares, respectively), beans (up to 30 rain-fed
hectares or 5 irrigable hectares) and milk (up to 100 dairy cows). LICONSA, a state enterprise, purchases
beans, maize and milk from small producers and also processes and distributes milk at subsidised prices.
Under this programme, small-scale maize producers are eligible for a transportation subsidy. For wheat
and rice producers, SEGALMEX (Mexican Food Security) pays the difference between the reference and
guaranteed prices, while for medium-scale maize producers, support is provided for the purchase of risk
management instruments. The reference price is calculated as the sum of the average future price of maize
published in the Chicago Board of Trade, converted to Mexican pesos using Banco de Mexico’s published
average exchange rate, and a commercialisation fee determined by SEGALMEX. In all cases, there are
limits to the support a single farmer can receive.
The Production for Wellbeing programme focuses on area-based payments that target small and medium
producers, including from indigenous communities. Payment rates decrease with farm size and differ by
product (Table 19.3).
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 421

Table 19.3. “Production for Wellbeing” payment rates
Producer type
Area
Payment per ha
Small producers
Up to 5 rain-fed ha
MXN 2 000 (USD 100)
Medium producers
Between 5 and 20 rain-fed ha or Up to 5 irrigated ha
MXN 1 200 (USD 61)
Coffee producers
No limit
MXN 6 200 (USD 314)
Sugar cane producers
No limit
MXN 7 300 (USD 367)
Source: Reglas de Operación del Programa Producción para el Bienestar de la Secretaría de Agricultura y Desarrollo Rural para el ejercicio
fiscal 2021, Diario Oficial de la República Mexicana, Mexico, 28/12/2020.
The Fertiliser Programme grants support to producers of maize, beans or rice holding no more than three
hectares located in highly marginalised localities in the state of Guerrero. Up to 450 kg of fertiliser per
hectare can be granted per producer each year.
SADER implements sanitary and phytosanitary measures for early detection of pests and diseases. This
programme supports inspection and monitoring projects of sanitary risks, control and prevention of pests
and diseases, establishment of systems to reduce sanitary risks, and promotion of good sanitary practices.
The Secretariat of Wellbeing (Social Development Ministry) operates the Sowing Life programme, which
supports agroforestry projects implemented by small-scale farmers (having 2.5 hectares of available land)
located in poor municipalities. The programme provides direct payments, in-kind support (e.g. plants,
seeds, sowing tools and nurseries) and technical support for afforestation and agroforestry projects.
Additional support is provided for on-farm consumption of electricity for water pumping.
Consumer food subsidies are an important poverty alleviation instrument in Mexico. Poor families obtain
basic staples through DICONSA (state-owned rural shops selling basic staples in poor localities), while the
LICONSA programme sells milk at prices below market levels.
Mexico’s pledge to the Paris Climate Conference in December 2015 includes both unconditional and
conditional targets. Under the 2020 update of Mexico’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC), Mexico
committed to unconditionally lower GHG emissions by 22% and black carbon1 emissions by 51% of
business-as-usual levels by 2030. Reductions excluding black carbon come from transport (-18%),
electricity generation (-31%), residential and commercial electricity consumption (-18%), oil and gas
(-14%), industry (-5%), agriculture (-8%) and waste (-28%). Depending on international support, the GHG
target could increase to as much as 36% and to 70% of black carbon emissions. In order to achieve such
targets, the general strategy for the agricultural sector promotes agricultural practices adapted to climatic
and environmental conditions, considering community and scientific knowledge; and adopting agroforestry,
agroecology and the use of biodigesters in livestock farms. The strategy also considers adaptation
measures in the agricultural sector. It promotes sustainable production and consumption practices,
incorporating climate risk into value chains and investment plans, preventing and controlling pests and
animal diseases, strengthening environmental policy instruments to protect native crops from climate
change, and financing mechanisms in the primary sector to cope with adverse climate change impacts. In
addition, the government aims to strengthen the adaptive capacity of at least 50% of municipalities most
vulnerable to climate change, establish early warning and risk management systems at every level of
government, and reach a 0% net deforestation rate by 2030.
SADER organised venues for technical agro-climatic discussions with the International Maize and Wheat
Improvement Center (CIMMYT) and agricultural producers regarding climatic conditions and appropriate
adaptation practices to minimise the impact of climate change.


422 

Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
As part of the policy changes, in June 2020, the Mexican Government published the Sectoral Programme
for Agriculture and Rural Development 2019-2024 (the Sectoral Programme), which guides the
implementation of the National Development Plan for the period 2019-24.
SADER continued with the targeting of beneficiaries of the payments based on area (Production for
Wellbeing) payments to focus on small and medium size producers with less than 20 hectares and those
in highly marginalised indigenous communities in the states of the southeast of the country. The
guaranteed minimum prices programme now includes medium size maize producers (those with 5 to
50 hectares).
For 2021, SADER has the objective to increase the support to women farmers. The share of support
provided to women farmers through the fertiliser programme is expected to reach 40% and that provided
by payments based on area is expected to reach 30%.
Congress is in the process of approving the new Law of the National Financing of Agricultural Development
(Financiera Nacional de Desarrollo Agropecuario, FND, formerly Financiera Rural), which contemplates
the merger of the latter with three other financial and insurance promotion entities of the sector:
AGROASEMEX, FIRCO and FOCIR. This would integrate, in a single entity, the services of credit granting,
price insurance, crop and animal insurance, risk sharing and financing of projects to add value to primary
products.
One of the priority objectives of the Sectoral Programme is the “Transition to Sustainable Agriculture for
Present and Future Well-being”. It aims to promote sustainable production, the restoration of ecosystems
and adaptation to climate change, as well as the use of clean energy in the agricultural and aquaculture-
fishing sector.
The SADER and the Ministry of the Environment and Natural Resources (SEMARNAT) are developing the
National Strategy for the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Pollinators (ENCUSP) for promoting the
conservation of pollinators and valuate the ecosystem services they provide.
SADER dismantled or suspended a number of agencies and programmes. The Marketing Support
Program of the Agency for Marketing Services and Market Development (ASERCA), which provided
support for the purchase of financial instruments for price volatility and contractual agricultural schemes,
was dismantled. Contractual agriculture schemes will be in charge of the above-mentioned Financiera
Nacional de Desarrollo Agropecuario (FND), with the ambition to link the price risk management systems
with the granting of credit to the sector. Support for financial instruments (price hedging, insurance and
contractual agriculture) was suspended. Livestock Credit, Rural Development, Productive Linkage and
Livestock Promotion and Quality Standardisation of Livestock Products were dismantled.
The Agriculture Development Programme, the Livestock Development Programme and the Fisheries and
Aquaculture Development Programme were merged and subject to substantial budgetary cuts, which led
to the cancelation of support to agriculture and livestock under those programmes.
The administrative and institutional restructuring of the Ministry continued in 2020 and 2021. The approval
of the new structure of the SADER was published in the Mexican Official Journal on 3 May 2021. Under
the new structure, the Under-Secretariat for Rural Development was modified and the Under-Secretariats
of Agriculture and Food, and Competitiveness were replaced by an Under-Secretariat for Food Self-
Sufficiency and a General Unit for Rural Development. A new General Coordination of Agricultural Market
Intelligence was also created.


 423

Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The Sowing Life programme that distributes payments, plants and inputs for agroforestry projects to
producers with incomes below the poverty line, was expanded to include 200 000 more recipients.
SADER worked in collaboration with the members of productive chains to make sure food supply,
inventories and distribution are not disrupted. Particular attention is given to key productive chains such
as grains, horticulture, poultry, beef, fisheries and aquaculture. Digitalisation services have been expanded
for speeding up food imports. Up to 60% of the administrative import processes are now done remotely by
the Centre for Documentation and Judgement (CDD) of the National Service for Health, Safety and Agri-
food Quality (SENASICA).
The government has recommended reinforcing hygiene inspection systems in food production units and
is encouraging consumers to follow hygiene practices when handling and preparing food.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
On 28 April 2020, the European Union and Mexico finished negotiations on a new EU-Mexico trade
agreement, which will supersede the EU-Mexico Global Agreement that has been in force since 2000. The
new agreement further liberalises more than 85% of the agricultural tariff lines that were left out of the
original accord. For the remainder, market access was negotiated in the form of tariff rate quotas (TRQs).
The European Union established TRQs for imports of various Mexican products, including beef, chicken
breast, egg yolks, and frozen ham. In turn, Mexico established TRQs for imports of certain European
products, including mature cheeses, fresh cheeses, skimmed milk powder, pork and poultry. In addition to
improved market access on agricultural products, the agreement promotes co-operation on issues related
to animal welfare and antimicrobial resistance (EC, 2018[1]). The agreement is awaiting signature and
conclusion from the European Council and the European Parliament.
On 1 July 2020, the Mexico-United States-Canada Agreement (called Tratado entre Mexico, Estados
Unidos y Canada - T-MEC - in Mexico) entered into force to replace the former NAFTA from 1994. In
contrast to NAFTA, T-MEC establishes that grading standards for agricultural products will be non-
discriminatory (they cannot be used to discriminate among products from member countries). There are
new provisions that enhance the transparency of the basis used to set sanitary and phytosanitary
measures for agricultural products. T-MEC also intends to boost agricultural biotechnology and gene
editing trading, by promoting co-operation, information sharing and other trade rules in those areas.
Contextual information
Mexico has a population of 126 million, ranks as the 15th largest world economy and has a per capita GDP
just below the average of all countries covered in this report. Agriculture’s GDP share has remained stable
at 3% since 2000. Despite the decline over the past two decades, however, agriculture’s share in total
employment remains comparatively high at more than 12% in 2019, indicating that labour productivity in
the sector is well below that of other sectors. Trade is an important driver of Mexico’s economy: it
represents 36% of GDP and has grown 12 percentage points since 2000. Agro-food trade is an important
fraction of total trade, both in terms of exports and imports, representing 7.2% and 5.4% of each,
respectively. Since 2015, Mexico has registered a positive and growing net agro-food balance. Whereas
most agro-food exports are primary and processed for final consumption, more than half of agro-food
imports are intermediate products for further processing.


424 

Table 19.4. Mexico: Contextual indicators

Mexico
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
1 097
2 604
2.7%
2.3%
Population (million)
101
126
2.3%
2.4%
Land area (thousand km2)
1 944
1 944
2.3%
2.3%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
106 330
106 891
3.5%
3.5%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
52
64
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
10 870
20 703
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
24
36
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
3.3
3.4
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
17.3
12.5
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
4.6
7.2
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.5
5.4
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
57
58
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
43
42
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
22
22
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Economic growth has been slowing since 2010 and stalled in 2019. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
and related restrictions, economic output has fallen by 9% in 2020, one of the strongest contractions in the
country’s history. The inflation rate has declined since its most recent peak in 2017. The unemployment
rate has remained stable at around 3% a year, but increased to more than 5% in 2020.
Figure 19.5. Mexico: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate


 425

Figure 19.6. Mexico: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural output in Mexico has been increasing predominantly due to Total Factor Productivity (TFP)
growth, and to a limited extent to growth in primary factors and more use of intermediate inputs (fertiliser
and feed). TFP growth between 2007 and 2016 is estimated slightly below the global average, and thus
has been much less dynamic than during the 1990s. In contrast to the trend observed in the OECD area,
nutrient balances in Mexico have increased in the last decade, potentially impacting water and air quality.
Agricultural GHG emissions represent 15% of the country’s total, higher than the OECD average likely due
to the sector’s greater importance in the economy compared to many other OECD countries. Water stress
is well above the OECD average, and agriculture is partly responsible for this pressure due to its high
share on total water abstractions.
Figure 19.7. Mexico: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.


Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
8
44
37
47
34
5
21
5
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
0.2%
0.5%
0.5%
0.05%
1.3%
1.6%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
Mexico
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


426 

Table 19.5. Mexico: Productivity and environmental indicators

Mexico
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
3.0%
1.3%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
24.7
25.6
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
1.6
2.4
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
3.0
3.6
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
17.3
14.6
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
4.5
5.7
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
82.0
76.0
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
15.6
19.5
9.3
8.5
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.

Reference

EC (2018), New EU-Mexico Agreement: The Agreement in Principle, European Commission,
https://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2018/april/tradoc_156791.pdf.
[1]


Note
1 Black carbon is particular matter formed by the incomplete combustion of fossil, biofuels and biomass; it
is a short-lived but powerful climate warming pollutant.



 427

Support to agriculture
Since the reform of its agricultural policies in the mid-1980s, production- and trade-distorting policies
almost disappeared in New Zealand, and the level of support to agricultural producers has been the lowest
among OECD countries. Over the past decade, this support consistently accounted for less than 1% of
farm receipts, with an average of 0.7% during 2018-20. Almost all prices align with world market prices.
Exceptions are fresh poultry and table eggs, and some bee products, which cannot be imported into New
Zealand due to the absence for these products of Import Health Standards (IHS), the biosecurity standards
that products considered to pose a biosecurity risk must meet in order to be imported into New Zealand.
These restrictions result in some market price support – the only form of support to individual commodities
in New Zealand – amounting to 15% and 37% of respective gross farm receipts for these commodities in
2018-20 and representing the majority of the low level of producer support. Support for on-farm services
mainly related to animal health and for disaster relief provide additional producer support to a small extent.
The main focus of agricultural policies in New Zealand is on animal disease control, relief payments in the
event of natural disasters, and the agricultural knowledge and information system. The government also
provides support to community-scale off-farm investments in irrigation systems. Over the past decades,
the share of agricultural land under irrigation expanded significantly.
Support for general services equalled just over 4% of agricultural value-added during 2018-20, slightly less
than the OECD average. Overall, for most of the past two decades, more than 70% of all support was for
general services, with the remainder benefitting producers individually. On average, total support to the
sector represented 0.3% of the country’s GDP during 2018-20, roughly half the share calculated for the
whole OECD.
Recent policy changes
Recent policy changes in New Zealand focused particularly on several adverse events that occurred in
2020, on- and off-farm support for mitigating and adapting to climate change and other environmental
challenges, the signing of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, and responses to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
A flooding event in Otago and Southland, and a significant drought affecting large parts of the country that
was classified as a large-scale adverse event, triggered public support for recovery and relief, and support
for individual farmers in hardship through Rural Assistance Payments.
A number of activities, both strategic and through specific measures, focused on improving the
environmental and economic performance of the agricultural sector, and its preparedness for climate
change, including:

A ten-year roadmap for boosting primary-sector export earnings while reducing New Zealand’s
biogenic methane emissions in accordance with the 2019 Zero Carbon Act.
20 New Zealand


428 


The He Waka Eke Noa – Primary Sector Climate Action Partnership, which seeks to reduce
agricultural greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and enhance the sector’s resilience with respect to
climate change.

The 2020 Resource Management (National Environment Standards for Freshwater) Regulations,
which identifies activities that pose risks to freshwater and freshwater ecosystems.

Funding for a number of projects under the Sustainable Land Management and Climate Change
Research Programmes, focusing in particular on freshwater protection and climate adaptation.
Once in force, the newly signed Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) will combine and
deepen a number of New Zealand’s bilateral and regional trade agreements, providing benefits particularly
in areas of trade facilitation and non-tariff trade barriers. RCEP partners account for more than half of New
Zealand’s agro-food exports and imports.
The COVID-19 Response and Recovery Fund Foundational Package included NZD 50 billion
(USD 32 billion) economy-wide allocations to support job creation, conservation projects, and employment
and upskilling schemes. Projects in the agriculture sector, amounting to NZD 185 million
(USD 117 million), focus on facilitating job transition, boosting horticultural activity and growth, containing
wallabies and weed wilding pines, and preventing food waste.
Additional financial support, for unemployed New Zealanders taking on seasonal work, aims to tackle
labour shortages in the primary sector due to travel restrictions. The government also allocated funding to
infrastructure improvement, and to food and welfare assistance. Finally, a total of NZD 372 million
(USD 236 million) was allocated to the International Air Freight Capacity scheme to ensure the provision
of required international air connectivity, mainly to maintain freight capacity for exports and for essential
imports.
Assessment and recommendations

New Zealand’s open agricultural sector remains focused on foreign markets and trade. Its export
orientation, underlined by the country’s low level of producer support, is buoyed by New Zealand’s
engagement in a large number of free trade agreements (FTA), including the recently signed
RCEP, the world’s largest FTA to date, which combines a number of existing bilateral and regional
agreements, creating benefits through trade facilitation related to non-tariff barriers in particular.

New Zealand’s IHS represents a key tool to ensure the country’s biosecurity vis-à-vis imported
products. While required for all imported products considered to pose a biosecurity risk, some
livestock products, including eggs, fresh chicken meat, and honey do not have IHS, meaning that
these products cannot be imported into New Zealand. While representing a small share of New
Zealand’s agricultural output, this deprives consumers of lower prices and larger choice. The
development of relevant IHS would benefit consumers while ensuring required biosecurity
standards.

Kiwifruit exports to markets other than Australia by entities besides Zespri, the main company,
continue to be regulated by requiring authorisation by Kiwifruit New Zealand. New Zealand should
aim to change these restrictions as they burden the participation in kiwifruit exports by other firms
wishing to do so, and thus reduce competition and efficiency in kiwifruit trade.

New Zealand’s policy mix focusses on key general services. In addition to pest and disease control,
significant investments target the country’s agricultural knowledge and innovation system, which
should improve agricultural productivity growth, estimated at comparatively low levels in recent
years. Mandatory funding from private investors often complements public expenditures for general
services, which can help to ensure effective allocation of these investments, and contributions to
the provision of services by those who benefit from them.


 429


Almost half of all GHG emissions in New Zealand originate from the agricultural sector. With the
passage of the 2019 Zero Carbon Amendment Act and proposed pricing of livestock and fertiliser
emissions from 2025, New Zealand is one of the first countries to bind its climate commitments into
law and include objectives for agriculture as an integral component. The country’s engagement in
a number of climate-related research activities at national and international levels complements
planned economic incentives for emission reductions.

Available data suggests that New Zealand’s agricultural sector faces large and, in the case of
nitrogen, increasing nutrient surpluses related to the country’s large livestock sector and increased
fertiliser use, representing risks to soil, water and air quality. While the 2020 Resource
Management Regulations aim to limit agricultural pollution of freshwater ecosystems and could
reduce such pressures, this might require greater attention.

Recent OECD work identified New Zealand’s good practices in building resilience and managing
natural hazards, including clear and consistent policy signals that farmers are primarily responsible
for managing natural hazard risk; investments in stakeholders’ resilience capacities; and a holistic
approach to building agricultural resilience that takes into account social and cultural factors
(Casalini, Bagherzadeh and Gray, 2021[1]). Nevertheless, New Zealand could place greater
emphasis on identifying and assessing natural hazard risks, including improved data collection on
disaster impacts. Extension services could also play a greater role in informing stakeholders about
changes in the risk landscape.
Figure 20.1. New Zealand: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/1hb4nx
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.01
1.02
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%
1.0%
1.2%
1.4%
1.6%
TSE as % GDP
1986-88
2000-02
2018-20


430 

Figure 20.2. New Zealand: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/u6kfwl
Figure 20.3. New Zealand: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/tdgw5l


-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Eggs
Poultry meat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 431

Table 20.1. New Zealand: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
4 067
6 371
19 659
19 557
19 711
19 711
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
72.1
73.1
73.3
74.3
73.2
72.3
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
1 624
2 626
9 936
9 508
9 871
10 429
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
424
33
139
92
135
192
Support based on commodity output
54
15
116
70
115
163
Market Price Support1
53
15
116
70
115
163
Positive Market Price Support
53
15
116
70
115
163
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
1
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
179
17
23
20
19
29
Based on variable input use
2
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
154
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
23
17
23
20
19
29
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
26
1
0
1
0
0
Based on Receipts / Income
26
1
0
1
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
165
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
10.2
0.5
0.7
0.5
0.7
1.0
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.01
1.00
1.01
1.00
1.01
1.01
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.11
1.01
1.01
1.00
1.01
1.01
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
119
85
426
393
483
403
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
60
46
202
170
244
190
Inspection and control
31
28
191
174
211
189
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
27
11
34
49
27
24
Marketing and promotion
0
0
0
0
0
0
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
21.0
72.0
74.4
81.1
78.2
65.6
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-53
-13
-107
-70
-109
-143
Transfers to producers from consumers
-51
-13
-112
-68
-109
-161
Other transfers from consumers
-2
0
-2
-3
0
-2
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
6
0
0
19
Excess feed cost
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-3.4
-0.5
-1.1
-0.7
-1.1
-1.4
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.03
1.01
1.01
1.01
1.01
1.02
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.03
1.01
1.01
1.01
1.01
1.01
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
542
118
572
485
618
614
Transfers from consumers
53
13
114
70
109
162
Transfers from taxpayers
491
105
460
417
509
454
Budget revenues
-2
0
-2
-3
0
-2
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.5
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.3
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
489
103
456
414
503
451
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.4
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
138
205
200
204
210
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
1.71
2.25
1.50
1.45
1.52
1.54
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for New Zealand are: wheat, maize, oats, barley, milk,
beef and veal, sheep meat, wool, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




432 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Prior to the 1970s, while New Zealand exported more than half its agricultural production to the United
Kingdom, support for agricultural producers was largely inexistent, with the exception of some import-
competing sectors such as eggs and poultry. In turn, New Zealand’s Statutory Marketing Boards, operating
since the end of World War I, enjoyed significant rights to regulate supply and trade of several key export
products. Overall, relative to the more protected manufacturing sectors, agriculture was implicitly taxed
(Anderson et al., 2008[2]).
The accession of the United Kingdom to the European Economic Community in 1973 worsened New
Zealand’s access to its most important market, and the oil shock of the mid-1970s generated significant
foreign exchange shortfalls given the country’s dependence on oil imports. In response, the government
introduced support measures to encourage farmers to increase production (MPI, 2017[3]). These included
input subsidies, minimum prices supported by import barriers and export incentives, tax concessions, low-
interest loans and development grants (MPI, 2017[3]; Harris and Rae, 2004[4]).
Following macroeconomic problems, including the unsustainable fiscal costs of these support measures,
a new government undertook significant economic reforms implemented during the second half of the
1980s. By the end of that decade, production and trade distorting policies supporting the farm sector
practically disappeared (Table 20.2). In the context of these reforms, New Zealand’s Statutory Marketing
Boards lost most of their original authority or were dissolved (Nayga and Rae, 1993[5]).
Table 20.2. New Zealand: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1975
Export-oriented agriculture with little policy
intervention. Implicit taxation notably of exporting
agriculture relative to the manufacturing sector
Statutory Marketing Boards with significant authority to regulate
production and trade of key export products
Agricultural and manufacturing import tariffs
Limited farm support, including some input subsidies
1975-1984
Incentivising agricultural production
Introduction of significant farm support measures: price support, input
subsidies, tax concessions, low-interest loans, development grants
Late 1980s
Reforms to market and trade liberalisation
Dismantling of price support and most other forms of direct farm
support, along with economy-wide reforms liberalising the
manufacturing industry as well
Restricted function or dismantling of the Statutory Marketing Boards.
Exit packages and debt restructuring programmes for farmers who
had to stop operating
1990-present
Continuing trade liberalisation
Focus on general services and disaster aid
Since the policy reforms in the late 1980s, New Zealand’s level of support to agricultural producers has
been the lowest among OECD countries (Figure 20.4). Consequently, for the last three decades, total
support to the sector was driven mainly by policies related to general services to agriculture, such as
agricultural research and biosecurity controls for pests and diseases.


 433

Figure 20.4. New Zealand: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
New Zealand limits its agricultural support largely to expenditures on general services, such as agricultural
research, and biosecurity controls for pests and diseases. A significant share of the costs of regulatory and
operational functions, including for border control, is charged to beneficiaries or those who create risks.
Practically all of New Zealand’s agricultural production and trade is free from economic regulation. Since
the phasing out of restrictions on dairy exports to specific tariff quota markets by the end of 2010, such
export rights were allocated to dairy companies based on the proportion of milk-solids collected. Export
regulations continue to exist for kiwifruit: the New Zealand company Zespri has the default, but not
exclusive right to export kiwifruit to all markets other than Australia. Other traders can export kiwifruit to
non-Australian markets in collaboration with Zespri, subject to approval by the relevant regulatory body,
Kiwifruit New Zealand. Kiwifruit exporters to Australia are required to hold an export licence under the
New Zealand Horticulture Export Authority Act 1987, which provides for multiple exporters to that
market.
The 2017 amendments to the Kiwifruit Export Regulations 1999 allow Zespri shareholders to set rules
around maximum shareholding and eligibility for dividend payments; clarify the activities Zespri can
undertake as a matter of core business; and enhance the independence and transparency of the industry
regulator, Kiwifruit New Zealand.
The Food Act 2014 came into force on 1 March 2016. Since March 2019, all business operates under this
new law. The Food Act 2014 applies a risk-based approach focused on the outcome of safe and suitable
food, rather than using prescriptive regulation. It aligns the domestic food system with the risk-based
approach of other New Zealand food statutes that have more of an export focus, and with international
trends in food regulation.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


434 

Import Health Standards (IHS) are issued under the Biosecurity Act 1993. They state the requirements
to meet before importing risk goods into New Zealand. Risk goods can be imported only with an IHS in
place, and with the product meeting all relevant IHS measures. For some products (table eggs, uncooked
chicken meat, honey), no IHS is in place. These products therefore cannot be imported, leading to some
market price support as their domestic prices are above the world market level.
“Industry good” activities1 (such as research and development, forming and developing marketing
strategies, and providing technical advice) previously undertaken by statutory marketing boards are now
managed through producer levy-funded industry organisations under the Commodity Levies Act 1990.
Under this legislation, levies can only be imposed when supported by producers, and producers
themselves decide how to spend the levies. With a limited number of exceptions, levy funds may not be
spent on commercial or trading activities. As a provision for accountability to levy payers, the Act requires
that levying organisations seek a new mandate to collect levies every six years through a referendum of
levy payers held prior to the expiry of their levy orders.
The New Zealand Government engages with industry and stakeholders to build biosecurity readiness and
response capability. The Government Industry Agreement for Biosecurity Readiness and Response
(GIA) established an integrated approach to preparing for and responding to biosecurity risks through
voluntary partnerships between the government and primary industry sector groups. Signatories share
decision-making, costs and responsibility in preparing for and responding to biosecurity incursions. The
number of industry groups having joined with the Ministry for Primary Industries under GIA remains at 20.
Overseer is a tool used to set and manage nutrients within environmental limits. Overseer estimates
nutrient losses from farm systems, helping farmers and growers improve their productivity, reduce nutrients
leaching into waterways, and reduce GHG emissions. The intellectual property is jointly owned by the
Ministry for Primary Industries, AgResearch Limited, and the Fertiliser Association of New Zealand.
Regional councils increasingly used Overseer to implement the National Policy Statement on Freshwater
Management.
Pastoral Genomics was a New Zealand partnership programme for forage improvement through
biotechnology, funded by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), DairyNZ,
Beef+Lamb New Zealand, Grasslands Innovation, NZ Agriseeds, DEEResearch, AgResearch, and Dairy
Australia. The programme ended on 30 June 2020. The partnership supported the private-sector seeds
companies PGG Wrightson Seeds and Agriseeds in exploring the adoption of genomic selection (a non-
regulated technology enabling more rapid uptake by partners and companies) to accelerate the
improvement of ryegrass and clover.
Sustainable Food and Fibre Futures (SFF Futures) finances projects that create value and improve
sustainability in the food and fibre industries. SFF Futures has a budget of NZD 40 million (USD 25 million)
per year and provides a single gateway for farmers, growers, harvesters and industry to apply for
investment in a range of projects that deliver economic, environmental and social benefits. Projects range
from small, one-off initiatives to long-running multi-million dollar partnerships. Community projects require
co-investment from the partner organisation of at least 20% of costs. Commercially-driven projects require
a co-investment of at least 60% of costs.
The Ministry for Primary Industries’ Productive and Sustainable Land Use package promotes practices
aimed at improving value creation and environmental outcomes. One part of the programme, Extension
Services, supports and enables producers to improve environmental, social and wellbeing outcomes in
their communities by driving their own solutions. Extension Services emphasises partnering with farmers,
regional stakeholders and agricultural professionals to ensure services are relevant to the needs and
priorities of local communities. The programme’s NZD 35 million (USD 22 million) budget over four years
from July 2019 supports up to 2 200 producers across targeted catchments and regions.


 435

The Māori Agribusiness: Pathway to Increased Productivity (MAPIP) framework supports Māori
primary sector asset owners who seek to sustainably increase the productivity of their primary sector
assets, including land, agriculture, horticulture, forestry, and seafood. Introduced in 2015, the MAPIP
programme offers a one-on-one approach to achieving primary sector aspirations. The Māori
Agribusiness Extension Programme (MABx) enables the Crown to partner with Māori (in a one-to-many
approach) to achieve economic, environmental, social and cultural aspirations through sustainable
development of primary sector assets. The government committed NZD 12 million (USD 7.6 million) to
facilitate MAPIP projects.
Although no longer accepting new applications for financial support, Crown Irrigation Investments
Limited (CIIL) manages three investments under existing contracts: completion of Central Plains Water
Stage 2 (Canterbury plains); construction of the Kurow-Duntroon scheme (Kurow, South Canterbury); and
construction of the Waimea Community dam (Nelson/Tasman). CIIL focuses on water storage solutions
for use in agricultural irrigation providing farmers and growers with a reliable supply of water throughout
the year.
The One Billion Trees programme aims to double the current planting rate (including re-planting
following harvest and new planting) to plant one billion trees over the decade from 2018-28. The
programme is supported both by direct government investment (such as the One Billion Trees Fund and
joint ventures between Crown Forestry and private landowners), and adjustments to regulatory settings
(such as the Emissions Trading Scheme) to encourage and support tree planting.
The One Billion Trees Fund launched in November 2018 as part of the One Billion Trees programme.
The Fund has provided NZD 94 million (USD 60 million) for tree planting grants to landowners including
farmers, in order to generate environmental, landscape and productivity benefits. The Fund has also
provided NZD 108 million (USD 68 million) for partnership initiatives that underpin successful tree planting.
The Fund expires in June 2021 and decisions on its future are soon to be made by the new Minister of
Forestry.
The Sustainable Land Management Hill Country Erosion Programme (HCEP) aims to protect New
Zealand’s estimated 1.4 million hectares of pastoral hill country classified as erosion prone. It funds
councils to develop four-year erosion control projects. The government approved a total of
NZD 35.3 million (USD 22.4 million) for the period 2019-23.2 Selected projects include: the development
of whole-farm plans to manage erosion on farms with highly erodible land, the development of agroforestry
plans, wide-spaced planting of poplars and willows, land retirement from production to revert to native
vegetation, and soil conservation and sustainable land management programmes. Although the main
purpose of the HCEP is to reduce erosion, it also reduces sediment loss to waterways, increases on-farm
biodiversity, and contributes to the sequestration of carbon in small-scale forests and through planting of
poplars and willows.
The New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme (NZ ETS) is the main policy tool to reduce greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions. It requires companies in the agricultural supply chain (e.g. meat processors, dairy
processors, nitrogen fertiliser manufacturers and importers) to report on their agricultural emissions.
However, these companies are not required to pay for their emissions. The NZ ETS also imposes a cost
on emissions from transport fuels, electricity production, synthetic GHGs, waste and industrial processes.
The New Zealand Government researches and develops mitigation technologies to reduce agricultural
GHG emissions. It does so primarily through the New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research
Centre (NZAGRC), the Pastoral Greenhouse Gas Research Consortium (PGgRc), and in co-ordination
with the 64 member countries of the Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases
(GRA).
The NZAGRC, funded by the Ministry for Primary Industries, brings together nine organisations that
conduct research to reduce New Zealand’s agricultural GHG emissions.3 Research focuses on practical


436 

ways to reduce on-farm methane and nitrous oxide emissions while improving productivity and
sequestering soil carbon. The PGgRc is a partnership funded 50:50 by government and industry, which
aims to provide livestock farmers with information to mitigate their GHG emissions. The PGgRc focuses
mainly on research to reduce methane emissions in ruminant animals.
The GRA was established in 2009. New Zealand hosts the Secretariat and GRA Special Representative,
and is a co-chair of its Livestock Research Group. GRA member countries collaborate on research,
development and extension of technologies and practices to deliver more climate-resilient food systems
without growing GHG emissions. In 2020, New Zealand provided more than NZD 2.6 million
(USD 1.6 million) to support several scholarship programmes for students at Masters and PhD level from
developing countries. These joint initiatives utilise relationships built through the GRA. Other funders
include the Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security programme of the Consultative Group on
International Agricultural Research (CGIAR-CCAFS) and the Government of the Netherlands.
In support of the GRA, New Zealand committed to providing NZD 20 million (USD 12.7 million) over four
years to internationally collaborative research. The aim is to accelerate global research in mitigating GHG
emissions from pastoral livestock farming. The focus is priority research topics identified by the GRA and
relevant to New Zealand’s agricultural production systems. Research challenges include manipulating
rumen function, reducing nitrous oxide emissions from soils, manipulating rates of soil carbon change, and
improving tools and practices for minimising farm system-level greenhouse gas emissions intensity.
The Zero Carbon Amendment Act sets separate long-term emission reduction targets for long-lived and
short-lived GHG emissions, including a target for biogenic methane. In particular, the proposed emissions
reduction targets set out in the Zero Carbon Act aim to reduce all GHG emissions (except biogenic
methane) to net zero by 2050; and reduce gross biogenic methane emissions by 10% by 2030 and by 24-
47% by 2050 (below 2017 levels). These targets are consistent with the Paris Agreement’s objective of
limiting global warming temperature rise to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels.
The National Science Challenges were established in 2014 to tackle New Zealand’s biggest science-based
issues and opportunities. A core part of the government’s investment in science, at just over
NZD 680 million (USD 431 million) over ten years, is dedicated to the Challenges. Past and current
projects related to agriculture include the Deep South Challenge: Changing with our Climate to enable
New Zealanders to adapt, manage risk and thrive in a changing climate; Climate Change & Its Effect on
Our Agricultural Land to better understand the impacts of climate change on land use suitability; and
Primary Sector Preparedness for Climate Change to assess the impact of rapid and slow-onset climate
changes to the primary sector and evaluate the role and cost of adaptation for resilience.
The Overseas Investment Amendment Act 2018, in force since October 2018, brought residential and
lifestyle land under the definition of “sensitive” land. The key change replaced the large farm directive with
a broader, rural land directive that applies to all rural land larger than five hectares, other than forestry. As
a result, most New Zealand land is now “sensitive”, meaning that transactions of such land involving
“overseas persons” as defined under the Act require the consent of the Overseas Investment Office. The
Amendment Act also places conditions on overseas investors – they must now demonstrate how their
investment will benefit the country.
As a trade-dependent economy geographically distant from export markets, New Zealand currently has
ten FTAs in force, which account for approximately two-thirds both of the value of New Zealand’s total
exports and of its agro-food exports. Three additional agreements are concluded but not yet in force: the
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP);4 the New Zealand-Gulf Co-operation Council
FTA (involving Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates); and the Anti-
Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA).5 Negotiations between New Zealand and the countries of the
Pacific Alliance6 and negotiations for a New Zealand-European Union FTA and a New Zealand-United
Kingdom FTA are ongoing.


 437

Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
In July 2020, the Dairy Industry Restructuring Act 2001 (DIRA) was amended to remove regulatory
requirements deemed no longer necessary. The amended Act provides the Fonterra Co-operative with
more flexibility to manage its operations, and increases clarity on regulatory aspects affecting Fonterra and
other dairy industry stakeholders. The DIRA was originally established to promote the efficient operation
of the New Zealand dairy industry. In particular, it aims to ensure that dairy farmers can easily enter and
exit the Fonterra Co-operative, and that other dairy processors can obtain raw milk in order to be
competitive in dairy markets.
The government launched Fit for a Better World – Accelerating our Economic Potential in July 2020.
It is a ten-year roadmap designed to boost primary sector export earnings, especially forestry, seafood and
horticulture, by NZD 44 billion (USD 28 billion) over the next decade, containing specific targets for the
food and fibre sectors related to the environment and to the country’s recovery from COVID-19. Among
others, the Roadmap specifies the targets of reducing New Zealand’s biogenic methane to 24-47% below
2017 levels by 2050; of restoring New Zealand’s freshwater to a healthy state within a generation; and of
increasing domestic employment in the food and fibre sector by 10% by 2030.
A significant rainfall event in autumn 2020 caused flooding in Otago and Southland. Support totalling
NZD 77 930 (USD 49 400) was provided to the two Rural Support Trusts to co-ordinate recovery activities
for farmers. Significant drought affected many parts of New Zealand in 2020. The drought conditions in
the North Island, top of the South Island (Tasman, Marlborough, and Kaikoura), North Canterbury, and the
Chatham Islands were classified as a large-scale adverse event (the last large-scale adverse event
classification for drought was in 2013). Such a classification enables the government to provide additional
funding to co-ordinate and deliver support farmers and growers. Support totalling NZD 2.07 million
(USD 1.31 million) was provided in 2020 for rural support trusts, recovery coordinators and mayoral
drought relief funds. A further NZD 3.5 million (USD 2.2 million) has been made available for professional
planning advice through the Drought Recovery Advice Fund.
Rural Assistance Payments (RAPs) were also made available in response to the 2020 drought. RAPs
are only available on case-by-case basis to farmers in real hardship and cover essential living costs for
those farmers whose income is severely impacted by a medium-scale (or greater) adverse event and who
have no other means of supporting their family. In calendar year 2020, a total support of NZD 180 157
(USD 114 200) was received by 34 families.
In July 2017, following the discovery for the first time in New Zealand of the bacterial infection Mycoplasma
bovis in cattle in South Canterbury, the Ministry for Primary Industries declared a biosecurity response.
Government and agricultural sector leaders agreed to work together to eradicate Mycoplasma bovis from
New Zealand. The ten-year eradication programme is ongoing with compensation payments to farmers for
slaughtered cattle, estimated at NZD 166 million (USD 105 million) as of July 2020. Until mid-2021, the
focus of the programme is on ensuring all infected herds have been found, before the focus moves to the
long-term surveillance phase to prove absence of the disease. This will involve ongoing bulk tank milk
surveillance and on-farm herd testing.
The Mycoplasma bovis Recovery Advice Service helps farmers pay for business and technical advice
on recovering from the effects of Mycoplasma bovis. The Ministry for Primary Industries makes payments
to eligible farmers of up to NZD 5 000 (USD 3 170) per property. In 2020, NZD 144 574 (USD 91 650) was
paid to 72 farms.
The National Animal Identification and Tracing (NAIT) is a system of livestock tracing enabling MPI to
respond quickly in case of a serious biosecurity outbreak or natural disaster. The 2019 amendments to the
National Animal Identification and Tracing Act 2012 included provisions to strengthen the requirements for
tagging, incentivise greater rates of compliance, and provide better access to, and use of, NAIT data. In
June 2020, further requirements for transporting animals took effect, placing accountability on animal


438 

transporters to ensure that animals are transported in compliance with the scheme. From December 2020,
persons in charge of NAIT animals must only use tags issued for the place where the animal originates.
This requirement aims at more effective tracing by providing a link between the NAIT tag and the birthplace
of the animal.
The Farm Debt Mediation Act 2019 came fully into force on 1 July 2020. It requires secured creditors to
farm businesses to offer statutory mediation before taking any enforcement actions in relation to debt held
over that business. The Act aims to provide for fair, equitable and timely resolution of farm debt issues,
thereby supporting the mental, emotional and financial wellbeing of farmers and farming families. The
scheme applies to all secured lenders, including non-bank lenders.
In September 2020, a Consortium was appointed to establish the prototype Food and Fibre Centre of
Vocational Excellence (Food and Fibre CoVE) to support better training for New Zealand’s primary
sector workers. The Consortium is a collaboration of 54 organisations across the entire food and fibre
sector including industry associations, tertiary providers, Māori, employers and employees. The Food and
Fibre CoVE will define vocational excellence, identify and fund specialised projects aimed at building
excellence across regions and sectors. It is one of up to three prototype sector-based Centres of Vocational
Excellence to be established, with funding of NZD 18 million (USD 11.4 million) committed over up to 4
years.
Following up on the Zero Carbon Act, in October 2020 the New Zealand Government announced the
pricing of livestock emissions at the farm gate and fertiliser emissions at the manufacturer and importer
level from 2025 at the latest. In the meantime, the government agreed to work with the food and fibre sector
and Māori on the He Waka Eke Noa – Primary Sector Climate Action Partnership. The partnership
aims to implement a framework by 2025 to reduce agricultural greenhouse gas emissions and build the
agricultural sector’s resilience to climate change. This is to be achieved through a) measuring, managing
and reducing on-farm emissions; b) recognising, maintaining or increasing integrated sequestration on
farms; and c) adapting to a changing climate.
The Resource Management (National Environment Standards for Freshwater) Regulations 2020 set
requirements regulating activities that pose risks to freshwater and freshwater ecosystems. The new
standards include a number of policies with impacts on the agricultural sector as they are aimed to limit
pollution from the sector. Key actions include binding limits on nitrate and suspended sediment
concentrations in waterways; restricting major agricultural intensification; implementing stronger controls
for feedlots and stockholding areas; reducing excessive nitrogen use through a cap on synthetic fertilisers;
excluding stock from waterways; and ensuring intensive winter grazing of forage crops meet standards.
The regulations also aim to reduce soil loss by strictly managing activities such as earthworks and land
clearance; maintaining existing ecosystems by protecting streams and wetlands from draining or
development; and controlling activities that can affect sources of drinking water.
The Sustainable Land Management and Climate Change (SLMCC) Research Programmes help
agricultural and forestry sectors with the challenges arising from climate change. In 2020, the government
committed:

NZD 14.4 million (USD 9.1 million) for 12 freshwater mitigation projects that assess the
effectiveness of methods for protecting water health and reducing nutrient runoff.

NZD 2.8 million (USD 1.8 million) for seven climate adaptation projects aimed at improving food
and fibre sector resilience to a changing climate and help farmers move towards low carbon
farming, for example through assessing risks and planning for resilience to adverse events, and
sustainable irrigation.

NZD 800 000 (USD 507 000) for three extension projects focused on translating the latest scientific
research into practical application on farm.


 439

Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The COVID-19 Response and Recovery Fund (CRRF) Foundational Package was introduced in the
2020 Budget and NZD 50 billion (USD 32 billion) was allocated to support the recovery response to
COVID-19. The support includes boosting job creation, conservation projects, and various employment
and upskilling schemes to deliver economic, social, cultural and environmental benefits to society.
Proposals submitted to the CRRF are assessed under a wellbeing framework. The overall programme is
equally available to the agricultural sector as to the non-agricultural sectors. Of the total funding available,
some NZD 185 million (USD 117 million) is allocated to individual projects in the primary agriculture sector.
These include:

addressing primary sector workforce shortfall with job transition support (NZD 19.3 million)

boosting economic activity and future growth in the horticulture sector (NZD 38.54 million)

containing wallabies to protect agriculture, forestry and native plants, and boost regional
economies (NZD 27.47 million)

the national wilding conifer control programme7 to boost regional economies and employment
(NZD 100 million).
COVID-19 caused labour shortages in the primary sector due to travel restrictions limiting the number of
overseas workers coming to New Zealand, and increased unemployment among New Zealanders across
all sectors. In November 2020, the government introduced additional financial support for unemployed
New Zealanders taking on seasonal work, including NZD 200 (USD 127) per week towards
accommodation costs for up to 13 weeks and NZD 1 000 (USD 634) for workers who complete jobs of six
weeks or longer. Changes have also been made to the Seasonal Work Assistance Programme to provide
the equivalent of the minimum wage to seasonal workers who cannot work due to bad weather, for up to
40 hours a week depending on the number of hours lost.
In June 2020, the government allocated up to NZD 100 million (USD 63 million) for waterway fencing,
riparian planting and stock water reticulation as part of a package of measures to boost employment post-
COVID-19. The funding is repurposed Provincial Growth Fund (PGF)8 money and unallocated funding
from the Regional Investment Opportunities Contingency.
The government provided NZD 30 million (USD 19 million) to support the delivery of food and welfare
assistance by local authorities and Civil Defence Emergency Management Groups during New Zealand’s
COVID-19 Alert Levels 3 and 4. The funding was used to bolster the organisation of food parcels and
provide upfront funding or reimbursement to food banks, community food organisation and other welfare
providers. The above-mentioned CRRF package also includes funding for a project aiming to reduce food
waste9 (NZD 14.9 million, USD 9.4 million).
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
In November 2020, New Zealand and 14 other countries10 signed the Regional Comprehensive Economic
Partnership (RCEP). Once in force, RCEP will be the largest free trade agreement in the world covering
nearly a third of both the global population and its GDP. It combines and deepens a number of existing
bilateral and regional agreements, benefitting New Zealand’s trade particularly in the area of trade
facilitation and non-tariff trade barriers. RCEP partners account for more than half of both New Zealand’s
total agro-food exports and imports. Negotiations for a New Zealand-United Kingdom FTA were launched
in June 2020.
In January 2021, New Zealand and the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”) signed the upgraded
New Zealand-China Free Trade Agreement, for which negotiations had been concluded in November
2019. The upgraded FTA includes a number of provisions with a direct impact on agro-food products. This
concerns areas such as certificates of origin (introducing the option for ‘approved exporters’ to self-declare


440 

the origin of their goods) as well as simplifying administrative processes and trade documentation for goods
in transit. Further operational improvements cover expedited six-hour clearance times for perishable
products, release of such goods outside normal business hours, and appropriate storage. Remaining
safeguard-related tariffs on New Zealand dairy exports to China will be phased out by 2024.
Negotiations with Costa Rica, Iceland, Norway, Fiji and Switzerland on the Agreement on Climate Change,
Trade and Sustainability (ACCTS) are ongoing. The agreement aims to bring together some of the inter-
related elements of the climate change, trade and sustainable development agendas.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The government originally allocated NZD 330 million to the International Air Freight Capacity (IAFC)
scheme, extending this by an estimated NZD 42 million to keep the scheme in place until March 2021
(USD 209 million and USD 27 million, respectively). The IAFC scheme helps ensure a predictable and
regular schedule of air services to safeguard New Zealand’s international connectivity. The primary
objectives of the scheme are to maintain some airfreight capacity for exports and for essential imports such
as medical supplies. Secondary objectives are to maintain air connectivity for passengers and future
tourism capacity, international relations and the competitiveness and sustainability of the aviation sector.
The scheme is market led with importers and exporters paying airlines for freight services. Airfreight rates
out of New Zealand remain significantly higher than they were pre-COVID. Only flights that do not get
enough passengers and freight to break-even are eligible for support.
In March 2020, New Zealand and Singapore announced a World Trade Organization plurilateral trade
declaration to ensure supply chain connectivity through COVID-19. The declaration makes commitments
with regard to tariff elimination, export restrictions, non-tariff barriers, and the facilitation of trade in essential
goods (covering medical goods as well as essential food products). Other WTO members are encouraged
to join the initiative.
Contextual information
New Zealand is a relatively small and thinly populated economy with per capita GDP slightly above the
OECD average, but well above the average of all countries covered by the report. Its market openness is
related to its high dependency on international trade. Agriculture has a comparatively high, albeit slowly
shrinking, importance to the economy, as it accounts for around 6% of both GDP and employment.
Moreover, agro-food products account for close to two-thirds of New Zealand’s total exports.
With little arable land, grass-fed livestock products represent the backbone of the agricultural sector. New
Zealand is the world’s largest exporter of sheep meat, and among the largest exporters of dairy products.
Beef, fruit and horticultural products also contribute significantly to the country’s agro-food exports.




 441

Table 20.3. New Zealand: Contextual indicators

New Zealand
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
83
216
0.21%
0.19%
Population (million)
4
5
0.09%
0.10%
Land area (thousand km2)
263
263
0.32%
0.31%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
15 413
10 467
0.50%
0.34%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
15
19
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
21 476
43 774
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
25
20
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
8.3
6.4
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
8.5
5.8
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
50.7
66.2
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.9
11.6
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
18
24
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
82
76
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
10
5
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
New Zealand has a stable economy having featured robust growth and a relatively low inflation rate for
most of the past decade. However, the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions led to a drop in New
Zealand’s GDP by almost 5% in 2020.
New Zealand is a consistent and growing net exporter of agro-food products, which after some drops in
2015 and 2016 due to, among others, lower dairy prices, have picked up again since 2017. Most of New
Zealand’s agro-food trade, particularly its exports, is processed food for final consumption. On the import
side, however, intermediary products represent two-fifths of the trade basket.


442 

Figure 20.5. New Zealand: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 20.6. New Zealand: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
New Zealand’s growth in agricultural output over the 2007-16 decade has been below global average,
driven by relatively low productivity growth: at 0.7%, the estimated average growth in total factor
productivity (TFP) is well below the global average and among the lowest of all countries covered by this
report. It is also well below the TFP growth measured for the 1990s.
Given the large share of renewables in electricity generation and the dominant role of dairy and ruminant
meat, agriculture is the main source of New Zealand’s GHG emissions, and nutrient surpluses are also
well above the respective OECD averages. The sector is also the country’s prime consumer of freshwater
as irrigated land is expanded, including to respond to climate related uncertainties. Nonetheless, its overall
level of water stress, while higher than in the 1990s, is relatively low.
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
12
14
49
73
10
5
29
9
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


 443

Figure 20.7. New Zealand: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 20.4. New Zealand: Productivity and environmental indicators

New Zealand
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.7%
0.7%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
36.7
63.9
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
13.2
9.6
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
3.5
4.3
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
48.6
47.8
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)¹
3.7
6.9
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
..
61.7
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
0.7
2.2
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
1. Data are not comparable between time periods due to change in methodology.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


0.4%
0.5%
0.9%
0.05%
0.7%
1.6%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
New Zealand
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


444 

References

Anderson, K. et al. (2008), “Distortions to Agricultural Incentives in Australia and New Zealand”,
Agricultural Distortions Working Paper, No. 09, World Bank, Washington, DC.,
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/28184.
[2]
Casalini, F., M. Bagherzadeh and E. Gray (2021), “Building the resilience of New Zealand’s
agricultural sector to floods”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 160, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/dd62d270-en.
[1]
Harris, D. and A. Rae (2004), “Agricultural Policy Reform and Industry Adjustment in Australia
and New Zealand”, Conference paper for International Agricultural Trade Research
Consortium, Philadelphia, 6-7 June 2004, http://dx.doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.15762.
[4]
MPI (2017), New Zealand Agriculture. A policy perspective, Ministry for Primary Industries, New
Zealand, https://www.mpi.govt.nz/dmsdocument/27282/direct.
[3]
Nayga, R. and A. Rae (1993), “New Zealand’s statutory marketing boards: Their history and
some recent developments”, Journal of Food Distribution Research, Vol. 24, pp. 94-100,
https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/6988122.pdf.
[5]
NZIER (2007), Productivity, profitability and industry good activities. Report to Dairy Insight, New
Zealand Institute of Economic Research,
https://nzier.org.nz/static/media/filer_public/11/cb/11cb415e-a97b-4ac9-b86c-
a0b238de9b61/productivity_profitability_and_industry_good_activities_feb_2007.pdf.
[6]






 445

Notes
1 Activities “beneficial to the industry, but whose benefits cannot be captured by those who fund or provide
the activity”, or “long-term investments in the industry made with the expectation of accelerating delivery
of better technology and products for the industry” (NZIER, 2007[6]).
2 The HCEP existed before the One Billion Trees programme but has received significant funding from it.
3 The seven member Crown research institutes and universities are: AgResearch, Landcare Research,
Lincoln University, Massey University, National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research, Plant Food
Research and Scion. The two other organisations involved are DairyNZ and the Pastoral Greenhouse Gas
Research Consortium.
4 RCEP comprises the ten countries that make up the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
Australia, the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”), India, Japan, Korea and New Zealand.
5 Other ACTA signatories include Australia, Canada, the European Union and 22 of its Member States,
Korea, Japan, Mexico, Morocco, Singapore, and the United States.
6 Pacific Alliance countries are Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru.
7 Wilding pines are weeds that overwhelm the native landscape and have the potential to spread across
7.5 hectares of vulnerable land within 30 years if there is no national intervention. The national wilding
conifer control programme funds projects that preserve natural landscapes on both private and rural land
and crown owned conservation estate land from encroachment of pine trees that have accidentally seeded.
8 The PGF, established in 2018 and available to all sectors, is administered by the Provincial Development
Unit, part of the Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment.
9 This initiative redirects food from the primary sector that would otherwise be wasted. It includes an
additional 100 000 fruit and vegetable boxes distributed to children over 10 weeks via school and
community programmes. The government also met the cost of purchasing, processing and distributing an
oversupply of New Zealand pork to families in need. (The temporary oversupply of pork arose as a result
of pork producers’ normal retail outlets and butchers being closed by government order during the New
Zealand lockdown). A further five initiatives will receive funding of up to NZD 100 000 each for a ten-week
trial period with the aim of developing long-term solutions.
10 These include the ten members of ASEAN Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam; as well as Australia, China, Japan and Korea.



446 

Support to agriculture
In Norway, reforms of agricultural policies have been modest and support is among the highest within the
OECD. Norway uses an array of policy measures to regulate the market and support agricultural producers,
including a complex system of payments and several tax concessions. The main agricultural sectors
remain insulated from the world market and subject to production-distorting support.
The level of support to producers relative to gross farm receipts (%PSE) declined gradually since the mid-
1980s.  In 2018-20, support was around 56% of gross farm receipts, which implies that, on average, the
value of support is higher than that of agricultural production valued at world market prices. Moreover, at
56%, Norway’s %PSE is the second highest across all OECD, and emerging and developing countries for
which it is calculated, at more than three times the OECD average.
The share of potentially most-distorting support decreased, but is still more than half of farmers’ support.
Market price support is the main component. The level of support in 2020 declined mainly due to the
increase in border prices, which more than offset the increase in producer prices and budgetary payments.
Effective prices received by farmers were on average 1.8 times world prices in 2018-20. Single commodity
transfers (SCT) accounted for 57.5% of the total producer support estimate (PSE). The share of SCTs is
over 30% of commodity gross receipts for all commodities. Expenditures on general services (GSSE) for
the sector as a whole are relatively small at around 5% of the total support estimate (TSE) and 1.9% of
agricultural value-added, and declined significantly relative to the size of the sector. Support to general
services mostly finances the agricultural knowledge and innovation system. Total support to agriculture as
a share of GDP declined significantly over time. About 93% of the total support goes to individual farmers.
Recent policy changes
An agreement concerning target prices and the budgetary framework for payments to farmers was reached
between the government and the two farmers’ organisations involved in agricultural negotiations. The main
changes in the agreement were: an increase in target prices and budgetary support; a transfer of
NOK 93.4 million (USD 9.8 million) from the 2020 budget to the 2021 budget; strengthening of small and
medium-sized farms; increased support for areas with poor conditions for agricultural production; and
increased support for investments in vegetable production and sectors with potential for increased market
share of domestic production.
Norway eliminated its last export subsidies on cheese and processed agricultural products as of the end
of 2020.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Norway implemented a number of measures relevant to the
agricultural sector, including support to farmers who were unable to harvest in 2020 due to lack of seasonal
works, temporary lifting of maximum ceilings within the scheme for investment aid for rural development
purposes, and elevated vigilance for personnel working at border stations or with meat control at
slaughterhouses to avoid infections.
21 Norway


 447

Assessment and recommendations

There is scope to accelerate the pace of reforms, to achieve stated goals at lower cost to taxpayers
and consumers. A change in agricultural policy towards long-term productivity growth and
environmental sustainability could help.1 Specifically, further policy actions should reduce
potentially most-distorting support in order to increase exposure to market signals and eliminate
output-related measures.

The efficiency of agricultural support measures in achieving stated policy objectives such as food
security, sustaining rural economies and landscape amenities at lower costs, would improve if the
intended beneficiaries of such measures were identified and policy measures targeted to specific
outcomes.

Norway should gradually reduce border protection and commodity-specific support in a predictable
way to let markets play their role in allocating production resources.

Phasing out export subsidies is a positive step and should reduce market distortions associated
with these measures.

Re-orienting support towards general services – especially for the agricultural knowledge and
innovation system – could increase productivity growth while maintaining environmental protection
and sustainable natural resource management. Norway should strengthen efforts to provide
farmers with tailored advice about sustainable technologies and practices by paying attention to
supporting activities, such as technology monitoring, training advisors, and the production,
collection and distribution of technical knowledge.

Climate change and agriculture rank high in the national agricultural policy debate, but commodities
that generate the highest greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are currently those most heavily
supported. Moreover, farmers are exempt from GHG emission taxes and the cap-and-trade
system. Norway faces a sizeable emission-reduction challenge, and reducing GHG emissions from
agriculture will be difficult without significant policy reform. Norway should restructure support and
treat agriculture similarly to other sectors in the economy to intensify GHG reduction. Recent
legislation restricting cultivation on peatlands – if applied with enough ambition – could significantly
reduce GHG emissions from agriculture and should be carefully monitored.

Norway’s co-operative approach to develop policies for controlling GHGs and food waste in the
agro-food sector has merit. The climate change agreement between the government and farmer
organisations facilitates buy-in to reform proposals by stakeholders. However, agreed climate
measures should be consistent with the mitigation actions stated in the 2016-27 White Paper and
should not lead to increased subsidies to agriculture.




448 

Figure 21.1. Norway: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/j8x9pl
Figure 21.2. Norway: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/7siahu
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
TSE as % GDP
1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD


 449

Figure 21.3. Norway: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/yrdfmq


-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Wool
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Oats
Barley
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


450 

Table 21.1. Norway: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
2 533
2 052
3 535
3 704
3 554
3 348
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
73.3
80.8
76.0
74.6
76.3
77.1
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
2 667
2 084
3 831
4 370
3 478
3 644
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
2 833
2 337
3 049
3 536
3 038
2 572
Support based on commodity output
2 059
1 346
1 522
1 839
1 561
1 166
Market Price Support1
1 386
1 009
1 208
1 503
1 252
869
Positive Market Price Support
1 386
1 009
1 222
1 515
1 267
882
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
-14
-12
-16
-14
Payments based on output
673
337
314
336
309
297
Payments based on input use
250
117
181
183
187
175
Based on variable input use
149
71
91
97
90
86
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
91
38
81
75
88
79
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
11
8
10
10
10
10
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
524
871
995
1 147
945
895
Based on Receipts / Income
0
49
79
83
76
79
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
524
822
916
1 063
869
816
with input constraints
371
644
683
704
678
666
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
344
358
341
333
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
3
6
10
4
4
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
3
6
10
4
4
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
71.2
69.0
56.4
61.6
56.9
50.9
Producer NPC (coeff.)
4.09
2.56
1.75
1.93
1.73
1.63
Producer NAC (coeff.)
3.47
3.22
2.30
2.61
2.32
2.04
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
129
158
160
171
159
150
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
74
62
104
110
104
98
Inspection and control
5
25
33
38
32
29
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
29
54
14
14
15
14
Marketing and promotion
21
15
9
9
9
9
Cost of public stockholding
0
2
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
4.1
6.2
4.8
4.5
4.8
5.2
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-1 374
-1 034
-1 326
-1 814
-1 194
-969
Transfers to producers from consumers
-1 671
-1 100
-1 335
-1 559
-1 303
-1 144
Other transfers from consumers
-167
-75
-192
-401
-32
-143
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
220
71
119
104
121
133
Excess feed cost
244
70
82
42
19
186
Percentage CSE (%)
-56.2
-51.1
-35.3
-42.5
-35.6
-27.6
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
3.22
2.28
1.66
1.81
1.62
1.55
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
2.28
2.04
1.55
1.74
1.55
1.38
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
3 182
2 566
3 328
3 811
3 318
2 854
Transfers from consumers
1 838
1 175
1 527
1 960
1 334
1 287
Transfers from taxpayers
1 511
1 466
1 992
2 252
2 015
1 710
Budget revenues
-167
-75
-192
-401
-32
-143
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
3.5
1.4
0.8
0.9
0.8
0.8
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
1 796
1 557
2 120
2 308
2 066
1 986
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
2.0
0.9
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.6
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
163
282
287
285
275
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
6.88
8.59
8.78
8.13
8.80
9.41
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Norway are: wheat, barley, oats, milk, beef and veal,
sheep meat, wool, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 451

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Historically, Norway’s agricultural policies relate to food security, farm incomes, and regional distribution
of production and employment objectives. Today, they also address consumer and societal concerns,
including food safety and animal welfare, environmental issues, climate, cultural landscape, innovation,
agro-tourism, and small-scale food industry. These are implemented through four pillars: i) border
protection; ii) legal frameworks to secure family-owned farms; iii) annual negotiations between the state
and farmers’ organisations to determine producer prices, budget transfers and allocation of funds; and
iv) domestic regulations to balance the market through producer co-operatives. Agricultural support is a
component of Norway’s regional and rural policies.
Overall, since the mid-1980s there was modest policy reform towards market orientation, and modest
reduction in the level of support. Farmers in Norway are heavily supported through border measures,
domestic market regulations, budgetary payments and tax breaks.
Prompted by the WTO Uruguay Agreement on Agriculture, a number of changes were introduced to
agricultural policies, to improve cost efficiency and market orientation, including increased flexibility in milk
quotas, removal of administered prices for eggs, poultry, beef and sheep, and phasing out of export
subsidies as of the end of 2020. But high levels of protection remain against imports of the most important
and sensitive agricultural products, such as meat, dairy, eggs and grains, and about 61% of production still
has some form of administered price. Moreover, the primary agricultural sector is exempt from standard
competition law.
Norwegian agricultural policies are underpinned by the premise that certain environmental public goods
are positive externalities of agricultural commodity production, and implementation costs of alternative
policies are high. Environmental cross-compliance was introduced in 1991 and the Acreage and Cultural
landscape Programme grants payments on the condition that farmers meet cultural landscape
requirements.
Table 21.2. Norway: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1985
Closed economy
High agricultural import tariffs and non-tariff measures
Administered prices of agricultural products
Production quotas of certain products
1985-1994
Modest domestic reforms
Modest reduction in agricultural import tariffs
Removal of several administered prices
Increased flexibility in the milk quota system
1995-2000
Implementation of the WTO Uruguay Agreement on
Agriculture; more emphasis on environmental
sustainability issues
Modest import tariff reduction; tariffication of non-tariff measures
Introduction of environmental cross-compliance
2000-present
Continuation of trade reforms
Lower border protection
Abolition of export subsidies
Source: (OECD, 2021[1]).
The share of potentially most-distorting support (support based on commodity output and payments based
on variable inputs without constraints) declined significantly. But such measures still account for over half
of support to farmers, due to continued reliance on market price support.
Market price support, mainly due to border protection and domestic market regulation, remains the main
component of support to producers and its 39% share of PSE remains unchanged since 1995


452 

(Figure 21.4). Payments based on output are now around one-third of 1986-88 levels, whereas payments
based on current production factors increased. Agriculture in Norway remains among the most highly
protected in the OECD.
Figure 21.4. Norway: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The strategic objectives of agricultural and food policies, as set out in White Paper No. 11 (2016–17),
“Change and development – A future-oriented agricultural production”, are: food security; agriculture
throughout the country; creating more added value; and sustainable agriculture. The agricultural policy
aims at sustainable use of natural resources, developing know-how and contributing to the creation of
employment and value-added in farming and farm-based products throughout the country.
The principal policy instruments supporting agriculture include border measures, domestic market
regulation, based on the Marketing Act, and budgetary payments. The Marketing Act covers certain types
of meat (beef, mutton, pork and poultry); milk, butter and cheese; eggs; cereals and oilseeds; potatoes,
vegetables, fruit and berries; and fur skins.
Target prices are provided for milk, pork, grains and some fruits and vegetables. The government and
farmers’ organisations annually negotiate target prices and the budgetary framework for payments to
farmers. Marketing fees collected from producers finance marketing activities dealing with surpluses (until
2020 also including export subsidies for livestock products). Milk production quotas were introduced in
1983 and a system of buying and selling quotas was introduced in 1997.
Various direct payments are provided to farmers, including area and headage payments as well as
payments based on product quantities (meat). Many of these are differentiated by region and farm size in
order to equalise incomes across all types of farms and regions. Environmental levies are applied on
agricultural pesticides.
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 453

The National Agri-Environmental Programme (NAP) structures agri-environmental measures and provides
a central framework and national goals. It contains the main agri-environmental measures, such as the
Acreage Cultural Landscape Support, payments to extensive grazing, payments for grazing animals and
payments for organic agriculture. Agri-environmental measures are organised at national, regional and
local levels. Measures included in the NAP are not targeted to specific environmental activity of the farmers
as such, but are generally conditioned on the adoption by farmers of good agricultural practices. More
targeted support schemes are the Regional Environmental Programmes (REP) and special environmental
measures in agriculture, organised on the regional and local level, and targeted at issues not addressed
in national schemes. For example, the programmes include payments to reduce water pollution from
agricultural fields, environmentally-friendly spreading of manure, mowing small (abandoned) fields with
high or special biodiversity in forest and mountain areas, grazing on islands, maintenance around heritage
sites in the agricultural landscape, etc.
The 2017 Climate Change Act establishes Norway’s targets to reduce emissions by 2030 and to become
a low-emission society by 2050. Norway signed and ratified the Paris Agreement and a bilateral agreement
with the European Union, under which it commits to reducing GHG emissions by 2030 by at least 50% and
up to 55% of 1990 levels. Carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel use in agriculture are subject to a
carbon dioxide tax similar to that in place for other sectors. Other GHG emissions from agriculture are not
subject to such taxation nor are they included in the European Emission Trading System (ETS). Instead,
a combination of regulatory, financial and advisory measures reduce GHG emissions from agriculture.
In October 2019, the European Union, Iceland and Norway formally agreed to extend their climate co-
operation for 2021-30 by including the Effort Sharing Regulation and the regulation on greenhouse gas
emissions and removals from land use, land use change and forestry (the LULUCF-Regulation), into the
European Economic Area (EEA) Agreement. According to the agreement, Norway will fulfil its respective
GHG reduction target for 1 January 2021 to 31 December 2030 in accordance with the Emissions Trading
System Directive, LULUCF-Regulation and the Effort Sharing Regulation.
In 2016, the government published the national strategy on bio-economy. This was a broad cross-sectoral
strategy developed by eight ministries, including the Norwegian Ministry of Agriculture and Food. The
strategy has three overarching objectives ‒ increased value creation, reduced GHG emissions, and
increased resource use efficiency and sustainability ‒ and four focus areas: i) co-operation across sectors,
industries and thematic areas; ii) markets for renewable bio-based products; iii) efficient use and profitable
processing of renewable biological resources; and iv) sustainable production and extraction of renewable
biological resources.
Most of Norway’s tariff-rate-quotas were eliminated in 2000 when the WTO bound tariff rates became equal
to the in-tariff quota rates. Tariffs for some products, particularly livestock products are set between 100%
and 400% though there is a system of “open periods” for imports at reduced tariff rates when domestic
prices rise above threshold levels. Since 1 January 2015, Norway unilaterally eliminated import duties on
114 agricultural tariff lines. While these duties were low (and not important for protecting Norwegian
agricultural production), their elimination resulted in reduced customs procedures and administrative costs.
Export subsidies were abolished at the end of 2020.
Article 19 of the EEA agreement concerning trade in basic agricultural products is reviewed periodically.
The last round of these reviews was finalised in April 2017 and changes agreed entered into force in
October 2018. Under the EEA, tariff rate quotas (TRQ) expanded on several products, including meat,
cheese, vegetables and certain products used in the food industry for making processed agricultural goods.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
The coalition government formed in January 2019 broadly supports the strategic orientations of the White
paper No. 11 (2016-17). The government aims to enhance the efficiency and competitiveness of the sector,


454 

while maintaining the overall system of market regulation and border protection. Agricultural policy is to
continue to build on four pillars: i) the system of annual agricultural negotiations and agreements; ii) a well-
functioning border protection; iii) farmers’ responsibility for balancing supply and demand on the domestic
market through producer co-operatives; and iv) continuation of the property regulations in agriculture to
protect the family-based ownership of farms. Other key elements of the political platform include:
continuation of the milk quota system; introduction of the Act on Good Business Conduct during 2020;
following up the soil protection strategy; stimulating organic farming; reinforcing the focus on animal
welfare; strengthen R&D; and continuing the policy for low antibiotic use and low prevalence of antibiotic
resistance in animal husbandry.
In May 2020, an agreement was reached between the government and the two farmers’ organisations
involved in the agricultural negotiations. The main changes in the agreement were:

an increase in target prices with a total budgetary effect by NOK 300 million (USD 32 million) from
1 July 2020

an increase in budgetary support by NOK 350 million (USD 37 million) from 2020 to 2021

a transfer of NOK 93.4 million (USD 9.8 million) from the 2020 budget to the 2021 budget

further strengthening of small and medium-sized farms

increased support for areas with poor conditions for agricultural production

increased support for investments in vegetable production and in sectors with potential for
increased market share of domestic production.
A system for buying and selling milk quotas was put into place in 1997. The milk quota system serves to
regulate milk production in proportion to the market situation. Each year the basic quota volumes are
multiplied by a factor to fix the amount of milk each producer can deliver to a dairy (i.e. actual production
possibility). For 2021, the quota volumes were multiplied by a factor of 1.07 in order to balance the market.
The milk production prognosis is 1 537 million litres.
Due to an agreement between the government and one of the farmers’ organisations, the government
bought about 35 million litres of milk quotas from the market in 2020. According to the agreement, the
quota scheme will be reintroduced in the market from 2022. Farmers selling cow milk quota will then be
allowed to sell 60% of their quota directly to other producers within a production region (mainly defined as
the county), but a minimum of 40% has to be sold to the government at a fixed price. There are
14 production regions within which redistribution can take place. The purpose of these regions is to ensure
good geographical distribution and equal development opportunities for producers in all regions.
Following the 2018 strategy on organic production, a programme was prepared to prioritise measures for
organic production over the long-term. A forum was established where representatives from the whole
value chain as well as researchers, organisations and the agricultural extension service can discuss
relevant challenges and solutions for the development of organic production. In 2020, NOK 116 million
(USD 12 million) was provided for measures to support organic production and NOK 34 million
(USD 0.4 million) to different projects on information and demonstration projects.
The budget for the Regional Environmental Programmes (REP) has increased to NOK 528 million
(USD 56 million) for 2020. Payments under these programmes finance measures such as the reduction of
run-off from agricultural fields, environmentally friendly spreading of manure, maintenance of fields with
high or special biodiversity in the forest and mountains areas, grazing on islands, and maintenance around
heritage sites in the agricultural landscape.
On bio-economy, the Research Council of Norway, Innovation Norway and Industrial Development
Corporation of Norway (Siva) have developed a common Action Plan for the implementation of the
recommendations of the strategy, which was published in February 2020. Work on developing a strategy


 455

on circular economy is in progress, with nine ministries involved in the process, including the Ministry of
Agriculture and Food.
In June 2019, the government and farmers’ organisations negotiated a climate agreement for agriculture.
The agreement sets targets for the abatement of GHG emissions and uptake from agriculture over 2021-
30. Improvement in on-farm livestock, manure and soil management will be key to reach these targets,
alongside improvements in consumption and reduction in food losses and waste.
The rural development aspects of Norwegian agricultural policy include several programmes designed to
stimulate innovation and the establishment of alternative businesses on farms and alternative employment
in rural areas. Most of the funding is financed through the Agricultural Development Fund. For 2020, the
total allocation of funds for rural development (within the Agricultural Agreement) was NOK 1 251 million
(USD 132 million).
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Norway has implemented several measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, many of which are
relevant to the agricultural sector. Farmers who are unable to harvest in 2020 due to lack of seasonal
workers were eligible for payment under the crop insurance compensation scheme. The temporary
measure applied to farmers of fruits, berries, vegetables or potatoes. Compensation up to NOK 2 million
(USD 200 000) could be approved for significant crop failures of more than 30% compared to the average
production in a five-year period. The application deadline was 31 October 2020.
Certain adjustments have also been made to the scheme for investment aid for rural development
purposes. For a temporary period until 31 December 2020, investment aid could exceed the maximum
ceilings of NOK 2 million (USD 200 000) and 35% of total cost estimates, if the project can document
significantly higher costs or reduced liquidity as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic and falling
exchange rate.
The Norwegian Food Safety Authority elevated vigilance for personnel working with meat control at
slaughterhouses and control at border stations to avoid personnel being infected or quarantined. The
Norwegian Food Safety Authority is continuously assessing measures to limit contamination to critical
personnel.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
Following the WTO Ministerial Decision on agriculture in Nairobi in December 2015, Norway eliminated its
remaining export subsidies on cheese and processed agricultural products as of the end of 2020.
Through the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), Norway has negotiated 29 Free Trade Agreements
(FTAs) with 40 partner countries. Norway and its EFTA partners revised their chapter on trade and
sustainable development, which now includes an article on trade and sustainable agriculture and food
systems. The agreement with Ecuador, which was concluded in 2018, entered into force 1 November
2020. Ecuador accounts for about 0.03% of Norwegian agro-food exports and agro-food imports. There
are ongoing free trade negotiations between EFTA and India, Viet Nam and Malaysia. Negotiations with
MERCOSUR were concluded in August 2019. EFTA has also started re-negotiations of free trade
agreements with Chile and the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) (Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia,
South Africa and Swaziland). These Free Trade Agreements and negotiations include processed
agricultural products and a range of primary agricultural products. In 2020, Norway and the People’s
Republic of China made further progress in bilateral negotiations on a trade agreement.


456 

Contextual information
Norway has a shortage of arable land, but an abundance of grass and pasture. Agricultural land accounts
for only 3% of the country’s total area; therefore, the most favourable lands are mostly allocated to arable
crops as a matter of policy design, while ruminant livestock is allocated to regions with less favourable
conditions. As a result, production of cow and goat milk, and bovine and sheep meat takes place in rural
areas, and production of grains, poultry and eggs mainly takes place in central parts of Norway.
Due to unfavourable climatic conditions, the agricultural sector produces a rather narrow range of
commodities. In addition to sheep farming, the primary activity has traditionally been cattle (for milk and
meat) and cereals (mainly used as animal feed). The farm structure is dominated by relatively small family
farms, many of which are in remote locations.
Table 21.3. Norway: Contextual indicators

Norway
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
166
357
0.4%
0.3%
Population (million)
4
5
0.1%
0.1%
Land area (thousand km2)
365
365
0.4%
0.4%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
1 042
986
0.03%
0.03%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
14
17
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
36 950
66 831
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
28
23
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
2.1
2.2
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
4.1
2.0
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
0.8
1.2
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.6
8.9
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
28
30
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
72
70
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
84
81
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Natural resource wealth and a regulative framework conducive to business development have helped to
boost Norway’s per capita GDP, which is now one of the highest in the world. Combined with its “Nordic
model” ensuring inclusiveness and low inequality, Norway exhibits impressive levels of well-being in many
dimensions. Sustaining Norway’s inclusive society will require diversification away from oil-related activities
and finding new opportunities from globalisation and digitalisation. The recent outbreak of COVID-19 and
the associated shutdown have had an impact on the economy. According to OECD projections, real GDP
is estimated to have fallen by 1.2% in 2020.
Norway is a net importer of agricultural products: agro-food imports represent around 9% of total imports,
while agro-food exports represent 1.2% of total exports. The vast majority of Norway’s agricultural
production is consumed domestically. Most of the agro-food exports are in products for final consumption,
while a small majority of imports are for further processing. The European Union is Norway’s main trading
partner.


 457

Figure 21.5. Norway: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 21.6. Norway: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Over the 2007-16 period, agricultural output is estimated to have increased at a slow annual pace. Variable
inputs and fixed factors of production have declined, while total factor productivity is estimated to have
increased at a rate that is slightly higher than the world average. Overall, there are signs of improvements
in some agri-environmental indicators, but sustainability performance is a concern in terms of emissions,
biodiversity and nutrient balances. While policies towards land management and the cultural landscape
have had some success, achieving reductions in nutrient balances and meeting both domestic policy goals
and international commitments related to GHGs, ammonia emissions and water protection have proved
challenging. Norway’s nutrient surpluses are among the highest in OECD and have not significantly
declined in recent years.
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
22
1
42
46
11
8
24
44
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


458 

Figure 21.7. Norway: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 21.4. Norway: Productivity and environmental indicators

Norway
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.2%
1.9%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
85.3
94.5
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
12.1
10.6
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
1.6
1.5
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
8.3
8.6
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
4.2
3.3
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
32.8
..
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
..
..
9.3
8.5
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


-0.1%
0.5%
-1.1%
0.05%
1.9%
1.6%
-1.5%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
Norway
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


 459

Reference

OECD (2021), Policies for the Future of Farming and Food in Norway, OECD Agriculture and
Food Policy Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/20b14991-en.
[1]


Note
1 For more detailed assessment and recommendations see (OECD, 2021[1]).



460 

Support to agriculture
Support to Philippine farmers in 2018-20 averaged 27.5% of gross farm receipts. This is up from 22% at
the beginning of the 2000s, higher than the OECD average and one of the highest levels among all
emerging economies covered by this report.
Market price support (MPS), which reflects existing trade barriers (mainly tariffs and Tariff Rate Quotas
[TRQs]), is the dominant form of support to Philippine producers, of which rice producers are the main
beneficiaries. In addition to rice, import tariffs support the prices of sugarcane, pig meat, and poultry. As a
result, domestic producer prices are 40% higher on average than prices on international markets.
Payments to farmers support the use of inputs and investments, mainly in the rice sector. The MPS and
payments for inputs are considered potentially most production- and trade-distorting, and represent around
90% of support to farmers.
Expenditures for general services (GSSE) more than doubled relative to agricultural value-added from
2000-02 to 2018-20, driven largely by higher investments in irrigation systems and extension programmes.
Expenditures on public stockholding (mainly related to rice) are also an important GSSE expenditure. The
overall cost of support to the Philippine agricultural sector was 2.5% of GDP in 2018-20, one of the highest
across all countries measured, but down from 2.9% estimated for 2000-02.
Recent policy changes
In March 2019, the Philippines replaced quantitative restrictions on rice imports with tariffs. In order to
offset the effect of this liberalisation, the government established a Rice Competitiveness Enhancement
Fund (RCEF) with an annual PHP 10 billion (USD 192.3 million) appropriation over the following six years.
Areas supported in 2020 include investments in machinery and equipment, breeding, and distribution of
high quality rice seeds, credit and extension.
Furthermore, an excess rice tariff collection (above the PHP 10 billion financing the RCEF) was provided
in the form of an unconditional cash transfer of PHP 5 000 (USD 101) per farm to benefit small rice farmers
(less than 1 hectare planted for rice). In 2020, small producers of corn, coconut and sugar cane received
a similar support from the budget in the form of cash and food assistance worth the same amount per farm.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the government took several measures to support the agro-food
sector. During the period of quarantine, all farmers, farm workers, fisher folk and agribusiness personnel
were exempt from quarantine measures if they observed safety protocols. The Philippine Department of
Agriculture implemented the Plant, Plant, Plant Programme to enhance food security in response to
concerns amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. It is an all-encompassing programme for crops, livestock,
poultry and fisheries, realised through specific interventions. The programme involves a Rice Resiliency
Project aimed at increasing the country’s self-sufficiency level from 87% to 93%. The SURE Aid and
Recovery Project extended additional loans and loan guarantees to small farmers. In order to avoid a sharp
22 Philippines


 461

rise in retail food prices due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the government imposed retail price controls by
implementing suggested retail prices (SRP) on basic food items sold in public markets.
Assessment and recommendations

The Philippines’ agricultural policy focuses on food security and poverty alleviation through a
guaranteed supply of staple food (rice) at affordable prices. The goal of self-sufficiency in rice
drives a range of policy measures supporting rice producers, in contrast to the trend, elsewhere in
Southeast Asia, toward diversification into higher-value commodities. The extension of direct
income support to small producers of commodities other than rice, implemented in 2020, is a step
in the right direction.

Rice stocks operated by the National Food Authority (NFA) have the official role of emergency
buffer stock. However, the NFA uses these stocks to support prices paid to farmers by buying at
administered prices and reducing consumer prices by selling at subsidised prices on retail markets.
Hence, these stocks de facto represent “intervention stocks” with significant implications for
markets and the government budget. The budget financing these interventions could be spent on
direct income support, and to finance general services to improve productivity in the sector.

From 2017, the Philippines reallocated some funding from subsidising variable inputs to
infrastructure investments, and through the re-orientation of agricultural knowledge systems.
Continuing efforts to refocus spending onto general services to the sector are key for promoting
productivity growth, estimated at very low levels in the past decades.

In view of the Philippines’ high susceptibility to typhoons, tropical storms and flooding, the
government should take a holistic approach to risk management that adapts policy objectives
across programmes and institutions. Moreover, the effectiveness of current risk management tools
should be assessed – in particular, the extent to which insurance and cash-transfer schemes
encourage risk-reducing decision-making on the farm. Lastly, making information about local
conditions, future projections and adaptive solutions more available would increase farmers’
awareness and capacity to prepare and adjust.

The Philippines is particularly vulnerable to climate change. To improve the agricultural sector’s
capacity to adapt, the government should develop clear and measurable objectives on climate
adaptation, and ensure a coherent set of measures to implement across policy programmes and
public agencies.




462 

Figure 22.1. Philippines: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most-distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/0s1pnl
Figure 22.2. Philippines: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/gy51k6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
1.45
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0%
1%
2%
3%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20
-5%
-4%
-3%
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD


 463

Figure 22.3. Philippines: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/gkfip9


-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Coconuts
Eggs
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Sugar
Rice
Maize
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


464 

Table 22.1. Philippines: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
9 727
27 122
27 117
26 250
28 000
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
89.2
92.8
92.9
92.7
92.9
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
9 950
30 532
30 526
29 606
31 463
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
2 167
7 552
7 730
7 278
7 648
Support based on commodity output
2 094
7 242
7 438
7 042
7 248
Market Price Support1
2 094
7 242
7 438
7 042
7 248
Positive Market Price Support
2 134
7 242
7 438
7 042
7 248
Negative Market Price Support
-40
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
69
297
282
224
384
Based on variable input use
36
149
161
128
158
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
32
148
121
95
226
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
5
13
10
13
17
Percentage PSE (%)
22.0
27.5
28.2
27.5
26.9
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.31
1.40
1.41
1.40
1.40
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.28
1.38
1.39
1.38
1.37
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
244
1 580
1 649
1 379
1 712
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
56
324
316
249
408
Inspection and control
14
78
62
73
98
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
155
972
1 070
855
992
Marketing and promotion
6
47
47
45
49
Cost of public stockholding
12
136
133
135
141
Miscellaneous
1
22
21
22
23
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
10.1
17.3
17.6
15.9
18.3
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-2 250
-7 802
-7 911
-7 658
-7 836
Transfers to producers from consumers
-2 299
-7 696
-7 721
-7 488
-7 880
Other transfers from consumers
-152
-579
-566
-568
-604
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
201
474
376
398
648
Percentage CSE (%)
-22.5
-25.6
-25.9
-25.9
-24.9
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.32
1.37
1.37
1.37
1.37
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.29
1.34
1.35
1.35
1.33
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
2 411
9 132
9 378
8 657
9 360
Transfers from consumers
2 451
8 276
8 287
8 056
8 485
Transfers from taxpayers
112
1 435
1 657
1 169
1 480
Budget revenues
-152
-579
-566
-568
-604
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
2.9
2.5
2.7
2.3
2.5
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
318
1 889
1 941
1 615
2 112
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.4
0.6
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
180
180
181
..
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
48.96
51.36
52.67
51.80
49.62
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Philippines are: maize, rice, sugar, beef and veal,
pig meat, poultry, eggs, bananas, coconut, mango and pineapple.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 465

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Heavy government interventions in agricultural markets within a closed economy characterised the period
from 1970 to 1986. The government had monopoly control over trade in rice, sugar and maize, operated
by the National Grains Authority (NGA) established in 1972 (later renamed the National Food Authority
[NFA]). Sugar trade was nationalised under the National Sugar Trading Corporation. At the same time,
high-yield rice varieties were introduced. Input subsidies encouraged farmers to use high-yield varieties of
rice, as well as fertilisers and pesticides. Public spending in the sector increased (particularly on irrigation),
financed by a mix of taxes on major agricultural exports and foreign loans. Access to credit was facilitated
by legally obliging financial institutions to provide 25% of their loans to the agricultural sector. Budgetary
expenditures financed extension services to the farming sector (OECD, 2017[1]).
Partial liberalisation of the sector was implemented gradually from 1986 to 2000. Reforms undertaken in
the 1990s aimed to improve services provided to agriculture, particularly extension services, and
infrastructure. Market interventions were gradually reduced, as were tariffs and non-tariff measures on
agro-food imports. The policy of self-sufficiency in rice continued. The strategy continued the provision of
input subsidies to farmers, mainly fertilisers and certified seeds, but also credit facilitation and support to
public services for agriculture, such as investments in irrigation and farm-to-market roads. At the beginning
of the 1990s, the Philippines negotiated a number of trade agreements (it is a founding member of the
ASEAN free trade area). Upon joining the WTO in 1995, the country committed to removing quantitative
restrictions on imports of sensitive agricultural products (with the exception of rice) and to gradual
liberalisation of agro-food trade. Public expenditure on agriculture declined substantially in the late 1990s,
due to tight fiscal policies adopted in the aftermath of the Asian Financial Crisis (OECD, 2017[1]).
Furthermore, since 1988, the Philippines has undertaken an ambitious agrarian reform to redistribute
agricultural land to landless farmers and land workers. The reform covered close to three-quarters of the
country’s agricultural area. By the end of 2015, the redistribution of land was almost complete, but property
rights remain to be settled. Almost half of the reform beneficiaries still have collective ownership certificates
instead of individual property rights.
During the 2000s, the government undertook policy measures to further reduce market interventions in
agriculture. Subsidised credit programmes were terminated, and private traders allowed to import rice at
limited levels. However, the focus on food (rice) self-sufficiency was further reinforced and, after the global
food price crisis in 2008, spending on agriculture increased substantially. The government increased public
expenditure on irrigation and input subsidies to achieve self-sufficiency. The Food Staples Sufficiency
Programme launched in 2011 retained the focus on rice and selected other staples, but shifted emphasis
away from input subsidies towards public services to agriculture such as extension and infrastructure
(OECD, 2017[1]). Following the Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture, the system of quantitative
restrictions for rice was abolished in March 2019.




466 

Table 22.2. Philippines: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1986
Closed economy with heavy state
interventions in agricultural markets
and trade
Agricultural import tariffs; Export taxes on agricultural products
State monopoly control over rice and maize trade (NGA, now NFA)
Food self-sufficiency (rice and other staples); Increasing support to those commodities
Nationalisation of sugar production; Creation of the National Sugar Trading Corporation
1986-2000s
Gradual reforms towards trade
liberalisation
Continued policy of food self-sufficiency (rice)
Land reform started in 1988 (redistribution of land)
National Sugar Trading Corporation reduced its functions and changed to the Sugar
Regulatory Administration
Investments in general services (irrigation, roads)
Input subsidies declined due to the Asian financial crisis
Removal of quantitative restrictions of all agricultural products except rice
FTAs and WTO accession
2000-present
Minor policy change, some forms of
state intervention in markets and
trade maintained
Food self-sufficiency (rice) continues to be the main objective
Quantitative quotas for rice imports
High tariffs of some agricultural products, particularly rice and maize
Subsidised credit was dismantled
Input subsidies for rice
Import quantitative restrictions for rice abolished and replaced by import tariffs (2019)
Increased budgetary support to rice producers
Support to farmers as a share of gross farm receipts (percentage PSE) tended to slightly increase and
then stabilise over the last 20 years. It is above the OECD average and one of the highest among the
emerging economies included in this report. Market price support constitutes a major part of support to
farms, while input subsidies and other budgetary payments play a secondary role (Figure 22.4).
Figure 22.4. Philippines: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 2000 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 467

Main policy instruments
Various measures provide price support to Philippine producers. Price support policies mainly focus on
rice and sugar, and comprise a combination of trade barriers (tariffs and TRQs) and domestic market
regulations for rice. The NFA implements rice price support by buying buffer stocks at administered prices
from domestic producers and selling these stocks at subsidised prices to consumers. For sugar, production
quotas and trade barriers (tariffs and TRQs) provide producer price support and market regulation.
Tariff protection is the Philippines’ main trade policy tool. Trade liberalisation primarily occurs within
regional trade agreements, particularly the ASEAN Free Trade Area. The simple average applied Most
Favoured Nation (MFN) tariff on agricultural products was 9.8% in 2016. Tariff lines applied are ad valorem
and range from 0% to 65%.
Tariff rate quotas are applied to 14 agricultural products, with in-quota tariffs ranging from 30% to 50%
and out-of-quota from 35% to 65%. Products covered include live swine, goats and poultry and meat
thereof, potatoes, coffee, maize, rice, and sugar. For three others (poultry meat, potatoes and coffee),
TRQs only apply to a specific range of tariff lines. Import licensing is required for all regulated products
(including those under TRQs), intended to safeguard public health, national security and welfare.
To comply with WTO obligations, the Philippines replaced quantitative restrictions on rice imports with an
import tariff system as of March 2019, under the Rice Tariffication and Liberalisation Law (RA 1120). In
place of a quota on imports from ASEAN countries, a single tariff of 35% applies. For imports from non-
ASEAN countries, a TRQ applies. Applied MFN in-quota and out-of-quota tariffs for rice are set at 40%
and 180%, respectively. Additionally, grains, grain products and sugar require export permits.
The Rice Tariffication and Liberalisation Law (2019) introduced measures related to the changes in rice
trade and related domestic market regulation. The food safety regulatory function, and hence responsibility
for issuing permits, licenses, or registering trade and importation of rice was transferred from the NFA to
the Bureau of Plant Industry (BPI). Nowadays, the NFA’s main role consists of local paddy procurement
from domestic producers and management of buffer-stocks, including sales to domestic markets.
To offset the effect of the liberalisation of rice imports on producers’ incomes, in 2019 the government
established the RCEF with an annual appropriation of PHP 10 billion (USD 202 million) over the following
six years (see next section).
Budgetary support to agricultural producers, both through payments provided to farmers individually and
to the agricultural sector as a whole (general services), is small compared to the level of price support.
Budgetary support to producers focuses on subsidising the use of variable inputs, including seed and
fertiliser subsidies.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
In 2020, the NFA intervened on the domestic market by increased buying of rice into buffer (intervention)
at a price set at PHP 19 (USD 0.38) per kg of rice, and also by selling domestic rice from its buffers at an
administered price (generally below the market price) in order to lower consumer prices. Overall, the
general strategy of the NFA is buying more rice from farmers and increasing the turnover of the stocks
(i.e. more buying in and more selling to consumers from the stocks). Hence, these stocks play more a role
of an “intervention stock” rather than an “emergency buffer stock” with two functions: (i) supporting
domestic producer prices through buying stocks at administered prices; and (ii) reducing consumer prices
in the market by releasing from stocks at subsidised prices.
In order to offset the effect of the liberalisation of rice imports on producers’ incomes, the government
established in 2019 a Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund (RCEF) with an annual PHP 10 billion
(USD 202 million) appropriation (financed from the receipts from rice import tariffs) through the following
six years. In 2020, the expenditures were spent as follows: (i) PHP 5 billion for rice farm machinery and


468 

equipment; (ii) PHP 3 billion for rice seed development, propagation and promotion; (iii) PHP 1 billion for
credit to farmers; and (iv) another PHP 1 billion for extension.
Furthermore, an excess rice tariff collection (above the PHP 10 billion financing the RCEF), estimated at
PHP 5 billion (USD 101 million) in 2020, was provided in the form of an unconditional cash transfer of PHP
5 000 (USD 101) per farm to benefit small rice farmers (less than 1 hectare planted for rice). Starting from
2020, small producers of corn, coconut and sugar cane received a similar support from the budget in the
form of cash and food assistance1 worth PHP 5 000 per farm.
The Department of Agriculture (DA) developed a new programme to assist farm and fishery co-operatives
through a financial grant. The Enhanced Kadiwa Financial Grant programme aims to provide co-operatives
with additional capital to purchase supplies and equipment, and help them sell their produce directly to
consumers.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
In the period of quarantine, all farmers, farm workers, fisher folk and agribusiness personnel were
exempted from quarantine measures, provided that they observed safety protocols.
The Philippine Department of Agriculture will be implementing a PHP 31 billion (USD 608 million) Plant,
Plant, Plant Programme to enhance food security in response to concerns amidst the COVID-19 pandemic.
It is an all-encompassing programme for crops, livestock, poultry and fisheries and is realised through the
implementation of specific interventions including: 1) productivity enhancement projects; 2) income
enhancement projects on food markets (logistics and processing); 3) social protection and amelioration
projects; and 4) Cash for Work (C4W) projects for displaced workers and unemployed. The programme
involves a PHP 8.5 billion (USD 171 million) ‘Rice Resiliency Project’ aimed at increasing the country’s
self-sufficiency level from 87% to 93%. Parallel to this programme, the Philippine government plans to
import 300 000 tonnes of rice through a government-to-government purchase arrangement.
From April 2020, the Agricultural Credit and Policy Council started to implement the expanded SURE Aid
and Recovery Project (SURE COVID-19) for small farmers and fishermen (SFF) and agriculture and fishery
micro and small enterprises (MSE) whose livelihoods, agribusiness operations, and incomes were affected
by the COVID-19 pandemic. Under this project, additional loans and loan guarantees were extended to
SFF and MSEs. Total funding of these programmes represented PHP 2.5 billion (USD 50 million).
The Department of Agriculture (DA) continues to implement major interventions to ensure adequate,
accessible, and affordable food to Filipino households, particularly in Metro Manila and other major centres,
during the COVID-19 pandemic. The DA is easing its rules on food pass issuance to ensure seamless
movement of food and agri-fishery products and inputs especially in Metro Manila and other metropolitan
areas in Luzon.
To ensure a stable supply of affordable food for Metro Manila, the DA implemented a Food Resiliency
Action Plan. The plan monitors on a weekly basis the demand and supply (including the source of supply)
for basic food commodities in Metro Manila. A network of government stores (“KADIWA ni A ni at Kita”)
sells the basic food items to Metro Manila residents at regulated prices.
In order to avoid a sharp rise in retail food prices due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the government imposed
a control of retail prices by implementing suggested retail prices (SRPs) on basic food items sold in public
markets (pork, poultry, fish, sugar, onion, garlic). In November 2020, the DA extended the SRPs to other
basic agriculture commodities (beef, selected vegetables). This followed the Luzon-wide price freeze
imposed earlier in response to typhoons that generated significant damage across the country.


 469

Trade policy developments in 2020-21
On 13 June 2019, the government issued Executive Order No. 82, reducing tariff rates for mechanically
deboned or mechanically separated poultry from 40% to 5%, while those for frozen whole turkey were
reduced from 40% to 20%. These rates were set to remain at the lower tariff until 31 December 2020.
Executive Order No. 20, issued in 2017, prescribes the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) tariff schedule until
31 December 2020.
In September 2020, the DA has issued a temporary ban on the importation of domestic and wild pigs, pork
products, and by-products from Germany. The ban was imposed as a reaction to the first case of African
Swine Fever (ASF) affecting wild boar in Germany.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The Philippine Government agreed bilateral commitments with Viet Nam to ensure that the Philippines
continues to be supplied with its rice requirement during the pandemic.
The Philippine Government imposed a temporary ban on Brazilian poultry products after the People’s
Republic of China reported finding traces of the COVID-19 in chicken products from Brazil. The ban was
issued as a precautionary measure to ensure the safety and health of Filipino consumers. The DA, through
the Bureau of Animal Industry (BAI), is awaiting a reply from the Brazilian Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock
and Supply (MAPA), particularly on the requested documents related to COVID-19 prevention and control
procedures among Brazilian factory workers in poultry processing facilities.
Contextual information
The Philippines is a mid-size country in terms of land area, but its population of 108 million makes it the
world’s 13th most populous country. At USD 9 277 in purchasing power parity (PPP), GDP per capita in the
Philippines is less than half the average GDP per capita of all countries analysed in this report (Table 22.3).
Agriculture is an important sector for the Philippines, accounting for almost a quarter of total employment
and 9% of GDP (Table 22.3). Farms tend to be small-sized with the average land size at just 1.3 hectare
(OECD, 2017[1]).
Since 2012, the Philippines has achieved relatively stable growth of around 6% annually, and enjoys
comparatively low levels of unemployment at less than 4%. However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the
GDP fell by around 10% in 2020. Inflation has been fluctuating and was 4% in 2019 and 2020 (Figure 22.5).
Overall, the Philippine economy, including its agro-food sector, integrates well in international markets – as
measured by the ratio of trade to GDP at 25% in 2019.




470 

Table 22.3. Philippines: Contextual indicators

Philippines
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
268
1 003
0.7%
0.9%
Population (million)
78
108
1.8%
2.1%
Land area (thousand km2)
298
298
0.4%
0.4%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
11 234
12 440
0.4%
0.4%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
262
363
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
3 440
9 277
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
45
25
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
13.9
8.8
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
37.1
23.4
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
4.0
8.3
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.3
12.0
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
63
53
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
37
47
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
45
45
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Figure 22.5. Philippines: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; ILO estimates and projections; and Economist Intelligence Unit.
With limited land and a large population, the Philippines is a growing net importer of agro-food products.
Of these imports, three-quarters are processed goods that are used directly for (final) consumption or as
intermediate inputs by the processing industry. In contrast, almost half of its exports are primary goods for
consumption, and close to a quarter of the exports are processed products going to final consumers
(Figure 22.6).
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate


 471

Figure 22.6. Philippines: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Total Factor Productivity (TFP) in agriculture is estimated to have stalled over the past ten years, down
from already low TFP growth during the 1990s. Agricultural output growth has remained relatively slow
and has averaged 0.5% per year, well below the world average (Figure 22.7). It has been driven entirely
by increased use of both primary factors and intermediary inputs.
Agricultural land resources are under strain from frequent natural disasters, population growth and
urbanisation. The Philippines has abundant water resources, of which the agriculture sector is the main
user – accounting for almost three-quarters of total freshwater withdrawals (Table 22.4). Nonetheless,
shortages can occur during the dry season in some regions. The share of agriculture in total energy use
has increased, but remains well below the OECD average. The Nitrogen balance has slightly increased,
while that of Phosphorus has declined, but both remain about double the OECD average.
Figure 22.7. Philippines: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
7
46
44
22
19
8
31
24
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
0.2%
0.5%
0.3%
0.05%
-0.01%
1.6%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
Philippines
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


472 

Table 22.4. Philippines: Productivity and environmental indicators

Philippines
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.8%
-0.01%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
57.9
58.3
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
7.4
6.8
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
0.2
0.7
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
29.2
..
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
..
15.2
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
82.4
73.3
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
..
..
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.

Reference

OECD (2017), Agricultural Policies in the Philippines, OECD Food and Agricultural Reviews,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264269088-en.
[1]


Note
1 PHP 3 000 in cash and PHP 2 000 in kind (at PHP 1 000 for rice and PHP 1 000 for chicken and eggs).
Beneficiaries can obtain rice, chicken, and eggs using an e-voucher system.



 473

Support to agriculture
Support to producers in the Russian Federation (hereafter “Russia”) fluctuated significantly in the past, but
stabilised somewhat since 2014 at levels between 9% and 13% of gross farm receipts. Average annual
support to farms was around 9% in 2018-20.
Around 70% of support to farms is most-distorting, in the form of support based on output (including market
price support) and unconstrained variable input use. On average domestic prices are 5% above world
market prices. However, aggregate market price support disguises variations in support across
commodities: it represents a mix of border protection for imported livestock products and sugar, and implicit
and explicit taxation of exported grains and oilseeds. Livestock producers further benefit from domestic
grain prices below world levels.
Expenditure financing general services to the sector (GSSE) remains within 3% to 4% of agricultural gross
value-added, below the OECD average. Within support to general services, the agricultural knowledge
system, development and maintenance of infrastructure, and the inspection and control system absorb the
largest shares of public funding. Total support to agriculture (TSE) equalled 0.6% of GDP in 2018-20. This
has decreased since the mid-1990s, largely reflecting GDP growth and the declining share of agricultural
in the economy.
Recent policy changes
The State Programme for the Development of Agriculture is in its second phase of implementation from
2018 to 2025. The funding structure in 2019 and 2020 was approximately identical. The areas of state
support did not change significantly, but some sub-programmes were transformed to finance regional
projects. The emphasis on support to agricultural exports continues. The agricultural export component
focuses on developing export infrastructure, facilitation of access to foreign markets through phytosanitary
improvements, and product promotion and positioning abroad.
The government launched additional measures in May 2020. These included an increase in support for
the purchase of agricultural machinery, goods and processing equipment, and an increase in the
authorised capital of Rosagroleasing in order to increase the supply of equipment to the farming sector.
The railroad subsidies expanded to soybean meals and vegetables. Initially, only grain transportation was
subsidised. A new subsidy to support oilseeds production was introduced in 2020 in the form of area
payments to soybeans and rapeseed.
Support to producers intended to stimulate production was reformed in 2020. Two new subsidy
programmes, “compensatory” and “stimulative” subsidies, replaced the unified subsidy, milk output
payments and area payments. The compensatory subsidy includes crop area payments, milk subsidies,
support to pedigree livestock, elite seed subsidy, support to locally traditional subsectors, and an
agricultural insurance subsidy. The stimulative subsidy includes support to priority subsectors chosen by
23 Russian Federation


474 

regional governments from a state-defined list. It can also provide support to the development of small
farming and support to the ten least-developed regions of the country.
On 21 January 2020, the President of the Russian Federation approved the new Food Security Doctrine,
which is aimed to systematically address challenges and threats to food security. According to this
document, the minimum threshold share of domestic production in domestic consumption ranges from
60% for fruits and berries to 95% for grains.
In response to the COVID-19 crisis, the payment of principal debt due in 2020 was deferred for up to 1
year. Payment of accrued interest for short-term loans, and interest and principal for investment loans was
also deferred.
At the end of 2020, to address the decreased real incomes of the population, the government set marginal
prices for so-called socially significant food products. To achieve this, the Ministry of Agriculture and the
Ministry of Industry and Trade concluded price agreements with food producers and retail chains, valid
until the end of March 2021.
On 21 November 2020, the government extended until the end of 2021 the ban on importing agricultural
products from countries that apply economic sanctions against Russia. Tariff quotas for wheat, rye, barley
and corn exports were established for 2021. For grain exports above the quota, a duty of 50% of the
customs value of the exported products (but at least EUR 100 per tonne) applies. Furthermore, from
15 February to 30 June 2021, an export duty of 30% (but no less than EUR 165 per tonne) applies to
soybeans, rapeseed and sunflower seed. The export duty on oilseeds will be extended for the second half
of 2021, and floating export duty on sunflower oil is planned starting 1 September.
In order to ensure the import of agricultural goods in view of the global pandemic, Rosselkhoznadzor
simplified procedures for agricultural imports. In order to minimise the negative economic consequences
of COVID-19, to prevent shortages of socially significant goods in Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU)
countries, on 31 March 2020, the Eurasian Economic Council (EEC) established restrictions (valid until
30 June 2020) on the export of certain types of agro-food products from EAEU member states. The EEC
also approved a list of critical imports to exempt from duties into EAEU countries. The exemption was in
effect from 1 April to 30 June 2020.
Assessment and recommendations

The State Programme for Development of Agriculture aims to boost agricultural production and
agro-food import substitution. Most recently, the policy orientation expanded to include
development of agricultural export potential and tapping markets in large agro-food importers.
However, the state programme does not provide a stable policy framework for decision-making by
farmers, due to frequent ad hoc changes in the implementation of various policy measures.

Although there was some shift towards area and per head payments, most-distorting payments
and import protection continue to dominate support provided to achieve the stated objectives of
import substitution and export development.

A substantial and sustained improvement in the competitiveness of agriculture would more likely
be achieved through a focus on investment in the sector’s long-term growth, such as infrastructure,
technological innovation, and robust plant and livestock health systems.

Research and development (R&D) and knowledge transfer are another critical area to improve
competitiveness and support long-term growth. This is key to the most recent export development
objective, which requires knowledge and skills to seize new demand signals and external market
opportunities. Apart from developing new methods and technologies, fostering their uptake by
agricultural producers and agribusiness is also important. This challenge goes beyond agricultural


 475

policy and requires improvements in the general environment for investment and doing business,
which includes a stable agricultural policy framework.

Human capital is another key to long-term growth. Consecutive programmes have directed
resources to rural development. A substantial increase of such spending is foreseen within the new
State Programme on Integrated Development of Rural Territories. This is a positive development,
but much work remains to improve living conditions in rural areas and secure skills and knowledge
for the rural economy.

The agricultural sector could be a main beneficiary of the State Programme for the Preservation of
the Environment through its effects on improved waste management, reduced water and air
pollution, forest rehabilitation, and support for the best available technologies. The agricultural
sector should use these opportunities to seize potentially considerable demand for environmentally
friendly products, both domestically and abroad.

The success of R&D, rural development and environmental programmes will depend, among other
things, on the consistency of actual funding with declared financial targets. As these programmes
significantly rely on sources other than the state budget, it is important to ensure that the planned
activities and administration costs of these programmes are sufficiently attractive for commercial
investors.
Figure 23.1. Russia: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/avfu6o
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
10%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1.00
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.3%
0.4%
0.5%
0.6%
0.7%
0.8%
0.9%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20


476 

Figure 23.2. Russia: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Note: The producer price change and the border price change are not calculated when the negative price gap occurs at the commodity level
for the current or previous year.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/50i9xz
Figure 23.3. Russia: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/klzpqe


-25%
-20%
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
PSE change decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE
-40%
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Eggs
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Sunflower
Rye
Oats
Maize
Barley
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 477

Table 23.1. Russia: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
25 436
77 750
73 707
80 162
79 380
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
81.7
77.7
78.2
77.3
77.7
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
30 143
75 832
74 473
78 393
74 628
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
1 968
7 341
8 892
7 599
5 531
Support based on commodity output
967
3 737
5 224
3 801
2 188
Market Price Support1
770
3 583
5 052
3 627
2 071
Positive Market Price Support
2 017
5 150
6 816
4 300
4 332
Negative Market Price Support
-1 247
-1 566
-1 764
-674
-2 260
Payments based on output
198
154
172
174
116
Payments based on input use
719
2 258
2 343
2 471
1 959
Based on variable input use
359
479
565
476
395
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
318
1 709
1 700
1 905
1 523
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
42
70
78
89
42
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
515
732
752
60
Based on Receipts / Income
0
40
39
67
14
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
475
693
685
46
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
282
831
592
576
1 324
Percentage PSE (%)
7.5
8.9
11.5
9.0
6.7
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.02
1.05
1.07
1.05
1.02
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.08
1.10
1.13
1.10
1.07
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
684
1 781
1 891
1 912
1 540
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
175
635
709
632
564
Inspection and control
203
482
475
521
450
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
230
440
429
491
400
Marketing and promotion
2
70
54
90
64
Cost of public stockholding
1
67
130
72
0
Miscellaneous
73
87
94
106
62
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
25.3
19.2
17.2
19.7
21.2
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-1 471
-4 591
-6 654
-4 084
-3 035
Transfers to producers from consumers
-477
-3 657
-5 136
-3 544
-2 290
Other transfers from consumers
-661
-949
-1 283
-855
-708
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
25
208
231
218
175
Excess feed cost
-359
-193
-466
98
-212
Percentage CSE (%)
-5.1
-6.0
-9.0
-5.2
-4.1
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.04
1.06
1.09
1.06
1.04
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.05
1.06
1.10
1.06
1.04
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
2 677
9 330
11 015
9 729
7 246
Transfers from consumers
1 138
4 606
6 420
4 400
2 998
Transfers from taxpayers
2 201
5 673
5 878
6 184
4 956
Budget revenues
-661
-949
-1 283
-855
-708
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.8
0.6
0.7
0.6
0.5
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
1 908
5 746
5 962
6 102
5 174
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
627
619
643
619
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
29.56
66.61
62.81
64.71
72.32
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Russia are: wheat, maize, rye, barley, oats,
sunflower, sugar, potatoes, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




478 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Prior to the 1990s, during the Soviet era, a centrally planned system regulated all sectors of the economy,
including agriculture. State enterprises controlled the supply chains of the agricultural sector, food
processing and distribution from the farm to the table. Prices at almost all levels were administered by the
state. In addition to financial support from the budget, administered exchanged rates generated significant
transfers through inflated domestic producer prices compared to relatively low world prices expressed in
national currency. No private land ownership existed, and large-scale state farms (sovkhoses) or collective
farms (kolkhozes) operated all agricultural activities (OECD, 1998[1]).
The move from a planned to a market economy reduced budgetary support to both producers and
consumers, dismantled domestic market regulation and liberalised prices (both for farm products and
inputs). Increasingly, investment support to farms was provided in the form of soft loans (OECD, 1998[1]).
Since the mid-2000s, border measures dominate agricultural support policies. The meat and sugar sectors
in particular continue to benefit from high protection. In contrast, the export-oriented grain sector (grains
and oilseeds) continues to have negative support resulting from various export barriers, in particular export
taxes. The implementation of some domestic support policies, such as concessional credit and leasing,
strongly relies on state-supported companies.
From 2013, the policy goals shifted to increased self-sufficiency and import substitution. While taxation of
exports of competitive crop products (grain, oilseeds) continued, policies were implemented to increase
the export potential of livestock products.
Table 23.2. Russia: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1992
Planned economy
State owned enterprises plan and market agricultural production
Administered prices both at farm and consumer level
Budgetary allocation subsidises both farms and consumers
State trading with agricultural inputs and agro-food products
1992- 2007
Transition period: gradual reform towards market
economy
State marketing enterprises dismantled or functions reduced
Reduction of budgetary subsidies
Soft loans to farms by state or parastatal lenders emerge
Reduction of agricultural tariffs of both outputs and inputs
National Priority Project on Agriculture Development (2006-2007)
2008 - 2012
Agricultural sector recovery
First mid-term State Programme (2008-2012)
Increase of state support to the sector
Concessional short-term and long-term credits to agriculture
Tariff and non-tariff barriers
Special attention to small forms in agriculture and development of
cooperatives
WTO accession (2012)
2013-present
Increasing role for the state
Second State Programme (2013-2025)
Prioritisation of import substitution (since 2013)
Orientation towards export support (since 2017)
Export taxes for grains and oilseeds
Since 2000, the country has kept overall positive total support to the sector. Support to farmers as a share
of gross farm receipts stabilised around 10% since 2014 and declined in 2018-20. The overall positive
producer support (PSE) is due to budgetary support and market price support for livestock products and
sugar, partly offset by negative price support to exported commodities such as grains and oilseeds.


 479

Budgetary transfers to producers are dominated by subsidies to variable inputs use and investments
(Figure 23.4).
Figure 23.4. Russia: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Since its launch in 2013, the current State Programme for Development of Agriculture (hereafter, State
Programme for Agriculture) underwent amendments in response to changing economic conditions. Its sub-
programmes were reconfigured in 2015 and 2017 to meet new goals of export support and import
substitution. The programme’s initial budget targets were also adjusted in terms of overall spending and
shifts of funds within and between components. In 2019 and 2020, the State Programme underwent further
changes in structure, spending levels, administration and implementation period, some of which were
introduced in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. An important trend in agricultural development in
Russia is digitalisation, included in the State Programme as a sub-programme for 2019-20.
Russia applies a range of price policy instruments. The main one is border protection, including Tariff
Rate Quotas (TRQ) and non-tariff measures. Since accession to the WTO in July 2012, Russia applies
Most Favoured Nation (MFN) agricultural tariffs, which were reduced to 11.2% on average by 2020 and
align with average final bound agricultural tariffs. In 2019, the average applied agricultural tariff was nearly
twice the average non-agricultural tariff (11% versus 6%). Animal and dairy products, beverages and
tobacco, sugar and confectionary face the highest average import duties within the agricultural group
(WTO/ITC/UNCTAD, 2020[2]). Border measures are in large part implemented within the framework of the
Customs Union of the EAEU.
Domestic price regulation such as grain interventions also apply. The government can purchase or sell
grain if market prices move above or below the established price band. Prices at which market interventions
are carried out, however, do not play the role of price guarantees. Restrictions on imports or exports can
be imposed.
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


480 

Payments based on output for marketed livestock products come from regional budgets. There is also a
national payment for milk co-financed by federal and regional governments.
Concessional credit (for short and long-term investments) is the primary support instrument, taking the
form of loans from commercial banks at reduced interest rates (compared to commercial rates) fixed by
the government, with financial compensation by the state to lending banks. For credit taken before 2017,
concessions are also granted in the form of interest subsidies to borrowers. In addition, there is a range of
subsidies for variable inputs. Support comes through leasing machinery, equipment and pedigree
livestock at preferential terms.
Area payments for crop production began in 2013, replacing several previous nationwide input subsidies
for sowing and harvesting campaigns.
Agricultural producers benefit from a number of tax preferences and concessions on repayment of
historical arrears on federal taxes and social contributions.
Most support measures described above are implemented within the multi-year State Programme for
Agriculture – the country’s main agricultural policy framework. It is based on support measures co-financed
by federal and regional governments, with co-financing rates varying across regions and individual
measures. In addition to support included in the State Programme, regions implement and finance their
own, strictly regional support measures.
Some recently introduced State Programmes in other economic and social areas, such as rural
development and environment, contribute to shaping conditions for long-term sustainable development
of agriculture.
On 6 October 2019, Russia ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, which it had signed in
April 2016. In 2014, the government had approved an action plan to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions. It focuses on developing a regulatory and operational framework, such as the systems for
registration, evaluation and projection of emissions, as well as state regulation of emissions. As part of this
plan, a draft law on the regulation of GHGs was prepared in 2018 and is currently under regulatory impact
assessment.
Other main national policy documents related to climate change are the Climate Doctrine of the Russian
Federation, and the Comprehensive Plan for the Implementation of the Climate Doctrine of the Russian
Federation for the Period until 2020. The Climate Doctrine sets out a conceptual framework for national
activities on climate change, while the Comprehensive Plan formulates unified state policy in that area.
The latter spells out key actions assigned to ministries and public agencies.
In accordance with the Climate Doctrine and the Comprehensive Plan, the Ministry of Agriculture promotes
climate adaptation practices such as adaptive landscape farming systems; sustainable water, air, and
nutritional regimes; the introduction of new agricultural crop varieties; and the optimisation of crop
conditions based on long-term forecasts. Another policy document, the State Programme for the
Development of Agriculture, is the main sectoral policy framework and aims to create favourable conditions
for the efficient use of land among other things. It also foresees investments in land reclamation and
support for innovations for resource saving and energy efficiency. Beyond the long-term activities included
in the framework policy documents mentioned above, policy measures were taken in the context of
recurrent climatic disasters of past years. This includes establishment of formal procedures for state
support in respect of catastrophic weather events, such as budgeting financial assistance through different
administrative levels and assessment of damage and restoration costs.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
In 2019, the 15th edition of the State Programme for the Development of Agriculture came into force. The
State Programme was officially extended until 2025, and its validity period was excluded from its official


 481

name. Thus, programme has lost the properties of the medium-term planning tool, which was supposed to
ensure the stability of the goals, directions, structure and financing for the entire period of its operation,
having acquired, in fact, an indefinite nature (the implementation period can be extended indefinitely, while
the changes are made unpredictably, up to several times a year). The State Programme is divided into two
sub-programmes: i) development of the sub-sectors of the agro-industrial complex (RUB 221 billion or
USD 3.1 billion); and ii) ensuring the conditions for the development of the agro-industrial complex
(RUB 62.3 billion or USD 0.8billion).
Funding for the State Programme for the Development of Agriculture from the federal budget over the past
three years peaked in 2019 and slightly reduced in 2020 (2018 – RUB 254.1 billion; 2019 –
RUB 303.6 billion; 2020 – RUB 283.6 billion). The 2020 reduction was more substantial when expressed
in USD equivalent due to the weakening of the national currency (2018 – USD 4 billion;
2019 – USD 4.7 billion;
2020 – USD 3.9 billion)
(FL,
2019[3]).
Those
federal
expenditures
are
supplemented by co-financing from the regional budgets, which amount to a one-tenth of the total
agricultural subsidies in the State Programme in 2020. In addition, regions provided support to strictly
regional programmes.
The largest support measure in terms of volume of financing is the short-term and investment
concessional credit – RUB 90.8 billion (USD 1.2 billion) (32.1% of all subsidies). In 2020, it was provided
in the form of compensating for the lost income of Russian credit organisations, international financial
organisations and the state development corporation “VEB.RF” for the loans issued to agricultural
producers at publicly-fixed, below-market interest rates.
The funding structure in 2019 and 2020 was approximately identical. The areas of state support have not
changed significantly, but part of the sub-programmes has been transformed into financing of regional
projects. The emphasis on support to agricultural exports continues. In 2020 the volume of financing for
this area was slightly decreased from RUB 37.1 billion (USD 0.5 billion) in 2019 to RUB 33.8 billion
(USD 0.45 billion) in 2020 (MOA, 2020[4]).
A set of additional measures was launched by the government in May 2020 (GRF, 2020[5]). Those
measures included an increase in the volume of support for the purchase of agricultural machinery, goods,
and processing equipment to RUB 18.5 billion (USD 0.3 billion) and to increase the authorised capital of
Rosagroleasing by RUB 6 billion (USD 0.1 billion).
The railroad tariff subsidies have been expanded. Initially, only grain transportation was subsidised. Now
the subsidy is expanded to cover soybean meal transportation from the Far East to Siberia and Ural, while
vegetables will receive a subsidy for transportation from Ural and Siberia to the Far East, and mineral
fertilisers from any region to the Far East.
The mechanism of support to producers to stimulate increasing output was changed in 2020. Two new
subsidy programmes, the “compensatory” and “stimulative” subsidies, replaced the unified subsidy, milk
output payments and area payments. The compensatory subsidy includes crop area payments, milk
subsidies, support to pedigree livestock, elite seed subsidy, support to traditional subsectors (northern
reindeers, maral and horse breeding, sheep wool), and agricultural insurance subsidy. The stimulative
subsidy includes support to priority subsectors to be chosen by the regional governments from a state-
defined list, which includes grains and leguminous, oilseeds, flax and hemp, vegetables on open soil, fruits
and berries (including seedlings, setting up and maintenance of perennials), grapes, milk, specialised
cattle, sheep meat. It can also provide support to development of small farming, and support to the ten
least developed regions of the country. The cumulative amount of financing of the programmes (federal
plus regional level) remained unchanged.
Support in the form of investment grants was provided at the regional level (with federal co-financing) in
2020. In 2020, the grants were provided to 102 projects focusing on milk and sheep meat production,
storage facilities, and plant selection and seed breeding centres (GRF, 2020[6]). The concessional credit


482 

remains the prevailing form of support to investment in the agro-food sector, as it is deemed more efficient
in terms of attracting the investments per one rouble of budget funds.
The project “Export of Products of the Agro-industrial Complex”, in force since 2017, reflects the shift of
the policy goals from the import substitution to export expansion, but envisions no major changes in the
budget spending structure. In some cases, the existing support measures were moved from other parts of
the State Programme to the “Exports” project, i.e. capitalisation of the state-owned Rosselkhozbank and
Rosagroleasing, subsidised credit, soil improvement. Export infrastructure gets additional financing.
Financing of general services to exporters, such as simplification of border procedures, veterinary and
phytosanitary services, information support, and support to promotion and market access are also part of
the export support project. However, less than 10% of budget transfers to the export support project are
allocated to those services.
A new subsidy to support oilseeds production was introduced in 2020 in the form of area payments to
soybean and rapeseed. It is a component of the export support project as it is aimed at increasing the
volume of oilseed exports.
Overall, the budget to finance rural development was doubled from RUB 17.4 billion (USD 0.24 billion) in
2019 (financed from the State Programme for Agriculture) to RUB 35.9 billion (USD 0.5 billion) in 2020,
but that was much below the RUB 79.2 billion (USD 1 billion) planned in the initial budget of the new
Integrated Development of Rural Territories.
As one of the measures aimed at increasing the volume of exports, the Russian Government also
expanded the eligibility for concessional loans to agricultural organisations who have concluded
agreements with the Ministry of Agriculture to increase competitiveness.
The State Programme on “Integrated Development of Rural Territories” contains four main areas of
support: (1) creating conditions for affordable and comfortable housing for the rural population;
(2) development of the labour market (personnel potential) in rural areas; (3) analytical, regulatory,
methodological support for the integrated development of rural areas; (4) creation and development of
infrastructure in rural areas. The latter includes the construction of roads, creation of social infrastructure
facilities, improvement of the territory, the development of gas, energy and water supplies, and requires
more than half of annual funding of the programme.
The project digitalisation of agriculture aims at supporting the sector’s development through the
introduction of digital technologies and platform solutions, including the creation, in 2020, of an information
system for collection and analysis of industry data “Single Window” for obtaining operational information
about the current state of the agro-industrial complex on the basis of a single digital platform.
In January 2020, the law on “Organic Products and on Amending Certain Legislative Acts of the Russian
Federation” entered into force. Although the law provides, among other things, requirements for the
production of organic products, the introduction of labelling of organic products, the procedure for certifying
the conformity of production of organic products has yet to be resolved. Until recently, Russian
manufacturers received a certificate from the International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements
Certification (IFOAM). The creation of a Russian system of certification of organic products is ongoing, with
64 producers currently certified. Organic production is dominated by cereals and bread products (23%)
and fruits, vegetables and drinks (22%). Dairy products make up 13%, and meat and meat products 11%.
A December 2019 decree expanded the list of food products benefiting from the reduced VAT rate of 10%,
compared to the normal VAT rate of 18% (increased to 20% in 2020).1
The Law on Viticulture and Winemaking took effect on 26 June 2020. The law creates conditions for the
development of the industry, ensuring the production of high-quality domestic products from grapes and
protecting the population from counterfeit products The Bill determines that the geographical indication
(GI) “wine of Russia” should be produced exclusively from the grapes grown in the country.


 483

On 21 January 2020, the President of the Russian Federation approved the new Food Security Doctrine.
According to this document, the thresholds, defined as the minimum share of domestic production in
domestic consumption range from 60% for fruits and berries to 95% for grains. For some products the
current production is well above these thresholds: grains 155% (threshold 95%), sugar 125% (threshold
90%) and meat 97% (threshold 85%). For some products the current production is well above these
thresholds: grains 155% (threshold 95%), sugar 125% (threshold 90%) and meat 97% (threshold 85%).
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
In 2020, the target production and export levels in the State programme were adjusted in view of the effects
of the COVID-19 pandemic. The goal to reach a total export value of USD 45 billion is postponed from
2024 to 2030, and the objective for the production growth between 2017 and 2024 is reduced from 15.1%
to 13.9% (the actual growth until 2020 was 2.8% instead of the envisaged 3.8%).
In response to the COVID-19 crisis, the payment of the principal debt due in 2020 has been deferred (for
up to one year) (GRF, 2020[7]). The payment on accrued interest for short-term loans and interest and
principal for investment loans was also deferred (GRF, 2020[8]).
At the end of 2020, to address the decreased real incomes of the population, the government set marginal
prices for so-called socially significant food products. To achieve this, the Ministry of Agriculture, together
with the Ministry of Industry and Trade, concluded the agreements on prices with food producers and retail
chains. Such agreements were aimed to reduce retail prices for certain types of the most demanded goods,
in particular, sugar and sunflower oil. The agreements are valid until the end of March 2021. The Federal
Tax Service monitors the implementation of the agreements based on online cash registers in addition to
the regular price monitoring conducted by the Rosstat.
In order to compensate bread and flour producers for their losses incurred by the regulated prices, an
additional RUB 4.7 billion (USD 70 million) was allocated for 2021 to partially compensate the cost of food
wheat and of the marketing costs.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
On 21 November 2020, the government issued decree No. 2054 extending the ban on the import of
agricultural products from the countries that applied economic sanctions against Russia until the end of
2021. The government has also introduced a quota for exports of wheat and meslin, rye, barley and
maize, with a total amount of 7 million tonnes, to non-EAEU member states. The quota was valid from
1 April to 30 June 2020. Given that Russia accounts for more than 80% of production and about 79% of
grain consumption in the EAEU, the quota has significantly affected the markets of Russia and the states
of the Eurasian Economic Union. On 26 April 2020, the quota was fully exhausted.
Russia has reintroduced export quotas from15 February to 30 June 2021. Tariff quotas for the export of
wheat, rye, barley and corn with a cumulated amount of 17.5 million tonnes were established.2 For grain
exports above the quota, a duty of 50% of the customs value of the exported products (but at least EUR 100
per tonne) applies. Furthermore, from 15 February to 30 June 2021, an export duty of 30% (but no less
than EUR 165 per tonne) applies to soybeans. In 2020, soybean export was not subject to a duty. The
export duty on rapeseed is extended until 31 August 2022, on sunflower seeds from 1 July 2021 to
31 August 2022, the duty rate will be 50%, but not less than USD 320 per 1 000 kg. From 1 September
2021 to 31 August 2022, a 70% floating export duty on sunflower oil will be introduced. The fee will be
charged on the difference between the base price (USD 1 000 per tonne) and the indicative price (the
arithmetic average of market prices for the month), reduced by the value of the correction factor (USD 50
per tonne).


484 

The zero rate of the import duties for agricultural products imported from Moldova (vegetables, pears,
apples, a quince, apricots, cherry, sweet cherry, peaches and plums and for tinned vegetables and natural
grape wines, including fortified wines), which was in force in 2019, was extended to 30 June 2020.
The Federal Service for Veterinary and Phytosanitary Supervision (Rosselkhoznadzor) applies a number
of imports bans due to veterinary and phytosanitary reasons. Thus, from November 2020, imports of live
birds, poultry and eggs from the Netherlands were prohibited due to an avian flu outbreak. From
December 2020, for phytosanitary reasons Russia prohibited imports of tomatoes and apples from
Azerbaijan, tomatoes from Armenia and all vegetables from some areas in Turkey. These bans were
partially lifted by the end of 2020. In February 2021, Russia lifted restrictions on the import of live fish from
the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”), allowing exports of beef from two Russian producers,
and of dry milk from ten Russian producers. Negotiations on permitting further exports to China are
ongoing.
To expand markets and remove trade barriers, the Rosselkhoznadzor has concluded several certification
agreements to facilitate the exports of livestock products. In 2020, 38 types of livestock products were
permitted for export to 24 countries. Veterinary certificates for a range of livestock products were granted
for exports to Viet Nam, Algeria, Lebanon, and Iran. On 7 June 2020, the Board of the Eurasian Economic
Commission (EEC) simplified the procedure for exporting Russian livestock goods. Three chapters of the
Common Veterinary Requirements and relevant forms of veterinary certificates were amended (approved
by Decision No. 607 of the Customs Union Commission dated 7 April 2011). In addition, in 2020 an
electronic veterinary certification system, ECert, was introduced, with a unified database for all exported
products (Rosselkhoznadzor).
Russia continues its co-operation with the EEC. On 28 February 2020, the EEС adopted recommendations
for the harmonisation of food safety indicators: a tool that allows setting food safety requirements taking
into account WTO principles and the Codex Alimentarius standards. This list of recommendations aims to
facilitate the development of harmonised standards for EAEU food safety indicators, and the revision of
existing ones.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
In order to ensure the transportation of agricultural goods in view of the global pandemic,
Rosselkhoznadzor has simplified the procedures for agricultural imports by allowing the use of copies of
veterinary and phytosanitary documents instead of their originals.
In order to minimise the negative economic consequences of the spread of COVID-19, to prevent
shortages of socially significant goods in the EAEU countries, on 31 March 2020, the EEC established
restrictions (valid until 30 June 2020) on the export of certain types of agro-food products from the EAEU
member states. The products concerned by these restrictions include onion, garlic, turnip, rye, rice,
buckwheat, millet, cereals, wholemeal flour and cereal granules, hulled buckwheat, soybeans, sunflower
seeds, and ready-made food products from buckwheat.
On 3 April, the Council of the EEC approved a list of critical imports to be exempted from import duties
when imported into the EAEU countries. The exemption was in effect from 1 April to 30 June 2020. The
list was based on the proposals of the EAEU countries and includes agricultural and food products
(potatoes, onions, garlic, cabbage, carrots, peppers, rye, long-grain rice, buckwheat, juices and ready-
made products for baby food), medicines and medical supplies. The EEC Council also decided to
temporarily simplify the use of Form A certificates of origin issued by the developing and least developed
countries. This allowed the use of paper or electronic copies of the certificates at customs until
30 September 2020 (EEC, 2020[9]).


 485

Contextual information
Russia has the largest land area in the world and is abundantly endowed with agricultural land. Natural,
economic, and social conditions are highly diverse across the territory. The country is the world’s sixth
largest economy in purchasing power parity (PPP) terms. Agriculture contributes 3.4% of GDP and 6% of
employment, both shares significantly declined since the mid-1990s. In 2020, the country ranked as the
second world’s largest producer of barley, rye, sunflower seeds and sunflower oil and fourth largest
producer of wheat; it is also among world’s top ten producers of dairy products, pig meat, and poultry.
The farm structure is dualistic, where commercial operations of different sizes co-exist with household
units. Commercial units generate nearly 70% of agricultural output and produce virtually all grain, oilseeds,
and sugar beet, 84% of animals for slaughter, and 64% of milk. Households engage in agriculture mainly
for own consumption and generate less than one-third of total output value. They grow two-thirds of
potatoes and 52% of vegetables produced in the country. The rural population is 37.2 million (1 January
2020), or 25% of the total. Households allocated on average 30% of their final consumption expenditures
to food and non-alcoholic beverages (2019), this share ranging from 47% for the poorest to 16% for the
richest 10% of the population.
Table 23.3. Russia: Contextual indicators

Russia
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
1 074
4 282
2.7%
3.8%
Population (million)
147
147
3.4%
2.8%
Land area (thousand km2)
16 381
16 377
19.6%
19.3%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
217 162
215 494
7.1%
7.1%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
9
9
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
7 323
29 175
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
25
20
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
5.8
3.4
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
14.5
5.8
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
1.1
4.7
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
21.6
11.5
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
58
55
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
42
45
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
57
56
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
GDP growth declined in 2019 and dropped by 5% in 2020, mainly due to the restrictions related to the
COVID-19 pandemic. Inflation went down from the 2015 peak and has stabilised in the most recent years,
while the unemployment rate continued its moderate downward trend.


486 

Figure 23.5. Russia: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; ILO estimates and projections; and Rosstat.
Russia is the largest exporter of wheat and barley, the fourth largest exporter of sunflower seeds and the
fifth largest exporter of sunflower oil. The country is among the top five beef importers. Agro-food products
account for a significant but declining share of total imports and for a smaller, but rising share in total
exports. The negative agro-food trade balance has narrowed significantly since the beginning of 2010 and
has stabilised in most recent years. Agro-food imports are focussed on supplying domestic food
consumption in primary and processed products, while exports are largely destined to agro-processors
abroad.
Figure 23.6. Russia: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural output has been recovering from a deep recession in the 1990s. Output growth since 2007 has
been driven mainly by the improvements in Total Factor Productivity (TFP), exceeding average global TFP
growth. The higher use of intermediate inputs was largely offset by the declining employment of primary
factors, in particular of machinery and labour.
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
30
7
43
23
14
45
13
25
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


 487

The share of agriculture in total energy use decreased since the 2000s and was below the OECD average
in 2019, despite a greater importance of the sector in the economy. Agriculture’s contribution to GHG
emissions has also declined and remains well below the OECD level. Compared to the OECD area,
agriculture accounts for a relatively small share of total water abstractions. Aggregate indicators also
suggest that water stress is much less of a problem than in many OECD countries. Preliminary estimates
indicate a relatively low nitrogen surplus balance and point to an almost balanced phosphorous budget.
Figure 23.7. Russia: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 23.4. Russia: Productivity and environmental indicators

Russia
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.0%
2.7%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
5.0
5.0
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
0.6
-0.1
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
3.3
1.7
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
6.7
5.7
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
..
1.7
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
28.5
28.9
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
1.8
1.3
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.

1.5%
0.5%
-1.4%
0.05%
2.7%
1.6%
-2.0%
-1.0%
0.0%
1.0%
2.0%
3.0%
4.0%
5.0%
Russia
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


488 

References

EEC (2020), “EEC Council expanded the list of commodities to be imported duty-free and
simplified the requirements to the certificates of origin”,
http://www.eurasiancommission.org/ru/nae/news/Pages/03-04-2020-2.aspx.
[9]
FL (2019), “On the federal budget for 2020 and for the planning period 2021 and 2022”, Federal
Law of 02 December 2019, No 380-FZ (ed. 18.03.2020).
[3]
GRF (2020), “On amending the rules of providing subsidies to the Russian credit organizations”,
Decree of the Government of the Russian Federation dated May 26, 2020 No. 748 (in
Russian), https://www.garant.ru/products/ipo/prime/doc/74079897/.
[5]
GRF (2020), “On amending the rules of providing subsidies to the Russian credit
organizations…”, Resolution of the Government of the Russian Federation of July 11, 2020
No. 1022 (in Russian), http://government.ru/docs/40061/.
[8]
GRF (2020), “On amending the rules of provision and distribution of the intra-budgetary transfers
from the federal budget to the budgets of the regions of the Russian Federation for partial
compensation of the costs of payment of the interest rates....”, Resolution of the Government
of the Russian Federation of July 8, 2020. No. 1010 (in Russian),
http://government.ru/docs/40010/.
[7]
GRF (2020), “On Distribution of the other intra-budgetary transfers to the regions of the Russian
Federation in 2020 for partial compensation of the fixed investment costs for creation or
modernization of the facilities for agro-industrial complex”, Decree of the Government of the
Russian Federation of December 14, 2020 No. 3308-p (in Russian),
http://government.ru/docs/41115/.
[6]
MOA (2020), “National Report on the State Programme of Agriculture Development
Implementation (2019)”, (in Russian),
https://mcx.gov.ru/upload/iblock/98a/98af7d467b718d07d5f138d4fe96eb6d.pdf.
[4]
OECD (1998), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Russian Federation 1998, OECD Review
of Agricultural Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264163126-
en.
[1]
WTO/ITC/UNCTAD (2020), World Tariff Profiles,
http://stat.wto.org/TariffProfile/WSDBTariffPFHome.aspx?Language=E.
[2]






 489

Notes
1 The following domestically produced and imported products are currently eligible for the preferential VAT
rate: apples, pears, quince, all categories of citrus, grapes, apricots, cherry, sweet cherry, peaches,
nectarines, plums, sloe and cherry plum, watermelons, melons, papaya, avocado, dates, fig, pineapples,
guava, mango, mangosteens, kiwi, persimmon, barberry, feijoa, medlar; berries: strawberry, raspberry,
blackberry, currants black, white or red, gooseberry, cranberry, bilberry, blueberry, cornel, wild-growing
berries; planting material of fruit and berry crops: seeds, seedlings, roots, cuttings and taps.
2 Within these limits, duties on the export of wheat are planned to be EUR 50 per tonne between 1 March
and 30 June 2021, on corn – EUR 25 per tonne beginning on 15 March, on barley – EUR 25 per tonne,
and rye will be duty free within quota. From 2 June, the rates of export customs duties on wheat, corn and
barley will be floating, calculated on a weekly basis.



490 

Support to agriculture
South Africa reduced support to agriculture during the reforms of the mid-1990s and support to farms has
remained below 5% of gross farm receipts since 2010. In 2018-20, support to agriculture was around 3%
of gross farm receipts.
Market price support and payments based on input use are the most important components of the relatively
low support to farmers. The level of price distortions is low and domestic prices for most commodities align
with world price levels, except for sugar and, to a lesser extent, wheat and pig meat, mainly due to import
tariffs. Most direct payments are provided as an input subsidy (fuel tax refund) and investment subsidies
directed towards small-scale farming.
Support for general services to the sector (GSSE) declined relative to the size of the sector. Its level is
similar to the average of other countries covered in this report, and below the OECD average. The GSSE
averaged around 4% of agricultural value-added during 2018-20, below the 6% of the early 2000s. Most
payments to general services finance the agricultural knowledge and innovation system, and expenditure
on infrastructure. Support in these categories mainly targets an enabling environment for small-scale
farming, which emerged following land reform. Expenditures financing inspection and control are also an
important and growing element of services provided to the sector. Overall, total support fell in relative
terms, from an average of 0.6% of GDP in 2000-02 to 0.3% in 2018-20.
Recent policy changes
In recent years, several policy changes sought to enhance the redistribution of land within the land reform,
such as allowing compulsory purchase of land in public interest (“Strengthening the relative rights of people
working the land”). In March 2018, Parliament voted to allow expropriation of commercial farms without
compensation. In order to apply in practice, however, this requires a change to the Constitution, and that
process was still ongoing in 2020.
The Agriculture Development Agency (AGDA) launched on 18 February 2020 as a private-sector initiative
under the Public Private Growth Initiative (PPGI) framework. AGDA aims to channel expertise and capacity
available within the private sector to develop sustainable land reform projects for Black farmers.
A signatory to the 2016 Paris Agreement on Climate Change, South Africa committed to reduce
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 34% by 2020 and 42% by 2025 relative to 1990 levels (National
Climate Change Response Policy 2011) through the approval of a carbon tax act on 16 August 2017.
South Africa implements the carbon tax through a phase-in approach. The current Phase 1 covers the
period from 2019 to 2022 and exempts primary agriculture from the carbon tax. However, this exclusion
may be reconsidered for Phase 2 (after 2022).
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the government set aside ZAR 1.2 billion (USD 64 million) to
support distressed small farmers. The fund provides support to small producers of poultry, livestock and
24 South Africa


 491

vegetables. An additional ZAR 400 million (USD 21 million) were redirected from the Proactive Land
Acquisition Strategy Programme (which allows the state to buy farmland for redistribution) to also support
distressed small farms.
Assessment and recommendations

With significant policy reforms implemented in the mid-1990s, South Africa successfully opened its
markets for the agricultural sector by eliminating market price support for most products. However,
price support for sugar – through high tariffs and a price-pooling scheme applied by the South
African Sugar Association – remains high, and the government should consider reducing import
tariffs.

Since the 1990s reforms, increases in budgetary spending finance the land reform process and
support its beneficiaries (subsistence farmers, smallholders and commercial farmers). Most of the
spending finances general services to the sector, mainly through knowledge transfer and
infrastructure. The main challenge continues to be implementing and targeting support
programmes tailored to the needs of emerging farmers.

Involving experienced commercial farmers in the development of support programmes is key to
strengthen programmes assisting entrepreneurs entering commercial farming. Private-public
partnerships are an efficient tool for engaging available resources and addressing current
weaknesses in programmes and services from public authorities. The possibility of expropriation
of property without compensation remains a concern. It could reduce the willingness of the
commercial farming sector to enhance these activities, and increase investor uncertainty around
property ownership.

The pace of land reform should be linked to development of an enabling environment for its
beneficiaries (including education and training, adequate infrastructure, and marketing channels).
Without these developments, land redistribution cannot deliver the expected outcomes, such as
improving the welfare of rural Black populations, increasing food security in rural areas and
developing a viable commercial sector.

The carbon tax bill is an integral part of implementing government policy on climate change, but in
Phase 1 (2019-22) its implementation does not apply to agriculture. Agriculture is only indirectly
affected in this phase through increased input costs, particularly for electricity, fertilisers and
pesticides, and fuel and energy. Nonetheless, this should create incentives for farmers to look for
ways to use inputs more effectively and switch to alternative inputs or practices. On the other hand,
the applied fuel tax rebate provides a counter incentive.

Very low (and negative in the case of nitrogen) nutrient balances across South Africa raise
questions about long-term effects on soil fertility in undersupplied parts of the country. The
government should ensure well-functioning markets and facilitate sufficient supplies of crop
nutrients across South Africa.




492 

Figure 24.1. South Africa: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/jg2nd0
Figure 24.2. South Africa: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/4lh2y9
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.08
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.3%
0.4%
0.5%
0.6%
0.7%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD


 493

Figure 24.3. South Africa: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/62fw8h


0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Pig meat
Sugar
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


494 

Table 24.1. South Africa: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
6 824
20 406
21 347
20 064
19 806
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
74.8
73.3
74.2
72.8
72.9
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
6 000
18 265
19 939
18 226
16 629
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
477
720
1 009
601
550
Support based on commodity output
438
534
782
423
396
Market Price Support1
438
534
782
423
396
Positive Market Price Support
451
534
782
423
396
Negative Market Price Support
-13
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
36
174
195
173
154
Based on variable input use
25
133
144
134
121
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
11
40
50
38
32
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
1
1
1
1
1
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
3
12
32
4
0
Based on Receipts / Income
3
12
32
4
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
7.3
3.4
4.7
3.0
2.8
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.08
1.03
1.04
1.02
1.02
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.08
1.04
1.05
1.03
1.03
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
264
311
327
306
301
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
146
128
135
126
124
Inspection and control
39
63
60
62
68
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
78
93
96
95
89
Marketing and promotion
0
26
35
23
20
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
34.2
30.6
24.5
33.8
35.3
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-350
-462
-632
-387
-366
Transfers to producers from consumers
-347
-417
-628
-319
-305
Other transfers from consumers
-17
-44
-5
-68
-61
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
14
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-6.0
-2.5
-3.2
-2.1
-2.2
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.07
1.03
1.03
1.02
1.02
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.06
1.03
1.03
1.02
1.02
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
741
1 031
1 336
907
851
Transfers from consumers
364
462
632
387
366
Transfers from taxpayers
394
614
708
588
546
Budget revenues
-17
-44
-5
-68
-61
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.6
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.3
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
304
497
554
484
454
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
303
291
303
316
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
8.69
14.72
13.25
14.45
16.46
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for South Africa are: wheat, maize, sunflower, sugar,
milk, beef and veal, pig meat, sheep meat, poultry, eggs, groundnuts, grapes, oranges and apples.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 495

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Widespread support, regulation, and price and production control within a closed economy characterised
agricultural policy in South Africa under the apartheid regime between 1955 and 1990.
Post-apartheid, quick and substantial reforms in the mid-1990s reduced state intervention in agricultural
markets, leading to more market-oriented commercial farming. Domestic marketing of agricultural products
was deregulated, and barriers to agricultural trade were reduced by replacing direct import controls with
tariffs, removing state controls over exports and eliminating export subsidies. These reforms reduced
market price support and budgetary support to commercial farming.
As stated in the White Paper on Land Policy of 1997, the land reform aimed to redress past injustices,
foster reconciliation and stability, support economic growth, improve household welfare and alleviate
poverty. Key elements of the land reform included land restitution, land redistribution and land tenure
reform. The land reform process is going on and its regulation was amended several times. The original
objective was to redistribute 20% of agricultural land. In 2019 this target was adjusted to 14%. Since the
beginning, the land reform was accompanied by support exclusively targeting Black smallholders (mainly
provided within the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme [CASP]). These include subsidies for
variable and fixed input credit and financial support, extension and marketing, and training and services
(Table 24.2).
Table 24.2. South Africa: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to mid-1990s
Closed economy under the apartheid
regime
Large subsidies for commercial agricultural producers
Import controls; Export subsidies for agricultural products
Price and production controls under the Agricultural Marketing Act of
1937
Mid-1990s-present
Post-apartheid period; Democratic
government Market deregulation and trade
liberalisation
Land redistribution; Emphasis on black
small-scale producers’ development
Marketing of Agricultural Products Act (1996) brings market deregulation
and trade liberalisation
WTO accession
Agricultural tariffs replace import controls
Import Tariffs applied to sugar, wheat and maize (0 tariffs for maize from
2007) and livestock products (except eggs)
Land restitution and redistribution
Land reform-related programmes supporting black small farmers:
- Increased spending to finance the land reform process
- Direct support targeting mostly to black smallholders
Support to farmers has been decreasing as a share of gross farm receipts (with some year-to-year
variation) during 1995–2007 because of policy reforms and deregulation of the market. Since then, support
tended to stabilise at a relatively low level, around 4% of gross farm receipts. Market price support is the
main component of support, provided mainly to sugar (Figure 24.4). Budgetary support to producers,
mostly input subsidies, is targeted to Black smallholders. Budgetary expenditures on general services to
the sector are increasing and spent mainly on knowledge transfer and infrastructure.


496 

Figure 24.4. South Africa: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1994 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The current system has no domestic market support interventions or export subsidies. Border measures,
applied on Southern African Customs Union (SACU)1 common borders, are the only price support policy
for all commodities except sugar.
Import protection for agricultural and food products is based on specific and ad valorem tariffs. The
average applied Most Favoured Nation (MFN) tariff for agricultural products is around 9%, well below the
average bound tariff on agricultural products of 39%. Tariff rate quotas (TRQ) exist for a range of
agricultural products under the WTO minimum market access commitments. The zero import-tariff for
maize applies since 2007.
The Sugar Agreement of 2000 (between agents in the sugar production chain) permits exports of raw
sugar only through a single-channel industry arrangement and allocates quotas to individual producers for
sugar sold on the domestic market.
Other policy instruments include input subsidies, mainly in the form of a diesel tax rebate; programmes
supporting new farmers benefiting from land reforms; and general services provided to the sector, mainly
research, extension and inspection services. The National Land Care Programme (NLP) is a community-
based and government-supported approach promoting sustainable management and use of natural
agricultural resources.
During the reforms concerning land restitution and land redistribution (launched in 1994) a range of
programmes (Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, Illima/Letsema projects and Micro-
agricultural Financial Institutions of South Africa [MAFISA]) were implemented to create an enabling
environment for previously disadvantaged farmers (subsistence, smallholders and commercial), such as
input subsidies, capacity building, provision of information services and infrastructures.
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 497

Reviews of the Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development (LRAD) projects, carried out in 2004-07,
indicated that a number of projects were not economically viable. The Department for Rural Development
and Land Reform (DRDLR) amended the Land Reform regulation in 2009 to rationalise the land
redistribution process and assist vulnerable projects. The Agricultural Land Holding Account (created in
2009) is responsible for land acquisition, and recapitalisation and development of distressed land reform
projects through the Recapitalisation and Development Programme. Beneficiaries may dispose of the land
after an agreed lease period, provided the project is economically viable.
The Integrated Food Security Strategy (IFSS), introduced in 2002 based on public and private civil society
partnerships, focuses on household food security as the building block for national food security. One of
the strategic approaches increases household food supplies by providing production support services to
households’ own food production. The food security objective is further supported by Fetsa Tlala, an
integrated food production initiative, introduced in 2013, which aims to produce staple foods on fallow land
with agricultural potential in communal areas.
The Ilima/Letsema Programme implemented in 2008 aims to increase food production, particularly by
smallholder farming. Through provincial departments, it finances mostly conditional grants for projects such
as upgrading irrigation schemes and other infrastructure and on-farm investments to strengthen production
capacity.
The Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme (CASP) focuses on: on- and off-farm infrastructure
and production inputs; targeted training, skill development and capacity building; marketing and business
development and support; information and knowledge management; technical and advisory services;
regulatory services; and financial services.
The Comprehensive Rural Development Programme (CRDP) launched in 2009 supports the development
of rural areas through two main programmes, both related to the agricultural sector. The Rural
Infrastructure Development (RID) programme promotes investment in rural infrastructure. Expenditure
increased significantly due to increased funding for projects providing access to basic services, particularly
sanitation, irrigation and roads. The Rural Enterprise and Industrial Development (REID) programme
assists in co-ordination and facilitation of rural enterprise development, industrial development, and
support to rural communities to produce their own food.
South Africa is a founding member of the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), a full customs union
with a common external tariff. In 1994, South Africa became a member of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC).2 From 2012, the SADC free trade agreement (FTA) was fully
implemented.
South Africa is also a beneficiary of the US African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), a non-reciprocal
trade preference programme that grants eligible Sub-Saharan Africa countries duty-free, quota-free
(DFQF) access to the United States for selected export products. AGOA was enacted in 2000 for
eight years. The Act was extended to 2015, and further to 2025. AGOA has a positive impact on some of
South Africa’s agricultural sub-sectors, in particular exports of wine, macadamia nuts and oranges.
A signatory to the 2016 Paris Agreement on Climate Change, the South African Government committed to
reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 34% by 2020 and 42% by 2025 relative to 1990 levels
(National Climate Change Response Policy 2011), through the approval of a carbon tax on 16 August
2017. This is integral for implementing government policy on climate change. It should enable South Africa
to meet its Nationally Determined Contributions commitments, and reduce the country’s GHG emissions
in line with its National Climate Change Response Policy and National Development Plan. South Africa
implements the carbon tax through a phase-in approach. The current Phase 1 is set for 2019 to 2022 and
exempts primary agriculture from the carbon tax. However, this exclusion may be reconsidered for Phase 2
(from 2023).


498 

Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
Support to agriculture: Overall, policies supporting farmers have remained unchanged. Most of the policy
measures continue to target the smallholder sub-sector. The government provides post-settlement
assistance; including production loans to new and upcoming farmers (mostly small scale farmers operating
on redistributed or resituated land). Several programmes support those farmers to develop commercially
viable businesses. There were no substantial changes in these programmes in most recent years.
Land reform
On 9 October 2020, the South African Ministry of Public Works and Infrastructure published the
2020 Expropriation Bill. The bill provides the much-needed update to the old Expropriation Act 63 of 1975,
and ensures alignment to the current South African Constitution.
The 2020 Expropriation Bill is separate from the ongoing process to amend the South African Constitution
to allow for the expropriation of land without compensation for the purposes of land reform. The key
difference is that the 2020 Expropriation Bill is not aimed at expropriating property or land for land reform,
but its objectives are for the expropriation  of property including land for a public purpose or in the interest
of the public, such as for building infrastructure, industrial development, etc.
If the 2020 Expropriation Bill is passed, it will mark the first time for South African policy to allow for the
expropriation of property without compensation. This policy position may further be entrenched if South
Africa also finalises the ongoing Constitutional amendment process to allow expropriation of property
without compensation for land reform purposes.
Institutional change
Only a limited number of black farmers, benefiting from land reform, have made meaningful progress
towards commercialisation. The main barriers towards commercialisation for these farmers are the lack of
knowledge and the inability to access affordable capital. The Agriculture Development Agency (AGDA)
was launched on 18 February as an entirely private sector initiative falling under the Public Private Growth
Initiative (PPGI) framework. The specific aims of AGDA are to channel expertise and capacity available
within the private sector for development of sustainable land reform projects for the black farmers.
The National Agricultural Marketing Council decided not to recommend the continued application of the
statutory levy for financing the activities of the Winter Cereal Trust (WCT). The WCT fund finances
important operational functions within the commodity value chain, and therefore the industry had to put in
place an alternative system before the start of the new marketing season on 1 October 2020. Hence, an
alternative trust – the South African Winter Cereal Industry Trust (SAWCIT) – was established by the
Industry for the collection of voluntary levies in order to continue to finance the activities of the former WCT.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The Department of Agriculture, Land reform and Rural Development (DALRRD) set aside ZAR 1.2 billion
(USD 64 million) to support distressed small-holder farmers. There are approximately 200 000 emerging
smallholder farmers and over 2 million subsistence farmers in South Africa. The fund provides support to
small producers of poultry, livestock and vegetables. The programme prioritises women, youth, and
disabled farmers and the funds were delivered in the form of vouchers. ZAR 400 million (USD 21 million)
will be redirected from the Proactive Land Acquisition Strategy Programme (PLAS), which allows the state
to buy farm land for redistribution, also to support distressed small farms.
The DALRRD also monitors food supply in the country through an “agricultural value chain tracker” to
ensure that any disruptions are addressed early and quickly. The South African Government issued a
“request to express interest” for agricultural input suppliers willing to participate in a voucher scheme aimed


 499

at helping smallholder and communal farmers. The vouchers are capped at ZAR 50 000 (USD 2 700) per
farmer.
On 28 December 2020, the government announced a total ban on the sale of alcohol from stores,
restaurants and bars until 15 January 2021. The prohibition was in response to surging case numbers of
COVID-19 that are associated with a new, more infectious strain of the virus. During 2020, the sale and
distribution of alcohol had already been prohibited twice to reduce the spread of COVID-19: 27 March to
1 June 2020 and 12 July to 17 August 2020. The South African alcohol industry is calling for a review of
the ban, stating that there are other ways to address the spike in COVID-19 cases.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
In March 2020, the South African Government substantially increased the applied most-favoured nation
import tariffs on bone-in chicken meat and on boneless chicken meat. The MFN duties on imports were
raised from 37% to 62% for bone-in chicken and from 12% to 42% for boneless portions. The
announcement came more than one year after the International Trade Administration Commission of South
Africa initiated its investigation in November 2018 at the request of the South Africa Poultry Association.
Contextual information
South Africa is the most industrialised and diversified economy in Africa, and the second largest economy
(after Nigeria) on the African continent. With the largest GDP per capita of the continent, it ranks as an
upper middle-income country. However, income inequality is high and poverty persists. South Africa has
experienced a relatively moderate and decreasing level of inflation — below 5% in most recent years, with
inflation targeting in the range of 3% to 6 %. However, a persistently high rate of unemployment remains
a challenge. The GDP growth rate has been declining since 2011 and came close to zero in 2019. The
GDP dropped by 10% in 2020, mainly because of the restriction of economic activities related to the
COVID-19 measures (Figure 24.5).
The importance of agriculture in the economy is relatively low, around 2% of GDP, and 5% of employment
(Table 24.3). Due to a large component of modern farming and processing industries, the upstream and
downstream linkages in the agro-food complex are much larger than for the primary sector. South Africa
has abundant agricultural land, but only 13% of it is arable, while the remaining agricultural area is mostly
semi-arid pastures with extensive livestock production. The farm structure is highly dualistic, with a well-
developed and market oriented sector of large-scale commercial farms and a large number of smallholder
and subsistence farms.




500 

Table 24.3. South Africa: Contextual indicators

South Africa
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
347
761
0.9%
0.7%
Population (million)
44
59
1.0%
1.1%
Land area (thousand km2)
1 213
1 213
1.5%
1.4%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
98 125
96 341
3.2%
3.2%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
37
48
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
7 715
12 999
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
19
25
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
3.3
2.1
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
9.9
5.1
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
8.5
11.3
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.2
7.2
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
56
52
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
44
48
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
14
12
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Figure 24.5. South Africa: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; ILO estimates and projections; and Statistics South Africa.
South Africa is a consistent net exporter of agro-food products (Figure 24.6). The share of agro-food
exports in total exports was around 11%, while the share of agro-food imports was around 7% in recent
years (Table 24.3). Three-quarters of agro-food exports are for final consumption, both of primary and
processed products. Around three-quarters of agro-food imports are processed products (Figure 24.6).
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate


 501

Figure 24.6. South Africa: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Growth in total factor productivity (TFP) contributes most to agricultural output growth in South Africa
(Figure 24.7). However, TFP growth has slowed significantly relative to the 1990s and averaged 0.9% per
year during 2007-16. As for output growth overall, TFP growth has therefore been well below the world
average. Increased use primary factors and moderate growth in intermediate input use also contributed to
the increase in output (Table 24.4).
Phosphorus and nitrate balances are very low and negative, respectively and well below the OECD
average. Although agriculture uses almost 60% of abstracted water, only a few regions have irrigated land,
and water resources are scarce in most of the agricultural areas (Table 24.4). The livestock sector is
another important user of water in agriculture. Agriculture’s share in energy use has increased and remains
above the OECD average.
Figure 24.7. South Africa: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
8
42
46
33
19
11
27
14
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
0.2%
0.5%
0.6%
0.05%
0.9%
1.6%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
South Africa
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


502 

Table 24.4. South Africa: Productivity and environmental indicators

South Africa
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
3.0%
0.9%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
-2.5
-4.3
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
0.2
0.2
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.6
3.1
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
..
..
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
1.5
1.7
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
61.3
58.8
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
41.7
..
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.

Notes
1 The SACU members are: Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, Swatini (former Swaziland) and South Africa.
2 The SADC member countries are: Angola, Botswana, Democratic Republic of Congo, Lesotho,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Seychelles, South Africa, Swatini, Tanzania,
Zambia and Zimbabwe.



 503

Support to agriculture
In past decades, Switzerland made moderate reductions in support to agriculture, but levels stabilised in
recent years. Support to producers expressed as a share of gross farm receipts remains high: around 50%
on average in 2018-20, almost three times the OECD average. However, changes in the structure of
support are pronounced, as direct payments partly replaced market price support (MPS).
MPS, mainly due to tariff rate quotas (TRQ) with high out-of-quota tariffs, remains the main component of
support. Over the past 30 years, MPS fell from 80% to around 50% of total producer support. Nonetheless,
average domestic prices were on average 46% above world prices in 2018-20. The biggest price gaps
(Producer Nominal Protection Coefficient) and share of Single Commodity Transfer (SCT) in commodity
gross farm receipts are for poultry, eggs, pig meat and rapeseed.
Switzerland provides significant direct payments to farms (almost all subject to environmental cross-
compliance). These increased over time: while they represented around 20% of support to farmers in the
1980s, their share rose to almost 50% in recent years. Most are general area payments to all agricultural
land, payments to maintain farming in less favoured conditions, and payments to farmers who voluntarily
apply stricter farming practices related to environmental and animal welfare.
Expenditures for general services (GSSE) are high in Switzerland. GSSE relative to agricultural value-
added rose from 11% in 2000-02 to 16% in 2018-20, and is among the highest of countries covered by
this report. Almost half of GSSE expenditure finances the agricultural knowledge and innovation system.
Total support to agriculture as a share of GDP fell from 2% in 2000-02 to 1% in 2018-20.
Recent policy changes
In February 2020, the Federal Council submitted to Parliament a message on the future development of
the Agricultural Policy from 2022 (PA22 +) along with a draft federal decree on financial resources for
agriculture for the years 2022 to 2025. However, in December 2020, the Council of States decided to
suspend work on the PA22 + and maintain the 2022-2025 financial envelope at the same level as before.
These decisions were confirmed by the National Council during its 2021 spring session in March. In
parallel, the Federal Council is required by both chambers of Parliament to submit a report on the future
direction of agricultural policy to Parliament by the end of 2022 at the latest.
In November 2020, the Federal Council approved a package of agricultural ordinances setting procedures
for withdrawal of plant protection products, implementation of regional development projects and allocation
of aid for structural improvements. New plant health legislation applies from 1 January 2020, with stricter
rules for trade with plant materials and stronger measures to prevent the introduction and spread of pests.
On 27 January 2021, the Federal Council adopted the Long-Term Climate Strategy for Switzerland, which
sets out climate policy guidelines up to 2050 in order to achieve a net-zero target. The objectives are to
reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from domestic agricultural production to at least 40% below
25 Switzerland


504 

1990 levels and avoid transfers of GHG emissions abroad. These are primarily to be achieved through
legislative measures. The total revision of the CO2 Act was adopted by Parliament in autumn 2020 and will
come into force if approved in a referendum by the population citizens on 13 June 2021. On 14 April 2021,
the Federal Council opened the consultation procedure on the amendment of the CO2 Ordinance. The CO2
Ordinance specifies reduction targets for the building (-65%), transport (-25%), industry (-35%) and
agriculture (-20%) sectors by 2030 compared to 1990.
On 1 April 2020, the Federal Council took action to stabilise agricultural markets and mitigate economic
impact to the agricultural sector from the COVID-19 crisis. The aim was to ensure the supply of food for
the population while preventing a fall in market prices that would affect the entire value chain. The
agriculture and food sector also benefited from the general package of measures to mitigate the economic
consequences of the pandemic (e.g. to avoid layoffs, safeguard jobs and guarantee wages).
In addition to short-term loans to provide liquidity for agricultural producers, the Swiss Government
approved early direct payments to farms and allocated funds for long-term storage of beef, veal and goat
meat, for which demand had declined. Responding to reduced demand for high quality wines following the
closure of bars and restaurants and the ban on public events, it also approved exceptional financial
assistance for AOC wines downgraded to table wine.
Assessment and recommendations

Measures envisaged in the Agricultural Policy 2022 could contribute to more efficient use of natural
resources and enhance the environmental sustainability of agriculture. However, a better
distinction can be made between policies that address market failures (providing positive
externalities and public goods, and avoiding negative externalities) and those that address income
problems. The latter might be better addressed via economy-wide measures as opposed to
agricultural ones.

Security of the food supply should be sought through a more competitive agriculture sector rather
than direct payments. Policies facilitating structural change, including investment support and exit
strategies, can accelerate progress.

Reduction of import barriers and elimination of export subsidies for processed products are
important to reducing the burden on consumers and market distortions.

The introduction of output payments for milk and area payments to grain producers to compensate
for the elimination of export subsidies for processed products could undermine efforts to reduce
resource misallocation, and could impede structural adjustment. Such compensatory measures
should be temporary.

The Swiss agricultural sector is only marginally affected by current CO2 legislation, as the levy
applies to fuels for heating greenhouses and barns for livestock, but not to other CO2 emissions
from agricultural production. In order to achieve its climate change targets for the agricultural
sector, Switzerland should consider extending the CO2 Act to other parts of the agricultural sector
and focus more on targeted policies.




 505

Figure 25.1. Switzerland: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/1atzc2
Figure 25.2. Switzerland: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/z01jfi
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
TSE as % GDP
1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
-8%
-6%
-4%
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD


506 

Figure 25.3. Switzerland: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/372j6m


0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Rapeseed
Maize
Barley
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 507

Table 25.1. Switzerland: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
8 025
5 695
9 168
8 929
9 081
9 495
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
62.8
58.0
58.3
58.4
56.9
59.5
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
12 693
8 853
14 119
13 887
14 119
14 352
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
6 871
5 054
6 269
5 975
5 940
6 893
Support based on commodity output
5 966
3 361
2 985
2 741
2 721
3 494
Market Price Support1
5 939
3 142
2 629
2 442
2 347
3 098
Positive Market Price Support
5 939
3 142
2 629
2 442
2 347
3 098
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
27
218
357
300
374
396
Payments based on input use
358
126
148
147
146
150
Based on variable input use
289
67
69
68
67
71
with input constraints
0
14
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
46
53
79
79
79
79
with input constraints
0
0
38
36
37
42
Based on on-farm services
23
6
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
392
564
1 012
981
995
1 060
Based on Receipts / Income
10
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
382
564
1 012
981
995
1 060
with input constraints
217
540
963
935
946
1 008
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
18
51
1 078
1 068
1 054
1 111
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
774
104
116
105
91
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
774
104
116
105
91
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
58
727
713
708
759
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
58
727
713
708
759
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
137
120
215
209
209
227
Percentage PSE (%)
76.6
66.4
48.9
47.9
46.9
51.9
Producer NPC (coeff.)
4.41
2.43
1.46
1.43
1.41
1.56
Producer NAC (coeff.)
4.27
2.98
1.96
1.92
1.88
2.08
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
431
337
783
761
770
817
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
110
70
386
367
384
406
Inspection and control
9
24
11
12
11
12
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
80
54
84
84
83
86
Marketing and promotion
29
37
67
69
63
70
Cost of public stockholding
66
32
45
42
45
48
Miscellaneous
137
120
189
187
184
195
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
5.4
6.1
11.1
11.3
11.5
10.6
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-9 012
-5 032
-4 259
-3 887
-3 975
-4 916
Transfers to producers from consumers
-6 065
-3 243
-2 654
-2 449
-2 373
-3 139
Other transfers from consumers
-3 788
-1 986
-1 632
-1 451
-1 623
-1 821
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
700
147
8
4
5
16
Excess feed cost
141
50
18
9
15
29
Percentage CSE (%)
-75.0
-57.8
-30.1
-28.0
-28.2
-34.3
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
4.44
2.44
1.43
1.39
1.39
1.53
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
4.00
2.37
1.43
1.39
1.39
1.52
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
8 002
5 538
7 060
6 741
6 715
7 725
Transfers from consumers
9 853
5 229
4 285
3 900
3 995
4 961
Transfers from taxpayers
1 937
2 296
4 406
4 292
4 342
4 586
Budget revenues
-3 788
-1 986
-1 632
-1 451
-1 623
-1 821
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
4.3
1.9
1.0
0.9
0.9
1.0
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
2 063
2 396
4 431
4 299
4 368
4 627
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.1
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
127
136
136
136
136
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
1.58
1.64
0.97
0.98
0.99
0.94
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Switzerland are: wheat, maize, barley, rapeseed,
sugar, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




508 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Until the early 1990s, high trade barriers and strong domestic market regulations isolated Swiss agriculture
from world markets. Substantial reforms of agricultural policy were implemented in the mid-1990s and early
2000s. These were prompted by commitments made under the GATT and later the WTO. There were no
systematic policy reforms since 2013.
The reforms implemented between 1993 and 2003 had three main elements:
1. Reduced and more transparent import protection, the gradual removal of price guarantees and
other market regulations while maintaining production quotas for milk and introducing (in 1998)
new market regulations for sugar.
2. New direct payments less coupled to production, and voluntary ecological direct payments linked
to ecological services.
3.  Cross-compliance requirements connecting almost all direct payments to proof of ecological
performance as of 1999.
Between 2004 and 2013, policy reforms were comparatively modest and focussed on deregulation of
agricultural markets. In 2013, Switzerland adopted a new policy framework for 2014-17, subsequently
extended to 2021. This framework amended the direct payment scheme to improve its efficiency and
effectiveness, and set up a system of direct payments linked to specific production practices.
Table 25.2. Switzerland: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1993
Closed market
High border protection; regulated prices and interventions in domestic agricultural markets
Payments based on output and input use; commodity-specific area and headage payments
1993-1998
Reforms to open up markets
New system of direct
payments
Reduced import barriers; enhanced transparency
Reduction of export subsidies for some agricultural and processed products
Reduction of domestic market regulations except for milk (production quotas); introduction of
sugar production quotas and guaranteed prices
Creation of General Direct Payments, including:
- Complementary Direct Payments based on area (arable and grassland) and other
supplementary payments
- Payments for integrated production
- Payments for farming in difficult conditions
Introduction of Ecological Direct Payments as voluntary schemes based on environmental
services provided by farmers (biodiversity, landscape, animal welfare, etc.), and incentives for
more sustainable use of resources and pollution reduction
1999-2004
Continuation of reforms to
open up markets
Changes in the system of
direct payments
Further gradual reduction of import barriers
Reform of the General Direct Payments; Complementary Direct Payments replaced by a
general Area Payment not requiring production of particular crops; introduction of a general
payment for ruminants
Abolition of payments for integrated production
Introduction of environmental cross-compliance; all direct payments conditional to a proof of
ecological requirements
2005-2013
Abolition of export subsidies
Removal of production quotas
(dairy, sugar)
Further gradual reduction of import barriers
Abolition of export subsidies for primary agricultural products (2010)
Abolition of dairy quotas and related guarantee prices for milk (2009)
Abolition of sugar market regulations and introduction of area payments for sugar-beet to
compensate for related price reductions (2009)
2014-present
Reform of the general direct
payments
Reform of the system of General Direct Payments (2014)
Abolition of general area payments
Reallocation of payments related to specific agricultural practices


 509

Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Introduction of transition payments to make the reform socially acceptable
Replacement of general headage payments to ruminants with area payments to pastures with
a minimum stocking density
Continuation of environmental cross-compliance conditions within the new system of
payments
Abolition of remaining export subsidies for some processed products (1 January 2019)
New payments to producers of commercial milk and grains to compensate for price
reductions due to the abolition of export subsidies for processed products (2019)
Support to farmers declined from close to 80% of gross farm receipts in the late 1980s to slightly less than
50% in 2020. Potentially most production- and trade-distorting support (mainly market price support) also
declined from around 80% to less than 50% of producer support between 1986 and 2020, while payments
considered less distorting grew.
Figure 25.4. Switzerland: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
In a 2017 referendum, the Swiss electorate adopted a new article on food security in the Swiss Constitution.
It states that in order to guarantee the supply of food to the population, the Confederation shall create
conditions for:

safeguarding the basis for agricultural production, and agricultural land in particular

food production adapted to local conditions and using natural resources efficiently

an agriculture and food sector that responds to market requirements

cross-border trade relations that contribute to the sustainable development of the agriculture and
food sector

using food in a way that conserves natural resources.
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


510 

The new article in the Federal Constitution calls to guarantee sufficient food supplies to the Swiss
population in the long term based on both domestic production and imports, considering the entire value
chain. Together with the constitution article on agriculture, the article on food security defines broad
objectives for agricultural policy. Four-year frameworks then detail specific measures.
The most recent of these covers 2018-21 (PA 2018-21). Broadly speaking, this policy framework continues
agricultural policies applied in 2014-17, though overall spending shrank by 1.7% in nominal terms.
Many agro-food imports to Switzerland are regulated by tariff rate quotas with relatively low in-quota tariffs
and high out-of-quota tariffs. In particular, TRQs cover meat, milk products, potatoes, fruits, vegetables,
bread cereals and wine. Since 1999, an auctioning system allocates some of the TRQs to traders. A
notable exception to the quota system is feed grains, which are subject to single tariffs. These are adjusted
according to the market to ensure that protection does not increase feed prices.
Preferential tariff rates apply unilaterally to imports from developing countries under the general system
of preferences. In the context of the Swiss Government granting zero tariffs to all products from Least
Developed Countries (LDCs), agricultural imports from LDCs (according to the official UN definition) are
duty- and quota-free since September 2009.
Export subsidies for primary agricultural products were eliminated by 1 January 2010. The remaining
export subsidies for some processed products were abolished as of 1 January 2019. Subsequently,
additional payments to producers for commercial milk (Agriculture Act Art. 40) and grain (Agriculture Act
Art. 55) were introduced.
Following the abolition of milk quotas in May 2009, the inter-branch organisation for milk, l’Interprofession
du Lait (IP Lait), implemented standard milk delivery contracts for its members. These set different prices
and volumes for milk delivery (contingents A, B and C). A decision of the Federal Council made these
contracts compulsory for all milk producers including those outside IP Lait from 1 July 2013 to the end of
2021 (with potential to be extended). This means that the previous production quota system was de facto
replaced by another production control mechanism on a private basis.
Switzerland’s network of trade agreements consists of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA)
Convention, the Free Trade Agreement with the European Union and some 32 agreements concluded with
42 countries. All were signed within EFTA, with the exception of agreements with the People’s Republic of
China, Japan and the Faroe Islands.
Spending to support agriculture consists of three broad financial envelopes. These are direct payments,
production and marketing, and improving the production base combined with social measures.
Direct payments to farmers meet societal demands for such things as food security, environmental services
(landscape, biodiversity, sustainable use of resources) and animal welfare. These payments link to
environmental cross-compliance conditions.
Production and marketing expenditures mainly support dairy producers via three types of payments: (1) for
milk delivered for cheese processing; (2) for milk production without silage feed; and (3) for commercial
milk (introduced in 2019). In addition, area payments apply to oilseeds, protein crops, grain (introduced in
2019) and sugar beet. Some expenditures under this heading also provide funds for general services to
the sector, including marketing and product promotion.
Policies to improve the production base and social measures include direct support to farm investments
as well as general support for infrastructure improvement, social aid to farmers, and advisory services.
These payments were provided within the PA 2014-17 policy framework, extended to 2021.
In the context of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, a key tool to achieve targets is the
CO2 levy. This incentive tax is in place since 2008 for fossil fuels such as oil or natural gas. An Emission
Trading System (ETS) facilitates emissions reduction where the costs of such reductions are low. Future


 511

ambitions are to link this ETS to the EU trading system so that Swiss companies can participate in the
larger and more liquid EU emissions market, and benefit from the same competition conditions as EU
companies. To this end, an agreement was signed with the EU on 23 November 2017. The Swiss
parliament approved this agreement on 22 March 2019 and accepted the necessary changes to the current
CO2 act. Current CO2 legislation only marginally affects the Swiss agricultural sector as the levy applies to
fuels to heat greenhouses and barns for livestock. The current CO2 legislation does not address other
climate-damaging emissions and in particular other emissions from agricultural production.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
The Federal Council approved a package of agricultural ordinances on 11 November 2020. These relate
to the procedure for the withdrawal of plant protection products, implementation of regional development
projects and the allocation of aid for structural improvements. In the area of plant protection products, the
re-evaluation procedure for active substances that have been withdrawn in the European Union is
simplified. The aim is to avoid a lag between the date of withdrawal of a substance in the European Union
and in Switzerland.
Regarding structural improvements, the process of implementing regional development projects (RDPs)
has been made more flexible and effective. In order to reach environmental objectives for agriculture, new
measures are implemented such as the support of installation of air scrubbers to reduce ammonia
emissions. Support for the integration of agricultural buildings into the landscape is provided to meet
objectives for building and landscape culture.
Discussions concerning future development of the Agricultural Policy from 2022 (PA 22+) continued.
In February 2020, the Federal Council submitted to Parliament a message on the future development of
the Agricultural Policy from 2022 along with a draft federal decree on financial resources for agriculture for
the years 2022 to 2025. However, in December 2020, the Council of States decided to suspend work on
the Agricultural Policy from 2022 (PA22 +) and to maintain the financial envelope for the years 2022-25 on
the same level as the previous period. These decisions were confirmed by the National Council during its
2021 spring session on 16 March 2021. In parallel, the Federal Council is required by both chambers of
Parliament to submit a report on the future direction of agricultural policy to Parliament by 2022 at the
latest.
Several popular initiatives related to the agriculture and food sector have been filed in previous years and
are expected to be submitted to balloting. Among these, an initiative “for clean drinking water”
(January 2018) and an initiative “for a Switzerland free of synthetic pesticides” (May 2018). The vote on
these two popular initiatives is scheduled to take place on 13 June 2021. In this context, a parliamentary
initiative “Reducing the risk of the use of pesticides” has been tabled (August 2019). This initiative aims to
enshrine a reduction trajectory in legislation with target values for the risks arising from the use of pesticides
and suggests adaptations to improve groundwater quality in relation to the degradation of products from
pesticides. It would also commit the government to establish a path to reduce nutrient losses by 2030.
Furthermore, the government has proposed on 12 August 2020 a counter-proposal to the popular initiative
against mass animal husbandry, which was launched on 17 September 2019. The counter-proposal was
adopted by the Federal Council on 19 May 2021.
New plant health legislation applies as from 1 January 2020 – with stricter rules for trade with plant
materials and stronger preventive measures as it aims to protect plants from the introduction and spread
of particularly harmful pests. From 2020 onwards, importation of plant material, including through
passenger travel, will be subject to stricter rules. Additional import bans on plants and plant products with
high plant health risks from countries outside the European Union may be applied on a temporary basis.
A plant passport is required for all plants for planting for trade within Switzerland and with Member States
of the European Union. The new plant health legislation also introduces new contingency planning
instruments.


512 

From 1 January 2021, hemp will no longer be subject to agricultural seed legislation. This makes it possible
to produce and market seeds and plants for the production of CBD hemp.
On 27 January 2021, the Federal Council adopted the “Long-Term Climate Strategy for Switzerland”,
which sets out climate policy guidelines up to 2050 in order to achieve the net-zero target. The strategy
establishes strategic targets for key sectors building on the measures and targets of the revised CO2 Act
(adopted by Parliament in autumn 2020 and coming into force upon approval by population on 13 June
2021). For the agriculture and food sector, the 2050 objective is to bring the GHG footprint of the food
sector in line with the net-zero target and to avoid any further transfers of GHG emissions abroad. To
achieve this, favourable framework conditions for sustainable food systems are to be developed. By 2050,
GHG emissions from domestic agricultural production are to be at least 40% below 1990 levels and Swiss
agriculture should contribute at least 50% to the country’s food supply. The message on the complete
revision of the CO2 Act for the post-2020 period includes a sectoral target of emissions reduction in
agriculture of 20% to 25% by 2030 compared to 1990. The target is primarily to be achieved through
legislative measures. On 14 April 2021, the Federal Council opened the consultation procedure on the
amendment of the CO2 Ordinance.  The CO2 Ordinance specifies reduction targets for the building (-65%),
transport (-25%), industry (-35%) and agriculture (-20%) sectors by 2030 compared to 1990.
Switzerland increased its contribution to the Green Climate Fund to CHF 145 million (USD 150 million) for
the years 2020-2023. The Green Climate Fund helps developing countries to implement the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. It finances measures taken by countries to limit GHG
emissions and adapt to climate change.
The aim of Switzerland’s Soil Strategy, adopted by the Federal Council on 8 May 2020, is to preserve
the fertility of the soil and to enable it to continue to perform its other services for society and the economy.
The Strategy and a series of measures pursue the objective to halt any net loss of soil in Switzerland by
2050.
The Federal Council opened the consultation process for its Draft 2030 Sustainable Development
Strategy which sets out how Switzerland intends to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development over the next ten years. The strategy, which defines three priority issues in which there is a
particular need for action and co-ordination between policy areas, is a first step towards a more systematic
approach. The Federal Council highlights the need for a food systems transformation through its priority
area “sustainable consumption and production” which contains three objectives (related to consumption
modes, sustainable agricultural production and food loss and waste) as well as a system-wide indicator on
the GHG footprint of food.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
On 1 April 2020, the Federal Council took measures to stabilise the agricultural markets and to mitigate
the economic impact in the agricultural sector in the current crisis. The aim was to ensure the supply of
food to the population while at the same time preventing a fall in market prices that would have
repercussions on the entire value-added chain.
In addition to short-term loans already available to provide liquidity for agricultural producers, the Swiss
Government has approved the advanced payment of direct payments. The agriculture and food sector
could also benefit from the comprehensive general package of measures to mitigate the economic
consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g. to avoid layoffs, safeguard jobs and guarantee wages).
The government granted exceptional permits for work-related travel during the closed period to allow the
entry of seasonal workers and for the management of agricultural land near the border, and exemption
from quarantine rules for border regions in order to guarantee work-related travel. Several existing web-
based platforms help farms to find additional labour resources and to connect employers and workers.


 513

Temporarily, the official agricultural and feed controls were adapted (where necessary) to follow the
hygienic recommendations.
The Swiss National Economic Supply Agency issued non-legally binding letters confirming towards
companies their relevance for the supply system. Food is given priority at border crossing (“green lanes”)
and the ban on transporting overnight and on public holidays has temporarily been lifted for essential
goods.
The Swiss Government has allocated CHF 3 million (USD 3.1 million) for long-term storage of beef, veal
and goat meat for which demand has declined. The Swiss Government has approved the Ordinance on
exceptional financial assistance of CHF 10 million (USD 10.3 million) for the downgrading of AOC wines
to table wine. It is based on two pillars: the downgrading of AOC wine to table wine with the granting of a
contribution of a maximum of CHF 2 (USD 2.07) per litre; and the reduction of maximum yields by the
cantons for the 2020 harvest.
While retail markets were closed, direct sale from farms to consumers, farm shops, shops with food and
goods of daily use, self-serving machines and the online sale (e.g. food, seeds and other gardening
products) remained allowed. Serving food and drink to customers on site at restaurants is forbidden,
whereas take away is allowed.
In order to guarantee the availability of products and to avoid food waste, the Federal Council has adopted
an amendment to the Ordinance on Foodstuffs and Commodities. The amendment allows certain
deviations from the regulation to be temporarily tolerated. However, the foodstuffs concerned must be
marked with a red sticker. These temporary exceptions should not endanger the health of consumers.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
As an EFTA member, Switzerland participates in ongoing free trade negotiations with India, Malaysia and
Viet Nam. Trade negotiations with Indonesia and Mercosur have been completed, with signatures
pending.1 The FTA with Ecuador has been in force since 1 November 2020.
Existing Free Trade Agreements with Chile and the South African Customs Union (SACU) are currently
under renegotiation. These Free Trade Agreements and the ongoing negotiations cover trade of all
processed agricultural products as well as a range of basic agricultural products.
Switzerland and its EFTA partners revised their chapter on trade and sustainable development, which now
includes an article on trade and sustainable agriculture and food systems.
Switzerland and Japan agreed on mutual recognition of organic standards for animals and animal
products. In 2013, the two countries had already mutually recognised the equivalence of organic standards
with respect to plant products. In July 2020, Japan and Switzerland confirmed that organic products of
animal origin and products containing components of animal origin will henceforth be recognised as
equivalent.
Following the end of the Brexit transition period, Switzerland’s relations with the United Kingdom are
governed by seven new bilateral agreements as of 1 January 2021. Through these agreements,
Switzerland and the United Kingdom largely continue their trade relationship with the same rules as prior
to Brexit. One of these agreements, the Trade Agreement, transfers the Agricultural Agreement with the
European Union previously in place into the Swiss-UK relationship. Some of the replicated provisions do
not apply from 1 January 2021, however, as they depend on an equivalent arrangement between the
United Kingdom and the European Union.


514 

Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Flexibility has been introduced into the partial tariff rate quotas for foodstuff to stabilise market prices. This
has been used for butter and eggs, but potentially can be used for a range of other goods as well. In case
of food shortages, tariff rate quotas as well as payment terms for agriculture imports can be temporarily
extended.
Contextual information
Switzerland is a small economy with one of the highest GDP per capita, low and periodically negative
inflation and unemployment rates around 4%. GDP growth has been stable at around 2% in recent years,
but GDP dropped by almost 5% in 2020, mainly due to the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The relative importance of agriculture in the Swiss economy is low with its share in the GDP at 0.7%, while
its share in employment is around 3%. The farm structure is dominated by relatively small family farms.
Hills and mountain farming areas (including alpine summer pastures) are used for extensive milk and meat
production, while more concentrated pork and poultry production is located in valleys. The agricultural area
is mostly grassland with arable land representing 26% of the total. Crop production has shifted away over
time from traditional arable crops (grains, oilseeds) towards an increasing production of fruits and
vegetables.
Table 25.3. Switzerland: Contextual indicators

Switzerland
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
257
609
0.6%
0.5%
Population (million)
7
9
0.2%
0.2%
Land area (thousand km2)
40
40
0.05%
0.05%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
1 566
1 510
0.05%
0.05%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
180
214
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
35 426
70 986
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
29
40
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
1.1
0.7
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
4.8
2.9
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
2.8
3.1
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.9
4.5
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
50
48
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
50
52
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
26
26
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Switzerland has consistently been a net agro-food importer; its current share of agro-food imports in total
imports is 4.5%, while the share of agro-food exports in total exports is 3.1%. Swiss agro-food exports
consist mostly of processed products for final consumption (85% of total agro-food exports). This category
also represents half of the agro-food imports (Figure 25.6).


 515

Figure 25.5. Switzerland: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 25.6. Switzerland: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Total factor productivity (TFP) growth in agriculture has slowed significantly and is estimated to have been
negative between 2007 and 2016. This was partially compensated by a small growth in the use of
intermediary inputs (0.3%) and primary factor growth (0.1%). Still, overall output has declined during that
decade.
Swiss agriculture is largely rain-fed. Swiss farmers irrigate only 2.2% of their agricultural land and the share
of agriculture in the country’s water abstraction is less than one-fifth of the OECD average. In addition, the
water stress indicator is well below the OECD average. Nutrient surpluses have declined moderately, but
the surplus of nitrogen is still more than twice the OECD average. The share of agriculture in greenhouse
gas emissions has slightly increased and is higher than the OECD average. Agriculture’s share in energy
use went down, and is less than one-third of the OECD average.
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
19
7
50
85
17
2
14
6
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


516 

Figure 25.7. Switzerland: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 25.4. Switzerland: Productivity and environmental indicators

Switzerland
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.8%
-0.5%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
67.3
65.8
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
3.6
3.3
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
0.6
0.6
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
11.7
12.9
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
2.8
2.2
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
..
8.0
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
4.9
3.8
9.3
8.5
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.




Note
1 The FTA with Indonesia was approved by the Parliament and is subject to a referendum on 7 March
2021.

0.3%
0.5%
0.1%
0.05%
-0.5%
1.6%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
Switzerland
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


 517

Support to agriculture
Transfers to agricultural producers in Turkey since the 1980s have comprised an important but decreasing
share of farm revenues, from a high of 31% in the 1990s to about 15% in recent years. Most of this support
has been through influencing the market price of agricultural products. Measures to address the COVID-
19 pandemic drove changes in the composition of support in 2020. These measures increased the
producer support estimate (PSE) from an average of 15% in 2017-19 to almost 20% in 2020 – albeit still
below the 24% PSE observed 2000-02.
Concessional loans increased sharply in 2020, bringing payments based on variable input use to almost
half of total PSE, reversing the downward trend in total support as a share of GDP. Other interest
concessions also grew, increasing payments based on fixed capital formation by a factor of four from the
previous year.
Market price support (MPS) is provided mainly for sunflower, potatoes and beef, in the form of reductions
of exporters’ debts to public corporations. MPS trended lower in recent years. This is a consequence of
higher world prices following the COVID-19 pandemic, and continued depreciation of the Turkish Lira. MPS
was estimated to make up 54% of the PSE on average during 2018-20, compared with 78% in 2000-02.
Support to general services (GSSE) mainly comprises irrigation infrastructure, duty write-offs and equity
injections connected to commodity marketing agencies. At 2.6% of Turkey’s agricultural value-added on
average for 2018-20, expenditures on general services relative to the sector’s size are below those in many
OECD countries.
Total support to the sector was as high as 4% of GDP until 2000-02, but declined as the importance of
agriculture in the overall economy diminished. Total support to agriculture was about 1.4% of GDP in
2018-20.
Recent policy changes
The Eleventh Development Plan, covering 2019-23, sets a number of targets to be achieved by 2023,
including increased production of red meat and oilseeds, land consolidation and use of irrigation. The plan
anticipates improvements to the agricultural information system, reform of regulations to protect and
consolidate agricultural land, and continued development of irrigation.
Special measures were put in place in 2020 related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Some programme
deadlines were extended to ensure that domestic agricultural production was not unduly impacted by
COVID-19 precautions, and principal and interest payments on concessional loans for farmers were
postponed for six months. Some tax deadlines were extended, and agricultural payments were made in
advance instead of instalments.
To increase yield, quality and diversity of production, Crop Production Improvement Projects were initiated
in 24 provinces where additional summer planting was possible. This provided grants covering 75% of
26 Turkey


518 

seed costs. In addition, some public land was opened to production by farmers to increase domestic
production.
Border measures for paddy rice, wheat, barley and maize were adjusted in 2020 to avoid any domestic
supply disruptions that could be caused by COVID-19 restrictions. These reductions in tariff rates extend
into the first half of 2021.
Apricots were included in the scope of intervention procurement for the first time. Aydın chestnut,
Gaziantep baklava, Aydın fig, Malatya apricot and Milas olive oil were added as EU geographical indication
registrations in 2020.
In co-operation with the Food and Agriculture Organisation, Turkey launched a national Save Your Food
Campaign to reduce food loss and waste, and published its national strategy document on Prevention,
Reduction and Monitoring of Food Loss and Waste, and its related action plan.
Assessment and recommendations

The largest form of support to farmers is market price support. This is a relatively inefficient way to
support farmers’ incomes. Moreover, decoupled area payments introduced in the 2000s were re-
coupled to production to a certain extent. Alternatives such as payments based on historical
entitlements would be more efficient at raising farm incomes, while income-based disaster
payments can reduce risks.

Existing commodity marketing entities require periodic capital infusions. Continuing the
deregulation and privatisation of these enterprises can reduce their fiscal burden and improve
allocative efficiency in the economy.

Turkey allocates a relatively small share of spending to investments in innovation, services to help
farmers improve their practices, and education and training for farmers. Greater emphasis on these
essential services should be considered.

The new Digital Agricultural Market (DITAP) is a good way to help farmers access markets and
can increase allocative efficiency in the economy. It remains to be seen how this new platform will
affect the role of State Economic Enterprises (SEE) and Agricultural Sales Co-operative Unions
(ASCUs), but more alternatives for buyers and sellers of agricultural products are welcome.

A stronger policy emphasis on competition, adaptation and resilience to climate change rather than
production quantity and quality can help set the stage for long-term sustainability of the sector. For
example, the recent emphasis on water use efficiency rather than simple expansion of irrigation
infrastructure can make the sector more resilient to drought.

Recent re-allocation of unused public land to farmers in response to the COVID-19 pandemic is
unlikely to increase food supplies significantly. Care should be taken that expanded land use does
not lead to problems for environmental sustainability, and that land allocation is done in a fair and
transparent manner.




 519

Figure 26.1. Turkey: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/gkwrpl
Figure 26.2. Turkey: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/ezmjo1
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
4.0%
4.5%
TSE as % GDP
1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
-40%
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD


520 

Figure 26.3. Turkey: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/aetxuo


-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Cotton
Potatoes
Apples
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Sunflower
Maize
Barley
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 521

Table 26.1. Turkey: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
18 343
22 169
48 195
47 171
50 377
47 038
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
55.0
70.6
70.2
71.6
69.5
69.5
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
14 075
18 581
35 668
35 361
37 911
33 733
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
4 304
5 922
8 878
8 022
7 867
10 745
Support based on commodity output
3 419
5 034
5 282
6 257
6 076
3 512
Market Price Support1
3 408
4 719
4 560
5 492
5 362
2 826
Positive Market Price Support
3 412
4 726
4 567
5 493
5 381
2 826
Negative Market Price Support
-3
-8
-7
-1
-19
0
Payments based on output
11
316
722
765
714
687
Payments based on input use
885
426
2 580
754
729
6 256
Based on variable input use
850
302
1 905
395
333
4 987
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
19
116
672
354
392
1 269
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
16
8
3
5
5
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
25
1 016
1 011
1 062
976
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
208
219
195
210
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
25
808
792
867
766
with input constraints
0
0
119
130
145
80
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
436
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
436
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
22.7
24.0
17.2
16.1
14.9
19.6
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.23
1.26
1.10
1.13
1.12
1.07
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.29
1.32
1.21
1.19
1.17
1.24
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
333
3 507
1 113
1 686
1 390
262
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
67
29
73
91
70
57
Inspection and control
51
67
16
20
16
13
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
22
513
766
1 240
1 057
0
Marketing and promotion
95
2 888
258
336
247
192
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
99
11
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
7.4
37.8
10.1
17.4
15.0
2.4
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-3 032
-4 513
-3 956
-4 762
-4 871
-2 233
Transfers to producers from consumers
-3 027
-4 547
-3 890
-4 564
-4 873
-2 231
Other transfers from consumers
-49
-64
-70
-199
-8
-2
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
43
97
4
0
11
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-22.2
-22.5
-10.7
-13.5
-12.8
-6.6
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.29
1.30
1.12
1.16
1.15
1.07
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.29
1.29
1.12
1.16
1.15
1.07
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
4 637
9 429
9 991
9 708
9 257
11 007
Transfers from consumers
3 075
4 611
3 959
4 762
4 882
2 233
Transfers from taxpayers
1 611
4 881
6 101
5 144
4 384
8 776
Budget revenues
-49
-64
-70
-199
-8
-2
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
4.0
3.8
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.6
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
1 229
4 710
5 431
4 215
3 895
8 182
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.1
2.0
0.8
0.5
0.5
1.2
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
139 552
945 848
828 845
944 107
1 064 592
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
0.00
1.12
5.84
4.84
5.68
7.02
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Turkey are: wheat, maize, barley, sunflower, sugar,
potatoes, tomatoes, grapes, apples, cotton, tobacco, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




522 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Before 1980, an import substitution policy was in place and production was mostly controlled by agricultural
policies. Some agricultural products were taxed while others received subsidies, but the sector was a net
payer to the budget overall (OECD, 2016[1]).
From the 1980s until 2000, the sector was a net beneficiary of support, directed towards import-competing
farm products. The main agricultural policy instruments were price support for crop products and input
subsidies. Programmes provided low-cost credit, agricultural chemicals, seeds, irrigation and fertiliser.
Livestock production was supported mainly by border measures.
State enterprises managed intervention buying, in the form of SEEs as exclusive purchasers of grains,
pulses, sugar, tobacco and tea; and ASCUs responsible for horticultural crops, cotton, oilseeds, nuts, and
olive oil. Support prices were announced after planting, and farmers received payment a year or more after
harvest and delivery.
After 2000, the country embarked on a process of structural reform as a condition for receiving macro-
economic stabilisation assistance from the IMF and World Bank (Burrell and Kurzweil, 2007[2]; OECD,
2016[1]). These reforms were carried out between 2001 and 2008 through the Agricultural Reform
Implementation Project (ARIP). ARIP was intended to improve efficiency in the agro-food sector by
removing market distortions, and contribute to fiscal consolidation. Under ARIP, Turkish agricultural policy
was oriented towards closer alignment with the EU’s CAP.
Reforms after 2001 reduced the state’s role in setting prices, marketing, and trade of agro-food products.
SEEs and producer co-operatives were made independent to varying degrees and at different speeds, and
became more exposed to market conditions. Structural adjustment in agriculture was promoted through
aid to convert land to alternative production, or land consolidation, and with transition support and aid for
rural development. This period also saw a shift away from output and input subsidies towards direct income
support payments, although high border protection for agro-food products remained in place (OECD,
2011[3]).
Since 2010, production-linked payments were re-established for many products. Current agricultural
policies also include import tariffs, fixed purchasing prices, export subsidies, deficiency payments (income
support payments), insurance support and input subsidies (mostly through interest concessions). In
addition, there is an emphasis on infrastructure, particularly for irrigation, also connected to rural
development objectives.
Table 26.2. Turkey: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1980s
Closed economy (import substitution regime)
High tariffs for border protection
Agricultural price controls
Input subsidies
Import controls by the State Economic Enterprises (SEE) which controlled
agricultural marketing and production
Agricultural Sales Co-operatives Unions (ASCU) and agricultural member
cooperatives (ASC)
Agricultural Credit Cooperatives
State-owned Agricultural Bank
1980-2010
Gradual reform to liberalise trade but with
agricultural protection
Agricultural Reform Implementation Project (ARIP) as a precondition of the
World Bank and IMF programmes
Privatization of SEEs and restructuring of ASCUs
Price-fixing by government discontinued for some products but remains for


 523

Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
others
Gradual reduction of tariffs for some agricultural inputs and outputs
Progressively reduced role for ASCUs and ASC
Price controls continued
Product and input subsidies phased out
Introduction of Direct Income Support
Compensatory payments to cover the cost of switching from crops in excess
supply (e.g. hazelnuts and tobacco) to alternative activities (net imported
products)
Introduction of agri-environmental policies and cadastral works
FTAs signed
2010-present
Open market economy but with agricultural
protection
Agricultural tariffs continue to be used
Export subsidies implemented
Deficiency payments differentiated according to 30 agricultural basins
throughout the country
Infrastructure investments increased
The PSE was mostly in the range of 25-30% of agricultural gross farm receipts over the past two decades,
with a significant decline after 2018 (Figure 26.4). This is a consequence of exchange rate movement
reducing the level of market price support, which made up about 54% of the PSE in 2018-20 but about
78% in 2000-02.
Overall, nominal support increased since the late 1980s. Budgetary payments grew, starting with the move
towards decoupled payments in the early 2000s, and remained significant through successive reforms that
changed their basis. Budgetary support jumped in 2020 as a consequence of exceptional spending related
to COVID-19, mainly for concessional loans and interest concessions.
Figure 26.4. Turkey: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


524 

Main policy instruments
The majority of support comes through market price support, consisting mainly of tariffs on imported
products. Budgetary support comes through deficiency payments and area payments based on production
characteristics. Purchases of inputs and marketing of major commodities is handled through SEEs or
ACSUs, which have price-setting power.
Export subsidies apply to 14 commodity groups, out of the 19 groups eligible under Turkey’s WTO
commitments. These include processed fruit and vegetables, poultry meat and eggs. Export subsidies are
granted in the form of reductions of the exporters’ debts to public corporations (for example, for taxes, and
telecommunications or energy costs). Production quotas apply at the farm level for sugar beet. Under the
Nairobi agreement, export subsidies are to be phased out by the end of 2022.
Deficiency payments are provided as “premium payments” for products considered to be in short domestic
supply. These are directed to producers of 17 different agricultural products, differentiated by production
area to encourage ecological and economical suitability of production, and high yield and quality.
Area-based payments fall under several different rationales. Hazelnut producers receive payments based
on area of production. Farmers can also receive area payments for producing fodder crops or certified
saplings, organic farming, using good agricultural practices, using certified seeds, and for the rehabilitation
of olive groves. Each farmer registered under the National Farmer Registration System (NFRS) receives
a so-called “diesel payment” and a “fertiliser payment” separately based on current area of production.
State-supported agricultural insurance (TARSİM) comes through a public-private partnership where private
insurance companies deliver uniform policies to farmers. The state pays between 50% and 67% of the
total insurance premium on behalf of farmers (Agricultural Insurance Pool, 2020[4]).
Turkey is a signatory to the Paris Agreement. Agriculture represents 7.3% of total greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions. In its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), Turkey proposes to reduce agricultural
emissions through fuel savings from consolidation of agricultural land, rehabilitating grazing lands,
controlling fertiliser use, implementing modern farming practices and encouraging minimum tillage farming
techniques.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry initiated a new Project, named Digital Agriculture Market (DITAP)
in co-operation with the Ministry of Treasury and Finance and the Ministry of Trade. The digital platform
makes it possible for all operations from pre-sowing to post-harvest to be carried out in a digital
environment. DITAP is a web-based digital platform for the supply and demand chain and includes a wide
range of members from smallholders to big players in the retail sector. DITAP provides farmers with new
opportunities to strengthen their marketing capabilities. The system also allows for contract farming, which
helps farmers meet the needs of the industry and the market by planning production and sales in advance.
Farmers can also purchase products such as seeds and fertilisers through DITAP, with the convenience
of input financing. In addition, a new agricultural land lease module, lets farmers lease their land through
DITAP (DITAP, 2021[5]).
Additional coverage is now available through the state supported agricultural insurance. Starting from
2021, coverage includes heat damage to oranges, tangerines, grapefruit, lemons and grapes, rain damage
to cotton during the harvest period, bird damage to sunflower and several new crops. In 2020, 2.1 million
insurance policies were issued and TRY 1.6 billion (USD 250 million) of state insurance premium support
was provided.
In 2020, Turkey published its national strategy document on Prevention, Reduction and Monitoring of Food
Loss and Waste and its action plan in co-operation with the FAO. The action plan aims to intensify efforts


 525

at national, regional and international levels to prevent food loss and waste. The national strategy sets
13 targets and 96 actions as part of four strategic goals to prevent food loss and waste (FAO, 2020[6]).
At the midpoint of the “Turkey Agricultural Drought Strategy and Action Plan, 2018-22”, activities continue
under five headings: i) drought risk estimation and crisis management; ii) ensuring a sustainable water
supply; iii) effective management of agricultural water demand; iv) increasing support to R&D activities,
training and extension services; and v) institutional capacity building. As part of the strategy, Drought
Management Plans are to be completed for 25 basins by the end of 2023. Between 2014 and 2020,
15 such plans were completed. Ten more basins are included in the 2021 programme, along with two plans
that are due for revision (required every six years). Responsible institutions must report on the
implementation of the Management Plans every six months.
Within the framework of the “Rural Development Investments Support Program”, 50% grant support is
available for the installation of irrigation systems (drip or sprinkler). Approximately 323 000 producers were
supported by grants and credit support, and pressurised irrigation systems were installed on a total area
of 1.1 million hectares by the end of 2020. Since 2003, the use of closed system irrigation projects has
been accelerated to reduce loss and leakage. In 2003, only 6% of irrigated area used piped irrigation
networks, but by 2020 this had increased to 29%.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
A Working Group and a Scientific Board were established within the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry to
carry out monitoring and evaluation studies of COVID-19. To ensure that seasonal workers can continue
to work, hygiene and personal protection products were provided and workers were allowed to travel to
agricultural areas despite restrictions on movement in order to take up work. Transportation and living
conditions of seasonal workers were checked to ensure sanitary conditions.
Deadlines were extended in some cases. Application deadlines for crop production supports for cereals
and legumes as well as deadlines for oilseeds and olives, organic agriculture and good agricultural
practices were extended to the second quarter of 2020. In April 2020, producers’ principal and interest
payments on concessional loans were postponed by six months. Tax payments due between April and
June for food enterprises were postponed. In addition, some agricultural payments are being made in
advance instead of as a sequence of smaller payments over the course of the year. Interest-free loans
were made available to small farmers and food enterprises.
Actions were also taken to accelerate planting. The “Crop Production Improvement Project” was initiated
in 24 provinces suitable for additional summer planting, providing a grant of 75% of seed costs. The aim
of the project is to increase the yield and quality of crop production as well as encouraging new species,
varieties, methods and technologies and increasing the use of agricultural mechanisation.
In co-operation with the Ministry of Environment and Urbanization, state lands not currently in use are to
be progressively opened for agricultural production. A pilot project allows non-cultivated state lands to be
used by farmers for sample cultivation. In the first stage of this project, 970 hectares of land are to be
planted to cereals, legumes, oilseeds and feed crops.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
The average rate of customs duties applied in 2020 for basic agricultural products outside the Customs
Union Common External Tariff was 58%. Customs duties were reduced on cocoa shells, husks, skins and
other cocoa waste.
In 2020, Turkey signed revised Free Trade Agreements (FTA) with EFTA, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Montenegro and ratification procedures are ongoing. FTA negotiations are actively ongoing with four
countries: Ukraine, Japan, Thailand and Indonesia. FTA negotiations with the United Kingdom have been


526 

concluded and Agreement was signed on 29 December 2020. The United Kingdom is a top-ten export
destination for Turkish agricultural products.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Exports of lemons were temporarily limited. Tariffs were reduced and in-quota import amounts increased
for many other commodities. These trade actions are mainly designed to ensure domestic supply, and are
in part a response to actions taken by trading partners and price increases resulting from demand spikes.
Since April 2020, exotic animals and pets are prohibited from entering the country to prevent this possible
vector of COVID-19 infection.
On 21 October 2020, customs duty rates, which were 45% for wheat, 35% for barley and 25% for maize,
were removed until at least 30 April 2021. In addition, the tax rate, which is 34% for paddy and 45% for
rice, has been reduced to 5% and 15%, respectively, from 23 December 2020 to 30 April 2021.
The exportation of lemons was subjected to prior authorisation to meet rising domestic demand due to the
COVID-19 pandemic. This regulation was put into force on 7 April 2020 and terminated on 7 August 2020.
The government of Turkey also removed the customs duty for 100 000 tonnes of paddy rice imports until
the end of May 2021.
Contextual information
Primary agriculture accounts for 6% of GDP and employs 18% of the workforce, making agriculture one of
the most important sectors of the country’s economy. Turkey is a net exporter of agricultural products,
which account for more than 10% of total exports, and access to world markets is a significant issue for
the sector. Notwithstanding various structural bottlenecks, such as the predominance of small-sized,
subsistence and semi-subsistence farms, Turkey ranks as a significant agricultural exporter of nuts, dried
fruits, and some fresh vegetables; main export destinations include the European Union, Iraq, the Russian
Federation and the United States.
The impact of the pandemic on economic activity unfolded later than in other countries in the region, but
was sharp. Employment and aggregate demand contracted strongly in the first wave, and then rebounded
following vigorous government support. However, they are again facing headwinds (OECD, 2021[7]).




 527

Table 26.3. Turkey: Contextual indicators

Turkey
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
609
2 347
1.5%
2.1%
Population (million)
64
83
1.5%
1.6%
Land area (thousand km2)
770
770
0.9%
0.9%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
40 479
37 802
1.3%
1.2%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
82
108
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
9 478
28 424
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
15
26
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
10.0
6.4
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
36.0
18.1
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
13.2
10.6
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.9
7.8
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
69
44
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
31
56
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
59
52
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Despite the pandemic, sector growth has outpaced overall GDP. In the first three quarters, overall growth
of agriculture was 5.3%. Agricultural and food products exports increased by 5% in 10 months of the year
compared to the same period of the previous year. However, growth in the sector has come mainly from
increased use of inputs and productivity growth lags the world average.
Figure 26.5. Turkey: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate


528 

Figure 26.6. Turkey: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agriculture is relatively carbon intensive compared with the rest of the economy, with the share of
emissions about double its share in GDP. Irrigation has been under continual expansion, and agriculture
is the major water user, accounting for 85% of total water abstractions. Phosphorous balances have
declined since 2000, but remain more than double the OECD average.
The agricultural sector has enjoyed robust growth based on increased use of inputs. Irrigated area has
expanded as a result of continued public investment, opening more land to intensive production. Total
factor productivity growth makes up only about a third of agricultural output growth between 2007 and
2016.
Figure 26.7. Turkey: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.


Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
5
10
15
20
25
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
12
36
13
39
54
8
22
16
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
1.3%
0.5%
1.0%
0.05%
0.8%
1.6%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
Turkey
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


 529

Table 26.4. Turkey: Productivity and environmental indicators

Turkey
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.0%
0.8%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
27.8
27.7
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
8.0
7.0
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
5.0
4.3
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
14.1
12.5
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
8.0
10.2
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
75.4
84.7
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
18.6
26.1
9.3
8.5
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.
References

Agricultural Insurance Pool (2020), Tarsim, https://web.tarsim.gov.tr/havuz/homePageEng
(accessed on 19 January 2021).
[4]
Burrell, A. and M. Kurzweil (2007), “Distortions to Agricultural Incentives in Turkey”, Agricultural
Distortions Working Paper Series 48388, World Bank.
[2]
DITAP (2021), Dijital Tarim Pazari (DITAP), https://ditap.gov.tr/ (accessed on 19 January 2021).
[5]
FAO (2020), Turkey’s National Strategy Document on Prevention, Reduction and Monitoring of
Food Loss and Waste and its Action Plan, FAO, Ankara,
http://www.fao.org/publications/card/en/c/CB1074EN (accessed on 19 January 2021).
[6]
OECD (2021), OECD Economic Surveys: Turkey 2021, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/2cd09ab1-en.
[7]
OECD (2016), Innovation, Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability in Turkey, OECD Food and
Agricultural Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264261198-en.
[1]
OECD (2011), Evaluation of Agricultural Policy Reforms in Turkey, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264113220-en.
[3]



530 

Support to agriculture
Ukraine’s support to agricultural producers, as measured by the producer support estimate (PSE), is low
compared to other countries. The PSE was volatile over the past three decades, mostly due to fluctuations
in market price support (MPS). During the past decade, however, PSE fluctuations narrowed around zero,
averaging 2.1% of gross farm receipts during 2018-20.
In most years, total MPS was negative – reflecting average producer prices below international reference
levels – but with significant variation across commodities and time. Due to tariff protection, domestic prices
for meat products and sugar were above international reference levels, while those for most crops, as well
as for milk, were generally below reference prices. In recent years, the overall impact of government
intervention on prices was likely limited and, since 2018, the total MPS for the sector was slightly positive.
Single commodity transfers (SCTs) mirror the MPS across commodities, with sugar, rye, and pig meat
receiving the highest support, while oats and, to a lesser extent, sunflower seed and milk are implicitly
taxed.
Budgetary support in the form of tax benefits and input support continues to be relatively small,
representing less than 1% of gross farm receipts, but contributed to positive overall producer support during
the last three years. Additional support was provided in 2020 in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic,
mostly in the form of investment aid and payments for keeping cows, but such transfers remained small,
representing less than half a percent of budgetary support to producers in that year.
Support for general services increased since 2015 but remains low compared to other countries. During
2018-20, the general services support estimate (GSSE) averaged 1.7% of agricultural value-added, well
below levels seen in the mid-1990s. Most of these expenditures go to inspection and control services, and
to agricultural schools. Overall, total support to the sector increased slightly in relative terms, from an
average of 0.5% of GDP in 2000-02 to 0.7% in the most recent three years.
Recent policy changes
New legislation passed in 2020 ended the ban on the sale of agricultural land. As of July 2021, citizens of
Ukraine will be permitted to purchase up to 100 hectares of land, while from January 2024 this possibility
will extend to purchases of up to 10 000 hectares, available to legal entities whose founders or final
beneficiaries are Ukrainians and which do not have business abroad or in offshore companies. This law
follows the end of the moratorium on the sale of agricultural land in late 2019, along with legislation related
to land documentation and illegal land appropriation.
Legislation was also passed related to climate change and environmental policies. In particular, this
concerns the monitoring, reporting and verification of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, the use of ozone-
depleting substances and fluorinated greenhouse gases, irrigation, and drainage. A new law, in force since
27 Ukraine


 531

early 2020, provides a strategy on environmental policies and lists indicators for measuring environmental
policy effects and compliance with environmental targets.
Two new free trade agreements (FTAs) entered into force in January 2021, including the Ukraine-Israel
FTA, and the Political, Free Trade and Strategic Partnership Agreement between Ukraine and the United
Kingdom. Both agreements facilitate bilateral trade in agricultural products, among others.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a 2020 State Program of Economic Stimulation provides a number
of measures that target the agricultural sector. In particular, these concern access to financial resources,
enhanced market facilitation and market monitoring, further facilitating organic agriculture, and specific
subsidies for capital investments, dairy producers and social insurance for family farms. During the first
half of 2020, Ukraine also imposed temporary bans on the export of buckwheat (2 April to 1 July 2020) and
undenatured ethyl alcohol (23 March to 15 May 2020).
Assessment and recommendations

With low levels of producer support overall, most-distorting policy interventions in Ukraine’s
agricultural markets became less dominant in recent years thanks to the reduction of both positive
and negative MPS. However, domestic prices for some export commodities, notably sunflower
seed and milk, remain below world price levels. Export duties applied to some of the products,
market activities (though limited) of state-owned enterprises, and limitations in export infrastructure
may each contribute to this negative support. In order to take advantage of its agricultural
competitiveness, Ukraine should take additional steps to facilitate exports, including continued
investment in logistics and transportation systems, in line with growing export volumes.

At the same time, the re-emergence of MPS for potatoes in the context of bad harvests in 2019
points to the distortive effects of import tariffs even in markets where trade has remained marginal
for some time.

In addition to abolishing VAT regimes that supported agricultural input use, the integration of
agricultural producers into the economy-wide VAT system since 2018 should increase efficiency
in the sector and reduce the administrative burden. Ensuring well-functioning input markets
remains key to improving farmers’ access to agricultural inputs.

Investments continue to be supported through grants and concessional loans. In recent years, the
scale of this support increased, including in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. While
investments in productive capacity are essential for raising the sector’s productivity and
competitiveness, public support may crowd out private sector investments and should not be seen
as a substitute for well-functioning credit markets.

Productivity in agriculture grew quickly over the past decade. However, the deterioration of capital
stocks despite investment aid – likely caused by economic and political uncertainties – threatens
future productivity growth. Ensuring macroeconomic and political stability will be critical for
maintaining and developing a productive agricultural sector.

The end of the moratorium on the sale of agricultural land, which had been extended annually
between 2002 and 2019, is a welcome step towards removing rigidities in the land market that
prevent this agricultural resource from being optimally allocated. The expected entering into force
of new legislation on the turn-over of agricultural land should enable land sales in the future. While
much will depend on the implementation, this legislation is important to improve efficiency in the
sector.

Public expenditure on general services started to recover after the economic depression of
2014-15, but remain low in relative terms. The focus on the country’s inspection and control system
is necessary to support the export-oriented sector. In light of changing climate conditions, however,


532 

also ensuring a well-functioning and sufficiently funded knowledge and information system would
help the productivity of Ukraine’s agricultural sector.

Ukraine’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) to the 2016 Paris Agreement on Climate
Change commit the country to not exceed 60% of its 1990 GHG emission levels in 2030, including
from all agricultural and other land use sources. The Action Plan that came into force in early 2020
should help implement multisectoral monitoring, reporting and verification of GHG emissions. With
agriculture responsible for more than 12% of national emissions, specific reduction targets and
related policy action will need to complement this Plan to achieve the emissions-reduction
objectives.

Figure 27.1. Ukraine: Development of support to agriculture

Note: *Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink  https://stat.link/tlw09q


0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
1.01
1.02
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.3%
0.4%
0.5%
0.6%
0.7%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20


 533

Figure 27.2. Ukraine: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Note: The producer price change and the border price change are not calculated when the negative price gap occurs at the commodity level
for the current or previous year.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/18qag9
Figure 27.3. Ukraine: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/pblhns


-60%
-50%
-40%
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
PSE change decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE
-40%
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Potatoes
Eggs
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Sunflower
Rye
Oats
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


534 

Table 27.1. Ukraine: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
9 619
33 508
31 469
34 265
34 791
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
86.8
83.8
82.7
83.9
84.8
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
8 841
23 717
21 066
25 394
24 692
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
53
726
668
1 025
484
Support based on commodity output
-415
408
357
690
178
Market Price Support1
-531
408
357
690
178
Positive Market Price Support
388
559
437
897
344
Negative Market Price Support
-919
-151
-80
-207
-166
Payments based on output
116
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
203
125
120
120
135
Based on variable input use
169
24
10
23
39
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
31
101
109
97
95
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
2
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
265
192
191
214
172
Based on Receipts / Income
265
161
158
166
160
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
31
33
48
12
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
0.5
2.1
2.1
3.0
1.4
Producer NPC (coeff.)
0.95
1.01
1.01
1.02
1.01
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.01
1.02
1.02
1.03
1.01
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
121
222
221
222
224
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
51
69
68
68
71
Inspection and control
26
136
130
138
141
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
36
7
14
6
2
Marketing and promotion
1
0
0
0
0
Cost of public stockholding
1
3
3
4
3
Miscellaneous
7
6
6
6
7
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
69.5
23.5
24.9
17.8
31.6
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
384
-394
-270
-700
-214
Transfers to producers from consumers
478
-351
-240
-638
-175
Other transfers from consumers
-38
-39
-24
-56
-38
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
-55
-4
-6
-6
-1
Percentage CSE (%)
4.3
-1.6
-1.3
-2.8
-0.9
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
0.95
1.02
1.01
1.03
1.01
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
0.96
1.02
1.01
1.03
1.01
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
174
948
889
1 246
708
Transfers from consumers
-440
390
264
694
213
Transfers from taxpayers
651
597
649
609
533
Budget revenues
-38
-39
-24
-56
-38
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.5
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
705
539
532
556
530
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.9
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
1 368
1 315
1 422
..
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
5.38
26.67
27.20
25.85
26.96
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Ukraine are: wheat, maize, rye, barley, oats,
sunflower, sugar, potatoes, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry, and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 535

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Prior to the 1990s, central planning regulated all sectors of Ukraine’s economy, including agriculture, as
part of the Soviet Union. The state administered prices, and state enterprises controlled production,
marketing of agricultural inputs and outputs, and processing and distribution of food (von Cramon-
Taubadel et al., 2008[1]).
The first reforms began at the end of the 1980s, when the country started to transition towards a market-
based economy. The ability to lease land from collective farms or individuals facilitated private agricultural
production, enabling the establishment of family farms (von Cramon-Taubadel et al., 2008[1]).
However, Ukraine went through an economic crisis in the early 1990s, involving significant economic
contraction and inflation. These impacted the agricultural sector and resulted in substantial reductions in
agricultural output and productivity. Consequently, several trade and price liberalisation policy reforms
were reversed in the mid-1990s. Renewed reforms in agribusiness privatisation and collective farm
restructuring intensified only after macroeconomic stabilisation in the 2000s (OECD/The World Bank,
2004[2]). While prior to the 1990s, the state owned all land,1 today about three-quarters of agricultural land
is private property (StateGeoCadastre, 2017[3]).2
In 2005, the State Agrarian Fund was established as a state-owned public joint stock company
(reorganised in 2013). Its initial mandate was to regulate grain prices through intervention purchases, to
store grain in state-owned silos and sell it to bakeries to guarantee bread prices, and to provide loans to
grain producers. The fund progressively became involved in other activities, such as state purchases and
sales of a broad range of agricultural and food products; forward contracts; flour processing and
wholesaling; and sales of fuel and mineral fertilisers to producers (OECD, 2015[4]).
Two key events helped shape agricultural policies in Ukraine. First, in 2008, Ukraine became a member of
the WTO, setting its agricultural bound tariffs at an average of 10.8%, expanding its export opportunities,
and contributing to changes in the system of state support for agriculture. Second, in 2014, the European
Union and Ukraine signed the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA) as part of their
Association Agreement. DCFTA involves tariff reductions and duty-free import quotas to facilitate trade
between Ukraine and the European Union, including in agro-food products.
From 1999 to 2016, the state provided significant support through VAT accumulation, based on an
agriculture-specific VAT regime. Agricultural producers accumulated in special bank accounts VAT due on
their primary and processed products. The accumulated funds were directed to cover VAT on purchased
inputs, with the residual available for any other production purpose. From 2014 to 2016, this mechanism
provided 90% of total state support. Other domestic policy measures notably comprised input subsidies,
tax concessions, price controls, import tariffs, non-tariff trade regulation, minimum purchase prices, direct
state purchases, and preferential loans (Table 27.2).




536 

Table 27.2. Ukraine: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1990s
Planned economy
Planned agricultural production
Controlled value chain, including trade, of agricultural production,
including inputs and outputs
1990-2000
Transition economy: gradual reforms towards market
economy
Interrupted by deep economic crisis in the early
1990s
Increased import tariffs for agricultural and processed food products
Land reform to allow private ownership
Gradual dismantling of centralised marketing schemes
Reversal of reforms during economic crisis
2000-present
Renewed reforms towards an open economy
Reduction of agricultural tariffs following WTO accession
Export taxes and quotas for main exported products, successively
eliminated or replaced by MoUs
State Agrarian Fund (price controls, production controls, marketing,
loans, etc.) with market interventions through minimum reference prices
and state food purchases successively reduced
Sugar production quotas until 2018
Various subsidies for inputs, interest support and tax concessions
Due to the negative market price support only partly offset by transfers to producers through tax
concessions and other measures, support to agricultural producers was negative for most of the 1990s.
While the level continued to fluctuate over the recent decade, it has been closer to zero (Figure 27.4). With
little budgetary support to general services or consumers, total support to the sector remained small for
most of the past 25 years.
Figure 27.4. Ukraine: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Ukraine’s agricultural policy measures are formulated in a number of major laws and decisions. The law
On State Support of Agriculture in Ukraine, adopted in 2004, defines priorities and measures of
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 537

agricultural policy. The 2017 Concept of development of farms and agricultural co-operatives for
2018-2020 sets out to create new rural jobs, provide support to private farms, encourage agricultural co-
operation, create affordable credit conditions for farms, and increase real rural incomes through agricultural
land leasing.
Agricultural producers are eligible for a Single Tax3 set as a percentage of normative agricultural land
values established on 1 July 1995 and adjusted since with the general consumer price index. Introduced
in 1998, the Single Tax originally replaced twelve taxes for which agricultural enterprises were liable as
business entities. The scope of this tax has narrowed since. At present, the Single Tax replaces three
taxes – profit tax, land tax (for land used in agricultural production), and a special water use fee – with
agricultural producers liable for all other taxes previously included in the Single Tax. The Single Tax regime
generates implicit tax benefits to agricultural producers, estimated to be around UAH 4.3 billion
(USD 160 million) annually in recent years.
The annual law On State Budget of Ukraine defines the financial scope of agricultural subsidy policies.
In 2020, this remained at a similar level as 2019, allocating some UAH 4 billion (USD 148 million) for
subsidies to agricultural producers. Given inflation of 2.7%, the 2020 budget declined slightly in real terms
relative to the prior year.
In addition to the Single Tax regime, the general budget programme On Financial Support of Agricultural
Producers provides a range of ongoing measures targeted to specific activities, such as partial
compensation for the costs of agricultural machinery and equipment, and compensation to farmers for
agricultural advisory services. For livestock producers, these also include interest rate support for livestock
husbandry and breeding; partial reimbursement of costs related to the construction and reconstruction of
animal farms and buildings; per head payments for cows to agricultural enterprises and for young cattle to
rural households; and partial compensation to agricultural producers purchasing high-breeding animals,
semen and embryos. In turn, on the crop side, support is provided in the form of seed cost compensation,
reimbursements for different types of on-farm investments and debt repayments.
As per a Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine (CMU) Resolution from June 2017, no price regulation of food
products has taken place since July 2017. However, the State Material Reserve of Ukraine (SRU) procures
and holds emergency reserves for a range of products, including agriculture and food products. Purchases
are made through open tenders.
Since 2002, a moratorium bans the sale of agricultural land in Ukraine, although leasing for cultivation is
permitted. The moratorium was extended annually until and including 2019. It was not formally extended
into 2020. However, only from July 2021 can limited amounts of land be purchased by individual citizens
of Ukraine, thanks to new legislation recently enacted. More important land purchases, including by
Ukrainian legal entities, will be permitted from January 2024 (see below).
Ukraine has been a member of the WTO since May 2008. The country charges import tariffs on most
agricultural products, with applied most-favoured-nation (MFN) tariffs for agricultural products averaging
at 9.2%, well above the average for non-agricultural products at 3.7%. While most imports face ad valorem
tariffs, Ukraine maintains a global tariff-rate quota for raw cane sugar. However, this quota was last used
in 2011, given the excess sugar supply on the Ukrainian market in more recent years. Export duties are
applied to some oilseeds, live animals and raw hides.
The Association Agreement with the European Union, ratified by Ukraine in 2014, increasingly
influences the country’s policies. On 27 June 2014, the European Union and Ukraine signed the Deep and
Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA) as part of their Association Agreement. It applied provisionally
from 1 January 2016 and formally entered into force on 1 September 2017. Trade liberalisation between
the European Union and Ukraine is to be implemented over a transition period of seven to ten years. The
European Union is to open tariff rate quotas for duty-free imports for Ukraine’s principal agro-food products,
such as grain, meat and milk products, and sugar, and to grant free access for the others. Ukraine is to


538 

reduce import duties for a number of goods from the European Union. About 40% of agriculture-related
import duties were reduced to zero immediately after the Agreement entered into force, and around half of
import duties will be eliminated during the transition period. For about 10% of tariff lines – covering selected
products in product categories such as dairy and eggs, sugar, miscellaneous edible products, animal oils
and fats, and feeding stuff for animals – Ukraine maintains tariff rate quotas (TRQs) with zero in-quota
tariffs, but with non-zero over-quota tariffs. Since 1 January 2016, Ukraine applies three TRQs with zero
in-quota tariffs for imports from the European Union of pig meat, poultry meat and poultry meat
preparations, and sugar, respectively. The parties committed to apply no export subsidies for mutually
traded agricultural goods.
The DCFTA incorporates fundamental WTO rules on non-tariff barriers, such as prohibition of import and
export restrictions, and disciplines on state trading. However, Ukraine’s difficulty complying with EU food
safety, veterinary and phytosanitary requirements remains a barrier for trade integration. Thus, the DCFTA
contains provisions for technical regulations, standards and conformity assessments to harmonise with
those of the European Union, as well as for technical co-operation in the field of regulations, standards
and related issues between Ukraine and the European Union. In line with these provisions, the
Comprehensive Strategy of Implementing Legislation on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures was
approved in 2016 and provides a process for harmonisation of Ukraine’s SPS legislation with EU
requirements.
Other free trade agreements of Ukraine include the FTA with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA)
in force since June 2012, the multilateral FTA with the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)4 in
force since August 2012 as well as bilateral ones with all CIS members, and the Canada-Ukraine FTA, in
force since August 2017. New agreements with Israel and the United Kingdom both entered into force in
January 2021 (see below).
In July 2019, the CMU approved the Strategy for the development of exports of agricultural and food
products for the period up to 2026. It focuses on product competitiveness, an expanded range of export
products, Ukrainian food brands, and supporting information and analysis on agro-food exports.
Ukraine signed the Paris Agreement of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in April 2016 and ratified it in September 2016. Through its NDC, Ukraine committed to total
emissions across sectors, including agriculture, not exceeding 60% of those in 1990 (equivalent to not
exceeding 140% of those in 2012). In December 2016, the CMU adopted the National Concept of State
Policy in the Field of Climate Change up to 2030. The CMU approved the Action Plan for the
implementation of this Concept in late 2017, while it approved the Strategy for Low Carbon Development
of Ukraine up to 2050 (SLCD) in July 2018. The SLCD defines a co-ordinated approach by various parties
concerned and provides a national vision for decoupling economic growth and social development from
the increase of GHG emissions. In addition, the Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food (MAPF)5 is developing
measures to improve environmental practices related to the adaptation of agriculture and forestry to climate
change, in line with obligations under the Association Agreement with the European Union.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
Changes to the legal framework
The State Strategy for Regional Development for 2021-2027, approved by the CMU in August 2020,
specifically focuses on agricultural co-operation, small and medium-sized agricultural producers, storage
infrastructure, and the introduction of new technologies and equipment for the processing of agricultural
raw materials.


 539

A new Strategy for attracting private investment in agriculture for the period until 2023 was approved
by the CMU in July 2019. It aims to increase agricultural exports, ensure national food security, and
enhance an environmentally balanced growth of the agricultural sector.
The Law on Agricultural Cooperation, in force since August 2020, regulates issues related to the
creation, management and dissolution of agricultural co-operatives. It eliminates the former differentiation
between production and service co-operatives and defines co-operative education as a priority task of
agricultural co-operatives.
Several legal acts have been put in place to regulate the documentation and market of agricultural land:

The Law on Amendments to Certain Legislative Acts of Ukraine on Combating Raids entered
into force in January 2020. It aims to enhance the protection against misappropriation of land and
property of agricultural enterprises, including, among others, through the registration of property
rights and real-estate transactions, and sets 1 January 2022 as a deadline for the completion of
the State Land Cadastre, a new cadastre to be maintained by Ukraine’s State Service for Geodesy,
Cartography and Cadastre (StateGeoCadastre).

By Resolution of March 2020, which entered into force in May 2020, the CMU requires that the
approval of all types of land management documentation be transmitted and approved in electronic
form through a personal account at StateGeoCadastre. This is expected to make the review of
documents more efficient and timely and to improve objectivity and impartiality of the process.

Aiming to facilitate the launch of a transparent land reform, following the relevant EU Directive of
2007, the Law on the National Infrastructure of Geospatial Data, which entered into force in
June 2020, aims to enhance access to geospatial data, the development of markets for modern
geo-information products and services. The ambition is a single portal for cadastres and geospatial
data.

A law adopted in November 2020 created a single state information system, the State Agrarian
Register. It is financed from the state budget to integrate information on agricultural producers and
their property as well as on related land, the environment, labour, finances and credits, among
others. The law also expands the range of potential recipients of state support to include
enterprises engaged in aquaculture, organic production, irrigation, vegetables, fruits and berries.

The Law on Amendments to Certain Legislative Acts of Ukraine concerning the Conditions
of Turnover of Agricultural Lands was ratified by the President of Ukraine and will come into
force in July 2021. The law ends the ban on the sale of agricultural land by granting the right to
purchase up to 100 hectares of land, as of 1 July 2021, to individual citizens of Ukraine. From
1 January 2024, purchases of up to 10 000 hectares are possible for Ukrainian citizens as well as
for legal entities whose founders or final beneficiaries are Ukrainians, and which do not have
businesses registered abroad or in offshore companies. The sale of land to foreigners remains
prohibited and can become legal only through a referendum. The sale of state- or communally-
owned agricultural land remains prohibited. A Presidential Decree in October 2020 charges the
CMU to work on facilitating the transfer of state-owned agricultural land to communal ownership,
and on draft laws on the support to private farms, the improvement of land management and land
deregulation.
New legal acts related to specific subsectors of agriculture and food include the following ones:

The Law on State Regulation of Ethanol, Cognac and Fruit, Alcoholic Beverages, Tobacco
and Fuel was amended in December 2019. The state monopoly on alcohol production is
abolished, allowing for alcohol production and export by any licensed business entity. Imports
remain limited to authorised state enterprises. As part of this programme, state distilleries are being
privatised through public procurement.


540 


The MAPF’s Order on Approval of Honey Requirements from June 2019 entered into force in
February 2020. The Order calls for the harmonisation of the Ukrainian legislation with the EU
legislation regarding the requirements for honey. The document sets requirements for the
characteristics and composition of honey, terminology, honey labelling.

The Concept of the State Target Program for the Development of Industrial Potato Growing for the
period up to 2025 and the Concept of the State Target Program for Vegetable Growing
Development up to 2025, both approved in October 2020, aim to foster production and marketing
of domestic potatoes and high-quality vegetable products, respectively.
A series of legal acts were put in place on climate change and environmental policies:

The Law on Principles of Monitoring, Reporting and Verification of Greenhouse Gas
Emissions came into force in March 2020 and applies from January 2021, reflecting Ukraine’s
obligations under international agreements, including the UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the 2015 Paris Agreement. Ukraine’s GHG emission monitoring legislation is to be
gradually adapted to EU legislation, in line with Ukraine’s EU Association Agreement.

The Law on the Basic Principles (Strategy) of the State Environmental Policy of Ukraine for
the period until 2030, in force since January 2020, replaces the former Strategy of Environmental
Policy of Ukraine until 2020 and includes a set of 30 indicators to measure the effects of
environmental policies and compliance with specific targets set by the law. The Action Plan 2021-
2025 on the new Strategy has yet to be adopted.

Following the Irrigation and Drainage Strategy of Ukraine for the period up to 2030, the
government approved the Action Plan on its implementation in October 2020. It foresees additional
state support measures to enhance the irrigation and drainage infrastructure in 2021-23. In
September 2020, the government also approved the CMU Resolution On Standards for
Environmentally Safe Irrigation, Drainage, Watering Control and Sewerage Management,
which regulates measures aiming to balance water consumption for irrigation purposes.
Continuing the legislative work on the development of the organic products sector, Ukraine introduced its
own system of certification of organic production through a CMU Resolution adopted in October 2020. Its
main provisions are in line with the relevant EU regulation. The CMU also determined, by its Resolution
adopted in February 2020, procedures for maintaining a range of state registers related to organic food
production, certification bodies, and seeds and planting material. The Ministry Order on Approval of the
Procedure for Maintaining the List of Foreign Certification Bodies, which came into force in May 2020,
aims to facilitate the legal regulation of the organic products market.
Since December 2019, the State Register runs a new service to monitor grain storage information across
all elevators in Ukraine, and to provide this information on a dedicated website.
Changes in agricultural support measures
A number of payment programmes from the budget for State support for the development of animal
husbandry and processing of agricultural products continued in 2020, such as the partial
compensation of the purchasing cost of high-breeding animals, the partial compensation of the
construction and reconstruction cost of animal farms and buildings, and the partial compensation of the
construction and reconstruction cost of grain storage and grain processing capacities. In contrast, the
compensation of the construction and reconstruction of animal farms and buildings financed by bank loans
in 2020 was only provided to producers and breeders who had benefitted from this programme already
during 2018-19 – no new investments of this type were supported in 2020. Similarly, the subsidies to rural
households for keeping registered young cattle, and to milk and beef producers for keeping registered
cows, were discontinued in 2020. A new measure under this heading provides subsidies to beekeepers
for maintaining between 10 and 300 bee colonies in 2020.


 541

Within the programme “Financial support for farm development” related to small and medium-size
producers, the partial compensation of expenses related to agricultural advisory services, the partial
compensation for agricultural machinery and equipment available to all producers, and subsidies for newly
established small and medium-size farms were continued in 2020. In contrast, several measures from this
programme were discontinued (although carry-over payments from 2019 continued in 2020), including

the subsidy for existing small and medium-size producers

the special programme for small and medium-size producers providing a partial compensation of
agricultural machinery and equipment

the seed subsidy

the interest rate support specifically aimed at small and medium-size producers.
Other support measures continued within the “Support for orchards, vineyards and berry fields”,
including the partial compensation of costs for planting material, of the cost of construction of refrigerators,
and of processing lines of fruits and berries. Interest rate support under the heading “Financial support
for agriculture through preferential credits”, which is the most important measure to support
investments in agriculture, also continued in 2020.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
In May 2020, the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine (CMU) set up the State Program of Economic
Stimulation to Overcome the Negative Effects Caused by Restrictive Measures to Prevent the
Occurrence and Spread of the Acute Respiratory Disease COVID-19 caused by Coronavirus SARS-
CoV-2 for 2020-2022. Under this programme, the government implements a number of measures aimed
at the agricultural sector, notably to ensure broad access of agricultural producers to financial resources,
and to ensure that agricultural products continue to be available on the market during the pandemic.
The programme also includes the enhanced market monitoring for agricultural and food products and other
essential goods; the development of a unified and simplified assessment of agricultural land values; the
development of digital tools for facilitating the sale and promotion of agricultural products and services;
and the improved conditions for the development of organic agriculture.
Finally, the programme involves several additional measures in support of the agricultural sector which
were implemented in 2020:

An additional subsidy is provided to agricultural service co-operatives to partially compensate costs
of purchasing agricultural machinery and equipment.

Private farm keeping dairy cows are eligible for a new dairy cow subsidy.

Family farms are eligible for a partial compensation of their obligatory social insurance fees.
The CMU Resolution on measures to stabilise prices for goods of considerable social significance,
anti-epidemic goods, adopted in April 2020 and in force since May 2020, introduces a public monitoring
of prices of essential goods. It requires retail sellers to declare price increases by 5% or more relative to
the retail price at the time of this resolution entering into force, or relative to a retail price declared in the
meantime. Food products covered by this resolution include certain grains and grain products; refined
sugar; and certain categories of milk, butter, eggs, and poultry.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
Two new free trade agreements have recently come into force. The free trade agreement between Ukraine
and Israel was ratified by Israel in November 2020 and came into force on 1 January 2021. Tariff reductions
mostly focus on manufactured goods, while import duties on about 9% of agricultural tariff lines are to be


542 

abolished by Israel, and duties on some 6% of agricultural tariff lines are to be eliminated by Ukraine, both
taking effect with the entry into force of the agreement.
The Political, Free Trade and Strategic Partnership Agreement between Ukraine and the United Kingdom
was signed in October 2020 and ratified by both countries. The Agreement is based on the 2014 EU-
Ukraine Association Agreement and gives additional access to the UK market for around 98% of Ukrainian
goods, mostly governed by newly established TRQs. Ukrainian agricultural exports to the United Kingdom
benefit from duty-free tariff quotas set for 36 types of products, including meat, dairy products, cereals,
sugar and others, with additional TRQs set for some of these products. In turn, Ukraine has opened TRQs
for pork, poultry and semi-finished poultry products, and sugar.
EU tariff rate quotas for animal products implemented under the DCFTA have not been fully used, and
those for beef, pork and lamb have never been used at all. Aiming to increase exports of animal products
into the European Union, Ukraine is working towards meeting the relevant sanitary standards. By
February 2020, EU veterinary services have certified seven poultry plants and 26 dairy processing
enterprises, permitting them to export to the European Union. In parallel, the European Union has gradually
increased its duty-free import quotas for Ukrainian poultry and processed poultry meet.
In April 2020, Ukraine ratified its accession to the OECD Seeds Schemes for seeds of cruciferous and
other oilseeds or spinning crops, and for seeds of sugar and fodder beet. In the same month, Ukraine’s
seed certification system was recognised as equivalent by the European Union, thus facilitating Ukraine’s
participation in international seeds trade.
The Ministry Order on Approval of Forms of International Certificates approved in July 2020 aims to
simplify import procedures by bringing Ukrainian legislation closer to European and international
requirements.
Ukraine had suspended VAT refunds for exports of soybeans from September 2018, and for exports of
rapeseed from January 2020, initially both for a period until the end of 2021. However, VAT refunds for
exports of both commodities were re-established from 23 May 2020.
In March 2020, the Ministry of Economic Development, Trade and Agriculture (MEDTA) and main
associations of grain exporters agreed on the Annex to the traditional Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) on grain exports signed in 2019. According to that annex, the maximum volume of wheat exports
for the 2019/20 marketing year was fixed at a level of 20.2 million tonnes. However, actual wheat exports
continued even after reaching this volume in May 2020. A new MoU for the marketing year 2020/21 was
signed in July 2020, with its Annex agreed in August 2020. It indicates maximum export volumes of
17.5 million tonnes of wheat and 1 000 tonnes of rye.
In response to a suspension by the Russian Federation of its free trade regime with Ukraine under the
Agreement on Free Trade in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Area, and the
implementation of a ban by the Russian Federation on imports of agro-food products from Ukraine, Ukraine
in turn has suspended trade preferences for imports from the Russian Federation foreseen by the CIS
FTA. Ukraine has banned imports of a list of 46 agricultural goods from the Russian Federation. This list
includes meat and meat by-products, fish, milk and dairy products, tea, coffee, grain and its processing
products, vegetable and animal oils, confectionery, baby foods, beer, vodka, ethyl alcohol, cigarettes, and
others. Both the suspension of trade preferences and the ban on specific imports have been prolonged on
an annual basis, most recently until the end of 2021. Since July 2019, Ukraine has also banned the import
of mineral fertilisers, animal feeds and veterinary products from the Russian Federation. Anti-dumping
duties for chocolate and other cocoa-based food products produced in the Russian Federation, effective
from 20 June 2017 for a period of five years, continue to be in place.
In January 2020, a new framework law came into force to improve the legal protection of geographical
indications (GIs). Following Ukraine’s obligations under the Association Agreement with the European
Union, the law also aims to facilitate the adaptation of the national legislation to the EU legislation.


 543

Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
During the first half of 2020, Ukraine implemented bans on exports of certain products, including buckwheat
(2 April to 1 July 2020) and undenatured ethyl alcohol with an alcohol concentration of at least 80% vol.
(23 March to 15 May 2020).
Contextual information
Ukraine is classified by the World Bank as a lower middle income country. It features a comparatively large
area of fertile arable land, making agriculture a major sector of the economy compared to most other
countries in this report: while the sector’s relative importance has declined, it still accounts for 9% of the
country’s economy and 15% of its employment. Agro-food exports represent around 40% of Ukraine’s total
exports.
Four-fifths of Ukraine’s agricultural area is arable, and crops represent some three-quarters of agricultural
output, up from two-thirds in the mid-1990s. Thirty per cent of Ukraine’s crop production, and almost half
of its livestock output, is generated by rural households, where a significant share of their produce is
consumed without entering the market. Companies, mostly with limited liability or joint-stock companies,
provide for much of the remaining output.
Table 27.3. Ukraine: Contextual indicators

Ukraine
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
202
561
0.5%
0.5%
Population (million)
49
44
1.1%
0.8%
Land area (thousand km2)
579
579
0.7%
0.7%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
41 406
41 329
1.4%
1.4%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
84
76
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
4 107
13 341
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
46
40
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
14.5
9.0
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
25.1
14.5
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
10.1
39.4
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
6.1
7.9
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
59
77
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
41
24
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
79
80
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year. 1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Between 2013 and 2015, real GDP had fallen by 16% while inflation rates had risen to almost 50%, due to
adverse political circumstances. Since then, the economy has grown steadily at rates between 2.4% and
3.3% per year while inflation rates have come down. In 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related
restrictions to the economy, real GDP shrank by almost 5% while inflation decreased to less than 3%.
Unemployment continues to be high at almost 9%.


544 

Ukraine is among the world’s leading exporters of grains and vegetable oils. Its agro-food exports grew
rapidly between the late 1990s and 2012, and export growth has resumed after the drop between 2012
and 2015, which was due to adverse political circumstances. Most of Ukraine’s agro-food exports are
intermediary, mainly primary, products for processing. Imports, in turn, are more mixed, with primary and
processed products for final consumption representing about 60% of agro-food imports.
Figure 27.5. Ukraine: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; ILO estimates and projections; and Economist Intelligence Unit.
Figure 27.6. Ukraine: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Both agricultural output and total factor productivity grew at rates significantly above global averages, at
4.6% and 4.1% per year respectively in the decade ending in 2016. Output was also driven by intermediate
input growth, while the use of primary factors, notably of capital, shrank. The shrinking capital stock may
pose a risk for continued productivity growth in the future.
Despite the declining importance of agriculture within the economy, agriculture’s shares in the country’s
energy use and GHG emissions have increased over the past two decades. In contrast, the average
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate, right axis
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2018
Composition of agro-food trade, 2018
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
20
5
40
12
24
50
16
33
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


 545

nitrogen balance has declined since 2000 and remain well below those across the OECD, while data now
suggest a nation-wide negative balance for phosphorous.
Figure 27.7. Ukraine: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 27.4. Ukraine: Productivity and environmental indicators

Ukraine
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.7%
4.1%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
20.9
12.2
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
2.6
-1.1
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.1
3.7
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
8.7
13.0
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
5.8
5.2
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
30.0
34.9
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
..
..
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


2.3%
0.5%
-1.8%
0.05%
4.1%
1.6%
-3.0%
-2.0%
-1.0%
0.0%
1.0%
2.0%
3.0%
4.0%
5.0%
6.0%
7.0%
Ukraine
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


546 

References

OECD (2015), “Sector competitiveness strategy for Ukraine – Phase III. Review of Agricultural
Investment Policies of Ukraine”, Project Report, OECD Eurasia Competitiveness Programme,
http://www.oecd.org/eurasia/competitiveness-programme/eastern-
partners/Agricultural_Investment_Policies_Ukraine_ENG.pdf.
[4]
OECD/The World Bank (2004), Achieving Ukraine’s Agricultural Potential: Stimulating
Agricultural Growth and Improving Rural Life, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264055841-en.
[2]
StateGeoCadastre (2017), Review of the State of Land Relations in Ukraine,
https://land.gov.ua/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Land-Review-Monthly_3_final-1.pdf
(accessed on 27 February 2017).
[3]
von Cramon-Taubadel, S. et al. (2008), “Ukraine”, Distortions to Agricultural Incentives in
Europe’s Transition Economies, (eds.) Anderson, K. and Swinnen, J., World Bank,
Washington, DC, http://hdl.handle.net/10986/6502.
[1]


Notes
1 Article 3 of the Land Code of the Ukrainian SSR, https://zakon.rada.gov.ua/laws/show/2874%D0%B0-
07/ed19920101#Text.
2 More recent estimates suggest that the share of private property in agricultural land is even higher, at
80%: Mykola Solsky (People’s Deputy, Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada Committee on Agrarian and Land
Policy), “It’s all about the land”, 2 April 2020, https://www.epravda.com.ua/columns/2020/04/2/658911/.
3 Termed the “Fixed Agricultural Tax” before 2015.
4 Other members and associate members include Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Moldova, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
5 Between 29 August 2019 and 28 December 2020, MAPF was integrated into the Ministry of Economic
Development, Trade and Agriculture, MEDTA.



 547

Support to agriculture
The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) defined support to agriculture in the United Kingdom (UK) during
its transition out of the European Union (EU) in 2020. Eighty per cent of support to producers originates in
the CAP, whereas the national budget funds three-quarters of general services to the sector.
Producer support (PSE) is estimated at around 20% of gross farm receipts for 2018-20.1 Market price
support (MPS) accounts for 24% of farm support, and originates entirely from EU border measures during
2018-20. Almost half of farm support comes through payments decoupled from current production. About
two-thirds of Exchequer-sourced expenditure go to schemes that may incentivise outputs and increase
environmental pressure through on-farm investments and input use, including tax rebates for agricultural
fuel. On the other hand, domestic expenditure also supports environmentally friendly production.
Public expenditure for general services to the sector (GSSE) is estimated at around 4% of agricultural
value-added, slightly below the OECD average. Expenditure on agricultural knowledge and innovation
services, mostly from the national budget, accounts for more than half of total support to the sector. Other
significant expenditures support inspection and control services, and the marketing and promotion of farm
products. Total support to agriculture (TSE) represented around 0.3% of GDP in 2018-20.
Recent policy changes
The year 2020 was marked by: (1) negotiation with the European Union over future trade and co-operation
relations, (2) preparation and adoption of laws to govern agriculture in the United Kingdom after withdrawal
from the European Union, and (3) bilateral trade liberalisation negotiations with third countries. Short-term
measures covered the immediate transition out of the European Union, and response to adverse events,
including wet weather and the COVID-19 pandemic.
Agricultural policies are devolved to the UK’s nations: the governments of England, Northern Ireland,
Scotland and Wales. Three acts of agricultural legislation were approved in 2020. The Agriculture Act 2020
governs agriculture in England with provisions for Northern Ireland and Wales (UK National Archives,
2020[1]). The Act became law on 11 November 2020, shortly after Scotland’s Agriculture (Retained EU Law
and Data) (Scotland) Act (Scottish Parliament, 2020[2]). The legislation authorises national expenditure for
agricultural policies, establishes flexible continuity for the EU CAP, and foresees transition periods to
introduce the next generation of measures that phase out the CAP. The transitory Direct Payments to
Farmers (Legislative Continuity) Act 2020 ensured the continuity of CAP direct payments in the United
Kingdom during 2020. Concurrently, a common administrative framework was jointly set up between the
UK Government and the national administrations for co-ordinating agricultural policy.
Policy measures also responded to adverse events in 2020. As a response to wet weather conditions,
direct payments were paid up-front in Northern Ireland. The crop diversification condition under greening
was relaxed, while greening was suppressed permanently in Scotland from 2021.
28 United Kingdom


548 

Trade policy developments focused on enabling the United Kingdom to maintain and develop trade
relations post-Brexit. Under UK membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Agriculture Act
2020 gives power to the Secretary of State to legislate for the UK to comply with the WTO Agreement on
Agriculture.
In 2020, the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement was achieved. It lays down the rules governing
relations between the two (EU and UK, 2020[3]). Of relevance to agriculture, the trade component of the
agreement includes duty- and quota-free imports of all goods that comply with rules-of-origin provisions.
Trade negotiations with third countries continued, and nineteen agreements were fully ratified. Provisions
also introduced to extend existing relations under the EU agreements to avoid any disruption while
negotiations were ongoing.
Assessment and recommendations

The United Kingdom is at the beginning of a seven-year transition out of the Common Agricultural
Policy. The next generation of policies is being developed, building on lessons learnt. On-going
consultations with stakeholders are important to identify sector needs, tailor policies to these needs
and ensure buy-in. If institutionalised throughout the transition process, consultations can prove
effective for defining next-generation measures, and assessing their efficiency against targets and
continued relevance as they are implemented.

Short-term measures have consisted of so-called simplification, waiving the entire greening
requirement or its crop diversification component, and easing penalty payments. Digital
technologies can be harnessed to reduce the administrative burden of reporting and ensure that
sustainability outcomes are safeguarded.

To achieve agricultural productivity and sustainability, next-generation policies should strengthen
agricultural innovation systems and the sector’s resilience to adverse events. These require
information systems that enhance risk awareness, measures that support both prevention and
ex ante approaches minimising exposure to multiple risks, and preparedness that prioritises
business continuity. Research and development, and extension and advisory services have a role
to play, as does emphasis on continued public support for these activities.

The current policy mix supports farm holdings through decoupled payments and payments that
promote environmentally friendly practices. At the same time, market measures and tax rebates
on agricultural diesel incentivise output and may encourage environmentally harmful practices.
Evaluation of the policy mix against well-defined objectives would improve policy coherence for
sustainable productivity growth.

The United Kingdom is in active negotiations to ensure continued co-operation and trading relations
with the European Union and third countries. The ambition could be to achieve greater openness,
as the current level of trade restrictions in the European Union triggered approximately one-fifth of
support, on average, this past decade.


 549

Box 28.1. Estimates of support: Implications of the United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the
European Union
This edition of the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) presents agricultural policy developments in the
United Kingdom in a separate chapter for the first time, following the UK’s withdrawal from the European
Union. Every effort was made to ensure consistency with past reporting in the M&E series of the United
Kingdom as an EU Member.
In addition to explaining the UK’s agricultural policies, the chapter includes calculations of its full set of
support indicators. This box describes the calculation choices made. More detailed information is
available in the definitions and sources associated with the online database (OECD, 2021[4]).
Public expenditure reported under the UK indicators of support is the sum of national budget
expenditure of the UK Exchequer and European Funds’ expenditure attributed to the United Kingdom
under the CAP. For EU support indicators in past M&E exercises, Exchequer expenditure on domestic
schemes and co-funded Pillar 2 schemes of the CAP under the European Agricultural Fund for Rural
Development (EAFRD) are reported and available in the OECD database. However, EU CAP
expenditures in the OECD database were aggregated across countries. Therefore, the new indicators
had to identify EU CAP expenditure attributed to the United Kingdom both under the European
Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF) – including expenditure under the Common Market Organisation
(CMO) and direct payments – and under the EAFRD. It was possible to do so for 2017 to 2020.
In 2020, the CAP continued to command part of agricultural expenditures in the United Kingdom, and
the United Kingdom remained part of the EU Single Market. Hence, through 2020, the market price
differential (MPD) for the United Kingdom is based on EU producer and border prices, and it is assumed
that the UK MPD equals the EU MPD. MPS is calculated for the specific UK commodity coverage by
combining the EU MPD with UK quantity and value measures of production and consumption. MPS is
calculated for a subset of commodities1 based on the so-called standard set of MPS commodities
(OECD, 2016[5]) for 2017 to 2020.
Due to these data limitations, the support indicators presented in Figure 28.1 follow two methodologies.
They cover the UK for 2018-20 and the EU for preceding years. Efforts will be made to improve the
expenditure coverage and extend the calculations to earlier periods in order to achieve data consistency
over a longer period and analyse the evolution of support over time.
The system coherence requires that the United Kingdom also be included in the EU aggregate for the
period during which it was a member and implemented the Common Agricultural Policy.
Note: 1. Market price support for the United Kingdom is calculated for wheat, maize, barley, oats, rapeseed, sugar, milk, beef and veal,
sheep meat, pig meat, poultry, and eggs.




550 

Figure 28.1. United Kingdom: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers. Calculations for 2018-20 combine UK and EU-CAP
elements.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/tvrgnb
Figure 28.2. United Kingdom: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Note: Calculations combine UK and EU-CAP elements.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/4x5tl9
EU28 (1986-88)
EU28 (2000-02)
United Kingdom (2018-20)
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
4.0%
4.5%
5.0%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
TSE as % GDP
not applicable
-5%
-4%
-3%
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%
PSE change decomposition
Budgetary Payments
MPS
PSE


 551

Figure 28.3. United Kingdom: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Note: Calculations combine UK and EU-CAP elements.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/xcrpje


-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Barley
Wheat
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


552 

Table 28.1. United Kingdom: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
..
30 971
31 775
31 101
30 037
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
..
72.9
73.8
73.0
72.0
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
..
33 809
35 157
31 673
34 596
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
..
7 493
7 751
7 436
7 292
Support based on commodity output
..
1 836
2 136
1 848
1 523
Market Price Support1
..
1 836
2 136
1 848
1 523
Positive Market Price Support
..
1 851
2 156
1 873
1 523
Negative Market Price Support
..
-15
-20
-25
0
Payments based on output
..
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
..
935
923
922
960
Based on variable input use
..
635
655
604
646
with input constraints
..
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
..
250
215
265
270
with input constraints
..
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
..
50
53
53
44
with input constraints
..
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
..
752
716
774
767
Based on Receipts / Income
..
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
..
752
716
774
767
with input constraints
..
752
716
774
767
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
..
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
..
3 518
3 588
3 466
3 501
With variable payment rates
..
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
..
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
..
3 518
3 588
3 466
3 501
with commodity exceptions
..
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
..
85
51
74
130
Based on long-term resource retirement
..
18
18
18
18
Based on a specific non-commodity output
..
67
33
56
112
Based on other non-commodity criteria
..
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
..
366
337
352
410
Percentage PSE (%)
..
20.5
20.7
20.3
20.4
Producer NPC (coeff.)
..
1.06
1.07
1.07
1.05
Producer NAC (coeff.)
..
1.26
1.26
1.25
1.26
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
..
720
685
743
731
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
..
396
370
409
409
Inspection and control
..
190
185
189
196
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
..
36
27
40
41
Marketing and promotion
..
96
98
106
84
Cost of public stockholding
..
2
5
0
0
Miscellaneous
..
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
..
8.8
8.1
9.1
9.1
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
..
-2 056
-2 564
-2 007
-1 596
Transfers to producers from consumers
..
-1 852
-2 190
-1 854
-1 511
Other transfers from consumers
..
-250
-428
-213
-108
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
..
11
5
4
24
Excess feed cost
..
35
50
56
0
Percentage CSE (%)
..
-6.1
-7.3
-6.3
-4.6
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
..
1.07
1.08
1.07
1.05
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
..
1.06
1.08
1.07
1.05
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
..
8 223
8 440
8 183
8 046
Transfers from consumers
..
2 102
2 618
2 067
1 620
Transfers from taxpayers
..
6 371
6 250
6 329
6 535
Budget revenues
..
-250
-428
-213
-108
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
..
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
..
6 387
6 304
6 335
6 523
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
..
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
..
232
225
229
243
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
..
0.77
0.75
0.78
0.78
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for the United Kingdom are: wheat, maize, barley, oats,
rapeseed, sugar, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 553

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
The United Kingdom joined the European Economic Community in 1973. Since then, its agriculture was
shaped by reform of the EU CAP, as described in Chapter 11.
The 2009 CAP Health Check allowed member states to adopt a selection of measures under their Pillar 2.
Subsequently, elective measures were also allowed under Pillar 1 of the CAP 2014-20, covering 2015 to
2023. The UK nations’ choices of elective measures were generally aligned in this context, while specific
payments were sometimes picked, such as the redistributive payment in Wales and Voluntary Coupled
Support in Scotland. The United Kingdom opted to transfer 10.8% of its broad-based direct payments
envelope to targeted longer-term expenditure under Pillar 2.
Legislation (Agriculture Act) adopted in 2020 foresees the implementation in England of schemes that
prioritise farm sustainability, productivity and competitiveness.
Figure 28.4. United Kingdom: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 2017 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The main policy instruments described below relate to measures implemented in the United Kingdom
within the framework of the Common Agricultural Policy2 that continued until 2021, and domestic measures
decided at national level. Agricultural policy in the United Kingdom is devolved to the UK nations: the
governments of England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales. As a result, different elective schemes
apply in these jurisdictions, as described below.
The CAP funded 80% of support to agricultural producers in the United Kingdom. In addition to output
support delivered through markets, the largest envelopes under the CAP fund per-hectare payments
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
2017
2018
2019
2020
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


554 

decoupled from production (Figure 28.4). The Basic Payment Scheme (BPS) accounts for 66% of direct
payments, the payment for greening (agricultural practices beneficial for the climate and the environment)
accounts for 30%, and the so-called young farmer scheme accounts for 2%. Only Wales offers the elective
decoupled redistributive payment for first hectares of farmland (EC, 2016[6]). Together, these absorb 99%
of direct payments under the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF). Output-linked Voluntary
Coupled Support is limited to three schemes that support the Scottish suckler cow and upland sheep
sectors (EC, 2019[7]).
Measures funded by the CAP’s European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) are co-
financed by the national budget and require a minimum five to seven years commitment. From a budgetary
standpoint, the top three elective measures under EAFRD support in the United Kingdom are: (1) agri-
environment and climate measures, (2) agricultural investments, and (3) payments to areas with natural
constraints. Organic farming is also supported, although with smaller budgets.
In addition to the CAP, national measures promote on-farm investments through capital grants, credit
concessions and guarantees. National measures also reduce the costs of farm inputs. Public revenues
foregone under the rebate on excise duties for agricultural diesel (so-called red diesel) represent the third-
largest element of support after the BPS and greening. At the same time, Exchequer-sourced output
payments support environmentally friendly production.
National measures are prominent in funding sector-wide general services, as three-quarters of the
spending comes from the national budget. These mainly support research and development to underpin
the UK’s knowledge and innovation system. The national budget also funds inspection and control
services. CAP funding supports knowledge, advisory and extension services which ensure on-farm
innovation uptake and capacity building, farm and business development, and marketing and promotion of
farm products and producer groups.
Until 31 December 2020, the United Kingdom was part of the EU Single market, with its trade governed
by the overarching settings of EU trade as foreseen in the Withdrawal Agreement (HM Government,
2019[8]).
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
The year 2020 was marked by the negotiation with the European Union of future trade and co-operation
relations, by the legislative preparation and adoption of the laws that govern agriculture in the United
Kingdom after withdrawal from the European Union and by bilateral trade liberalisation negotiations.
Shorter-term measures ensured the immediate transition out of the European Union and responses to
adverse events, including wet weather and the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Domestic legislative developments in 2020 included the adoptions of three agricultural acts. The
Agriculture Act 2020 governs agriculture in England with provisions for Northern Ireland and Wales (UK
National Archives, 2020[1]). The Act became law on 11 November 2020 shortly after Scotland’s
Agriculture (Retained EU Law and Data) (Scotland) Act which became law on 1 October 2020 (Scottish
Parliament, 2020[2]). These pieces of legislation authorise national expenditure for agricultural policies and
establish a flexible continuity of the EU CAP. The Agriculture Act 2020 legislates for a seven-year transition
period, beginning from 2021, during which the next generation of measures are to be introduced in England
to phase out the CAP. Year 2024 is announced as the first year when England fully introduces the new
schemes, including the three new Environmental Land Management schemes (DEFRA, 2020[9]). The
schemes are under development through collaboration with farmers and a range of environmental and
agricultural stakeholders (DEFRA, 2021[10]). The Sustainable Farming Incentive is the first of these three
schemes to begin roll-out in mid-2022, with the other two, the Local Nature Recovery and the Landscape
Recovery, to be launched in 2024. In Wales, proposals are being developed to reform the way in which
government supports agriculture, including farm woodland management.


 555

The transitory Direct Payments to Farmers (Legislative Continuity) Act 2020 ensured the continuity of
the CAP direct payments in the United Kingdom in 2020.
A common administrative framework has been set up to ensure the co-ordination of agricultural policy
between the UK Government and the devolved administrations.
Under so-called simplification, the EU financial discipline was not applied and the BPS advance payment
condition relaxed in 2020 in Northern Ireland. Penalty calculations were simplified for small over-claims of
the BPS and made proportionate in England and Northern Ireland.
Similar simplification measures were also introduced in 2020 to respond to adverse wet weather. Direct
payments were advanced and paid in full in Northern Ireland. The crop diversification condition under
greening was relaxed in England, Northern Ireland and Wales.
Simplification will be continued and, from 2021, greening will no longer be required in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland, while crop diversification will be suppressed in Scotland. Penalties under England’s
Countryside Stewardship Scheme will be replaced by payment reduction.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Sector specific payments were announced to alleviate the effects of price drop and income losses in dairy
(England, Wales, Northern Ireland), beef, sheep, ornamental horticulture and potato (Northern Ireland).
In response to the disruptions caused by the coronavirus outbreak, deadlines for applications for the BPS,
the Countryside Stewardship and the Environmental Stewardship schemes were extended in England to
allow for late applications. Inspection requirements were eased and physical checks replaced by new
technologies in Scotland.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
After 31 December 2020, the free movement of people, goods, services and capital with the European
Union was ended and EU trade agreements no longer applied to the United Kingdom. Therefore, the United
Kingdom actively engaged in negotiating trade agreements during 2020 to maintain and develop its trade
relations post-Brexit. As a member of the WTO, the Agriculture Act 2020 gives power to the Secretary of
State to legislate for the United Kingdom to comply with the World Trade Organization (WTO) Agreement
on Agriculture.
The EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement was achieved on 24 December 2020. It lays down the
rules governing the relations between the two. Of relevance to agriculture, the trade component of the
agreement includes duty and quota free imports on all goods that comply with rules of origin provisions.
Terms of the free trade agreement include duty and quota free imports on all goods that comply with rules
of origin provisions (EU and UK, 2020[3]).
Trade negotiations with other countries and regions were continued and 19 agreements were fully ratified,3
including with Japan and Ukraine (DIT, 2021[11]). The bilateral trade agreement with Japan entered into
force on 1 January 2021. The UK-Japan Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA)
parallels the market access and tariff commitments provided for agricultural products under the Japan-EU
Economic Partnership Agreement (which entered into force on 1 February 2019). Similarly, Geographical
Indication products of both countries are listed for protection in the CEPA. The Political, Free Trade and
Strategic Partnership Agreement between Ukraine and the United Kingdom came into force in
January 2021.
Agreements with Albania, Canada, Jordan and Mexico were signed. Mutual Recognition Agreements were
signed with Australia, New Zealand, and the United States. Under MRAs countries recognise the results
of one another’s conformity assessments. Provisions were also introduced to extend existing relations


556 

under the EU agreements to avoid any disruption while negotiations are on-going with Albania, Algeria,
Australia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cameroon, Ghana, Moldova, Montenegro, New Zealand, Serbia,
Turkey, and the United States.
Contextual information
The United Kingdom is a high income advanced economy. The country’s GDP per capita is more than
twice the average of the countries covered in this report. It accounts for less than 1% of the land and
agricultural land in the countries included in this report. Agriculture has a small share in the economy and
employment while the agro-food sector has a larger importance in trade (Table 28.2).
Table 28.2. United Kingdom: Contextual indicators

United Kingdom
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
1 556
3 255
3.9%
2.9%
Population (million)
59
67
1.4%
1.3%
Land area (thousand km2)
242
242
0.3%
0.3%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
16 964
17 351
0.6%
0.6%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
244
279
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
26 422
48 725
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
20
20
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
1.0
0.7
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
1.5
1.0
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
5.2
6.4
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.8
9.1
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
41
41
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
59
59
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
35
35
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic put an end to a decade of moderate economic growth in the
United Kingdom. The economy shrank by 10% while the unemployment rate increased to 4.6% in 2020
after eight years of uninterrupted decline (Figure 28.5).


 557

Figure 28.5. United Kingdom: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
The United Kingdom is a net agro-food importer. Agro-food exports account for more than 6% of total
exports and imports are close to 10%. Processed agro-food products make most of both exports (86%)
and imports (70%). Most of those are destined for final consumption (Figure 28.6).
Figure 28.6. United Kingdom: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Over the 2007-16 period, total factor productivity in the United Kingdom grew by 0.7% per year on average,
more than double TFP growth in the 1991-2000 period but well below the global average. The decline of
primary factors was compensated by intermediate input growth (Figure 28.7).
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate
Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
21
6
57
74
8
7
13
12
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry


558 

Figure 28.7. United Kingdom: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Environmental indicators indicate an improvement from 2000 to 2016, the nitrogen balance fell by nearly
20%, the phosphorous balance declined by about 40%, and the share of agriculture in water abstractions
fell by 18% as the agricultural irrigated area was halved. At the same time, the sector’s share in the
country’s energy use was increased by 20% and the share of its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions grew
by nearly 40% (Table 28.3).
Table 28.3. United Kingdom: Productivity and environmental indicators

United Kingdom
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.3%
0.7%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
107.0
86.1
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
9.6
5.8
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
0.8
1.0
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
6.4
8.8
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
0.8
0.4
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
17.5
14.2
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
..
4.3
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


0.2%
0.5%
-0.3%
0.05%
0.7%
1.6%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
United Kingdom
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


 559

References

DEFRA (2021), Environmental Land Management scheme,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/environmental-land-management-schemes-
overview/environmental-land-management-scheme-overview.
[10]
DEFRA (2020), Agricultural Transition Plan 2021 to 2024, Government Digital Service,
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_dat
a/file/954283/agricultural-transition-plan.pdf.
[9]
DIT (2021), Department of International Trade, UK trade agreements with non-EU countries,
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/uk-trade-agreements-with-non-eu-
countries?utm_source=14c7edef-37e8-490a-934c-
4ccecb9b8944&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=govuk-notifications&utm_content=daily.
[11]
EC (2019), Voluntary coupled support - Member States decisions. Informative note,
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/food-farming-
fisheries/key_policies/documents/voluntary-coupled-support-note-revised-aug2018_en.pdf
(accessed on 8 April 2021).
[7]
EC (2016), Redistributive payment, https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/food-farming-
fisheries/key_policies/documents/ds-dp-redistributive-payment_en.pdf (accessed on  2021).
[6]
EU and UK (2020), Trade and Cooperation Agreement,
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_dat
a/file/948119/EU-UK_Trade_and_Cooperation_Agreement_24.12.2020.pdf (accessed on
10 April 2021).
[3]
HM Government (2019), Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community,
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_dat
a/file/840655/Agreement_on_the_withdrawal_of_the_United_Kingdom_of_Great_Britain_and
_Northern_Ireland_from_the_European_Union_and_the_European_Atomic_Energy_Commu
nity (accessed on 12 April 2021).
[8]
OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture Statistics
(database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en (accessed on 13 April 2021).
[4]
OECD (2016), PSE Manual, OECD, https://www.oecd.org/agriculture/topics/agricultural-policy-
monitoring-and-evaluation/documents/producer-support-estimates-manual.pdf.
[5]
Scottish Parliament (2020), Agriculture (Retained EU Law and Data) (Scotland) Act,
https://www.parliament.scot/-/media/files/legislation/bills/current-bills/agriculture-retained-eu-
law-and-data-scotland-bill/stage-3/agriculture-retained-eu-law-and-data-scotland-bill-as-
passed.pdf.
[2]
UK National Archives (2020), The Agriculture Act 2020, UK Legislation,
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2020/21/contents/enacted/data.htm (accessed on
10 April 2021).
[1]




560 

Notes
1 Support calculations in this chapter combine UK national payments and EU-CAP expenditure to the
United Kingdom, UK production quantities and values, and EU domestic and border prices. More details
are provided in Box 28.1.
2 Chapter 11 of this report provides a detailed description of the European Union’s Common Agricultural
Policy.
3 Agreements were fully ratified with Central America, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, Eastern and Southern Africa
(ESA) trade bloc, Egypt , Faroe Islands, Georgia, Israel, Japan, Kosovo, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Palestinian Authority, Singapore, South Korea, Southern Africa Customs Union and Mozambique
(SACUM) trade bloc, Switzerland, Tunisia, Ukraine.



 561

Support to agriculture
Support provided to agricultural producers in the United States consistently measures below the OECD
average. Producer support declined from 19.5% of gross farm receipts in 2000-02 to 12% in 2018-20. The
share of potentially most-distorting transfers was 32% in 2018-20, also below the OECD average and lower
than in 2000-02. On average, prices received by farmers in 2018-20 were 4% higher than in world markets,
largely as a result of market price support (MPS) for milk, sugar and to a lesser extent sheep meat. Border
measures (including tariff rate quotas) protect these commodities. Producer prices of other commodities
mostly align with border prices.
MPS has become a progressively smaller share of US support to agriculture, while budgetary support
increased over time, due mainly to increases in payments that require production (reflecting the emphasis
placed on farm insurance and risk management), as well as increases in input payments. Reflecting that
crop insurance and the primary crop commodity programmes are counter-cyclical to market prices,
budgetary support relates inversely to market price developments. Budgetary support peaked when world
commodity prices were depressed (in terms of USD), while high commodity prices after 2007-08
contributed to lower levels of support.
Support to consumers accounts for close to half of total support to US agriculture as a result of US domestic
food assistance programmes. Expenditures for general services (GSSE) were equivalent to 6.1% of
agricultural value added in 2018-20, up from 5.2% in 2000-02 and slightly above the OECD average. Total
support to agriculture was 0.5% of GDP in 2018-2020.
Recent policy changes
Implementation of the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 (2018 Farm Bill) continued during 2020, along
with continued implementation of the 2019 suite of trade mitigation programmes, and 2018 and 2019
Congressional ad hoc disaster assistance programmes with 2020 supplements. On trade mitigation, in
February 2020, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) announced the third and final tranche
of payments under the 2019 Market Facilitation Program (MFP). The MFP provided up to USD 14.5 billion
to producers of commodities affected by the loss of traditional export markets resulting from retaliatory
tariffs. The February 2020 payments provided the remaining 25% of authorised payments.
On disaster assistance, in December 2019, the Further Consolidated Appropriations Act 2020 provided an
additional USD 1.5 billion for disaster assistance programme delivery, and added several new qualifying
disaster events and eligible participants under the Wildfire and Hurricane Indemnity Program Plus
(WHIP+). In addition, USDA’s Risk Management Agency (RMA) introduced a policy to help producers
recover from hurricanes. The Hurricane Insurance Protection-Wind Index (HIP-WI) Endorsement covers
70 crops and is available in counties near the Gulf of Mexico, Atlantic Ocean and Hawaii. Sustained
hurricane-force winds from a named hurricane are the only cause of loss recognised for HIP-WI.
29 United States


562 

Several trade agreements came into force in 2020: the Japan-US Free Trade Agreement, the United
States-Mexico-Canada Agreement and the “Phase One” Trade Agreement with the People’s Republic of
China (hereafter “China”).
The USDA implemented a series of policies to address the COVID-19 pandemic. On support for producers,
the Coronavirus Farm Assistance Program (CFAP), provided around USD 23.5 billion in direct income
payments to farmers and ranchers. CFAP provided financial assistance based on actual losses to
producers of agricultural commodities who faced price declines due to COVID-19, and significant additional
marketing costs because of lower demand, surplus production, and disruptions to shipping patterns and
the orderly marketing of commodities. The programme covered over 300 commodities, from livestock and
row crops to specialty crops and aquaculture. CFAP was implemented through two payment rounds
(CFAP-1 and CFAP-2) based on separate eligibility requirements and payment formulas. The USDA’s
Farm Service Agency (FSA) broadened use of the Disaster Set-Aside loan provision to allow farmers with
USDA farm loans who were affected by COVID-19 to have a payment set aside. FSA also made available
a one-time option for an annual instalment payment deferral of Farm Storage Facility Loans. USDA’s RMA
provided crop insurance programme flexibilities to assist producers affected by COVID-19 market
disruptions.
COVID-specific support for consumers included commodity distribution programmes and additional
funding for USDA domestic food assistance programmes. On commodity distribution, the USDA partnered
with regional and local distributors whose workforce had been significantly impacted by the closure of
restaurants, hotels, and other food service entities to purchase and distribute USD 4 billion in fresh
produce, dairy and meat products through the Farmers to Families Food Box Program. The USDA
Secretary authorised USD 470 million in additional Section-32-funded food purchases for distribution to
communities in response to the COVID-19 national emergency. The USDA also issued Disaster Household
Distributions, a food assistance programme that provides food to meet specific needs when traditional
channels are unavailable.
On domestic food assistance programmes, the USDA allowed States to issue benefits to households in
the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) that normally receive less than the maximum
benefit, and to provide programme flexibilities for SNAP issuance methods, and application and reporting
requirements. A pre-planned online purchasing pilot for SNAP participants was also expanded as part of
the USDA’s COVID-19 response. The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and
Children (WIC) programme received an additional USD 500 million in appropriations during the COVID-19
health emergency. The USDA gave states the option to allow parents or guardians to take meals served
under the Child and Adult Care Food Program home to their children and provided other means of getting
meals to children who normally receive free or reduced-price meals at school.
Assessment and recommendations

Levels of producer support and border protection decreased in the early 2000s. However, low
levels of support primarily reflected higher world commodity prices, as many agricultural support
programmes are counter-cyclical to market prices, and producer support has increased in recent
years.

Increased emphasis on insurance and risk management policy tools is, in principle, a good
approach to supporting producers when they are in need. However, most insurance programmes
remain commodity-specific. Moving to an all farm-revenue approach would exploit differences in
price and yield variability across products, reducing government costs for a given objective, and
also remove distortions across commodity sectors. Risk management instruments should also be
evaluated for their impact on farm-level incentives to adapt and transform in response to a changing


 563

risk environment and ensure that they do not transfer risk that should be borne by farmers to the
public budget.

Voluntary conservation programmes – such as the Environmental Quality Incentives Program
(EQIP) and the programmes consolidated into the Agricultural Conservation Easement Program
(ACEP) appear to be effective in addressing soil conservation and water pollution problems.
However, conservation programmes could be better leveraged to improve ex ante management of
natural hazard risk and support a more resilient recovery following a natural hazard event (Gray
and Baldwin, 2021[1]).

Recent Farm Bills continue support for farm incomes and strengthen the risk management system
to build farmers’ resilience against natural disasters and market shocks. It will be important to
ensure that the recent return to providing ad hoc support does not become entrenched, so as to
not dis-incentivise necessary adjustments to new market and environmental conditions or
undermine the ex ante framework established by agricultural risk management and disaster
assistance policies.

While a high rate of productivity growth – driven by farm consolidations and adoption of innovations
– helps keep US agro-food exports competitive, future opportunities will also be determined by
access to markets facilitated by trade agreements. Resolving current trade uncertainties will be
important to ensure that farmers can pursue available market opportunities.
Figure 29.1. United States: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/v7g5ky
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
1
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
1.1
1.12
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
0.0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%
1.0%
1.2%
TSE as % GDP
1986-88
2000-02
2018-20


564 

Figure 29.2. United States: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/bx14dh
Figure 29.3. United States: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/72wxt0


-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
PSE change
decomposition
Change in Producer
Price
Border Price change
decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
PSE
Border price
PSE
Budgetary Payments
Price Gap
Quantity
Producer
Price
Border Price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Cotton
Wool
Eggs
Sheep meat
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Milk
Sugar
Soybeans
Rice
Sorghum
Maize
Barley
Wheat
Alfalfa
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


 565

Table 29.1. United States: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
143 469
193 454
338 958
368 423
316 994
331 458
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
78.3
73.6
73.4
76.6
72.2
71.5
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
124 148
164 683
320 044
289 637
326 918
343 576
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
34 253
43 789
44 900
42 196
51 718
40 787
Support based on commodity output
14 031
19 713
13 002
19 210
10 683
9 114
Market Price Support1
10 922
12 532
7 712
10 518
10 117
2 501
Positive Market Price Support
11 008
12 532
7 712
10 518
10 117
2 501
Negative Market Price Support
-86
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
3 108
7 181
5 290
8 692
566
6 613
Payments based on input use
7 061
7 572
9 190
8 668
8 609
10 293
Based on variable input use
3 697
3 091
2 034
1 949
1 619
2 534
with input constraints
739
168
862
576
618
1 394
Based on fixed capital formation
1 233
361
2 017
1 996
2 042
2 013
with input constraints
1 233
358
1 935
1 920
1 891
1 996
Based on on-farm services
2 131
4 120
5 139
4 723
4 948
5 746
with input constraints
349
677
1 540
1 522
1 455
1 644
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
12 231
5 655
16 070
10 095
23 993
14 122
Based on Receipts / Income
912
2 055
2 227
2 328
2 205
2 146
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
11 319
3 600
13 843
7 767
21 787
11 976
with input constraints
2 565
1 570
13 842
7 763
21 787
11 976
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
194
216
365
2
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
338
8 789
4 680
2 594
6 098
5 349
With variable payment rates
0
3 969
4 672
2 588
6 080
5 349
with commodity exceptions
0
3 969
4 672
2 588
6 080
5 349
With fixed payment rates
338
4 819
8
6
18
0
with commodity exceptions
0
4 819
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
592
2 061
1 763
1 413
1 970
1 907
Based on long-term resource retirement
592
2 050
1 751
1 393
1 961
1 900
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
11
12
21
8
7
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
20.5
19.5
11.9
10.5
14.4
11.0
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.11
1.11
1.04
1.05
1.03
1.03
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.26
1.24
1.14
1.12
1.17
1.12
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
3 108
6 164
11 343
10 883
11 174
11 971
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
1 129
1 805
2 878
2 454
2 658
3 521
Inspection and control
372
685
1 315
1 418
1 254
1 273
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
13
461
3 900
4 209
3 730
3 760
Marketing and promotion
495
957
1 633
1 319
1 846
1 735
Cost of public stockholding
0
107
28
0
44
40
Miscellaneous
1 100
2 149
1 589
1 483
1 642
1 642
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
6.6
8.9
11.4
11.0
10.8
12.4
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-1 647
5 110
32 796
33 227
26 823
38 338
Transfers to producers from consumers
-10 379
-12 238
-7 606
-10 307
-10 011
-2 501
Other transfers from consumers
-1 651
-2 078
-2 970
-2 292
-3 359
-3 259
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
10 089
19 425
43 371
45 825
40 192
44 097
Excess feed cost
294
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-1.4
3.5
11.9
13.6
9.4
12.8
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.11
1.10
1.03
1.05
1.04
1.02
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.01
0.97
0.89
0.88
0.91
0.89
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
47 450
69 379
99 614
98 904
103 083
96 855
Transfers from consumers
12 030
14 316
10 576
12 599
13 369
5 759
Transfers from taxpayers
37 071
57 141
92 008
88 597
93 073
94 354
Budget revenues
-1 651
-2 078
-2 970
-2 292
-3 359
-3 259
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.0
0.7
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
36 528
56 847
91 902
88 386
92 966
94 354
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.5
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
139
196
193
196
198
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for the United States are: wheat, maize, barley,
sorghum, alfalfa, cotton, rice, soybean, sugar, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, wool, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




566 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
An omnibus legislative package known as the Farm Bill primarily governs agricultural policy in the United
States. Farm Bills authorise agricultural and food policies in areas including nutrition assistance, crop
insurance, commodity support, conservation and agricultural research. Each Farm Bill amends previous
agricultural and related policies, and establishes new policies on a five-year cycle that can be extended or
shortened depending on legislative priorities.
Historically, the commodity support component of Farm Bills focused on stabilising and boosting farm
income to aid economic recovery and development during the Depression and post-war eras through price
and income support for a specified set of  commodities, including but not limited to corn, soybeans, wheat,
cotton, rice, peanuts, dairy, and sugar (OECD, 2011[2]). Over time, Farm Bills expanded in scope: the 1973
Farm Bill first included a nutrition title while subsequent farm bills added titles on policy areas such as
agricultural trade, farm credit, rural development and crop insurance. The 1985 Farm Bill  added
conservation provisions; the 1990 Farm Bill, organic agriculture; the 1996 Farm Bill, agricultural research
; the 2002 Farm Bill, bioenergy; and the 2008 Farm Bill, horticulture and local food systems (Congressional
Research Service, 2019[3]).
Agricultural policy reform in the United States has been characterised by a significant shift towards less
production- and trade-distorting forms of support. Commodity programmes originally supported farm
incomes through a combination of taxpayer-funded production payments and supply management in the
form of acreage limits and commodity storage programmes. The Food Security Act of 1985 introduced
changes that moved farmers towards more market orientation by reducing price supports in favour of direct
payments, introducing greater planting flexibility and giving more attention to export opportunities for US
farm products (OECD, 2011[2]).
Reforms continued with subsequent Farm Bills. The 1996 Farm Bill1 re-designed income support
programmes by replacing target prices, price-based deficiency payments and acreage controls with
historically based direct payments independent of current production. A series of ad hoc emergency top-
up payments supplemented the historically based payments implemented under the 1996 Farm Bill to
provide additional assistance in the face of low commodity prices. These ad hoc payments were
institutionalised under the 2002 Farm Bill2 as counter-cyclical payments linked to the historically based
direct payments, and continued under the 2008 Farm Bill3 (OECD, 2011[2]). The 2014 Farm Bill ended
these direct and counter-cyclical payments but continued direct income support based on historical
production with programmes triggering payments based on either reference prices or revenue
benchmarks. It also ended the dairy price support programme, replacing it with a premium-based milk-to-
feed margin protection programme. The 2018 Farm Bill continued these programmes with only small
adjustments (Table 29.2).
The largest of the farm programmes in the Farm Bill, the Federal Crop Insurance Program (FCIP), was
established in the 1930s to cover yield losses from most natural causes.4 The programme’s current form
was authorised by the Federal Crop Insurance Act of 1980 and modified by subsequent Farm Bills and
other legislation. The 1980 act introduced federal premium subsidies and brought in private insurance
companies (Approved Insurance Providers, or AIPs) to deliver crop insurance policies. The catastrophic
(CAT) coverage level was created in 1994, under which 100% of the premium is subsidised and producers
pay a fee.5 The Agricultural Risk Protection Act of 2000 expanded the geographic availability of insurance,
increased premium subsidy levels, and removed restrictions on livestock insurance products.


 567

Table 29.2. United States: Main agricultural policy trends
Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1980
Federal Crop Insurance Act of 19801
Introduced federal premium subsidies for crop insurance (30% at the 65% coverage level)
Created a public-private partnership with private insurance companies (Approved
Insurance Providers), which became responsible for delivering crop insurance policies
1985
Food Security Act of 1985
Established marketing loans for cotton and rice, removing market price support element of
cotton and rice commodity loans
Set up the Export Enhancement Programme and the Dairy Export Incentive Programme.
Established the Conservation Reserve Programme (CRP)
Established conservation cross-compliance requirements (highly erodible land and wetland
conservation provisions)
1990
Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and
Trade Act of 1990
Introduced 15% “normal flex acres” and 10% “optional flex acres”
Extended marketing loan provisions to oilseeds in 1991, and to wheat and feed grains in
1993
Allowed oilseeds and alternative crops to be planted on land in a 0/85-92 programme
without loss of payments.
1994
Federal Crop Insurance Reform and
Department of Agriculture
Reorganization Act of 19941
Catastrophic (CAT) crop insurance coverage level created
Increased premium subsidies for higher coverage levels (buy-up coverage)

1996
Federal Agriculture Improvement and
Reform Act of 1996
Replaced crop deficiency payments and target prices with fixed direct payments decoupled
from current prices and production levels to be reduced over time
Eliminated most planting restrictions
Extended marketing loan provisions to most other covered crops and created alternative
direct Loan Deficiency Payments (LDP)
Phased-out the dairy support price (although interim legislation modified this provision)
Consolidated cost share and technical assistance programmes for crop and livestock
producers into the Environmental Quality Incentives Programme (EQIP)
Extended CRP authorisation and capped enrolment
Lifted conservation cross-compliance requirements for crop insurance participation
2000
Agricultural Risk Protection Act of 20001
Expanded the geographic availability of crop insurance, increased premium subsidy levels,
and removed restrictions on livestock insurance products
2002
Farm Security and Rural Investment Act
of 2002
Annually decreasing Production Flexibility Contract payments replaced by fixed Direct
Payments programme
Created the Counter-Cyclical Payments programme triggering supplemental direct income
support payments when prices fell below targets
Added soybeans and peanuts as covered commodities under the fixed Direct Payment and
Counter-Cyclical Payments programme
Increased payments for environmental conservation and protection
Eliminated peanut price support quota system, buying out peanut quota rights
2008
Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of
2008
Retained Direct Payment, Counter-Cyclical Payment and Marketing Assistance Loan
programmes
Created the Average Crop Revenue Election (ACRE) as a revenue-based alternative to the
Counter-Cyclical Payment programme
Changed the dairy price support programme basis from milk price to prices of dairy
products
Increased marketing assistance loan rates and Counter-Cyclical Payment programme
target prices for a number of programme crops and sugar
Introduced a permanent disaster assistance programme (Supplemental Agricultural
Disaster Assistance) to end the need for ad hoc programs
Significantly increased funding for domestic food assistance programmes
Ended the Export Enhancement Programme


568 

Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
2014
Agricultural Act of 2014
Repealed Direct Payment, Counter-Cyclical Payment, and ACRE programmes; created the
Price Loss Coverage (PLC) and Agriculture Risk Coverage (ARC), which used the historical
payment base established for the repealed programmes
Added new crop insurance options: Supplemental Coverage Option (SCO), Stacked
Income Protection Plan (STAX) for upland cotton; Expanded the Noninsured Crop
Assistance Program (NAP) to allow for higher premium-based coverage
Re-established conservation cross-compliance requirement to receive crop insurance
premium subsidies
Expanded programmes for specialty crops, organic farmers, bioenergy, rural development,
and beginning farmers and ranchers, continuing orientation to technical assistance,
research, and development loans.
2018
Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018
Continued 2014 Farm Bill programmes with only minor changes, with some additions to
programmes for specialty crops, organic farmers, local and regional markets, and
beginning, military veteran and minority farmers.
Notes: 1. Crop insurance legislation.
Source: Congressional Research Service (2018[4]); OECD (2011[2]; 2014[5]; 2019[6]); USDA ERS (2020[7]).
Producer support increased in recent years after declining since 2000-02. MPS became a progressively
smaller share of US support to agriculture. Budgetary support increased over time, mainly due to increases
in payments that require production (reflecting the increasing emphasis placed on farm insurance and risk
management, including the Federal Crop Insurance Program), as well as increases in input payments and
payments not requiring production (Figure 29.4).
Figure 29.4. United States: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The Agricultural Improvement Act of 2018 (the 2018 Farm Bill) provides the basic legislation governing
farm programmes for 2019 to 2023. The twelve titles of the 2018 Farm Bill authorise policies for commodity
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 569

programmes, conservation on agricultural land, agricultural trade promotion and international food aid,
nutrition programmes, farm credit, rural development, agricultural research, forestry on private lands,
energy, horticulture and organic agriculture, and crop insurance. Around 76% of budgetary spending under
the 2018 Farm Bill is projected for programmes in the Nutrition title – primarily the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) – with farm programmes accounting for less than 25% of projected budgetary
outlays. Of the farm programmes, crop insurance is projected to account for 9% of total expenditures, and
Commodities and Conservation for 7% each. The remaining titles together account for 1% of projected
spending.
The primary crop commodity programmes under the 2018 Farm Bill include programmes that make
payments to producers with historical base acres6 of programme crops (wheat, feed grains, rice, oilseeds,
peanuts, pulses and seed cotton) when prices fall below statutory minimums or when crop revenue is low
relative to recent levels. Producers are not required to produce the covered commodity to receive payments
on their historical base. Price Loss Coverage (PLC), a counter-cyclical price programme, makes a payment
when market prices for covered crops fall below fixed reference prices. Agriculture Risk Coverage (ARC),
a revenue-based programme, makes a payment when actual revenue at the county level falls below rolling
average benchmark revenues. For both programmes, payments are made on 85% of base acres. For their
base acre elections, participating producers are required to choose between the PLC and ARC
programmes on a commodity-by-commodity basis that holds for both 2019 and 2020, and then annually
for each year through 2023.
The crop insurance programme offers coverage options for both yield and revenue losses. Traditional crop
insurance makes subsidised crop insurance available to producers who purchase a policy to protect
against losses in yield, crop revenue, or whole farm revenue. The 2018 Farm Bill expanded the list of
insurable commodities to include hemp.7 In addition, the Supplementary Coverage Option (SCO) offers
producers additional area-based insurance coverage in combination with traditional crop insurance policies
(but excluding crops for which producers have elected to participate in the ARC programme). The Stacked
Income Protection Plan (STAX) provides premium subsidies to upland cotton producers to purchase area-
based revenue insurance policies. Producers who choose to enrol former upland cotton base acres as
seed cotton base (seed cotton became a covered commodity under the PLC and ARC programmes as a
result of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018) are not eligible to purchase STAX policies. Participants in the
STAX programme may not purchase SCO policies for the same upland cotton acreage.
Sugar is supported by a tariff rate quota (TRQ), together with provisions for non-recourse loans and
marketing allotments. Minimum prices with government purchases of butter, skim milk powder and cheddar
cheese no longer support milk and dairy products, but tariffs and TRQs continue to exist. For dairy
producers, the Dairy Margin Coverage (DMC) programme, insures the margin between milk price and feed
costs for a premium, with payments made on enrolled historical milk production. The 2018 Farm Bill also
allows producers to participate in both DMC and dairy livestock insurance programmes. Under the new
Milk Donation Reimbursement Program (MDP) fluid milk producers with pre-approved plans may be
reimbursed for costs incurred in donating fluid beverage milk to low-income groups. Marketing assistance
loans continue for wheat, feed grains, cotton, rice, oilseeds, pulses, wool, mohair and honey, as do border
measures (including TRQs) for beef and sheep meat and some other products, although US agricultural
tariffs are generally low, at 4.7% on average in 2019.8
At the federal level, agri-environmental programmes focus on land retirement and measures to encourage
crop and livestock producers to adopt practices that reduce environmental pressures on working land
(cropland and grazing land in production). Working land programmes include the Environmental Quality
Incentives Program (EQIP) and the Conservation Stewardship Program (CSP). Land retirement
programmes include the Agricultural Conservation Easement Program (ACEP) and the Conservation
Reserve Program (CRP). The Regional Conservation Partnership Program offers options for regionally or
watershed focused conservation efforts that may combine both land retirement and working lands
programmes. Since the enactment of the 1985 Farm Act, eligibility for most federal commodity programme


570 

payments, including crop insurance premium subsidies, is subject to recipients having established an
individual farm-based conservation plan to protect highly erodible cropland and wetlands.
Other farm programmes include direct and guaranteed loans (including microloans) for farmland purchase
and for operating credit, designed to assist producers who face difficulty obtaining credit in the private
market, particularly beginning, military veteran and socially disadvantaged farmers. Farm Bill programmes
also support public agricultural research and technical assistance, including programmes targeted to
specialty crops; organic production; pest and disease prevention; the promotion of sustainable farming
practices; and standing disaster programmes for livestock, forage, and trees, bushes and vines to help
producers cope with production, financial and physical losses related to or caused by natural disasters.
Production of ethanol and other biofuels is supported mainly in the form of mandated blending for fuel use,
and loan and grant programmes.
A wide range of other legislation also affects agriculture in the United States at federal, state and local
levels, including trade measures, food safety regulation, commodity trading and finance, tax policy, energy,
and transportation.
The United States continually works to enhance agricultural productivity, including under increasing
climate variability and extreme weather events. To support adaptation to climate change, The USDA
operates a network of Regional Climate Hubs. These link USDA research and programme agencies in
order to develop and deliver science-based, region-specific information and technologies to agricultural
producers and professionals, so as to enable climate-informed decision-making and direct stakeholders
towards resources needed to implement those decisions.
USDA also helps producers reduce GHG emissions, enhance carbon sequestration and adapt to a
changing climate while improving the natural resource base by providing technical and financial assistance
to landowners through its conservation programmes. For example, the Soil Health Initiative promotes and
supports adoption of soil health practices and systems through various conservation programmes,
including EQIP and CSP.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
Implementation of provisions of the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 (2018 Farm Bill) continued during
2020, accompanied by continued implementation of the 2019 suite of trade mitigation programmes and
the 2018 and 2019 Congressional ad hoc disaster assistance programmes with 2020 supplements. Most
prominently, however, USDA implemented a series of policies to address the COVID-19 pandemic,
including producer programmes, food assistance programmes, and regulatory flexibilities along the supply
chain. Several trade agreements came into force in 2020: the Japan-US Free Trade Agreement, the United
States-Mexico-Canada Agreement, and the “Phase One” Trade Agreement with China.
On trade mitigation, in February 2020, USDA announced the third and final tranche of payments under
the 2019 Market Facilitation Program (MFP). The MFP provided payments up to USD 14.5 billion in three
tranches to producers of commodities affected by retaliatory tariffs resulting in the loss of traditional export
markets, including non-specialty crops, hogs, milk, and certain specialty crops (fresh sweet cherries, tree
nuts, fresh grapes, cranberries, and cultivated ginseng). The February 2020 payments were the last of
three tranches of MFP payments, providing the remaining 25% of authorised payments.
On disaster assistance, in December 2019, the Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020 provided
an additional USD 1.5 billion for the continuation of disaster assistance programme delivery and added
several new qualifying disaster events and eligible participants under the WHIP+ programme (OECD,
2020[8]). These were losses from excessive moisture or drought suffered in 2018 and 2019; compensation
to grower members of sugar beet co-operatives for sugar beet losses in 2018 and 2019; and crop quality


 571

losses that resulted in price deductions or penalties when marketing the damaged crops due to qualifying
disaster events in 2018 and 2019.
On crop insurance, USDA’s Risk Management Agency (RMA) introduced a new policy in 2020 that will
help producers recover from hurricanes. The Hurricane Insurance Protection – Wind Index (HIP-WI) covers
70 different crops and is available in counties near the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic, as well as Hawaii.
The policy covers a portion of the deductible of a producer’s underlying crop insurance policy when their
county, or an adjacent county, is within the area of sustained hurricane-force winds, as determined by
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) hurricane wind extents data. Sustained
hurricane winds are the only cause of loss for HIP-WI.
On organic agriculture, the United States and Taiwan signed a new organic equivalence arrangement
allowing organic products certified in the United States or Taiwan to be sold as organic in either market,
and the United States and Japan announced the expansion of their organic equivalence arrangement to
include livestock products. The United States has organic equivalence arrangements with Canada, the
European Union, Japan, Korea, Switzerland, and Taiwan.
On agricultural biotechnology, USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) published
the Sustainable, Ecological, Consistent, Uniform, Responsible, Efficient (SECURE) rule, the first
comprehensive revision of the Agency’s biotechnology regulations in over 30 years. The new rule will
facilitate the development and availability of these technologies through a transparent, consistent, science-
based, and risk-proportionate regulatory system. Specifically, the new rule puts in place a more efficient
process to identify plants that would be subject to regulation, focusing on the properties of the plant rather
than on its method of production. APHIS will evaluate plants developed using genetic engineering for plant
pest risk under a new process called a regulatory status review, regulating only those that plausibly pose
an increased plant pest risk.
On natural resources and environmental measures, the new Conservation Reserve Program (CRP)
Soil Health and Income Protection Program (SHIPP) pilot, authorised under the 2018 Farm Act, was
launched in 2020. The programme is available to producers in Iowa, Minnesota, Montana, North Dakota
and South Dakota. Through SHIPP, producers have the option of three-, four- or five-year CRP contracts
to establish perennial cover on less productive cropland in exchange for payments. This pilot enables
producers to plant perennial cover that, among other benefits, will improve soil health and water quality
while having the option to harvest hay and graze during certain times of the year. Up to 50 000 acres can
be enrolled.
Also on natural resources, the new CRP CLEAR30 Program offers farmers and landowners with expiring
water-quality practice CRP contracts in the Great Lakes and Chesapeake Bay regions the opportunity to
enrol in a 30-year CRP contract. The longer contracts will help ensure that practices remain in place for
30 years, which will help reduce sediment and nutrient runoff and help prevent algal blooms. Traditional
CRP contracts run from 10 to 15 years.
On biofuels, in February 2020, the USDA announced the new Higher Blends Infrastructure Incentive
Program (HBIIP). The HBIIP makes USD 100 million in grants available for transportation fuel and
biodiesel distribution facilities to retrofit or upgrade fuel storage, dispenser pumps, and related
infrastructure to be able to sell ethanol and biodiesel. The programme builds on biofuels infrastructure
investments and experience gained through the Biofuels Infrastructure Partnership (BIP) administered by
USDA from 2016–19 (OECD, 2016[9]), which awarded competitive grants, matched by states, to expand
the availability of E15 and E85 infrastructure.
On local and regional food systems, in 2020 USDA’s new Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative
Production announced the first grants under its competitive grants programme. The programme was
authorised by the 2018 Farm Bill to address food access and education and innovative ways to increase
local food production in urban environments. USDA awarded USD 1.44 million for planning projects that


572 

target areas of low food access, provide job training and education, business and start-up costs for new
farmers, and the development of policies related to zoning and other needs of urban production. An
additional USD 1.88 million was awarded to implement projects that accelerate existing and emerging
models of urban, indoor and other agricultural practices that serve multiple farmers.
On food loss and waste, the Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production announced just over
USD 1 million in funding for 13 pilot projects through its Community Compost and Food Waste Reduction
Projects programme, to develop and test strategies for planning and implementing municipal compost
plans and food waste reduction. Priority projects anticipate or demonstrate economic benefits, incorporate
plans to make compost easily accessible to farmers (including community gardeners), integrate other food
waste strategies (including food recovery efforts), and collaborate with multiple partners.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Most programmes to address COVID-related disruptions in the US agricultural and food system are funded
by COVID-specific authorising legislation, including the Families First Coronavirus Response Act (FFCRA),
which was enacted on 18 March 2020, and the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act
(CARES Act), which was enacted on 27 March 2020.9 The CARES Act provided USD 9.5 billion in disaster
relief to prevent, prepare for, and respond to coronavirus by supporting agricultural producers impacted by
COVID-19, including producers of specialty crops, producers that supply local food systems (such as
farmers markets, restaurants, and schools), and livestock producers (including dairy producers). The
CARES Act provided USD 14 billion to replenish the borrowing authority for the Commodity Credit
Corporation (CCC).10 In addition, the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, which was enacted on
27 December 2020, provides additional funding for COVID-19 programmes that will be implemented in
2021. USDA also used existing authorities under the Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) Charter Act to
respond to COVID-19.
On COVID-specific support for agriculture, a new USDA programme, the Coronavirus Farm Assistance
Program (CFAP), provided around USD 23.5 billion in direct income payments to farmers and
ranchers. CFAP provided financial assistance based on actual losses to producers of agricultural
commodities who had faced price declines due to COVID-19 and additional significant marketing costs
because of lower demand, surplus production, and disruptions to shipping patterns and the orderly
marketing of commodities. The programme covered over 300 eligible commodities, from livestock and row
crops to specialty crops and aquaculture. CFAP funding was authorised through the CARES Act
(USD 9.5 billion) as well as USD 14 billion in funding provided through the Commodity Credit Corporation
(CCC) Charter Act. Approximately USD 500 million of the CARES Act funds were used for the Farmers to
Families Food Box programme described below, and actual outlays of additional CCC funds remained
below the total authorised at the end of 2020. CFAP was implemented through two payment rounds (CFAP-
1 and CFAP-2) based on separate eligibility requirements and payment formulas.
USDA also introduced flexibilities into its programmes and services in response to the COVID-19 pandemic
and as part of its implementation of the CARES Act.
On farm finance and credit, USDA’s Farm Service Agency (FSA) broadened the use of the Disaster Set-
Aside loan provision, normally used in the wake of natural disasters, to allow farmers with USDA farm
loans who were affected by COVID-19 to have a payment set aside. To assist Farm Storage Facility Loan
borrowers experiencing financial hardship from the pandemic and other challenges in production
agriculture, a one-time option for an annual instalment payment deferral was made available.
On crop insurance, USDA’s RMA provided administrative flexibilities to protect the health and safety of
crop insurance programme participants, including insurance providers, as well as more substantial
programme flexibilities to assist producers affected by COVID-19 market disruptions. These included:


 573


Allowing dairy producers who were forced to dump milk as a result of government-ordered
shutdowns to report that milk as marketed for insurance purposes.

Allowing organic producers to report acreage as certified organic, or transitioning to organic, for
the 2020 crop year if they can show that they have requested a written certification from a certifying
agent by their policy’s acreage reporting date.
USDA also extended the repayment period for agricultural producers to repay Marketing Assistance Loans
(MAL) from 9 to 12 months.
On farm labour, in April 2020, the Department of Homeland Security along with the USDA announced a
temporary rule change to H-2A visa requirements to help agricultural producers to avoid disruptions in their
labour force. The H-2A visa applies to foreign workers who perform agricultural labour on a temporary or
seasonal basis before returning to their home countries. The temporary change in rules allows foreign
workers who are already in the United States to change employers more quickly and easily, as well as stay
beyond the three-year maximum allowable period.
On animal health, as the national animal health reference laboratory, USDA’s APHIS established
confirmatory testing services for animal samples for SARS-CoV-2 and tested more than 500 animals for
the virus, confirming 66 animals as positive. APHIS also worked with 37 laboratories in the National Animal
Health Laboratory Network (NAHLN) to get them set up for added COVID-19 testing services, including 22
with capability to test human samples, and collaborated closely with both animal and public health officials
on a variety of COVID-19 related projects. Additionally, APHIS created a National Incident Coordination
Center to support producers impacted by COVID-19 closures and slowdowns at meat processing plants.
As part of these efforts, the National Veterinary Stockpile quickly deployed more than USD 2.24 million
worth of critical equipment, supplies and services to directly support affected producers.
On COVID-specific support for agro-food supply chains, in April 2020, President Trump issued an
executive order under the Defense Production Act authority to keep meat and poultry processing facilities
operating during COVID-19. The President directed the Secretary of Agriculture to take all appropriate
actions to ensure that meat and poultry processors continued operations, consistent with the guidance for
their operations jointly issued by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the US Department of Labor’s
(DOL) Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), to ensure that the plants can operate
safely.
In May 2020, USDA and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) established a Memorandum of
Understanding to clarify procedures in order to “prevent interruptions at FDA regulated food facilities,”
including fruit and vegetable processing facilities.
COVID-specific support for consumers included commodity distribution and additional funding for USDA
domestic food assistance programmes.
On commodity distribution, as part of CFAP and using funding authorised under the Families First
Coronavirus Response Act (FFCRA) and the CARES Act, in 2020 USDA partnered with regional and local
distributors whose workforce had been significantly impacted by the closure of many restaurants, hotels,
and other food service entities. USDA purchased and distributed USD 4 billion in fresh produce, dairy and
meat products through the Farmers to Families Food Box Program. The programme delivered more than
125 million pre-approved, family-sized boxes of fresh produce, dairy and meat products to food banks and
other non-profits serving low-income households.
CFAP programme funding also provided more than USD 850 million (USD 400 million through FFCRA and
USD 450 million through the CARES Act) to make additional purchases for distribution through The
Emergency Food Assistance Program (TEFAP), an ongoing programme that provides emergency food
assistance to low-income families through food banks and other nutrition assistance programmes.


574 

US Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue authorised USD 470 million in additional Section 32-funded
food purchases11 for distribution to communities in need in response to the COVID-19 national emergency.
USDA also issued Disaster Household Distributions, a food assistance programme that provides food
targeted to meet specific needs when traditional channels of food are unavailable. Distributions were made
to 16 states and territories and 29 tribal governments.
On USDA domestic food assistance programmes, under FFCRA authority, USDA allowed States to
issue benefits to Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) households that normally receive
less than the maximum benefit, and to provide programme flexibilities for SNAP issuance methods,
application, and reporting requirements. These modifications are applicable during the COVID-19 health
emergency. USDA’s Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) rapidly expanded a pre-planned online purchasing
pilot for SNAP participants as part of its COVID-19 response. Within six weeks of its launch in New York
in mid-April, USDA had expanded SNAP online purchasing to 36 states and the District of Columbia,
covering 90% of SNAP households, and eventually reaching an additional 10 states and covering more
than 97% of SNAP beneficiaries. SNAP spending increased 52% in FY2020 to USD 84.8 billion.
The FFCRA provided an additional USD 500 million in appropriations for the Special Supplemental
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) programme during the COVID-19 health
emergency. WIC provides supplemental foods, nutrition education, breastfeeding promotion and support,
and health care referrals to low-income pregnant, postpartum, and breastfeeding women, infants, and
children under five who are determined by health professionals to be at nutritional risk. FNS used
programme flexibilities and waiver authorities provided by Congress to facilitate participation, in particular
by allowing for remote approval of participants and flexible options for receiving benefits and picking up
food packages.
USDA provided states the option to allow parents or guardians to take meals home to their children being
served under the Child and Adult Care Food Program. Typically, children would need to be present at
school to receive a meal through this programme. Flexibilities were also provided to assist seniors and
individuals with disabilities served through the same programme.
USDA’s FNS also provided alternative means of getting meals to children who would normally receive free
or reduced-price meals at school. A new programme called Pandemic EBT (Electronic Benefits Transfer)12
provided for the electronic transfer of funds to households to cover the cost of meals children would
normally receive at school. The Emergency Meals to You programme, a public-private partnership,
delivered more than 40 million meals to approximately 400 000 children in rural areas during 2020 school
and summer meal programme closures. Various programme flexibilities, including allowing parents and
guardians to pick up meals rather than requiring children to be served meals in group settings, provided
local schools and meal programme operators with the option to tailor their offerings to community needs.
Programme flexibilities also allowed states and local school districts to develop hybrid in-school and
alternative meal strategies. USDA also developed a Meals for Kids interactive site finder to help parents
and children locate sites and meal service times.
USDA also provided additional food distributions through the Food Distribution Program on Indian
Reservations (FDPIR), a programme which provides USDA Foods to eligible households living on Indian
reservations and to American Indian households residing in approved areas near reservations and
throughout the state of Oklahoma. Many households participate in FDPIR as an alternative to SNAP
because they do not have easy access to SNAP offices or authorised food stores. Up to USD 50 million in
CARES Act funds have also been made available to tribal governments for COVID-related infrastructure
costs, such as personal protective equipment, freezers/coolers, mobile IT equipment, tailgate equipment,
and vehicles for home deliveries.


 575

Trade policy developments in 2020-21
The Japan-US Free Trade Agreement went into effect on 1 January 2020, providing for 5 to 15 year
phase-in periods for tariff reductions on canola oil, wheat, beef, pork, feed grains, and oilseeds (USTR,
2019[10]).
On 16 January 2020, the US Senate approved the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA)
by a vote of 89-10 following the December 2019 passage of the agreement by the US House of
Representatives. The new agreement entered into force on 1 July 2020, replacing the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). The agreement continues tariff-free access for most agricultural
commodities, expands market access for some additional commodities, and provides for new rules
governing agricultural biotechnology and sanitary and phytosanitary measures.
The United States and the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”) reached a “Phase One” Trade
Agreement that includes commitments by China to enact structural and economic reforms and make
additional purchases of US goods and services in the coming years. The agreement also lifts or modifies
import restrictions on a number of US agricultural products. The United States agreed to modify tariff
actions on Section 301 as part of this agreement. The agreement was signed on 15 January 2020 and
entered into force one month later.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
To alleviate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on animal origin commodity imports, USDA’s APHIS
provided flexibility by accepting electronic import documents, including veterinary certificates, regardless
of the disease status of the exporting country. The provisions are set to expire on 30 June 2021.
Contextual information
The United States is the world’s second largest economy and the third largest country by land area and
population. US GDP per capita is almost three times the average of all countries analysed in this report
(Table 29.3). Primary agriculture accounts for a small part of the economy – around 0.9% of GDP and
1.5% of employment – but agro-food exports account for over 10% of total exports. The US agricultural
sector benefits from a large domestic consumer market, as well as abundant arable and pasture land and
diverse climatic conditions that support production of a wide range of commodities. In recent years, total
agricultural production has been divided relatively equally between crops and livestock, although their
shares vary over time. Key industries include grains (maize and wheat), oilseeds (soybeans), cotton, cattle,
dairy, poultry, and fruits and vegetables.
The US economy contracted in 2020 and the unemployment rate increased for the first time since 2010 as
a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions (Figure 29.5). The United States is the world’s
largest agricultural exporter and was a net exporter up until 2018, although the US agro-food trade surplus
had narrowed in recent years (Figure 29.6). North America and developing East and Southeast Asia were
the largest markets for US agricultural exports in 2019. Exports are dominated by primary products for
further processing and processed products for final consumers, while half of agro-food imports are
processed products for final consumption.




576 

Table 29.3. United States: Contextual indicators

United States
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
10 252
21 433
25.7%
18.8%
Population (million)
282
329
6.6%
6.3%
Land area (thousand km2)
9 162
9 147
11.0%
10.8%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
414 399
405 810
13.6%
13.3%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
31
36
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
36 305
65 143
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
9
9
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
1.2
0.9
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
1.8
1.5
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
7.8
10.1
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
3.5
5.7
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
56
51
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
44
49
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
42
39
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Figure 29.5. United States: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate


 577

Figure 29.6. United States: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Total factor productivity (TFP) growth and intermediate input growth have driven agricultural output growth
of 1.2% per year on average over the recent decade (Figure 29.7). TFP growth averaged 0.9% per year
between 2007 and 2016, driven by farm consolidation and the adoption of innovations in crop and livestock
breeding, nutrient use and pest management, farm practices, and farm equipment and structures.
However, TFP growth has declined relative to the rate of growth over the period 1991-2000. The
productivity growth realised by US agriculture has been achieved with an overall reduction in environmental
pressures from the sector. Nutrient surplus intensities at the national level have declined and are close to
the average for OECD countries (Table 29.4). Agriculture’s share in energy use is below the OECD
average, as are GHG emissions. However, water stress in the United States is above the OECD average.
Figure 29.7. United States: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.


Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
25
14
51
35
11
35
13
17
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
0.4%
0.5%
-0.02%
0.05%
0.9%
1.6%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
United States
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


578 

Table 29.4. United States: Productivity and environmental indicators

United States
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
2.2%
0.9%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
34.4
27.0
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
3.2
2.8
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
0.9
1.3
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
7.6
9.3
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
5.3
5.6
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
39.7
45.6
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
19.5
15.6
9.3
8.5
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.
References

Congressional Research Service (2019), “What is the Farm Bill?”, CRS Report RS22131,
Congressional Research Service, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/RS/RS22131
(accessed on 1 February 2021).
[3]
Congressional Research Service (2018), Federal Crop Insurance: Program Overview for the
115th Congress, CRS Report R45193, Congressional Research Service,
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R45193/4.
[4]
Gray, E. and K. Baldwin (2021), “Building the resilience of the United States’ agricultural sector
to extreme floods”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 161, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/edb6494b-en.
[1]
OECD (2020), “United States”, in Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2020, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/6f8323d8-en.
[8]
OECD (2019), “United States”, in Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2019, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/189dd9b6-en.
[6]
OECD (2016), “United States”, in Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2016, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr_pol-2016-27-en.
[9]
OECD (2014), “United States”, in Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2014: OECD
Countries, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr_pol-2014-19-en.
[5]
OECD (2011), Evaluation of Agricultural Policy Reforms in the United States, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264096721-en.
[2]
USDA ERS (2020), Farm & Commodity Policy: Overview, https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/farm-
economy/farm-commodity-policy/ (accessed on 4 February 2021).
[7]


 579

USTR (2019), Fact Sheet on Agriculture‐Related Provisions of the U.S.-Japan Trade Agreement,
https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/fact-sheets/2019/september/fact-sheet-
agriculture%E2%80%90related.
[10]
WTO (2021), Tariff Profiles – United States,
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/tariff_profiles_list_e.htm.
[11]



Notes
1 Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (P.L. 104-127).
2 Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (P.L. 107-171).
3 Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 (P.L. 110-246).
4 Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938 (7 U.S.C. 1281)
5 Federal Crop Insurance Reform and Department of Agriculture Reorganization Act of 1994. The Food,
Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 (“2008 Farm Bill”) continued the 100% premium subsidy for CAT
but increased CAT fees from USD 50 to USD 300/crop/county.
6 Base acres are a farm’s crop-specific historical acreage of wheat, feed grains, seed cotton, rice, oilseeds,
pulse crops or peanuts eligible to participate in the ARC and PLC commodity programmes. Base acres are
not linked to current plantings.
7 Hemp was previously uninsurable because of legal restrictions on its cultivation.
8 Simple average MFN applied tariff (WTO, 2021[11]).
9 Families First Coronavirus Response Act (FFCRA) (Public Law 116-127), enacted on 18 March 2020
and the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) (Public Law 116-136), enacted
on 27 March 2020
10 The Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) funds many of the US Department of Agriculture’s (USDA)
programmes for farmers.
11 Section 32 is a permanent appropriation under the Agricultural Adjustment Act, as amended 24 August
1935 (P.L. 79- 320) that since 1935 has set aside the equivalent of 30% of annual customs receipts to
support the US food and agriculture sector through activities to encourage consumption of US agricultural
commodities. In recent years, this authority has primarily been used for purchase and distribution of
commodities for use in school lunch and other nutrition programmes and for distribution to low-income
households.
12 Pandemic EBT is modelled on the Electronic Benefits Transfer programme that utilises electronic debit
cards to provide SNAP benefits to eligible recipients.



580 

Support to agriculture
Support provided to Viet Nam’s agricultural sector fluctuates at low and negative levels, largely driven by
changes in market price support (MPS). In 2018-20, Viet Nam’s producer support estimate (PSE) was -
9.2%, implying an implicit overall taxation compared to the positive level of support in 2000-02. MPS varies
across commodities. Producers of import-competing commodities, such as maize, sugar cane and beef,
benefit from tariff protection, while producers of cashew nuts, pig and poultry meats, pepper, coffee, tea,
and rubber are implicitly taxed. Rice producers also benefit from price support based on target prices
designed to provide farmers with a profit of 30% above average production cost.1 In some years, this
system results in implicit taxation of rice producers when domestic prices are below international levels.
On average during 2018-20, effective prices received by farmers were 9% lower than world prices, though
this hides large differences between commodities.
Budgetary transfers to producers are relatively small and include payments based on variable input use
– primarily expenditure to subsidise an irrigation fee exemption and direct payments to rice producers tied
to maintaining land in rice production.
Support for general services for agriculture (GSSE) was equivalent to 2.5% of agricultural value-added in
2018-20, down from 2.9% in 2000-02. Expenditure to develop and maintain infrastructure, in particular
irrigation, dominates support for general services. Total support to agriculture (TSE) varies between
positive and negative values, as in some years budgetary transfers to producers and expenditure on
general services do not compensate for overall negative MPS.
Recent policy changes
In 2020, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) approved its Plan to Implement the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change for the period 2021-30. It sets out tasks for the sector to implement
the government’s 2016 action plan for the agreement. Key tasks for MARD include reducing greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions in the agriculture and rural development sector; and establishing measurement,
reporting and verification systems (MRV) for the agricultural sector and the land use, land use change and
forestry (LULUCF) sectors. The government also promulgated the National Climate Change Adaptation
Plan for 2021-30, with a Vision to 2050, which aims to minimise vulnerability to and risk of climate change
impacts by strengthening the adaptability of communities, economic sectors and ecosystems. For the
agricultural sector, the plan identifies adaptation needs, objectives and tasks.
Since 2003, most farming households and organisations are exempt from paying agricultural land use tax
or benefit from a land tax reduction. In June 2020, the government issued a Resolution extending the
exemption until 31 December 2025.
In 2020, Viet Nam signed the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP or ASEAN+5) and
the United Kingdom-Viet Nam Free Trade Agreement (UKVFTA). RCEP combines and deepens existing
bilateral and regional agreements, and will be the largest free trade agreement in the world once in force,
30 Viet Nam


 581

covering around 30% of both global population and GDP. UKVFTA was negotiated based on commitments
from the original agreement with the European Union (EVFTA) with necessary adjustments to ensure
compliance with the bilateral trade framework between Viet Nam and the United Kingdom. The Agreement
came into effect on 31 December 2020. (EVFTA entered into force on 1 August 2020.)
Viet Nam allowed enterprises, individuals and household businesses affected by the COVID-19 pandemic
to defer payment of value-added tax, corporate income tax, personal income tax, and land rental fees.
Enterprises, organisations, households and individuals engaged in agricultural, forestry and fishery
production, and food production and processing, are among those eligible to defer payments of tax and
land rent.
Also in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, in order to stabilise the domestic market, on 11 March 2020
the government ordered private rice traders to maintain rice reserves equivalent to 5% of the volume
shipped in the preceding six months. On 25 March 2020, the government suspended rice exports in order
to ensure domestic food security during the COVID-19 outbreak and in the context of a severe drought in
the Mekong River Delta. The decision was subsequently revised in favour of a monthly quota for rice
exports and, on 3 April 2020, the government approved a plan to export 400 000 tonnes of rice in April and
a further 400 000 tonnes in May.
On 27 March 2020, Viet Nam announced a plan to stockpile 270 000 tonnes of rice, including
80 000 tonnes of paddy (unhusked) rice, to ensure domestic food availability during the COVID-19
pandemic. The Ministry of Finance was directed to buy 190 000 tonnes of rice and 80 000 tonnes of paddy
rice from the domestic market.
Assessment and recommendations

Viet Nam’s deeper integration into the global economy, including through trade agreements such
as the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership and EVFTA,
brings the agricultural sector opportunities to expand and diversify exports and markets. But these
agreements also pose challenges to domestic producers, such as increased competition from
imports as agro-food tariffs are reduced and the requirement to meet stringent food hygiene, safety
and technical standards in export markets.

Further efforts are needed to improve the sector’s competitiveness and environmental
sustainability. Most easy ways of increasing production – expanding agricultural land area and
using higher rates of fertilisers – are fully exploited, and negative environmental impacts are
increasing. While these are challenges for Viet Nam, they also open opportunities to adopt new
technologies, create incentives for farm consolidation to increase the scale of production, and focus
on improving quality.

To improve the allocation of scarce land resources, farm consolidation could be encouraged,
including various forms of co-operation between farmers, and restrictions on crop choice should
be removed. This can help small-scale farming households connect to market opportunities and
participate in value chains.

To improve the competitiveness and quality of Viet Nam’s rice exports, reforms could consider
further easing restrictions on rice exporters, in particular deregulating the export floor price. The
current system risks cutting off potentially profitable rice exports and creates uncertainty around
export transactions if the minimum export price is likely to change.

The low cost of water exacerbates overuse and increases the agricultural sector’s vulnerability to
drought. While re-introducing a fee for irrigation services is a positive step, a fee based on unit of
water rather than on area or crop type, as previously applied, would encourage greater water use
efficiency.


582 


Viet Nam has committed to reduce GHG emissions by 8% between 2021 and 2030 compared to
business-as-usual (BAU) levels using domestic resources. The government has set the target of
reducing GHG emissions in agriculture and rural areas by 20% every 10 years through crop and
animal husbandry practices, including climate-smart agriculture practices.
Figure 30.1. Viet Nam: Development of support to agriculture

Note: * Share of potentially most distorting transfers in cumulated gross producer transfers.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/yi1t7q
Figure 30.2. Viet Nam: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2019 to 2020

Note: The producer price change and the border price change are not calculated when the negative price gap occurs at the commodity level
for the current or previous year.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/gdl5n0
-10%
-8%
-6%
-4%
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
PSE as %
of receipts (%PSE)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
% potentially most
distorting transfers*
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
1.04
1.06
Ratio of producer
to border price
(Producer NPC)
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
GSSE,
relative to AgGVA
-1.5%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
TSE as % GDP
2000-02
2018-20
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
PSE change decomposition
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE


 583

Figure 30.3. Viet Nam: Transfer to specific commodities (SCT), 2018-20

Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/5jc2us


-150%
-100%
-50%
0%
50%
100%
Rubber
Tea
Coffee
Peppers
Eggs
Poultry meat
Pig meat
Beef and veal
Sugar
Cashew nuts
Rice
Maize
% of commodity gross farm receipt for each commodity
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT


584 

Table 30.1. Viet Nam: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2018-20
2018
2019
2020p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
8 570
38 652
38 550
38 357
39 047
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
82.3
76.3
75.3
70.9
82.8
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
7 443
36 394
34 802
36 248
38 131
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
461
-3 586
-4 337
-4 027
-2 393
Support based on commodity output
340
-4 097
-4 762
-4 572
-2 957
Market Price Support1
340
-4 097
-4 762
-4 572
-2 957
Positive Market Price Support
901
1 517
1 329
1 273
1 949
Negative Market Price Support
-562
-5 614
-6 091
-5 845
-4 905
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
101
423
336
456
476
Based on variable input use
101
422
335
456
475
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
89
90
88
88
Based on Receipts / Income
0
2
2
2
2
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
87
88
86
86
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
21
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
21
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
5.2
-9.2
-11.1
-10.4
-6.0
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.04
0.91
0.90
0.90
0.94
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.06
0.92
0.90
0.91
0.94
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
206
870
762
906
942
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
23
96
91
94
104
Inspection and control
4
3
3
3
3
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
173
723
620
762
787
Marketing and promotion
1
1
1
1
1
Cost of public stockholding
5
46
47
45
46
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
31.2
..
..
..
..
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-549
340
1 294
77
-351
Transfers to producers from consumers
-551
2 050
2 322
1 963
1 866
Other transfers from consumers
-20
-2 082
-1 326
-2 267
-2 652
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
22
371
298
381
435
Percentage CSE (%)
-7.3
0.9
3.7
0.2
-0.9
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.08
1.00
0.97
1.01
1.02
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.08
0.99
0.96
1.00
1.01
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
667
-2 716
-3 575
-3 121
-1 451
Transfers from consumers
571
31
-996
304
786
Transfers from taxpayers
117
-665
-1 253
-1 158
415
Budget revenues
-20
-2 082
-1 326
-2 267
-2 652
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
2.0
-1.1
-1.5
-1.2
-0.5
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
328
1 381
1 188
1 451
1 506
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.0
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.6
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
399
396
403
..
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
15 000.33
23 161.93
23 023.21
23 226.28
23 236.30
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Viet Nam are: rice, rubber, coffee, maize, cashew nuts,
sugar, pepper, tea, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 585

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
A long series of reforms since the late-1980s have progressively liberalised Viet Nam’s agricultural sector.2
Agricultural reforms were embedded into the economy-wide programme of reforms (Doi Moi) initiated in
1986, which transformed Viet Nam from a centrally planned to a socialist-oriented market economy. Prior
to these, agriculture’s primary role was to support Viet Nam’s industrialisation by providing food at low
prices. Agricultural production was organised around co-operatives and state farms, with state-owned
enterprises providing inputs and controlling output markets. Under the new policy framework, agriculture
was elevated to primary importance. The focus of agricultural management moved from co-operatives to
farm households, with farmland redistributed in the form of land use rights3 and farm households given the
ability to make their own production decisions provided they met certain quotas. Broader reforms opened
the market to both greater domestic and international competition.
From the early 1990s, reforms introduced more market-oriented policies with the aim of expanding food
production for export to generate foreign exchange earnings. A number of these reforms aimed to improve
investment and technological innovation, including the establishment of a national extension service and
credit facilities for farmers. Production quota obligations were removed and regulatory barriers to trade
were gradually lifted. Viet Nam also entered into a large number of bilateral and regional trade agreements
and partnerships to expand market opportunities.4 The improved policy environment was supported by a
rapid increase in budgetary expenditure, including on irrigation infrastructure. At the same time, a Price
Stabilisation Fund was created to stabilise the prices of essential commodities including urea, paddy and
rice, coffee, and sugarcane.
From 2000, the policy framework aimed to stimulate agricultural and rural modernisation and
industrialisation by improving yields, quality and the value of production. Further international integration
at the bilateral, regional and multilateral level locked in previous reforms and motivated further actions.
The remaining few quantitative restrictions on agricultural imports and exports were removed.
Since 2008, two major resolutions guide agricultural policy development. Resolution No. 26/2008/NQ-TD
(the Tam Nong resolution) emphasises agricultural and rural development based on the market economy
with socialist orientation. Resolution No. 63/2009/NQ-CP seeks to ensure national food security by
guaranteeing adequate food supplies, particularly for rice. These resolutions are implemented through a
number of policy documents. This includes the Agricultural Restructuring Plan, which promotes the
restructuring of the agricultural sector towards improving value-added and sustainable development; and
the Agricultural Restructuring Plan 2017-2020, which aims to sustainably develop agriculture and rural
areas; increase value-added, efficiency and competitiveness; and improve the life of farmers, contribute to
poverty reduction, protect the environment and ecology, and ensure national security.5
Table 30.2. Viet Nam: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1976-1986

Reunification: Socialist centrally
planned system
Centrally planned economy, including the agricultural sector
Agricultural production organised into co-operatives that also administered land
Upstream and downstream sectors reorganised as state-owned enterprises
1986-1993
Renovation (Doi Moi): Launch of
reforms to transition Viet Nam to a
socialist-oriented market economy

Farm households replace co-operatives as focus of agricultural and rural development
Role of co-operatives reduced: farmers allowed to make production decisions; co-
operatives limited to trading and providing services (e.g. irrigation)
Economy opened to trade
Reduced government control over prices, although prices regulated for some products
(including fertiliser, sugar and rice)
1993-2000
Expansion: Further reforms to
Land Law 1993; land use rights extended to 20 years (annual crops) and 50 years


586 

Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
expand food production and
exports

(perennial crops)
Land use tax replaces production quota and agricultural output tax
Rural households allowed to borrow loans from commercial institutions
Price Stabilisation Fund for essential commodities
Restrictions on rice exports relaxed
Increased budgetary expenditure for agriculture
2000-2008
Consolidation: Policies to promote
agricultural and rural modernisation
and industrialisation

Policies to encourage production of primary and processed commodities, quality
improvement, domestic and international trade, and increase investments from various
sources in physical and social infrastructure
Regional and bilateral trade agreements
WTO accession
2008-present
Reorientation: Shift in emphasis
from extensive development of
agriculture based on quantity to
one focused on quality and
efficiency improvements

Agricultural policy guided by two major resolutions:
- Resolution No. 26/2008/NQ-TW on agriculture, farmers and rural areas (Tam Nong)
- Resolution No. 63/2009/NQ-CP to ensure national food security
Implemented by the Agricultural Restructuring Plan and the Agricultural Restructuring
Plan 2017-2020
Source: OECD (2015[1]).
Over the past 20 years, the overall level of support provided to Viet Nam’s agricultural sector fluctuated at
low or negative levels, largely driven by changes in market price support (MPS). Total support to agriculture
(TSE) varies between positive and negative values, as in some years budgetary transfers to producers
and expenditure on general services do not compensate for overall negative MPS.
Figure 30.4. Viet Nam: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 2000 to 2020
As a percentage of gross farm receipts

Note: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2021), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Market price support
Payments based on output
Payments based on input use
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments not requiring production
Other payments
Percentage PSE


 587

Main policy instruments
Domestic price support is the main form of support for Vietnamese producers, with border protection being
the main tool used. Domestic price support varies across commodities. In particular, tariffs protect
producers of import-competing commodities, such as beef and veal, and sugar cane. Producers of export
commodities, such as natural rubber, coffee, cashew nuts and tea are implicitly taxed in that they receive
prices lower than world prices for their outputs. As a result, total MPS is the sum of positive and negative
support. Farm gate rice prices are supported by a subsidy to rice purchasing enterprises for the temporary
storage of rice during harvest, and by target prices that vary between regions and crop season, with the
objective of providing farmers a profit of 30% above production cost.
Payments to producers are relatively small. Expenditure associated with subsidising the irrigation fee
exemption is the dominant form of budgetary support. An area payment has been provided since 2012
with the objective of keeping 3.8 million hectares in paddy rice production. Since 2016,6 rice growers
receive VND 1 million (USD 43)/ha/year for land under wet paddy cultivation, and VND 500 000
(USD 22)/ha/year for other rice land, except upland fields not under paddy land-use plans.7 Rice growers
also receive support when land is reclaimed for rice cultivation, amounting to VND 10 million
(USD 430)/ha/year, except for upland fields, and VND 5 million (USD 215)/ha/year for wet-paddy land
reclaimed from one-crop paddy land or other crop land.
Other support programmes based on input use include those that provide plant genetic and animal
breeding material to farmers at subsidised rates. At the national level, these are often part of a package
for farmers recovering from natural disasters or disease outbreaks. Since 2009, a number of policy
packages were introduced to provide farmers subsidised credit to purchase inputs and assets for
agricultural production (fertilisers, pesticides, machinery and equipment). Since 2003, most farming
households and organisations are exempt from paying agricultural land use tax or benefit from a land tax
reduction.
Expenditures on irrigation systems dominate general services for the agricultural sector. Expenditures on
other forms of general services, such as extension services, research and development, inspection and
control, and marketing and promotion are relatively limited.
All land is owned and administered by the state on behalf of the people. Farmers have land user rights,
and benefit from a wide range of rights, including the right to rent, buy, sell and bequeath land, and to use
land as collateral for mortgages with financial institutions. However, there are restrictions on land use
including the duration of land use rights, land areas per household, the choice of crops, the process for
converting paddy land from rice to another crop, and land transfers and exchanges.
Until 2016, the government maintained a large degree of control over rice exports. Exporters had to
meet specific milling and storage requirements, the minimum export price had to be respected (to limit
price declines), and certain administrative functions were given to the Viet Nam Food Association (VFA).
However, in January 2017, in line with the Investment Law of 2014, Viet Nam’s Ministry of Industry and
Trade (MOIT) abolished Decision No. 6139/2013/QD-BCT, which capped the number of rice exporters at
150 and stipulated strict conditions for becoming a rice exporter. In 2018, the government further relaxed
export conditions on rice.8 To be eligible to export rice, companies must have at least one storage and one
milling facility that meet national standards and regulations, which can be owned or leased. Traders must
also maintain rice reserves equivalent to 5% of the volume shipped in the preceding six months.
Following Viet Nam’s accession to the WTO in 2007, the simple average Most Favoured Nation (MFN)-
applied tariff on agricultural imports decreased from around 25% in the mid-2000s to 17.2% in 2019,
compared with a simple average bound tariff on agricultural products of 18.8% (WTO, 2021[2]). Applied
tariffs are much lower on imports originating from countries or regions with which Viet Nam signed free
trade agreements. For example, the average tariff is just 3.4% on agricultural imports from ASEAN
members and 5.4% from the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”).


588 

Since joining the World Trade Organisation (WTO) in 2007, Viet Nam progressed towards implementing
the requirements of the Sanitary and Phytosanitary Agreement. However, the regulatory regime still
suffers from limited enforcement capacity, poor co-ordination and a large number of overlapping
regulations.
Viet Nam implements trade liberalisation through multilateral, regional and bilateral trade agreements. It
is a member of the WTO, Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC), and supports trade liberalisation between ASEAN members and their major trading
partners in the region, including China, Japan, India, Korea, Australia and New Zealand.
Viet Nam’s 2011 National Strategy on Climate Change tasks the agricultural sector with reducing
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 20% every ten years, while increasing gross production by 20% and
reducing the poverty rate by 20% (Decision 2139/QD-TTg). The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development (MARD) subsequently issued an action plan to adapt to and mitigate climate change in the
agricultural sector, most recently in Decision No. 819/QD-BNN-KHCN. The action plan prioritises: research
on selection and production of plant varieties and animal breeds to minimise GHG emissions and adapt to
climate change; minimum tillage and techniques to reduce water use and fertilisers to minimise methane
gas emissions in rice fields; and increasing production of bioenergy crops. MARD also approved a
programme to reduce GHG emissions in the crop, livestock, fishery and forestry sectors, and in irrigation
and rural industries by 2020, while enhancing economic growth and reducing poverty (Decision
No. 3119/QD-BNN-KHCN). The programme aimed to: reduce GHG emissions in agriculture and rural
areas by 20%; ensure that 3.2 million hectares of rice apply advanced methods, such as the System of
Rice Intensification and Alternative Wetting and Drying (AWD); and promote more efficient use of
agricultural inputs.
Viet Nam ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change in 2016. Viet Nam’s Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC) commits to reduce GHG emissions by 8% between 2021 and 2030 compared to
Business-as-Usual (BAU) levels using domestic resources, and up to 25% conditional on receiving
international support. Decision 2053/QD-TTg (28 October 2016) outlines the Action Plan to Implement the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and includes activities for adaptation and mitigation in the agricultural
sector.
Policies for the agricultural and rural development sector also affirm the commitment to reduce agricultural
GHG emissions. In 2017, MARD issued Decision No. 932/QD-BNN-KH approving the Green Growth
Action Plan of the agriculture and rural development sector for the period 2016-2020. This plan
prioritises ten tasks and policy measures to reduce GHG by 20% in 2020, compared with the BAU scenario.
Key activities include applying organic farming; efficient use of agricultural inputs; short duration, high
quality rice varieties; water saving practices (alternate wetting and drying – AWD); climate smart agriculture
(CSA) practices; integrated crop management practices to reduce GHG emissions from rice and crop
production; and enhancing animal feed mixing and animal waste (biogas) and crop residues management
to reduce CH4 and other GHG emissions. The 2018 laws on Crop Production and Animal Husbandry
(OECD, 2019[3]) also identify a role for research and development to help the sector adapt to climate
change and mitigate GHG emissions.
Domestic policy developments in 2020-21
On agricultural and rural development, in October 2020, the government approved the strategy to
industrialise, modernise and sustainably develop livestock production in Viet Nam. The Livestock
Development Strategy for the Period 2021-2030, with a Vision for 2045 (Decision No. 1520/2020/QD-TTg)
aims to achieve annual growth in the value of livestock production of 3-4% during the period 2026-2030,
with specific targets for pork, poultry meat, beef, dairy and eggs production. The strategy also aims to
establish disease-free livestock production areas, and includes targets for improving the productivity and
quality of livestock breeds; improving quality and lowering prices for animal feed; raising capacity for


 589

slaughtering and processing of livestock products; and developing supporting industries for livestock
production. These targets are to be achieved through land allocation; preferential support, including access
to finance and credit; extension; and investments and international co-operation in research and
development.
In 2019, the government issued Resolution No. 53/NQCP on measures to encourage and facilitate
businesses to invest in agriculture in an effective, safe and sustainable manner (OECD, 2020[4]). Based on
this Resolution, in December 2020 MARD approved the Plan to promote investment in the agricultural and
rural sector in the period of 2021-25 (Decision No. 5227/2020/QD-BNN-KH). The plan clarifies the tasks
to promote business investment, which include:

Research into and evaluation of market potentials, trends and investment partners, including in
traditional trading partners, as well as countries that are members of the Comprehensive and
Progressive Agreement for a Trans Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), the EU-Vietnam Free Trade
Agreement (FTA), and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP).

Digitising and building a database on investment promotion activities; establishing a list of projects
calling for investment (including in the cropping and livestock industries, agriculture using high
technology, and organic agriculture).

Developing publications and material to promote investment; training and capacity building on
investment promotion.

Providing support to enterprises and investors (including support for consultancies, agricultural
enterprise start-ups, and use of geographic indicators).

Promoting domestic and international co-operation on investment promotion.
In March 2020, the government approved the Master Programme on Sustainable Agricultural Development
and Adaptation to Climate Change in the Mekong River Delta (MRD) to 2030, with a Vision to 2045
(Decision No. 324/2020/QD-TTg). The Master Programme establishes economic, social and
environmental targets for the agricultural and rural sector in the MRD, and solutions to achieve those
targets. These include reviewing and adjusting regional and provincial development plans in the direction
of sustainable transformation and climate change adaptation; the application of science and technology;
and capacity building for natural resource and environmental management.
The government approved the research and development programme for plant and livestock varieties
serving agricultural restructuring for the period 2021-30 (Decision No. 703/2020/QD-TTg). The programme
aims to improve research capacity and the production of agricultural plant and livestock varieties to support
the modernisation of the agricultural sector, adaptation to climate change, and the restructuring of
agricultural production to improve competitiveness, increase value-added and promote sustainable
development. Specific tasks include enhancing the science and technology for developing seeds,
developing capacity to produce seed, and improving research infrastructure for seed variety research and
production. Total investment in the programme is VND 103 050 billion (USD 4.4 billion) over the period
2021-30, including private funding.
The government also approved the Scheme for Developing Organic Agriculture in the Period 2020-2030
(Decision No. 885/2020/QD-TTg). The scheme sets out specific goals for increasing the share of organic
production in agricultural production, including for key crops, in livestock and aquaculture production, and
for improving the value per hectare of organic production by 2025 and 2030. By 2025, organic agriculture
is to account for 1.5-2% of the total agricultural area (and 2.5-3% by 2030); over 1% of the cultivated area
for major crops including rice, fruit and vegetables, tea, pepper, coffee, cashew nuts and coconut (2% by
2030); and 1-2% of domestically produced livestock products (2-3% by 2030). In addition, by 2025 the
value per hectare of organic production is to be 1.3 to 1.5 times higher than non-organic production (1.5 to
1.8 times higher by 2030). Other goals include: diversifying how organic production is organised, including
linkages between agricultural co-operatives and enterprises in the production and processing of organic


590 

products to create large-scale production areas; the application of technology in organic agriculture;
promoting processing, consumption and exports of organic products; developing certification bodies and
a system of standards for organic production; research and development on organic agriculture; and
human resources training.
On irrigation, in January 2020 the government approved Viet Nam’s irrigation strategy to 2030, with a
vision to 2045 (Decision No. 33/2020/QD-TTg), which establishes water supply targets for agricultural
production and aquaculture, among other objectives, such as ensuring the supply of water for double-
cropping paddy rice fields, and ensuring that 85% of the total area is under irrigation. By 2030, 30% of the
total area should be cultivated with advanced methods, and 60% by 2050. Other targets in the irrigation
strategy are improving drainage and environmental protection, and preventing and combating natural
disasters, and responding to climate change, including by responding to drought, saltwater intrusion,
floods, and riverbank and coastal erosion. Targets in the strategy will be achieved through a combination
of investments in irrigation infrastructure, improved planning and management of irrigation laws, and
technical solutions.
On direct support to rice growers, in 2019, the government issued a Decree that replaced the direct
area-based payments to rice growers with increased funding for local support programmes that aim to
protect land for rice cultivation (Decree No. 62/2019/ND-CP).9 Under the Decree, at least 50% of funds
available to support rice growers are to be used to support the adoption of new rice varieties, new
technologies in rice production, and to promote value chain linkages for the production and sale of rice.
Remaining funds are to be used for activities such as periodic soil analyses to guide restoration measures,
making improvements to land quality, and investments in agricultural and rural infrastructure. Local
authorities can determine the form of support provided based on local needs.
On land tax, most farming households and organisations are exempt from paying agricultural land use tax
or benefit from a land tax reduction.10 In June, the government issued a Resolution extending the
exemption to 31 December 2025 (Resolution No. 107/2020/QH14). The exemption had been due to expire
on 31 December 2020.
On agricultural regulation, in 2019 the government banned the use of glyphosate from 10 June 2020,
removing glyphosate-based herbicides from the list of plant protection agrochemicals permitted for use in
Viet Nam (OECD, 2020[4]). In September 2020, MARD issued a circular under which glyphosate-based
herbicides may be sold and used until 30 June 2021 (Circular No. 10/2020/TT-BNNPTNT). Under the same
circular, agrochemicals containing Chlorpyrifos-ethyl and Fipronil cannot be produced or imported, but may
be sold and used until 12 February 2021.
In response to natural disasters in 2020, the government provided paddy, maize and vegetable seeds
from national reserves to four provinces – Quang Tri, Quang Binh, Ha Tinh and Thanh Hoa – that were
affected by landslides and flooding following tropical storms and cyclones in October (Decision
No. 2144/2020/QD-TTg).
In response to African swine fever in 2019-2020, the government provided financial support to pig
producers having pigs infected by African swine fever and destroyed. The support level was VND 25 000
(USD 1.07)/kg to VND 30 00 (USD 1.29)/kg for live pigs in 2019, and VND 30 000 (USD 1.29)/kg to
VND 35 00 (USD 1.51)/kg for live pigs in 2020. For small and medium-sized livestock enterprises, the level
of
support
was
VND 8 000
(USD 0.34)/kg
to
VND 10 000
(USD 0.43)/kg
in
2019,
and
VND 10 000 (USD 0.43)/kg to VND 12 000 (USD 0.52)/kg in 2020. Total support should not exceed 30%
of total loss due to the disease.11
On natural resource management, in 2020 the government approved VND 530 billion (USD 22.8 million)
in financial support to prevent and combat drought, water shortages and salinisation in eight provinces in
the MRD, including the impacts on agriculture (Ben Tre, Long An, Tien Giang, Ca Mau, Kien Giang, Soc
Trang, Tra Vinh and Bac Lieu) (Decision No. 504/2020/QD-TTg). The funding will be used to implement


 591

urgent measures such as pumping water; dredging canals and ditches, and building temporary dams to
prevent salinity to maintain fresh water; and digging ponds and wells for storing fresh water.
On climate change, in March 2020, MARD approved its Plan to implement the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change for the period of 2021-2030 (Decision No. 891/2020/QD-BNN-KHCN). The Decision sets
out the tasks for the sector to implement the government’s 2016 action plan to implement the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change,12 which set out compulsory, prioritised and encouraged tasks for MARD,
where the three compulsory tasks are to:

Implement GHG emission reduction in the agriculture and rural development sector in order to
implement the NDC in accordance with national conditions on the basis of a periodic review of
global efforts.

Establish a Measurement, Reporting and Verification System (MRV) for sector-level GHG emission
reduction activities in the land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) sectors.

Establish a MRV System for sector-level GHG emission reduction activities in the agricultural
sector.
Solutions to implement the tasks include human resources training and capacity building; reviewing and
adjusting mechanisms, policies, and sectoral plans in accordance with the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change; applying scientific and technological solutions; international co-operation; and mobilising financial
resources, including in the form of public-private partnerships with domestic and foreign businesses.
Also on climate change, in July the government promulgated the National Climate Change Adaptation Plan
for 2021-2030, with a Vision to 2050 (Decision No. 1055/2020/QD-TTg), which aims to minimise
vulnerability and the risk of climate change impacts by strengthening the adaptability of the community,
economic sectors – including agriculture – and ecosystems. For the agricultural sector, the plan identifies
adaptation needs, objectives and tasks. Identified adaptation needs in the agricultural sector include:
improving the resilience of the agricultural sector through revising and completing laws and policies, and
providing training and improving capacity; adjusting farming plans, arranging crop structures and scaling-
up appropriate models for improving the effectiveness of agricultural land use and climate change
adaptation; and improving the resistance of plants and livestock to disease and pests under climate change
impacts. Funding to implement the plan will be sourced from the state budget, and from funding for
implementing adaptation actions in the national target programmes and other programmes and projects.
On food security, in December 2020 the government issued a Decision on the Action Plan to implement
the Politburo’s Conclusion No. 81-KL/TW dated 29 July 2020 on “Ensuring national food security to 2030”
(Decision No. 1975/2020/QD-TTg). The main tasks of the Plan are to: raise awareness about national food
security; reorganise production, including by promoting mechanisation, linkages in the processing and sale
of agricultural products, and large-scale production areas; improve people’s ability and access to safe and
nutritious food, including by upgrading and modernising transport and irrigation infrastructure and
developing a food security information system; and improve institutions and policies to ensure national
food security, including mechanisms and policies on land, investment, finance, credit and trade to provide
adequate support to farmers, rice production and business enterprises.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
On agricultural and agro-food supply chain policies implemented in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, Viet Nam allowed enterprises, individuals and household businesses affected by the COVID-
19 pandemic to defer payment of value added tax, corporate income tax, personal income tax, and land
rental fees. Enterprises, organisations, households and individuals engaged in agricultural, forestry and
fishery production, and food production and processing, are among the subjects that are eligible to defer
payments of tax and land rent.13


592 

At the national level, the government also issued a number of policies to support enterprises, households
and individuals facing difficulties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, which were amended and
supplemented during 2020.14 These policies provided support to household businesses, employers and
employees, including enterprises engaged in agricultural production and/or food production or processing.
Trade policy developments in 2020-21
The European Union-Viet Nam Free Trade Agreement (EVFTA) entered into force on 1 August 2020
after the agreement was approved by the Vietnamese National Assembly on 8 June 2020. Under the terms
of the agreement, the European Union will progressively phase out duties for most products over a period
of seven years, while Viet Nam will reduce tariffs on EU goods over ten years. The European Union
established duty-free tariff rate quotas (TRQs) for a variety of Vietnamese agricultural imports under the
agreement: 30 000 tonnes of milled rice; 20 000 tonnes of husked rice and 30 000 tonnes of fragrant rice,
as well as quotas for sweet corn, garlic, mushrooms, sugar and manioc starch. The tariff on broken rice
will be phased out over five years, starting with a 50% cut. Viet Nam will progressively eliminate duties for
EU products –beef and olive oil will be liberalised over three years; dairy, fruit and vegetables will be
liberalised over five years; frozen pork meat, food preparations and wine will be liberalised over seven
years; and chicken and beer will be liberalised after ten years. At the end of the implementation period, an
average tariff of 1.1% will apply to agricultural goods originating in Viet Nam and 2.1% to processed
agricultural products while the average tariff for EU agricultural exports will be 2.6%. Viet Nam will also
recognise and protect 169 EU geographical indications (GIs), while 39 Vietnamese GIs will be recognised
and protected in the European Union
On 15 November 2020, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)15 and the five states with
which ASEAN has existing free trade agreements – Australia, China, Japan, Korean and New Zealand –
signed the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP or ASEAN+5). RCEP combines
and deepens a number of existing bilateral and regional agreements, and once in force, it will be the largest
free trade agreement in the world covering around 30% of both the global population and its GDP. The
RCEP Agreement will enter into force 60 days after six ASEAN Member States and three non-ASEAN
Member States have ratified the Agreement. RCEP is expected to unlock more export markets for
Vietnamese agricultural products.
On 29 December 2020, the Viet Nam-United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement (UKVFTA) was signed.
The Agreement was negotiated based on the principle of inheriting commitments in EVFTA with the
necessary adjustments to ensure compliance with the bilateral trade framework between Viet Nam and
the United Kingdom. The Agreement came into effect on 31 December 2020.
In May 2020, the government of Viet Nam issued a decree revising Most Favoured Nation (MFN) tariff
rates on a number of agricultural products (Decree 57/2020/ND-CP). The Decree entered into force on
10 July 2020. MFN tariff rates were reduced for dairy products, ethanol, almonds, apples, grapes, wheat,
walnuts, frozen potatoes, raisins, and chilled pork. A temporary reduction for frozen pork until 31 December
2020 was also issued.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, on 11 March 2020, the government ordered private rice traders
to maintain rice reserves equivalent to 5% of the volume shipped in the preceding six months, in order to
stabilise the domestic market. On 25 March 2020, the government suspended rice exports in order to
ensure domestic food security during the COVID-19 outbreak and in the context of a severe drought in the
Mekong River Delta. The decision was subsequently reversed in favour of setting a monthly quota for rice
exports, and on 3 April 2020, the government approved a plan to export 400 000 tonnes of rice in April,
and a further 400 000 tonnes in May.


 593

On 27 March 2020, Viet Nam also announced that it planned to stockpile 270 000 tonnes of rice, including
80 000 tonnes of paddy (unhusked) rice, to ensure domestic food availability during the COVID-19
pandemic. The Ministry of Finance was directed to buy 190 000 tonnes of rice and 80 000 tonnes of paddy
rice.
Contextual information
Viet Nam is a mid-size country in terms of area, but its population of 96 million makes it the 15th most
populous country in the world. Around two-thirds of the population live in rural areas. Since the mid-1980s,
a long series of reforms have moved the economy, including the agricultural sector, in the direction of open
markets for trade and investment, private sector decision-making, private land use rights, and a greater
role for private firms. These reforms resulted in rapid, stable and inclusive economic growth, transforming
Viet Nam from one of the world’s poorest nations to a lower middle-income country, and contributing to
significant reductions in poverty rates and improvements in other social outcomes, including in rural areas.
The agricultural sector in Viet Nam has undergone significant structural changes in recent decades,
reflecting a shift away from staple foods to export commodities, in particular perennial crops such as rubber
and cashew nuts, and to livestock production, in particular pig meat. Nevertheless, crops dominate with
rice accounting for around 26% of the value of agricultural production. Agricultural production has more
than tripled in volume terms since 1990. While the relative importance of agriculture in the economy has
declined over time, agriculture remains an important sector, contributing 14% to Viet Nam’s GDP and
employing 37% of the labour force.
The agro-food sector is well integrated with international markets. Agro-food exports have increased eight-
fold since the early 2000s, and Viet Nam is now one of the world’s largest exporters of a wide range of
agricultural commodities, including cashews, black pepper, coffee, cassava and rice. Two-thirds of
Viet Nam’s agro-food exports are delivered to foreign consumers without further processing. Agro-food
imports have also increased significantly. The majority of agro-food imports form intermediate inputs into
Viet Nam’s processing sectors (Figure 30.6).




594 

Table 30.3. Viet Nam: Contextual indicators

Viet Nam
International comparison

2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
159
808
0.4%
0.7%
Population (million)
80
96
1.9%
1.9%
Land area (thousand km2)
310
310
0.4%
0.4%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
8 780
12 169
0.3%
0.4%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
258
311
53
63
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
1 987
8 374
9 265
21 975
Trade as % of GDP
49
100
12.3
14.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
22.7
14.0
2.9
3.5
Agriculture share in employment (%)
65.3
37.4
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
16.9
7.1
6.2
7.3
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
6.1
8.4
5.5
6.7
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
79
71
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
21
29
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
71
57
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report. Agro-food trade includes natural rubber.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Figure 30.5. Viet Nam: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2020

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; ILO estimates and projections; and Economist Intelligence Unit.
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
%
Real GDP growth
Inflation rate
Unemployment rate


 595

Figure 30.6. Viet Nam: Agro-food trade

Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding. Agro-food trade includes natural rubber.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural production increased by 2.9% p.a. on average between 2007 and 2016, driven by total factor
productivity growth of 1.8% p.a. and greater use of primary factors and intermediate inputs. However,
agriculture places significant and growing pressure on natural resources (Figure 30.7). Excessive use of
fertilisers, pesticides and other chemicals has contributed to a gradual degradation of water and land
quality. Together with climate change, degradation of the natural resource base caused by excessive use
of inputs poses a significant risk to agricultural production and the capacity of the sector to maintain current,
strong rates of productivity and output growth. The sector accounts for almost a third of Viet Nam’s
greenhouse gas emissions.
Figure 30.7. Viet Nam: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land, livestock and machinery.
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.


Agro-food trade, 2000 to 2019
Composition of agro-food trade, 2019
0
5
10
15
20
25
Billion USD
Agro-food exports
Agro-food imports
16
38
17
29
41
21
26
11
0
20
40
60
80
100
Import
Export
%
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
0.5%
0.5%
0.6%
0.05%
1.8%
1.6%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
Viet Nam
World
Annual growth rate
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth


596 

Table 30.4. Viet Nam: Productivity and environmental indicators

Viet Nam
International comparison

1991-2000
2007-2016
1991-2000
2007-2016



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
2.2%
1.8%
1.6%
1.6%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2019*
2000*
2019*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
174.3
154.3
33.2
28.9
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
29.9
35.7
3.4
2.6
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
1.7
2.1
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
47.9
31.6
8.4
9.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
..
..
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
94.3
94.8
46.0
43.4
Water stress indicator
..
..
9.3
8.5
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.

References

OECD (2020), “Viet Nam”, in Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2020, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/789c718e-en.
[4]
OECD (2019), “Viet Nam”, in Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2019, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/8ecdbfd5-en.
[3]
OECD (2015), Agricultural Policies in Viet Nam 2015, OECD Food and Agricultural Reviews,
OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264235151-en.
[1]
WTO (2021), Tariff Profiles – Viet Nam,
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/daily_update_e/tariff_profiles/VN_e.pdf (accessed
on 7 February 2021).
[2]


Notes
1 Separate target paddy prices (production cost plus 30% profit) are established for each region and for
each season based on production survey data (OECD, 2015[1]).
2 A detailed review of Viet Nam’s agricultural policies since Reunification in 1976 can be found in OECD
(2015[1]).




 597


3 Private ownership of land is not permitted. Instead, enterprises, households and individuals own land use
rights, including the right to rent, buy, sell and bequeath land, and to use land as collateral with financial
institutions for mortgages (Land Law of 1993).
4 In 1995 Viet Nam became a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and its
associated ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA). Viet Nam was formally admitted as a member of the Asia
Pacific Economic Community (APEC) in November 1998. In December 2001, the US-Viet Nam Bilateral
Trade Agreement came into effect. In 2007, Viet Nam obtained WTO membership.
5 Decision No. 899/2013/QD-TTg approving the plan of restructuring the agricultural sector, and Decision
No. 1819/2017/QD-TTg approving the agricultural restructuring plan 2017-2020.
6 Direct payments to protect and develop land for rice production were increased in 2016 in line with Decree
No. 35/2015/ND-CP on the management and use of land for rice cultivation.
7 Wet-paddy farming land is defined as land currently under wet-paddy cultivation or having the conditions
for growing two or more wet-paddy crops a year; other paddy farming land is defined as land for growing
only one wet-paddy crop a year and land for growing upland rice. Approximately 95% of current paddy
land meets the wet-paddy land definition (OECD, 2015[1]).
8 Decree No. 107/2018/ND-CP on rice export business.
9 The same Decree also revised the registration procedure that applies when paddy land is converted from
rice to another crop, see OECD (2020[4]).
10 Resolution No. 55/2010/QH12 of the National Assembly on agricultural land use tax exemption and
reduction, amended and supplemented by Resolution No. 28/2016/QH14 of the National Assembly.
11 Decision No. 793/QD-TTg dated 27 June 2019 of the Prime Minister on Mechanisms, policies,
beneficiaries, level of funding in the prevention and control of African swine fever; Decision No.
2254/2020/QD-TTg dated 30 December of the Prime Minister on Mechanisms, policies, beneficiaries, level
of funding in the prevention and control of African swine fever.
12 Decision No. 2053/QD-TTg dated 28 October 2016 of the Prime Minister on promulgating the Plan to
implement the Agreement.
13 Decree 41/2020/ND-CP extending tax and land rent payment deadlines.
14 Resolution 42/2020/ND-Ttg dated 9 April 2020 on measures to support people coping with difficulty
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Decision No. 15/2020/QD-TTg dated 24 April 2020 on the implementation
of policies to support people facing difficulties due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Resolution No. 154/NQ-CP
dated 19 October 2020 amending and supplementing Resolution No. 42/NQ-CP dated 9 April 2020 on
measures to support people facing difficulties due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Decision No. 32/2020/QD-
TTg dated 19 October 2020 amending and supplementing a number of articles of Decision
No. 15/2020/QD-TTg dated 24 April 2020 of the Prime Minister on policies to support people have been
facing difficulties due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
15 ASEAN comprises Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.


598 

Annex A. Sources and Definitions of Contextual
Indicators
Table: Contextual indicators
Gross Domestic Product – GDP (USD billion in PPP): OECD National Accounts Statistics (database),
Gross domestic product, USD, current prices, current PPPs. World Bank, World Development Indicators
(WDI database) for Emerging Economies not available in the OECD database.
Population (million): OECD National Accounts Statistics (database), Population and employment by main
activity. Calculation based on Eurostat database for the European Union. United Nations, World Population
Prospects: 2020 Revision, Population, for Emerging Economies not available in the OECD database.
Land area (thousands km2): FAOSTAT Land Use (database), Land area (1 000 ha) recalculated to
thousands km2. Land area excludes water areas.
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha): FAOSTAT Land Use (database), Agricultural area (1 000 ha).
Population density (inhabitants/km2): OECD Regional and Cities (database), Regional demography,
Population density and regional area. United Nations, World Population Prospects: 2020 Revision,
Population density, for economies not available in OECD database. Calculation based on the Eurostat
population and area databases for the European Union.
GDP per capita (USD in PPP): OECD National Accounts Statistics (database), Gross domestic product
(expenditure approach), per head, USD, current prices, current PPPs. World Bank, World Development
Indicators (WDI database) for Emerging Economies not available in OECD database.
Trade as % of GDP: Calculation based on UN COMTRADE (database) for trade data, customs data, and
GDP (local currency) indicator. Average trade calculated as (exports+imports)/2. The European Union
aggregate does not account for intra-EU trade.
Agriculture share in GDP (%): OECD National Accounts Statistics (database), “National Accounts at a
Glance”, Gross value added, Agriculture, forestry and fishing, percentage of total activity. Eurostat
database for the European Union. World Bank, World Development Indicators (WDI database) for
Emerging Economies not available in OECD database.
Agriculture share in employment (%): Calculation based on OECD Labour Force Statistics (database),
Employment by activities and status (ALFS), as a share of employment in agriculture, hunting, forestry and
fishing in all activities (ISIC rev.3, A-B and A-X; ISIC rev.4, A and A-U). Calculation based on Eurostat,
share of employed persons, aged 15 years and over, in agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing in total
NACE activities (Statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community), for the EU
Member States. World Bank, World Development Indicators (WDI database), Employment in agriculture,
hunting, forestry and fishing as a share of total employment; and national data for Emerging Economies
not available in OECD database.
Agro-food exports in total exports (%): Calculation based on UN COMTRADE (database). Agro-food
definition does not include fish and fish products. Agro-food codes in H0: 01, 02, 04 to 24 (excluding 1504,


 599

1603, 1604 and 1605), 3301, 3501 to 3505, 4101 to 4103, 4301, 5001 to 5003, 5101 to 5103, 5201 to
5203, 5301, 5302, 290543/44, 380910, 382360.
Agro-food imports in total imports (%): Calculation based on UN COMTRADE (database). Agro-food
definition does not include fish and fish products.
Crop in total agricultural production (%): National data, share of value of total crop production (including
horticulture) in total agricultural production.
Livestock in total agricultural production (%): National data, share of value of total livestock production
in total agricultural production.
Share of arable land in AA (%): Calculation based on FAOSTAT Land Use (database), arable land as a
share of agricultural area.
Table: Productivity and environmental indicators
TFP annual growth (%): Agricultural Total Factor Productivity indexes of the USDA Economic Research
Service use primarily FAO data supplemented by national data. Agricultural TFP indexes are estimates by
country and for groups of countries aggregated by geographic region and income class. The European
Union single area is recalculated from individual countries data and weights. The presented growth rates
are sensitive to the choice of the time period. Reported values have changed relative to previous releases
following the International Agricultural Productivity database update that includes revisions of historical
estimates to reflect newly available data and modifications to the estimation procedures.
The
full
documentation
of
the
revisions
is
available
at:
https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-
products/international-agricultural-productivity/update-and-revision-history/.
USDA, Economic Research Service (2019), International Agricultural Productivity database,
https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/international-agricultural-productivity/
(accessed
December
2019).
Nitrogen balance (Kg/ha): Balance (surplus or deficit) expressed as kg nitrogen per hectare of total
agricultural land calculated at the national level. OECD aggregate for nitrogen balance is calculated as the
ratio between the total surplus and the total agricultural land area in the OECD area. European Union as
a single area is calculated as the Gross Nitrogen Balance in the EU area over the utilised agricultural area
of the EU.
OECD
(2020),
Agri-environmental
indicators
(database),
http://www.oecd.org/tad/sustainable-
agriculture/agri-environmentalindicators.htm.
Phosphorus balance (Kg/ha): Balance (surplus or deficit) expressed as kg phosphorus per hectare of
total agricultural land calculated at the national level. OECD aggregate for phosphorus balance is
calculated as the ratio between the total surplus and the total agricultural land area in the OECD area.
European Union as a single area is calculated as the Gross Phosphorous Balance in the EU area over the
utilised agricultural area of the EU.
OECD
(2020),
Agri-environmental
indicators
(database),
http://www.oecd.org/tad/sustainable-
agriculture/agri-environmentalindicators.htm.
Agriculture share of total energy use (%): Share of agricultural consumption in total final consumption
(TFC).
International Energy Agency (2020), IEA World Energy Statistics and Balances (database),
https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00512-en,
and
OECD
Agri-environmental
indicators
(database),
http://www.oecd.org/tad/sustainable-agriculture/agri-environmentalindicators.htm,
Agriculture share in total GHG emissions (%): Greenhouse gas emissions by source, excluding land
use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF). European Union as a single area is calculated from


600 

UNFCCC data as Agriculture greenhouse gas emissions in the EU area over the total GHG emissions in
EU area.
UNFCCC Greenhouse Gas Inventory Database (2020), https://unfccc.int, and OECD Agri-environmental
indicators (database), http://www.oecd.org/tad/sustainable-agriculture/agri-environmentalindicators.htm
Share of irrigated area in Agricultural Area (AA) (%): Share of irrigated area in total agricultural area.
OECD (2020), Agri-environmental indicators (database), http://www.oecd.org/tad/sustainable-
agriculture/agri-environmentalindicators.htm and FAOSTAT database for Emerging Economies not
available in OECD database.
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%): Share of agriculture in total freshwater abstractions.
European Union as a single area is calculated as the total abstractions for agriculture in the EU area over
the total freshwater abstractions in the EU area.
OECD
(2020),
Agri-environmental
indicators
(database),
http://www.oecd.org/tad/sustainable-
agriculture/agri-environmentalindicators.htm.
Water stress indicator: The indicator refers to the intensity of use of fresh water resources. It is expressed
as gross abstraction of freshwater as percentage of total available renewable freshwater resources.
European Union is treated as a single area.
OECD (2020), "Water: Freshwater abstractions", OECD
Environment Statistics (database),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/data-00602-en.
Figure: Main macro-economic indicators, 2000 to 2020
Real GDP growth (%): OECD Country Statistical Profiles, real GDP growth. OECD Economic Outlook:
Statistics and Projections (database) as a benchmark for the latest year. World Bank, World Development
Indicators (WDI database) and Economist Intelligence Unit (2021), Country Reports (generated and
downloaded 2 February 2021) for Emerging Economies not available in OECD database.
Inflation rate (%): OECD National Accounts Statistics (database), Prices and Purchasing Power Parities,
Annual average rate of change in Harmonized Indices of Consumer Prices (HICPs). World Bank, World
Development Indicators (WDI database), Economist Intelligence Unit (2021), Country Reports (generated
and downloaded 2 February 2021) and national data for Emerging Economies not available in OECD
National Accounts Statistics.
Unemployment rate (%): OECD Economic Outlook: Statistics and Projections (database), Labour market
statistics. Eurostat database for the European Union. International Labour Organization (ILO),
Unemployment rate by sex and age (estimates and projections) for Emerging Economies not available in
OECD database.
Figure: Agro-food trade
Agro-food exports (USD billion), 2000 to 2018: UN COMTRADE (database). Agro-food definition does
not include fish and fish products.
Agro-food imports (USD billion), 2000 to 2018: UN COMTRADE (database). Agro-food definition does
not include fish and fish products.
Composition of agro-food trade, 2018: UN COMTRADE (database). Agro-food definition in HS
classification (see above) combined with the Classification by Broad Economic Categories (BEC) to
generate breakdowns into type of commodities (Primary or Industrial commodities) and type of destination
(Consumption or Industry).


 601

Figure: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2007-16
TFP annual growth (%): Agricultural Total Factor Productivity indexes of the USDA Economic Research
Service use primarily FAO data supplemented by national data. Input growth is the weighted-average
growth in quality-adjusted land, labour, machinery power, livestock capital, synthetic NPK fertilisers, and
animal feed, where weights are input (factor) cost shares. Special breakdown created to dissociate primary
factors (land, labour, machinery and livestock) from intermediate input (feed and fertilizer) growth. Output
growth corresponds to gross agricultural output for each country.
Agricultural TFP indexes are estimates by country and for groups of countries aggregated by geographic
region and income class. The European Union single area is recalculated from individual countries data
and weights. The presented growth rates are sensitive to the choice of the time period.
Reported values have changed relative to previous releases following the International Agricultural
Productivity database update that includes revisions of historical estimates to reflect newly available data
and modifications to the estimation procedures. The full documentation of the revisions is available at:
https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/international-agricultural-productivity/update-and-revision-
history/.
USDA, Economic Research Service (2019), International Agricultural Productivity database,
https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/international-agricultural-productivity/
(accessed
December
2019).
Indicators used to calculate selected ratio and percentage indicators
GDP (local currency): OECD National Accounts Statistics (database), Gross domestic product, local
currency, current prices. OECD Economic Outlook: Statistics and Projections (database) as a benchmark
for the latest year. Calculation based on Eurostat database for the European Union. World Bank, World
Development Indicators (WDI database) and Economist Intelligence Unit (2021), Country Reports
(generated and downloaded 2 February 2021) for Emerging Economies not available in the OECD
database.
Agriculture Gross Value Added (local currency) (AgGVA): Calculation based on Agriculture share in
GDP (%) and GDP (local currency) indicators.
Deflator: OECD Economic Outlook: Statistics and Projections (database), Gross domestic product, market
prices, deflator. Eurostat database for the European Union. World Bank, World Development Indicators
(WDI database) for Emerging Economies not available in the OECD database.
Exchange rate: OECD National Accounts Statistics (database), Prices and Purchasing Power Parities,
Nominal Exchange Rate. Eurostat database for the European Union and EU Member States. World Bank,
World Development Indicators (WDI database) and national data for Emerging Economies not available in
the OECD database.




602 

Currencies
ARS
Argentinian peso
AUD
Australian dollar
BRL
Brazilian real
CAD
Canadian dollar
CLP
Chilean peso
COP
Colombian peso
CHF
Swiss frank
CNY
Chinese yuan renminbi
CRC
Costa Rican colon
EUR
Euro
GBP
British pound
IDR
Indonesian roupiah
INR
Indian rupee
ILS
Israeli shekel
ISK
Icelandic krona
JPY
Japanese yen
KRW
Korean won
KZT
Kazakh tenge
MXN
Mexican peso
NOK
Norwegian krone
NZD
New Zealand dollar
PHP
Philippines peso
RUR
Russian rouble
TRY
New Turkish lira
UAH
Ukrainian hryvnia
USD
United States dollar
VND
Vietnamese dong
ZAR
South African rand



Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2021
ADDRESSING THE CHALLENGES FACING FOOD SYSTEMS
This annual report monitors and evaluates agricultural policies in 54 countries, including the 38 OECD countries,
the five non‑OECD EU Member States, and 11 emerging economies. The report includes country specific
analysis based on up‑to‑date estimates of support to agriculture that are compiled using a comprehensive
system of measurement and classification – the Producer and Consumer Support Estimates (PSE and CSE)
and related indicators. This year’s report focuses on policy responses to the COVID‑19 pandemic and analyses
the implications of agricultural support policies for the performance of food systems.
9HSTCQE*ffejce+
PRINT ISBN 978-92-64-55492-4
PDF ISBN 978-92-64-85370-6


Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further reproduction
prohibited without permission.


Agricultural Policy Monitoring
and Evaluation 2023
ADAPTING AGRICULTURE TO CLIMATE CHANGE




Agricultural Policy
Monitoring and Evaluation
2023
ADAPTING AGRICULTURE TO CLIMATE CHANGE


This document is published under the responsibility of the Secretary General of the OECD and the opinions expressed
and arguments employed herein do not necessarily reflect the official views of OECD Member countries. It reproduces,
in its Executive Summary and Chapters 1 and 2, work that was approved by the Working Party on Agricultural Policies
and Markets at its 90th session on 28-29 September 2023 on behalf of the Committee for Agriculture.
This document, as well as any data and map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over
any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.
The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities. The use of
such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in
the West Bank under the terms of international law.
Note by the Republic of Türkiye
The information in this document with reference to “Cyprus” relates to the southern part of the Island. There is no single
authority representing both Turkish and Greek Cypriot people on the Island. Türkiye recognises the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus (TRNC). Until a lasting and equitable solution is found within the context of the United Nations, Türkiye
shall preserve its position concerning the “Cyprus issue”.
Note by all the European Union Member States of the OECD and the European Union
The Republic of Cyprus is recognised by all members of the United Nations with the exception of Türkiye. The
information in this document relates to the area under the effective control of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus.
Please cite this publication as:
OECD (2023), Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2023: Adapting Agriculture to Climate Change, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/b14de474-en.
ISBN 978-92-64-82624-3 (print)
ISBN 978-92-64-31532-7 (pdf)
ISBN 978-92-64-99827-8 (HTML)
ISBN 978-92-64-38132-2 (epub)
Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation
ISSN 2221-7363 (print)
ISSN 2221-7371 (online)
Corrigenda to OECD publications may be found on line at: www.oecd.org/about/publishing/corrigenda.htm.
The use of this work, whether digital or print, is governed by the Terms and Conditions to be found at https://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions.


 3

Foreword
This Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2023 report provides up-to-date monitoring and
evaluation of agricultural policies across 54 countries from across the world, including the 38 OECD
countries and the five non-OECD EU Member States, and eleven emerging and developing economies:
Argentina, Brazil, People’s Republic of China, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, the Russian
Federation,* South Africa, Ukraine and Viet Nam. It is the 36th in the series of the OECD Agricultural Policy
Monitoring and Evaluation reports, and the 11th report to include both OECD countries and emerging and
developing economies.
The report provides insights into the increasingly complex nature of agricultural policy and is based on the
OECD’s comprehensive system for measuring and classifying support to agriculture — the Producer and
Consumer Support Estimates (PSE and CSE) and related indicators. These indicators provide comparable
information across countries on the nature and extent of support and serve as a basis for the OECD’s
Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation. This 2023 report focuses on the role of agricultural and other
policies in adapting agriculture to climate change.
The report is structured as follows. The Executive Summary synthesises the key findings. Chapter 1
discusses the implications of climate change for the agricultural sector and analyses public efforts to foster
agricultural climate change adaptation. In particular, it provides an overview of countries’ strategies and
policy actions for enhancing the sector’s adaptive, absorbtive and transformative capacities relative to
climate change, discusses how agricultural support policies may affect these capacities, and makes
recommendations to accelerate climate change adaptation in agriculture. Chapter 2 provides an overview
of recent developments in agricultural policies and support, with a special focus on policies implemented
in response to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine. Chapter 3 describes the overall trends in agricultural
support and is followed by individual chapters for each of the countries covered (the European Union,
which has a Common Agricultural Policy, is presented as a single chapter). Country chapters begin with
snapshots containing brief summaries of developments in agricultural policies and support as well as
country-specific policy recommendations. This is followed by more comprehensive descriptions of
agricultural policy developments, including related to efforts towards agricultural climate change
adaptation. A Statistical Annex containing detailed background tables of the indicators of agricultural
support is available as a separate document on the OECD website (https://doi.org/10.1787/b14de474-en).
The Executive Summary as well as Chapters 1 and 2 are published under the responsibility of the OECD
Committee for Agriculture. The remainder of the report is published under the responsibility of the
Secretary-General of the OECD.



* This report does not contain a country chapter on the Russian Federation, nor any tables with support indicators in
the Statistical Annex. However, aggregate data for the 11 emerging economies and for all 54 countries covered in this
report continue to include those for Russia.


4 

Acknowledgements
This report was prepared by the Trade and Agriculture Directorate of the OECD, under the general
oversight of Marion Jansen, with the active participation of countries included in this report. The preparation
was led by Martin von Lampe (project leader and overall co-ordinator), Urszula Ziębińska (co-ordinator of
the Technical Team) and Guillaume Gruère (Acting Head of Division).
Authorship of the different parts of this report is acknowledged as follows:
Chapter 1: Kelly Cobourn, Tim Whitnall and Jibran Punthakey
Chapter 2: Tim Whitnall and Martin von Lampe
Argentina: Mercedes Campi, with material provided by: Gerardo Luis Petri, Federico Amodei and Iván
Hrydziuszko (Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries)
Australia: Jibran Punthakey
Brazil: Dalila Cervantes-Godoy and Florence Bossard, with material provided by Antônio Luiz Machado de
Moraes (Ministry of Agriculture) and Helena Müller Queiroz Agricultural Counsellor, (Embassy of Brazil in
Paris)
Canada: Hélène Bombrun
Chile: Dalila Cervantes-Godoy
China: Silvia Sorescu and Florence Bossard, with material provided by: Cheng Guoqiang (National School
of Food Security Strategy, Renmin University of China and Rural Revitalization Expert Advisory Committee
of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs)
Colombia: Dalila Cervantes-Godoy
Costa Rica: Adriana García Vargas
European Union: Francesco Vanni, Urszula Ziębińska and Hélène Bombrun, based on information
collected for individual member states by their country-desk officers, additionally including: Masayasu Asai,
Mercedes Campi, Adriana García Vargas, Guillaume Gruère, Ben Henderson, Jussi Lankoski, Roger
Martini, Silvia Sorescu, Noura Takrouri-Jolly, Hugo Valin, Veronika Vanišová, Martin von Lampe, and Tim
Whitnall
Iceland: Jussi Lankoski
India: Silvia Sorescu and Florence Bossard, with material provided by: Ashok Gulati (Indian Council for
Research on International Economic Relations)
Indonesia: Jesús Antón and Florence Bossard, with material provided by: Tahlim Sudaryanto (Indonesian
Center for Agriculture Socio Economic and Policy Studies, Ministry of Agriculture)
Israel: Guillaume Gruère
Japan: Masayasu Asai


 5

Kazakhstan: Tim Whitnall and Ben Henderson, with material provided by: Yerlan Syzdykov (Analytical
Centre for Economic Policy in the Agricultural Sector)
Korea: Jaewon Song
Mexico: Dalila Cervantes-Godoy
New Zealand: Martin von Lampe
Norway: Tim Whitnall
Philippines: Florence Bossard, with material provided by Katrin Mares (Department of Agriculture), and
Divine Kathylin San Juan and Rachel C. Lacsa (Philippines Statistics Agency)
South Africa: Ben Henderson, with material provided by: André Joost (Stellenbosch University) and David
Spies (North-West University, Potchefstroom)
Switzerland: Hugo Valin
Türkiye: Roger Martini
Ukraine: Kelly Cobourn, with material provided by Vitaliy Zhygadlo (consultant to the OECD)
United Kingdom: Jibran Punthakey, Florence Bossard and Michael Ryan
United States: Roger Martini
Viet Nam: Kelly Cobourn, with material provided by Tran Con Thang (Institute of Policy and Strategy for
Agriculture and Rural Development) and Trang Nguyen (Ministry for Agriculture and Rural Development)
All chapters were peer-reviewed by other team members listed above who provided valuable comments
and suggestions for finalising them. In addition, all country chapters were reviewed by Martina
Abderrahmane, Guillaume Gruère, Roger Martini and Martin von Lampe. Specific parts of the report have
also been reviewed by other colleagues, including Marcel Adenauer, Armelle Elasri, Hubertus Gay and
Gregoire Tallard. Misha Pinkhasov provided external editing services. Contributions from capitals in the
form of policy information, data and reviews are gratefully acknowledged.
Technical and statistical assistance was provided by the Technical Team: Florence Bossard, Amaani
Hoddoon, Clarisse Legendre, Daniela Rodriguez, Noura Takrouri-Jolly and Urszula Ziębińska. Technical
assistance for the production of the Webbook was provided by Marc Regnier and Charles Cadestin.
Administrative and editing services were provided by Martina Abderrahmane.




6 

Table of contents
Foreword
3
Acknowledgements
4
List of Acronyms and Abbreviations
19
Executive Summary
21
1 Policies for agricultural adaptation to a changing climate
26
Agriculture is increasingly experiencing the impacts of climate change
27
How can agriculture adapt to a changing climate?
30
An evolving focus on agricultural adaptation and resilience: Analysis of UNFCCC reports
33
Agricultural climate change adaptation programmes and activities
37
How do agricultural support policies influence climate change adaptation?
44
Reforming agricultural policies for climate change adaptation
48
References
52
Annex 1.A. Details of the analysis
58
Keyword frequency analysis based on UNFCCC reports
58
Stocktake of agricultural climate change adaptation programmes and activities
61
Notes
62
2 Developments in agricultural policy and support
64
Key economic and market developments
65
Policy responses to the war in Ukraine and to inflationary pressures more generally
68
Other recent developments in agricultural policies
75
Developments in support to agriculture
81
Summary and conclusions
100
References
104
Notes
105
Annex 2.A. Definition of OECD indicators of agricultural support
107
Nominal indicators used in this report
107
Ratio indicators and percentage indicators
108
Drivers of the change in PSE
110
Definition of GSSE categories
111


 7

Developments in Agricultural Policy and Support by Country
113
3 Overall trends in agricultural support
114
OECD countries
114
Emerging economies
118
All countries
122
Notes
126
4 Argentina
127
Support to agriculture
127
Recent policy changes
127
Assessment and recommendations
128
Description of policy developments
132
Contextual information
140
References
145
Notes
145
5 Australia
146
Support to agriculture
146
Recent policy changes
146
Assessment and recommendations
147
Description of policy developments
152
Contextual information
160
References
164
Notes
165
6 Brazil
166
Support to agriculture
166
Recent policy changes
166
Assessment and recommendations
167
Description of policy developments
172
Contextual information
180
References
184
7 Canada
185
Support to agriculture
185
Recent policy changes
185
Assessment and recommendations
186
Description of policy developments
190
Contextual information
201
References
206
Note
209
8 Chile
210
Support to agriculture
210
Recent policy changes
210
Assessment and recommendations
211
Description of policy developments
215
Contextual information
220


8 

References
225
9 China
226
Support to agriculture
226
Recent policy changes
226
Assessment and recommendations
227
Description of policy developments
232
Contextual information
241
References
246
Notes
246
10 Colombia
247
Support to agriculture
247
Recent policy changes
247
Assessment and recommendations
248
Description of policy developments
252
Contextual information
257
References
262
Note
262
11 Costa Rica
263
Support to agriculture
263
Recent policy changes
263
Assessment and recommendations
264
Description of policy developments
268
Contextual information
273
References
278
Notes
279
12 European Union
280
Support to agriculture
280
Recent policy changes
280
Assessment and recommendations
281
Description of policy developments
286
Contextual information
314
References
319
Notes
325
13 Iceland
329
Support to agriculture
329
Recent policy changes
329
Assessment and recommendations
330
Description of policy developments
334
Contextual information
338
References
343
14 India
344
Support to agriculture
344
Recent policy changes
344
Assessment and recommendations
345


 9

Description of policy developments
350
Contextual information
360
References
365
Notes
365
15 Indonesia
367
Support to agriculture
367
Recent policy changes
367
Assessment and recommendations
368
Description of policy developments
372
Contextual information
380
References
385
Note
387
16 Israel
388
Support to agriculture
388
Recent policy changes
388
Assessment and recommendations
389
Description of policy developments
393
Contextual information
401
References
406
Note
406
17 Japan
407
Support to agriculture
407
Recent policy changes
407
Assessment and recommendations
408
Description of policy developments
412
Contextual information
421
References
426
Notes
427
18 Kazakhstan
428
Support to agriculture
428
Recent policy changes
428
Assessment and recommendations
429
Description of policy developments
433
Contextual information
439
References
443
Note
443
19 Korea
444
Support to agriculture
444
Recent policy changes
444
Assessment and recommendations
445
Description of policy developments
449
Contextual information
455
References
460


10 

20 Mexico
461
Support to agriculture
461
Recent policy changes
461
Assessment and recommendations
462
Description of policy developments
467
Contextual information
472
Reference
476
21 New Zealand
477
Support to agriculture
477
Recent policy changes
477
Assessment and recommendations
478
Description of policy developments
483
Contextual information
493
References
497
Notes
497
22 Norway
499
Support to agriculture
499
Recent policy changes
499
Assessment and recommendations
500
Description of policy developments
504
Contextual information
510
References
515
Note
515
23 Philippines
516
Support to agriculture
516
Recent policy changes
516
Assessment and recommendations
517
Description of policy developments
521
Contextual information
530
References
535
Note
535
24 South Africa
536
Support to agriculture
536
Recent policy changes
536
Assessment and recommendations
537
Description of policy developments
541
Contextual information
545
References
550
Notes
550
25 Switzerland
551
Support to agriculture
551
Recent policy changes
551
Assessment and recommendations
552
Description of policy developments
556
Contextual information
564


 11

References
569
Notes
569
26 Türkiye
570
Support to agriculture
570
Recent policy changes
570
Assessment and recommendations
571
Description of policy developments
575
Contextual information
583
Notes
588
27 Ukraine
589
Support to agriculture
589
Recent policy changes
589
Assessment and recommendations
590
Description of policy developments
594
Contextual information
602
References
606
Notes
607
28 United Kingdom
608
Support to agriculture
608
Recent policy changes
608
Assessment and recommendations
609
Description of policy developments
614
Contextual information
626
References
630
29 United States
631
Support to agriculture
631
Recent policy changes
631
Assessment and recommendations
632
Description of policy developments
637
Contextual information
657
References
661
Notes
661
30 Viet Nam
664
Support to agriculture
664
Recent policy changes
664
Assessment and recommendations
665
Description of policy developments
669
Contextual information
676
References
681
Notes
681
Annex A. Sources and Definitions of Contextual Indicators
683
Table: Contextual indicators
683
Table: Productivity and environmental indicators
684
Figure: Main macro-economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
685


12 

Figure: Agro-food trade
685
Figure: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
686
Indicators used to calculate selected ratio and percentage indicators
686

Tables
Table 1.1. Categories and sub-categories for adaptation actions and programmes
37
Table 2.1. Key economic indicators
66
Table 2.2. Emissions reductions targets
77
Table 3.1. OECD: Estimates of support to agriculture
117
Table 3.2. Emerging Economies: Estimates of support to agriculture
121
Table 3.3. All countries: Estimates of support to agriculture
125
Table 4.1. Argentina: Estimates of support to agriculture
131
Table 4.2. Argentina: Agricultural policy trends
132
Table 4.3. Argentina: Contextual indicators
141
Table 4.4. Argentina: Productivity and environmental indicators
144
Table 5.1. Australia: Estimates of support to agriculture
151
Table 5.2. Australia: Agricultural policy trends
152
Table 5.3. Australia: Contextual indicators
160
Table 5.4. Australia: Productivity and environmental indicators
164
Table 6.1. Brazil: Estimates of support to agriculture
171
Table 6.2. Brazil: Agricultural policy trends
173
Table 6.3. Brazil’s commitments under SPS-ABC for mitigation and adaptation in agriculture
177
Table 6.4. Brazil: Contextual indicators
180
Table 6.5. Brazil: Productivity and environmental indicators
183
Table 7.1. Canada: Estimates of support to agriculture
189
Table 7.2. Canada: Agricultural policy trends
191
Table 7.3. Canada: Contextual indicators
202
Table 7.4. Canada: Productivity and environmental indicators
205
Table 8.1. Chile: Estimates of support to agriculture
214
Table 8.2. Chile: Agricultural policy trends
215
Table 8.3. Chile: Contextual indicators
221
Table 8.4. Chile: Productivity and environmental indicators
224
Table 9.1. China: Estimates of support to agriculture
231
Table 9.2. China: Agricultural policy trends
233
Table 9.3. China: Contextual indicators
242
Table 9.4. China: Productivity and environmental indicators
245
Table 10.1. Colombia: Estimates of support to agriculture
251
Table 10.2. Colombia: Agricultural policy trends
253
Table 10.3. Colombia: Contextual indicators
258
Table 10.4. Colombia: Productivity and environmental indicators
261
Table 11.1. Costa Rica: Estimates of support to agriculture
267
Table 11.2. Costa Rica: Agricultural policy trends
268
Table 11.3. Costa Rica: Contextual indicators
274
Table 11.4. Costa Rica: Productivity and environmental indicators
278
Table 12.1. European Union: Estimates of support to agriculture
285
Table 12.2. European Union: Agricultural policy trends
288
Table 12.3. EU expenditure on agriculture by source and use, 2022
290
Table 12.4. Direct payments budget under Pillar 1, 2022
291
Table 12.5. Rural Development, total public expenditure by priority area (estimated 2022)
294
Table 12.6. Exceptional adjustment aid to agricultural producers available to EU Member States
309
Table 12.7. European Union: Contextual indicators
315
Table 12.8. European Union: Productivity and environmental indicators
319
Table 13.1. Iceland: Estimates of support to agriculture
333
Table 13.2. Iceland: Agricultural policy trends
334
Table 13.3. Iceland: Contextual indicators
339
Table 13.4. Iceland: Productivity and environmental indicators
342
Table 14.1. India: Estimates of support to agriculture
349


 13

Table 14.2. India: Agricultural policy trends
351
Table 14.3. India: Contextual indicators
361
Table 14.4. India: Productivity and environmental indicators
364
Table 15.1. Indonesia: Estimates of support to agriculture
371
Table 15.2. Indonesia: Agricultural policy trends
372
Table 15.3. Indonesia: Contextual indicators
381
Table 15.4. Indonesia: Productivity and environmental indicators
384
Table 16.1. Israel: Estimates of support to agriculture
392
Table 16.2. Israel: Agricultural policy trends
393
Table 16.3. Scheduled reduced custom duties on specific vegetables and fruits
398
Table 16.4. Israel: Contextual indicators
402
Table 16.5. Israel: Productivity and environmental indicators
405
Table 17.1. Japan: Estimates of support to agriculture
411
Table 17.2. Japan: Agricultural policy trends
413
Table 17.3. Japan: Contextual indicators
422
Table 17.4. Japan: Productivity and environmental indicators
425
Table 18.1. Kazakhstan: Estimates of support to agriculture
432
Table 18.2. Kazakhstan: Agricultural policy trends
433
Table 18.3. Kazakhstan: Contextual indicators
439
Table 18.4. Kazakhstan: Productivity and environmental indicators
442
Table 19.1. Korea: Estimates of support to agriculture
448
Table 19.2. Korea: Agricultural policy trends
449
Table 19.3. Korea: Contextual indicators
456
Table 19.4. Korea: Productivity and environmental indicators
459
Table 20.1. Mexico: Estimates of support to agriculture
466
Table 20.2. Mexico: Agricultural policy trends
467
Table 20.3. Mexico: Contextual indicators
473
Table 20.4. Mexico: Productivity and environmental indicators
475
Table 21.1. New Zealand: Estimates of support to agriculture
482
Table 21.2. New Zealand: Agricultural policy trends
483
Table 21.3. New Zealand: Contextual indicators
493
Table 21.4. New Zealand: Productivity and environmental indicators
496
Table 22.1. Norway: Estimates of support to agriculture
503
Table 22.2. Norway: Agricultural policy trends
505
Table 22.3. Norway: Contextual indicators
511
Table 22.4. Norway: Productivity and environmental indicators
514
Table 23.1. Philippines: Estimates of support to agriculture
520
Table 23.2. Philippines: Agricultural policy trends
522
Table 23.3. Philippines: Contextual indicators
531
Table 23.4. Philippines: Productivity and environmental indicators
534
Table 24.1. South Africa: Estimates of support to agriculture
540
Table 24.2. South Africa: Agricultural policy trends
541
Table 24.3. South Africa: Contextual indicators
546
Table 24.4. South Africa: Productivity and environmental indicators
549
Table 25.1. Switzerland: Estimates of support to agriculture
555
Table 25.2. Switzerland: Agricultural policy trends
556
Table 25.3. Switzerland: Contextual indicators
565
Table 25.4. Switzerland: Productivity and environmental indicators
569
Table 26.1. Türkiye: Estimates of support to agriculture
574
Table 26.2. Türkiye: Agricultural policy trends
576
Table 26.3. Türkiye: Contextual indicators
584
Table 26.4. Türkiye: Productivity and environmental indicators
587
Table 27.1. Ukraine: Estimates of support to agriculture
593
Table 27.2. Ukraine: Agricultural policy trends
595
Table 27.3. Ukraine: Contextual indicators
602
Table 27.4. Ukraine: Productivity and environmental indicators
605
Table 28.1. United Kingdom: Estimates of support to agriculture
613
Table 28.2. United Kingdom: Agricultural policy trends
614
Table 28.3. United Kingdom: Contextual indicators
626
Table 28.4. United Kingdom: Productivity and environmental indicators
629


14 

Table 29.1. United States: Estimates of support to agriculture
636
Table 29.2. United States: Agricultural policy trends
638
Table 29.3. United States: Contextual indicators
657
Table 29.4. United States: Productivity and environmental indicators
660
Table 30.1. Viet Nam: Estimates of support to agriculture
668
Table 30.2. Viet Nam: Agricultural policy trends
670
Table 30.3. Viet Nam: Contextual indicators
677
Table 30.4. Viet Nam: Productivity and environmental indicators
680

Figures
Figure 1.1. Frequency of reported natural disasters worldwide, 1970-2021
28
Figure 1.2. Frequency of reference to agricultural keywords, UNFCCC national communications
34
Figure 1.3. Frequency of reference to agricultural keywords, Paris Agreement documents
35
Figure 1.4. Contextual topic areas within which agriculture key words appear in UNFCCC reports
36
Figure 1.5. Agricultural adaptation actions and programmes by category and sub-category
38
Figure 2.1. Commodity world price indices, 2007 to 2023
67
Figure 2.2. Ukraine's share in global production and exports of selected agricultural commodities
70
Figure 2.3. Ukraine’s exports 2022 and 2023 of selected agricultural commodities
71
Figure 2.4. Structure of agricultural support indicators
82
Figure 2.5. Breakdown of agricultural support, total of all countries, 2020-22
83
Figure 2.6. Evolution of total support to agriculture in OECD and 11 emerging economies, 2000 to 2022
84
Figure 2.7. Total Support Estimate by country, 2000-02 and 2020-22
85
Figure 2.8. Evolution of the % Producer Support Estimate, 2000 to 2022
86
Figure 2.9. Producer support by country, 2000 to 2022
87
Figure 2.10. Producer Support Estimate by country, 2000-02 and 2020-22
88
Figure 2.11. Potentially most distorting transfers and other support by country, 2020-22
90
Figure 2.12. Market price support for all 54 covered countries and global wheat indicator price, 2000 to 2022
91
Figure 2.13. Variation of product-specific market price support by country, 2020-22
92
Figure 2.14. Producer Nominal Protection Coefficient by country, 2000-02 and 2020-22
95
Figure 2.15. Use and composition of support that is less coupled to production, selected countries, 2000-02
and 2020-22
96
Figure 2.16. Transfers to specific commodities (SCT), all countries, 2020-22
97
Figure 2.17. Composition of the Consumer Support Estimate by country, 2020-22
99
Figure 2.18. Composition of General Services Support Estimate, 2020-22
100
Figure 3.1. OECD: Development of support to agriculture
115
Figure 3.2. OECD: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22 116
Figure 3.3. Emerging Economies: Development of support to agriculture
119
Figure 3.4. Emerging Economies: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22
120
Figure 3.5. All countries: Development of support to agriculture
123
Figure 3.6. All countries: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts,
2020-22
124
Figure 4.1. Argentina: Development of support to agriculture
129
Figure 4.2. Argentina: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-
22
130
Figure 4.3. Argentina: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1997 to 2022
133
Figure 4.4. Argentina: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
142
Figure 4.5. Argentina: Agro-food trade
143
Figure 4.6. Argentina: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
144
Figure 5.1. Australia: Development of support to agriculture
149
Figure 5.2. Australia: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-
22
150
Figure 5.3. Australia: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
153
Figure 5.4. Australia: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
161
Figure 5.5. Australia: Agro-food trade
162
Figure 5.6. Australia: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
163
Figure 6.1. Brazil: Development of support to agriculture
169
Figure 6.2. Brazil: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
170


 15

Figure 6.3. Brazil: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22 170
Figure 6.4. Brazil: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2022
174
Figure 6.5. Brazil: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
181
Figure 6.6. Brazil: Agro-food trade
182
Figure 6.7. Brazil: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
183
Figure 7.1. Canada: Development of support to agriculture
187
Figure 7.2. Canada: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
188
Figure 7.3. Canada: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
188
Figure 7.4. Canada: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
192
Figure 7.5. Canada: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
203
Figure 7.6. Canada: Agro-food trade
204
Figure 7.7. Canada: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
205
Figure 8.1. Chile: Development of support to agriculture
212
Figure 8.2. Chile: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
213
Figure 8.3. Chile: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
213
Figure 8.4. Chile: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1990 to 2022
216
Figure 8.5. Chile: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
222
Figure 8.6. Chile: Agro-food trade
223
Figure 8.7. Chile: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
224
Figure 9.1. China: Development of support to agriculture
229
Figure 9.2. China: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
230
Figure 9.3. China: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22 230
Figure 9.4. China: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1993 to 2022
234
Figure 9.5. China: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
243
Figure 9.6. China: Agro-food trade
244
Figure 9.7. China: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
245
Figure 10.1. Colombia: Development of support to agriculture
249
Figure 10.2. Colombia: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
250
Figure 10.3. Colombia: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts,
2020-22
250
Figure 10.4. Colombia: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1992 to 2022
254
Figure 10.5. Colombia: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
259
Figure 10.6. Colombia: Agro-food trade
259
Figure 10.7. Colombia: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
261
Figure 11.1. Costa Rica: Development of support to agriculture
265
Figure 11.2. Costa Rica: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
266
Figure 11.3. Costa Rica: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts,
2020-22
266
Figure 11.4. Costa Rica: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2022
269
Figure 11.5. Costa Rica: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
275
Figure 11.6. Costa Rica: Agro-food trade
276
Figure 11.7. Costa Rica: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
277
Figure 12.1. European Union: Development of support to agriculture
283
Figure 12.2. European Union: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
284
Figure 12.3. European Union: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22
284
Figure 12.4. European Union: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
289
Figure 12.5. European Union: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
316
Figure 12.6. European Union: Agro-food trade
317
Figure 12.7. European Union: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
318
Figure 13.1. Iceland: Development of support to agriculture
331
Figure 13.2. Iceland: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
332
Figure 13.3. Iceland: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-
22
332
Figure 13.4. Iceland: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
335
Figure 13.5. Iceland: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
340
Figure 13.6. Iceland: Agro-food trade
340
Figure 13.7. Iceland: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
342
Figure 14.1. India: Development of support to agriculture
347
Figure 14.2. India: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22 348


16 

Figure 14.3. India: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 2000 to 2022
353
Figure 14.4. India: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
362
Figure 14.5. India: Agro-food trade
363
Figure 14.6. India: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
364
Figure 15.1. Indonesia: Development of support to agriculture
369
Figure 15.2. Indonesia: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
370
Figure 15.3. Indonesia: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts,
2020-22
370
Figure 15.4. Indonesia: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1990 to 2022
373
Figure 15.5. Indonesia: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
382
Figure 15.6. Indonesia: Agro-food trade
382
Figure 15.7. Indonesia: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
384
Figure 16.1. Israel: Development of support to agriculture
390
Figure 16.2. Israel: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
391
Figure 16.3. Israel: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22 391
Figure 16.4. Israel: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2022
394
Figure 16.5. Israel: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
403
Figure 16.6. Israel: Agro-food trade
403
Figure 16.7. Israel: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
405
Figure 17.1. Japan: Development of support to agriculture
409
Figure 17.2. Japan: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
410
Figure 17.3. Japan: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22 410
Figure 17.4. Japan: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
414
Figure 17.5. Japan: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
423
Figure 17.6. Japan: Agro-food trade
424
Figure 17.7. Japan: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
425
Figure 18.1. Kazakhstan: Development of support to agriculture
430
Figure 18.2. Kazakhstan: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
431
Figure 18.3. Kazakhstan: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts,
2020-22
431
Figure 18.4. Kazakhstan: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2022
434
Figure 18.5. Kazakhstan: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
440
Figure 18.6. Kazakhstan: Agro-food trade
441
Figure 18.7. Kazakhstan: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
442
Figure 19.1. Korea: Development of support to agriculture
446
Figure 19.2. Korea: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
447
Figure 19.3. Korea: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22 447
Figure 19.4. Korea: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
450
Figure 19.5. Korea: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
457
Figure 19.6. Korea: Agro-food trade
458
Figure 19.7. Korea: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
459
Figure 20.1. Mexico: Development of support to agriculture
464
Figure 20.2. Mexico: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
465
Figure 20.3. Mexico: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-
22
465
Figure 20.4. Mexico: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
468
Figure 20.5. Mexico: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
473
Figure 20.6. Mexico: Agro-food trade
474
Figure 20.7. Mexico: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
475
Figure 21.1. New Zealand: Development of support to agriculture
480
Figure 21.2. New Zealand: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
481
Figure 21.3. New Zealand: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts,
2020-22
481
Figure 21.4. New Zealand: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
484
Figure 21.5. New Zealand: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
494
Figure 21.6. New Zealand: Agro-food trade
495
Figure 21.7. New Zealand: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
496
Figure 22.1. Norway: Development of support to agriculture
501
Figure 22.2. Norway: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
502


 17

Figure 22.3. Norway: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-
22
502
Figure 22.4. Norway: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
505
Figure 22.5. Norway: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
512
Figure 22.6. Norway: Agro-food trade
513
Figure 22.7. Norway: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
514
Figure 23.1. Philippines: Development of support to agriculture
518
Figure 23.2. Philippines: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
519
Figure 23.3. Philippines: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts,
2020-22
519
Figure 23.4. Philippines: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 2000 to 2022
523
Figure 23.5. Philippines: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
532
Figure 23.6. Philippines: Agro-food trade
533
Figure 23.7. Philippines: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
534
Figure 24.1. South Africa: Development of support to agriculture
538
Figure 24.2. South Africa: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
539
Figure 24.3. South Africa: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts,
2020-22
539
Figure 24.4. South Africa: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1994 to 2022
542
Figure 24.5. South Africa: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
547
Figure 24.6. South Africa: Agro-food trade
548
Figure 24.7. South Africa: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
549
Figure 25.1. Switzerland: Development of support to agriculture
553
Figure 25.2. Switzerland: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
554
Figure 25.3. Switzerland: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts,
2020-22
554
Figure 25.4. Switzerland: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
557
Figure 25.5. Switzerland: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
566
Figure 25.6. Switzerland: Agro-food trade
567
Figure 25.7. Switzerland: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
568
Figure 26.1. Türkiye: Development of support to agriculture
572
Figure 26.2. Türkiye: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
573
Figure 26.3. Türkiye: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross receipts, 2020-22
573
Figure 26.4. Türkiye: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
577
Figure 26.5. Türkiye: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
585
Figure 26.6. Türkiye: Agro-food trade
586
Figure 26.7. Türkiye: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
587
Figure 27.1. Ukraine: Development of support to agriculture
591
Figure 27.2. Ukraine: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-
22
592
Figure 27.3. Ukraine: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2022
595
Figure 27.4. Ukraine: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2021
603
Figure 27.5. Ukraine: Agro-food trade
604
Figure 27.6. Ukraine: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
605
Figure 28.1. United Kingdom: Development of support to agriculture
611
Figure 28.2. United Kingdom: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
612
Figure 28.3. United Kingdom: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22
612
Figure 28.4. United Kingdom: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 2017 to 2022
615
Figure 28.5. United Kingdom: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
627
Figure 28.6. United Kingdom: Agro-food trade
628
Figure 28.7. United Kingdom: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
629
Figure 29.1. United States: Development of support to agriculture
634
Figure 29.2. United States: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022
635
Figure 29.3. United States: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts,
2020-22
635
Figure 29.4. United States: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
639
Figure 29.5. United States: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
658
Figure 29.6. United States: Agro-food trade
659
Figure 29.7. United States: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
660


18 

Figure 30.1. Viet Nam: Development of support to agriculture
666
Figure 30.2. Viet Nam: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-
22
667
Figure 30.3. Viet Nam: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 2000 to 2022
671
Figure 30.4. Viet Nam: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
677
Figure 30.5. Viet Nam: Agro-food trade
678
Figure 30.6. Viet Nam: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
680

Boxes
Box 1.1. Water policies and climate change adaptation
32
Box 1.2. The OECD’s Co-operative Research Programme: Sustainable Agricultural and Food Systems
40
Box 1.3. The OECD Seed Schemes for Sorghum and Pearl Millets
44
Box 2.1. Impacts of the war on Ukraine's agricultural sector
69
Box 2.2. OECD Ukraine Country Programme
74
Box 2.3. Market price support – concept and interpretation
93
Box 12.1. The 28 CAP Strategic Plans
300








Look for the 12 at the bottom of the tables or graphs in
this book. To download the matching Excel® spreadsheet, just type
the link into your Internet browser or click on the link from the digital
version.
This book has...
A service that delivers Excel® files from the printed page!
Follow OECD Publications on:
https://twitter.com/OECD
https://www.facebook.com/theOECD
https://www.linkedin.com/company/organisation-eco-cooperation-
development-organisation-cooperation-developpement-eco/
https://www.youtube.com/user/OECDiLibrary
https://www.oecd.org/newsletters/


 19

List of Acronyms and
Abbreviations
AEIs
Agri-environmental Indicators
AFOLU
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use
AIS
Agricultural Innovation System
APMC
Agricultural Produce Marketing Committee (India)
ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
ASF
African Swine Fever
BPNT
Food assistance programme (Indonesia)
BRM programmes
Business Risk Management programmes (Canada)
BULOG
Food Logistics Agency (Indonesia)
CAP
Canadian Agricultural Partnership
CAP
Common Agricultural Policy (of the European Union)
CEPA
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
CMU
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine
COVID-19
Corona Virus Disease, first recorded in 2019
EAEU
Eurasian Economic Union (Kazakhstan)
EEA
European Economic Agreement
EFTA
European Free Trade Association
EMBRAPA
Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FTA
Free Trade Agreement
GATT
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
GI
Geographical Indication
GRA
Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases (New Zealand)
GRF
Gross Farm Receipts
IHS
Import Health Standards (New Zealand)
INDAP
The smallholders’ agency (Chile)
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
LULUCF
Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry
MAFF
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (Japan)
MAPA
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (Brazil)
MARA
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (China)
MARD
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (Israel)
NAFTA
North American Free Trade Agreement
NDC
Nationally Determined Contribution
OECD
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PEM
Policy Evaluation Model
PROAGRO
General agriculture insurance programme (Brazil)
PROCAMPO
System of direct income support payments (Mexico)
RCEF
Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund (the Philippines)


20 

RCEP
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
R&D
Research and Development
RDP
Rural Development Programme
RTA
Regional Trade Agreement
TFP
Total Factor Productivity
TRQ
Tariff Rate Quota
UN
United Nations
UNFCCC
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
USDA
United States Department of Agriculture
VAT
Value Added Tax
WHO
World Health Organization
WTO
World Trade Organization
OECD indicators of support

ACT
All Commodity Transfers
CSE
Consumer Support Estimate
GCT
Group Commodity Transfers
GSSE
General Services Support Estimate
MPS
Market Price Support
NAC
Nominal Assistance Coefficient
NPC
Nominal Protection Coefficient
OTP
Other Transfers to Producers
PSE
Producer Support Estimate
SCT
Single Commodity Transfers
TBSE
Total Budgetary Support Estimate
TSE
Total Support Estimate
Currencies

ARS
Argentinian peso
AUD
Australian dollar
BRL
Brazilian real
CAD
Canadian dollar
CLP
Chilean peso
COP
Colombian peso
CHF
Swiss frank
CNY
Chinese yuan renminbi
CRC
Costa Rican colon
EUR
Euro
GBP
British pound
IDR
Indonesian roupiah
INR
Indian rupee
ILS
Israeli shekel
ISK
Icelandic krona
JPY
Japanese yen
KRW
Korean won
KZT
Kazakh tenge
MXN
Mexican peso
NOK
Norwegian krone
NZD
New Zealand dollar
PHP
Philippines peso
RUR
Russian rouble
TRY
New Turkish lira
UAH
Ukrainian hryvnia
USD
United States dollar
VND
Vietnamese dong
ZAR
South African rand



 21

Executive Summary
Rising impacts of climate change underscore the necessity of adaptation and reform of policies that
hinder adjustments to agricultural production systems
Agricultural markets have been facing successive crises while being confronted with climate-change
challenges. Policies urgently need to be reformed, to meet the triple-challenge of providing adequate,
affordable, safe and nutritious food for a growing global population; providing livelihoods all along the food
value chain; and doing so while increasing the environmental sustainability of the sector. Harmful support
should be reduced or reoriented notably towards climate change adaptation, emission reductions,
resilience, and sustainable productivity growth.
Support to agriculture continues to grow
Total support to agriculture reached USD 851 billion per year during 2020-22 for the 54 countries covered
by this report. This is a historical high and an almost 2.5-fold increase compared to 2000-02, even if below
the 3.6-fold growth in the value of agricultural production. Support to the agricultural sector includes
transfers to producers (both individually or collectively) and to consumers. Most producer support hinders
climate change adaptation, often is market distorting, and risks harming the environment.
Support remains highly concentrated in a few large producing economies: the People’s Republic of China
(hereafter “China”), now representing 36% of this total, has emerged as the country providing the most
support, displacing large OECD economies which have historically held that role. India, the United States
and the European Union, all large agricultural producers as well, now represent 15%, 14% and 13%,
respectively. Overall, China and India, although different in the structure and implications of their
agricultural policies, together account for 87% of the support provided to agriculture in the covered
emerging economies. In turn, the United States and the European Union provide close to two-thirds of
support among OECD countries.
Across the 54 countries, USD 518 billion per year was paid from government budgets, with the remaining
USD 333 billion per year being provided through policies lifting domestic prices above reference prices.
Both have continued to increase over most of the past five years. That said, higher prices on international
markets resulted in lower price support and counter-cyclical budgetary transfers in 2022. Global agriculture
has experienced exceptional conditions with Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine hitting agricultural
markets that were still recovering from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In terms of direct beneficiaries of support, USD 630 billion per year was transferred to individual producers
during 2020-22. This positive producer support accounted for 14% of gross farm receipts across the
54 countries covered in the report, with significant variation between them. While this average represents
a decline compared to the 20% measured for 2000-02, it has changed little since the early 2010s. In 2022,
two countries, Costa Rica and Israel, took steps to reduce market price support. However, efforts to reform
support have largely stalled over the past decade. More than half the producer support was provided
through higher market prices paid by consumers, while the remaining USD 297 billion per year was


22 

transferred from public budgets and hence paid by taxpayers. Policies in several countries suppress
domestic prices for some or most commodities, generating average annual transfers of USD 179 billion
away from producers in 2020-22, a more than seven-fold increase from the USD 24 billion two decades
earlier and on a strong rise in recent years. Differences in support across commodities, and the co-
existence of significant price support for some products with price-depressing policies for others, add to
the distortions generated by the overall price support, including within individual countries.
Finally, consumers and other first-level buyers of agricultural commodities received USD 115 billion per
year in budgetary support during 2020-22, a four-fold increase relative to the beginning of the century.
Despite this increase, however, this budgetary support did not, on average, offset the higher prices induced
by trade barriers and other price-increasing policies. Overall, consumers were implicitly taxed by close to
USD 150 billion per year, or 4% of their expenditures at farm-gate prices, down from 10% implicit taxation
20 years earlier but still adding to consumers’ cost of living.
Governments have taken significant policy actions to limit the market impacts of
the war in Ukraine and to address inflationary pressures more broadly
While the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic are still lingering, the war in Ukraine has further
disrupted international markets and value chains for both agricultural commodities and key inputs, notably
energy and fertilisers. Many governments have extended emergency measures or put in place new ones
to assist producers and consumers. These include helping Ukraine to continue to produce and export,
reducing import barriers for food and fertilisers, and providing support to compensate for rising input costs.
Countries also provided additional support to partly shield consumers from rising food costs.
At the same time, some countries have also implemented additional export barriers that added to pressures
on international markets, increased market uncertainty and risk increasing global food insecurity, as was
the case for those put in place during the COVID-19 pandemic. Others eased or suspended environmental
requirements to encourage domestic production and increase global commodity supplies, or subsidised
fertiliser and fuel, which may result in environmental degradation.
Governments are scaling up efforts to help agriculture adapt to climate change…
In addition to these acute crises, climate change is increasingly affecting agricultural production worldwide
through increased variability of temperatures and rainfall, disruptions to ecosystem services, and a
slowdown of productivity growth. Agriculture faces an increasing frequency and severity of extreme
weather events, including droughts, floods, heat waves, and storms. While some regions may benefit from
longer growing periods, production in most parts of the world urgently needs to adapt to less favourable
and more variable growing conditions.
This report identifies close to 600 measures for climate change adaptation in agriculture adopted in the
countries covered. Among the adaptation programmes, social, economic and institutional measures, such
as adaptation planning, investments in capacity-building, provision of climate services, and creation of
financial and insurance mechanisms, are most prominent. Together, they jointly account for 61% of all
adaptation measures. Other initiatives, which are more targeted to finding solutions for farmers and farming
systems, such as various ecosystem-based approaches, infrastructure and technical solutions, and
behavioural approaches, together account for the remaining 39% of the total.


 23

…but further actions and reforms are urgently needed
Effective adaption of agriculture to climate change will require further actions. Governments should move
beyond planning and urgently advance implementation, monitoring and assessment of adaptation
measures. Policy approaches for a more resilient agriculture should balance efforts to support short-run
recovery from climate and other shocks, with medium-term incremental adjustments to changing conditions
as well as the long-run transformation needed when existing systems become untenable. Although the
context matters, it is essential to evaluate to what extent the programmes developed by countries
contribute to strengthened resilience.
The growing number and severity of extreme weather events, together with other shocks, have made what
was once considered exceptional situations increasingly common. Preparing agriculture for a future where
climate change introduces new risks and exacerbates existing vulnerabilities calls for agricultural policies
that encourage agility and incentivise adaptation in a changing environment, yet most support reinforces
existing production structures. The continued prominence of market price support in many countries,
together with other forms of support that are potentially production and market distorting or commodity-
specific, discourage changes in production systems. These types of support also distort international
markets, which remain a key mechanism to smoothen the impacts of shortfalls or bumper harvests.
Avoiding trade barriers to the extent possible therefore contributes to the resilience of agriculture and food
systems.
In parallel, countries should urgently enhance their efforts to reduce agricultural greenhouse-gas (GHG)
emissions given that 11% of global anthropogenic emissions are directly agriculture related (with an
additional 11% related to land-use change that often is linked to the expansion of farming). Several
countries have updated their economy-wide mitigation targets, and an additional five countries have joined
the Global Methane Pledge calling for reducing global methane emissions. Still, today only 19 of the
54 countries covered in this report have put in place some form of mitigation target for their agricultural
sector. Mitigation efforts in agriculture are essential to meet the 1.5-degree target stipulated in the Paris
Agreement. This requires adjustments to production structures and methods, calling for reforms to the
same support policies that are hindering adaptation, and further reinforcing the importance of
transformative approaches to respond to the impacts of climate change. This calls for a need to foster
synergies between adaptation and mitigation efforts.
Opportunities to foster climate change adaptation are being missed as the share
of expenditures for general services declines
While overall support to agriculture has increased, investments in general services (GSSE), including R&D,
biosecurity services, infrastructure and other expenditures benefitting the sector overall, continue to
represent a small and declining share of transfers towards the agricultural sector. In 2020-22, these
investments amounted to USD 106 billion, or 12.5% of the total positive support, a share that had fluctuated
between 15% and 17% since 2000 but has fallen significantly after 2018. Almost half of this is spent on
investments in infrastructure, notably related to irrigation. While irrigation plays an important role to
withstand production under arid conditions, greater consideration needs to be given to unintended
consequences caused by such investments in the absence of adequate water management policies, such
as increased GHG emissions or growing pressures on water availability and water tables.
Less than a quarter of the general services investments across the 54 countries are for agricultural
knowledge and innovation systems. Research and development, as well as extension services and other
forms of knowledge transfer, are known to be highly efficient investments with high payoffs, even if the
returns may materialise only many years later. Nonetheless, public expenditures on innovation have
declined relative to the sector’s size, from 0.9% of the value of agricultural production in 2000-02 to less


24 

than 0.6% in 2020-22, with countries missing a significant opportunity. Continued technical progress
requires public investments in innovation complemented by private ones. At the same time, such
investments should be better targeted towards avoiding environmental damage and lowering the use of
natural resources, rather than just labour-saving technologies, as seen in many countries in recent years.
Agricultural productivity needs to rapidly increase in an environmentally sustainable manner to meet stated
global food security targets while reducing agricultural emissions and preserving natural resources.
Under a changing climate, investments in biosecurity may also play an increasingly important role.
Expenditures on inspection and control systems, including those related to pests and diseases, correspond
to 0.2% of the value of agricultural production, with little relative change over the past 20 years. These
activities are particularly relevant in the context of risks related to invasive species that can harm domestic
food systems and biodiversity, which can generate significant economic and environmental costs.
Transformative action for sustainable agriculture and food systems
At the OECD Meeting of Agricultural Ministers in November 2022, ministers and high representatives of
42 OECD member countries and emerging economies as well as of the European Union jointly committed
“to support the transformation of agriculture and food systems towards more sustainability and resilience”.1
In line with the ministers’ declaration, the following actions for governments are identified for improving
agriculture and food system’s resilience to successive shocks, including related to climate change.
•
Phase out measures that hinder adjustments to production, such as price support and other
policies targeting specific commodities that increase the rigidity of food systems by reducing
farmers’ incentives to adjust their production programmes to changing conditions. These are the
same policies, that previous editions of this report have found to be economically inefficient and
potentially most environmentally harmful. To facilitate reform, short-term non-trade-distorting
measures may be required. Periods of high food prices provide an additional impetus to reduce
and eliminate price support policies with minimal adjustment costs to producers and consumers.
Nonetheless, the persistently high levels of such support in some OECD countries and the
increased levels in some emerging economies suggest that more concerted multilateral action may
be required to facilitate such reforms.
•
Prioritise government engagement in agriculture’s risk management on information,
facilitation, and catastrophic risks. Governments should ensure that risk-related information is
available to farmers and other market participants, that insurance markets function well, and that
recovery-related support focuses on large-scale systemic or catastrophic risks that cannot be borne
by farmers or risk markets.
•
Invest in targeted interventions supporting climate-change adaptation and the sector’s
transition to more sustainable and resilient agriculture and food systems. This should include
significantly increasing investments in research, development and innovation to enhance on-farm
resilience, such as through activities that can safeguard genetic and species diversity, encourage
farmers to develop entrepreneurial skills and human capital, foster innovation on and promote the
uptake of resilience-enhancing practices and technologies. Governments should also consider
measures to increase agriculture’s transformative capacity, including the facilitation of structural
adjustments. This could also relate to diversifying income sources for farmers, including off-farm
employment. Although the context matters, governments should evaluate to what extent the
programmes developed by countries contribute to strengthened resilience.
•
Favour no-regret measures that support resilience in a wide range of circumstances. Given
the unknown nature of future crises and stressors, governments should focus on policy
opportunities that provide benefits and address underlying vulnerabilities under different
conditions. Facilitating international trade in agricultural commodities and their inputs, R&D focused


 25

on improved management of natural resources and the provision of other general services such
as biosecurity and key infrastructure, are important elements in this regard and should receive
increased attention.
In addition, governments should foster sustainable productivity growth in agriculture and food systems to
meet its triple challenge of providing adequate, affordable, safe and nutritious food for a growing global
population; providing livelihoods all along the food value chain; and doing so while increasing the
environmental sustainability of the sector. In addition to reforming policies and reorienting support as
recommended above, governments should:
•
Enhance the agricultural knowledge and innovation system and its focus on sustainable
productivity growth. Public expenditures should target productivity growth that reduces the
sector’s use of natural resources, its emissions of pollutants and their harmful effects. They should
also target the adoption of innovations by both small and large producers through enhanced
extension and farm advisory services, the designation of model farms, or other means. Public
investments need to complement private ones, and public-private R&D projects can facilitate the
adoption of innovative tools and practices. Reducing food losses and waste can further contribute
to lowering economic and environmental pressures.
•
Incentivise the supply of public goods. The agricultural sector faces an increasing demand for
contributions towards improved environmental outcomes and public goods, such as biodiversity
conservation, water quality, habitat restoration, or other ecosystem services. Governments should
increasingly consider targeted and tailored payments to support such activities where regulations
and market incentives are insufficient. This includes efforts towards reducing agricultural GHG
emissions, including by carbon pricing or other market-based approaches and through
complementing supply and demand side measures. Reorienting existing support that is distorting
or environmentally harmful provides an opportunity for supporting public goods without requiring
additional resources. Standards on the monitoring, measurement and reporting of such public
goods, and digital technologies to measure and trace them, could facilitate their provision and
valorisation. Countries may need to collaborate to avoid possible environmental leakages and other
issues that may arise from asymmetries in policies across countries.
Note

1 OECD (2022), Declaration on Transformative Solutions for Sustainable Agriculture and Food Systems,
OECD/LEGAL/0483, https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0483.


26 

This chapter analyses current policies and provides recommendations to
help agriculture adapt to climate change. It begins with an overview of the
current and future impacts of climate change on agriculture, and outlines
opportunities for agriculture to adapt to climate change. This is followed by
an analysis of UNFCCC reports yielding insights on the importance
governments attribute to agriculture in their adaptation strategies, and a
comprehensive stocktaking of nearly 600 agricultural climate change
adaptation programmes and activities across the 54 countries covered in
OECD’s Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2023. Finally, the
chapter discusses how agricultural support policies influence the ability of
farmers to adapt to climate change. The chapter concludes with key
recommendations for reforming agricultural policies to facilitate agriculture’s
adaptation to climate change.


1 Policies for agricultural adaptation
to a changing climate


 27

Agriculture is increasingly experiencing the impacts of climate change
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2023[1]), global temperatures
averaged 1.1°C higher over the previous decade than preindustrial levels and are rising by 0.2 degrees
per decade. Agriculture is among the sectors that is most exposed to the resulting changes in weather
patterns and extreme events, such as drought and flooding. Adapting to this changing environment is
imperative to tackle the triple challenge of providing food for a growing population, providing livelihoods all
along the food value chain and increasing the sustainability of the agricultural sector.
Observed impacts of climate change on agriculture
The effects of climate change have already had noticeable impacts on yield and the quality of agricultural
products. Although yields of staple crops have risen by 2.5 to 3-fold since 1960 due to improved technology
and management practices, global yields for crops such as maize and soybean are between 4% and 6%
lower than they would have been in the absence of warming trends (IPCC, 2022[2]; Moore, 2020[3]; Iizumi
et al., 2018[4]). Growth in the productivity of the sector has also significantly slowed:  since 1961, climate
change has reduced total factor productivity – a measure of how much output can be produced from a
given quantity of inputs – by an estimated 21% (Ortiz-Bobea et al., 2021[5]).
Agriculture is also particularly vulnerable to weather extremes given its intrinsic dependence on the natural
environment. Among the events most damaging to agricultural production, the frequency of droughts has
roughly doubled (from 8 per year in 1971-80 compared to 16 per year in 2011-20), storms have more than
tripled (from 29 to 103 per year), and floods have become nearly six times as prevalent (from 27 to 155
per year) (CRED, 2023[6]).1 In total, the number of natural disasters globally has increased since the 1970s,
from an average of 92 events per year between 1971-80 to 372 events per year between 2011-20
(Figure 1.1). The economic cost of disasters has risen from USD 1.63 trillion in 1980-99 to USD 2.97 trillion
in 2000-19, driven by a combination of factors including increased frequency of some types of events,
increased exposure, and increased vulnerability (CRED and UNDRR, 2020[7]).2 While the economic losses
are greatest in absolute terms in developed countries, the impacts of natural disasters are particularly
pronounced in developing countries, where the most vulnerable are less able to cope with and recover
from their impacts (OECD/FAO, 2021[8]).


28 

Figure 1.1. Frequency of reported natural disasters worldwide, 1970-2021

Note: Data include all reported natural disasters meeting at least one of the following criteria: 10 or more people dead; 100 or more people
affected; a declaration of a state of emergency; a call for international assistance.
Source: EM-DAT, CRED / UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium – www.emdat.be.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/e5mk10
The risks to agriculture from climate change are considerable, but there are also potential positive effects
in some regions, such as the geographic migration of agricultural production and resulting new
opportunities.3 For example, northern regions of Europe and North America are likely to become
increasingly suitable for agricultural production as warmer temperatures extend the length of the growing
season. Some regions may become more suitable for growing different types of crops. For example, some
parts of Spain have reported becoming increasingly favourable for growing tropical fruits. Wine production
has already extended northward, into the United Kingdom, for example, and into high-altitude growing
regions, such as mountainous areas of Italy. Countries in northern latitudes anticipate improved growing
conditions broadly for staple crops, such as sugar beets and maize. Even in countries with warmer climates
where increased temperatures are expected to be detrimental, a decrease in frost is expected to benefit
certain crops (Cobourn, 2023[9]).
Regionally, climate change has had varied effects on agriculture. Europe has faced earlier onset of growing
seasons, as well as warming and precipitation changes (IPCC, 2022[10]). Estimates suggest that this
positively affects maize and sugar beet yields, but negatively affects those of wheat and barley. Crop
losses due to droughts and heat waves in Europe have tripled over the past five decades (Brás et al.,
2021[11]). In recent years, cold winters, excessive autumn and spring rain, and summer droughts have
combined to reduce yields from expected levels based on historical trends. Warmer temperatures have
also led to poleward incursions of pests, diseases and invasive species. For example, the European corn
borer has moved over 1 000 km northward, and the Diamondback moth has moved 800 km farther
northward in Scandinavia than its former range in Russia. These trends are expected to continue with the
spread of the olive fly into northern areas of Italy (Skendžić et al., 2021[12]).
In Asia, climate change has been associated with changing monsoonal rains, extreme temperatures and
oceanic oscillations (IPCC, 2022[13]; Thirumalai et al., 2017[14]). For agricultural production, climate change
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
Wildfire
Other natural disaster
Extreme temperature
Earthquake, Landslide or mass movement
Epidemic
Storm
Flood
Drought
Frequency


 29

has delayed crop harvesting, reduced crop yields and quality, increased the incidence of pests and
diseases, stunted livestock growth and increased animal mortality. Climate change influences the
magnitude, timing and pattern of El Niño events, with adverse impacts on agricultural productivity and food
security in middle- and lower-income countries in Southeast and South Asia (Cai et al., 2014[15]). This is
particularly salient for rice production, which depends heavily on monsoon rainfall that declines with a
stronger El Niño. According to a recent study, El Niño negatively affects 13.4% of global rice harvesting
areas, including those located in India, Viet Nam, the Philippines, northeast People’s Republic of China
(hereafter “China”), and Japan (Cao et al., 2023[16]). Australasia has been affected by a number of drought,
heat and frost events in recent decades that have had strongly negative effects on agriculture (IPCC,
2022[17]). Northern Australia’s agricultural output losses are estimated to average 19% each year due to
drought. In New Zealand, reduced winter chill has led to earlier harvesting of kiwifruits (Cobourn, 2023[9]).
North America has faced shifting growing seasons, as well as extreme heat and precipitation (IPCC,
2022[18]). The share of land area in the United States that experienced extreme precipitation has risen
significantly since the 1980s which bring with it increased risk of surface runoff, soil erosion and loss of soil
carbon (Gowda et al., 2018[19]). Agricultural total factor productivity growth across North America has
generally declined as a direct result of climate change, with growing regions at lower latitudes more
affected (Ortiz-Bobea et al., 2021[5]).
Most subregions of South America have experienced increases in the intensity and frequency of hot
extremes and decreases in those of cold extremes (IPCC, 2022[20]). Drought duration and intensity is also
increasing with events such as the “Central Chile Mega Drought”, representing the longest drought in the
region in one thousand years, and the multi-year drought in the Parana-La Plata Basin, the most severe
since 1944. In South America overall, drought conditions reduced cereal harvests in 2020-2021 by 2.6%
relative to the prior year (WMO, 2022[21]). Drought in the Mexican state of Zacatecas reduced the bean
harvest in 2020 to its lowest level in 20 years. Central America and Northern South America have
experienced increases in magnitude and frequency of extreme precipitation events as well as fire. In
Argentina, fire destroyed critical pasture in the Gran Chaco region in 2022, decreasing pasture and
livestock productivity.
Potential future impacts of climate change on agriculture
Against this backdrop, the need for adaptation measures to limit and anticipate the effects of climate
change is ever increasing. IPCC scenarios project rising temperatures, elevated levels of CO2 and more
frequent and extreme weather events (IPCC, 2023[1]). These effects will continue to challenge agriculture
over the coming decades. For example, rising temperatures could reduce soil carbon and nitrogen levels,
which in turn will reduce the yield potential of crops (IPCC, 2022[2]; Basso et al., 2018[22]). Further yield
losses are expected to be realised from changes in insect pest populations and metabolic processes, which
are sensitive to rising temperatures (Deutsch et al., 2018[23]; IPCC, 2022[2]). Higher temperatures will also
increase the number of extreme stress days per year for livestock and could cause large production losses,
particularly for beef and dairy (Nardone et al., 2006[24]; IPCC, 2022[2]). Increasing CO2 levels are projected
to affect the establishment, competition, distribution, and management of weeds, reducing herbicide
efficacy (IPCC, 2022[2]). Increasing temperatures will reduce available water resources as a result of
changes in river flows, basin storage and decreased rates of groundwater recharge. This will have negative
consequences for the roughly 40% of global crops which are irrigated and could have even more important
impact in regions where agriculture faces increased competition from other sectors (OECD, 2017[25]).
The frequency and intensity of extreme events are also expected to worsen (IPCC, 2021[26]). More frequent
and damaging extreme weather events such as droughts, storms and floods will lead to more crop failures,
increase aflatoxin contamination, and affect the economic viability of grassland-based livestock production
in some regions. Floods and storms may increase the spread of water-borne diseases, microorganisms
and algae which negatively affect livestock health. They may also damage critical infrastructure required


30 

for the harvest, transport, and processing of farm produce. Although some tipping points have already
been crossed, or are close to being crossed, warming beyond 1.5°C is more likely to induce climate tipping
points, irreversibly affecting agriculture in certain regions. For instance, the slowdown of the Atlantic
Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC), is predicted to lead to abrupt and irreversible impacts,
including changes in monsoon systems and widespread drought with detrimental impacts for current
agricultural systems (OECD, 2022[27]).
Along with risks to individual growers, there are also risks to global food systems. There is growing
evidence that rising temperatures increase the probability of simultaneous yield losses in major food
producing regions (IPCC, 2022[2]; Gaupp et al., 2019[28]; Cai et al., 2014[15]; Perry et al., 2017[29]). These
concurrent yield loss events could lead to significant price spikes on international markets due to reduced
global supplies. This will impair the ability of importing countries to secure supplies and could increase the
risks to global food security.
The magnitude of the impacts of climate change on agriculture rise substantially with every additional
degree of warming, stressing the importance of mitigation efforts to limit emissions (IPCC, 2022[2]). Adverse
changes in precipitation, temperature and aridity could see as much as one third of current agricultural
land become unsuitable for major crop or livestock production by the end of the century under the IPCC’s
most pessimistic emissions scenario (Kummu et al., 2021[30]; IPCC, 2022[31]). However, even under more
optimistic climate change scenarios, large impacts on agricultural production are projected. For instance,
under a low-emissions scenario, up to 8% of current agricultural land is expected to become unsuitable for
major crop or livestock production by the end of the century.
How can agriculture adapt to a changing climate?
The IPCC defines climate change adaptation in human systems as “the process of adjustment to actual or
expected climate and its effects, in order to moderate harm or exploit beneficial opportunities” (Ara Begum
et al., 2022[32]). Adaptation in the agricultural sector may be autonomous or planned. Autonomous
adaptation is defined as a process undertaken without explicit planning or guidance and in response to
changes in the environment or market (Malik, Qin and Smith, 2010[33]). This form of adaptation often occurs
when farmers adjust their practices in response to observed changes in climatic conditions, such as
changing livestock or farm management practices, switching varieties or species, or altering the timing of
planting, stocking and other key activities. In contrast, planned adaptation follows from an intentional and
deliberative decision making process. Planned adaptations are often, but not exclusively, undertaken by
groups of actors or public entities in anticipation of or in response to a change. Examples include
investments in more resilient seeds or technologies to improve irrigation efficiency (Ignaciuk and Mason-
D’Croz, 2014[34]).
Farmers are often best positioned to determine the adaptation measures needed to mitigate climate risk
on their farms, provided that they have sufficient resources, access to knowledge, and financial and
technical capacity to adapt (Wreford, Ignaciuk and Gruère, 2017[35]). In many cases, on-farm adaptation
occurs without the need for policy interventions, or in spite of policies that hinder adaptation, as farmers
react to observed or projected changes in climatic conditions. In these instances, the benefits of adaptation
are derived locally and directly captured by farmers. This means that self-interest is a sufficient incentive
for the adaptation action to occur (Ignaciuk, 2015[36]).
However, even when there is a private benefit, farmers may choose not to engage in climate adaptation
actions due to information gaps, financial constraints or misaligned incentives (Wreford, Ignaciuk and
Gruère, 2017[35]). In other instances, climate adaptation cannot be adequately implemented on farm due
to market failures, externalities and information asymmetries or if more radical transformation is required
(Ignaciuk, 2015[36]). The IPCC (2022[2]) predicts that because of limited adaptive capacities and non-
climatic compounding drivers of food insecurity, autonomous adaptation will be insufficient to meet the UN


 31

Sustainable Development Goal 2 of ending hunger, achieving food security and improved nutrition and
promoting sustainable agriculture. Thus, more pro-active planned adaptation, supported by public policy,
will be essential.
The role for policy in climate change adaptation: Enhancing resilience
Given that farmers undertake their decisions within the context of social and economic institutions that
constrain, or facilitate, their ability to adapt, there is a clear role for public policy to play in creating an
enabling environment. The types of adaptation actions that may be justified for public interventions from
an economic perspective include, for example, actions that generate or transfer knowledge, correct for
externalities, allow for sharing extreme risk, and correct for institutional, regulatory or financial barriers to
adaptation (Ignaciuk, 2015[36]).
Planning adaptation strategies comes with a great deal of uncertainty and adaptation strategies can fail.
In some circumstances strategies may actually increase vulnerability to climate change, a phenomenon
known as maladaptation. Maladaptation refers to actions or inactions which lead to increased risk of
adverse outcomes, increased vulnerability, or diminished welfare as a result of climate change, now or in
the future (IPCC, 2022[2]). For example, subsidies for water efficient irrigation measures may lead to greater
extraction of groundwater and planting of more water-intensive crops, increasing the likelihood and
magnitude of losses due to future drought (OECD, 2017, p. 166[25]). Government support to specific
practices or technologies that do not fully respond to local needs can also generate harmful incentives or
simply reinforce existing production profiles and techniques, undermining the incentives for autonomous
adaptation. Even well-intentioned adaptation policies implemented today can turn out to be a driver of
maladaptation in the future because of significant uncertainty in climate projections. To minimise the risk
of maladaptation, “no regret” policies should be prioritised, alongside adaptation policies that are flexible
and suitably robust across a range of climate scenario outcomes with a view to improving long-term
productivity (Ignaciuk, 2015[36]; Antón et al., 2013[37]).
It is difficult for a policymaker to determine the specific adaptation actions suited for local conditions, thus
is generally accepted that policy should focus on developing the capacity of a system to adapt, rather than
prioritising specific adaptation strategies (OECD, 2014[38]). As a result, adaptation policies often focus on
increasing resilience, defined as “the ability to prepare and plan for, absorb, recover from, and more
successfully adapt and transform in response to adverse events” (OECD, 2020[39]). This definition
incorporates preparation and three core capacities – absorptive, adaptive, and transformative capacity –
which correspond to action over the short, medium, and long run, respectively.
Following OECD (2020[39]), absorptive capacity refers to the ability of a system to cope with the impacts of
a shock in the short run, e.g. by establishing early warning systems that allow farmers to adjust their
operations, or crop insurance schemes that compensate farmers for damages. Adaptive capacity is the
ability of a system to adjust in the medium-term through incremental changes in behaviour, but without
structural change. Examples of such incremental changes in behaviour include changes in farm
operations, adjustments to planting dates or crop mix, or changing irrigation systems. Transformative
capacity corresponds to the ability of a system to undergo structural change, such as moving crops into
new production regions, developing new infrastructure, creating new market opportunities, or leaving
farming altogether which could be supported by compensation for exiting the sector.4
It is essential that policy for climate change adaptation supports each of these three capacities in order to
facilitate effective adaptation and to avoid maladaptive outcomes in the long run. Actions that focus only
on countering short-term impacts of climate change can become maladaptive over time if the situation
does not improve (Lankoski, Ignaciuk and Jésus, 2018[40]; Schipper, 2020[41]). For example, ex-post
disaster compensation may support farmers through a season of drought, but increasing instances of
drought attributable to climate change may mean that better tools to assist farmers plan for and manage
risks or potentially even more transformative change may be necessary in the long-term. Similarly, focusing


32 

on medium-run capacity may supplant investments in transformative capacity that are necessary in the
long run. For example, investing in the development of new cultivars may delay the need to shift to a new
crop or new producing region, even if structural change will be necessary in the long run.
While agricultural and climate policies and investments are the main vehicles to progress towards
enhanced resilience capacity for agriculture, water policy can also play an important role to foster climate
change adaptation particular in regions subject to high water risks (Box 1.1).
Box 1.1. Water policies and climate change adaptation
Climate change is exacerbating water risks for agriculture, including via prolonged and more intense
droughts, extreme flooding, irregular precipitation or sea level rise. Managing these risks, which are
often local, complex and dynamic, require a multi-layer approach, encompassing changes at the farm
level, water basin level, and national level.
Water policies are essential as a complement to agriculture policies and investments for climate resilient
agriculture production systems. They include, in particular, a combination of regulatory economic and
collective approaches to manage groundwater sustainably, as aquifers remain the largest water
reservoir globally and a central resource for irrigated agriculture in key production regions. Water
policies also include water allocation regimes that can balance water demand and supply depending
on changes in precipitations.
Earlier OECD work found that future water risks for agriculture are concentrated in particular locations
in each country, continent and globally (OECD, 2017[25]). These “water risk hotspots” therefore deserve
more policy attention and efforts, as they are particularly likely to affect production, and may generate
significant market and food security impacts.
Source: OECD (2015[42]; 2016[43]; 2017[25]; 2020[44]).
The importance of linking adaptation and mitigation measures
Both adaptation and mitigation actions are critical in the face of a worsening climate and there are important
synergies to be realised from integrated responses that encompass both (Bezner Kerr et al., 2022[45]).
Mitigation refers to actions or activities that limit greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from entering the
atmosphere or reduce their levels in the atmosphere (e.g. through carbon sinks) (Grubb et al., 2022[46]).
Even with progress on mitigation, some climate impacts are already unavoidable and adaptation efforts
will be necessary to address further losses and damages. In this context, an integrated approach to climate
policy that includes both mitigation and adaptation components is necessary to develop long-term
resilience. To transition towards net-zero emissions, leveraging synergies between the two is essential to
generating effective and efficient policies (OECD, 2023[47]).
Adaptation and mitigation actions often have different drivers, benefits and barriers to adoption (Wreford,
Ignaciuk and Gruère, 2017[35]). In particular, adaptation actions can generate direct benefits for farmers
and local communities, whereas mitigation actions tend to result in public rather than private benefits. As
a result, policy intervention is often required to incentivise mitigation actions. The use of incentives such
as well-designed payments for environmental and climate services, land retirement policies, afforestation
and R&D incentives are examples of policies that may encourage emissions reductions, although care
must be taken in their design and implementation (OECD, 2022[48]). Reform of agricultural support policies,
in particular the phase out of market price support and payments with strong potential to harm the
environment and to distort markets and trade, is among the priority actions for climate change mitigation
(OECD, 2022[48]).


 33

Although adaptation actions may sometimes be socially optimal, there are many cases in which adaptation
fails due to a lack of financial, knowledge or technical resources. In these cases, the role for policy
predominantly lies in the provision of information, access to credit and engagement (Wreford, Ignaciuk and
Gruère, 2017[35]). In other cases where structural changes are required, or where there are considerable
public benefits, there is a clear economic rationale for policy intervention. Adaptation policies should
consider long-term risks, but factor in future uncertainty and build in flexibility so that well-intentioned
policies do not lead to maladaptation (Ignaciuk, 2015[36]). Policy coherence is imperative along with
monitoring the effectiveness of policy approaches.
Although the role of policy in mitigation and adaptation differs, it is often the case that a single policy
instrument simultaneously contributes to both objectives, providing mitigation-adaptation co-benefits
(Bustamante et al., 2014[49]). For example, measures to increase soil organic carbon may contribute to
both mitigation and to improving the yields of crops and pasture.
In practice, policies for mitigation and adaptation can be misaligned with each other, and with other
objectives (Lankoski, Ignaciuk and Jésus, 2018[40]). For instance, Lankoski, Ignaciuk and Jésus (2018[40])
found that a green set-aside payment may have positive effects on productivity and mitigation but negative
effects on adaptation. The impacts of any policy will be highly context-specific. Countries will thus need to
make specific assessments of likely policy effects on the three objectives and adopt a holistic approach in
order to tackle the triple challenge.
An evolving focus on agricultural adaptation and resilience: Analysis of UNFCCC
reports
What importance do governments convey to agriculture in their overall adaptation strategies? Following
Cobourn (2023[9]) and the related literature, international reporting documents submitted by each of the
countries included in this report (henceforth referred to as the “M&E countries”) to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) yield some insight into how the attention paid by
governments to climate change adaptation in agriculture has evolved over nearly four decades, from the
mid-1990s through early 2023.5 These include periodic national communications submitted by Parties to
the Convention, as well as reporting documents under the Paris Agreement, namely required nationally
determined contributions (NDCs) and optional adaptation communications.6
All of the documents submitted to the UNFCCC refer to agriculture, though the national communications
are the most comprehensive source of information spanning the M&E countries in terms of frequency with
which agriculture is discussed (Figures 1.2 and 1.3).7 Adaptation communications also address issues
related to agriculture but have been submitted by only 17 of the 54 M&E countries to date. A keyword
frequency analysis was conducted of all reporting documents (see the chapter Annex for more details),
which showed that there are large differences between countries in terms of how extensively agriculture is
discussed. Among OECD members, for example, words related to agriculture appear 3.3 times more often
in the national communications of Türkiye than of Luxembourg. In general, the national communications
of emerging economies more heavily emphasise agriculture than those of OECD countries, with a mean
frequency of references that is 1.5 times greater. This difference may be driven by the relatively greater
importance of agriculture to their overall economies or it may capture differences in predicted climate risks
arising from changing growing conditions and extreme events. However, it may also be driven by reporting
differences that arise because emerging economies rely on UNFCCC documents to justify their needs for
adaptation financing (Pauw, Mbeva and van Asselt, 2019[50]).
Since the mid-1990s, the UNFCCC documents have grown in length nearly four-fold as reporting on
climate change, including adaptation, has become more developed. The frequency of references to
agriculture within these documents has been relatively constant across reporting rounds for OECD


34 

members and for the emerging economies, but the total amount of text relevant to agriculture has increased
over time, indicating an increased depth of reporting on the sector (Annex Figure 1.A.1).
Figure 1.2. Frequency of reference to agricultural keywords, UNFCCC national communications

Note: Pie chart represents the proportion of usage of each agricultural keyword within all national communications reviewed (for all M&E countries).
Source: Author’s analysis based on documents submitted to the UNFCCC.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/m5qc3z
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
China
Brazil
Argentina
Kazakhstan
South Africa
Indonesia
Russia
Philippines
Ukraine
Viet Nam
India
Malta
Croatia
Bulgaria
Romania
Cyprus
Luxembourg
Spain
Japan
Chile
Mexico
Colombia
France
Germany
Belgium
Iceland
Italy
Greece
United States
European Union
Norway
Sweden
Portugal
Switzerland
Denmark
Australia
Austria
Costa Rica
Finland
United Kingdom
Estonia
Netherlands
Czech
Canada
Slovenia
Hungary
Poland
Slovakia
Latvia
Lithuania
New Zealand
Ireland
Israel
Korea
Türkiye
Emerging economies
Non-OECD EU
members
OECD members
Percent of words
65.9%
11.3%
6.2%
9.0%
7.7%
Agriculture
Crop
Livestock
Food
Farm


 35

Figure 1.3. Frequency of reference to agricultural keywords, Paris Agreement documents

Note: EE = Emerging economies. Pie charts represent the proportion of usage of each agricultural keyword within all NDCs and adaptation
communications reviewed (for all M&E countries).
Source: Author’s analysis based on documents submitted to the UNFCCC.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/sdnutj
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Argentina
Russia
South Africa
China
Kazakhstan
Indonesia
Brazil
Ukraine
India
Viet Nam
Philippines
Costa Rica
Colombia
Chile
Australia
Canada
United Kingdom
Norway
European Union
Switzerland
Iceland
Mexico
Korea
New Zealand
Japan
Israel
United States
Türkiye
Emerging economies
OECD members
Percent of words
56%
18%
10%
12%
4%
Agriculture
Crop
Livestock
Food
Farm
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Indonesia
Chile
Switzerland
Spain
Mexico
Austria
European Union
Canada
Sweden
United States
Portugal
United Kingdom
Norway
Australia
Japan
Italy
Netherlands
EE
OECD members
Percent of words
57%
11%
5%
21%
6%
Agriculture
Crop
Livestock
Food
Farm
Nationally determined contributions (NDCs)
Adaptation communications


36 

References to agriculture discuss different topics, including the role of agriculture in mitigation, agricultural
vulnerabilities to climate change, and adaptation of agricultural and food systems. The vast majority of the
discussion of agriculture in the UNFCCC documents focuses on mitigation, though OECD countries
emphasise mitigation more than the emerging economies, which focus more heavily on identifying
agricultural vulnerabilities and on adaptation (Figure 1.4).
Over time, agricultural mitigation, in terms of textual references, has declined in relative importance, falling
by 27% among OECD countries between the mid-1990s and 2023. Discussion has also focused less on
identifying climate change vulnerabilities and more on adaptation, a trend that is particularly evident among
emerging economies. Between the first and most recent reporting round for OECD countries, references
to agricultural adaptation increased by a factor of 4.9, compared to 6.3 for emerging economies. Notably,
discussion of the mitigation-adaptation co-benefits associated with agriculture has increased substantially
in the nationally determined contributions of all M&E countries, though the growth in discussion of these
co-benefits has been most pronounced among OECD countries.
Figure 1.4. Contextual topic areas within which agriculture key words appear in UNFCCC reports

Note: NC1 to NC8 refer to reporting rounds for the national communications to the UNFCCC. For original signatories, NC1 was submitted starting
in 1994, with successive reporting rounds approximately every 5 years. For Non-Annex I Parties, NC1 was submitted within 5 years of signing
the Convention, with dates that vary.
Source: Analysis based on national communications (NC) to the UNFCCC and nationally determined contributions (NDCs) and adaptation
communications under the Paris Agreement.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/sjgzp9
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Version 1
Version 2+
Percent of references to agriculture
NDCs (All)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
NC1
NC2
NC3
NC4
NC5
NC6
NC7
NC8
National communications (All)
Mitigation
Adaptation
Vulnerability
Mitigation &
adaptation
Other
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Version 1
Version 2+
Percent of references to agriculture
NDCs (Emerging economies)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
NC1
NC2
NC3
NC4
NC5
NC6
NC7
National communications (Emerging economies)
Mitigation
Adaptation
Vulnerability
Mitigation &
adaptation
Other
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Version 1
Version 2+
Percent of references to agriculture
NDCs (OECD)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
NC1
NC2
NC3
NC4
NC5
NC6
NC7
NC8
National communications (OECD)
Mitigation
Adaptation
Vulnerability
Mitigation &
adaptation
Other


 37

Agricultural climate change adaptation programmes and activities
Governments of M&E countries have undertaken a wide range of climate change adaptation programmes
and activities that may not all be described in the UNFCCC reports. This section analyses these efforts,
based on reporting from the M&E countries, as described in the country chapters.
More specifically, this section assesses and classifies adaptation responses using the following four
categories: (1) infrastructure and technological measures (INT); (2) behavioural and cultural measures
(BHC); (3) ecosystem or nature-based measures (ECO); and (4) social, economic, and institutional
measures (SEI). These categories are based on the classification scheme of the Global Adaptation
Mapping Initiative (GAMI), used in the 6th IPCC report to link agricultural adaptation options with the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (Bezner Kerr et al., 2022[45]).8 The sub-categories presented in
Table 1.1 were developed by the Secretariat to reflect the range of programmes and activities implemented
and reported by the M&E countries (see the chapter Annex for more details).
In total, 599 adaptation programmes and activities across the M&E countries were identified by the
Secretariat based on each country’s self-reported activities. The majority fall into the SEI category, which
account for 60.6% (363) of the total, shown in blue in Figure 1.5. Following that is ECO at 18.7% (112)
shown in green; INT at 11.4% (68) shown in grey; and BHC at 9.3% (56) shown in orange. When reported
programmes or activities included components or elements spanning multiple categories or sub-
categories, they were included in each of them for completeness.9 The following sub-sections discuss the
programmes and activities in each category, with examples from member countries included for illustrative
purposes.
Table 1.1. Categories and sub-categories for adaptation actions and programmes
Categories based on Global Adaptation Mapping Initiative (GAMI), with sub-categories modified to capture the range
of activities reported by M&E countries
Category and sub-category
Description
Infrastructure and technological approaches
(INT)
Enabling, implementing or undertaking technological innovation or infrastructure development
Irrigation and drainage
Investing in irrigation and drainage infrastructure on farm; e.g. installation of irrigation or
drainage technology, development of individual water storage systems
Regional water infrastructure
Investing in water infrastructure at a regional level (off farm); e.g. installation of flood control
technology, construction of reservoirs or canals
Crop or livestock technology
Investing in technologies for crop or livestock production; e.g. installation of canopies to
control the growing climate for tree crops, sprinkler or ventilation systems to prevent livestock
heat stress
Behavioural and cultural approaches (BHC)
Enabling changes in farmer behaviour
Crop management and operations
Altering crop management practices; e.g. adjusting planting dates, changes in growing
location
Livestock management and operations
Altering livestock management practices; e.g. adjustments in animal husbandry or manure
management.
Pest, disease and invasive species control
Managing pest, disease and invasive species problems in crop or livestock production;
e.g. invasive species inspection programmes, collaborative efforts to slow spread
Crop or livestock breeding or breed selection
Supporting the selection of cultivars or breeds or developing new cultivars or breeds;
e.g. breeding programmes, adoption of climate-adapted cultivars or breeds
Ecosystem-based approaches (ECO)
Enhancing, protecting or promoting ecosystem services
Water quality
Efforts to limit soil erosion and nutrient runoff into waterways; e.g. riparian buffers, use of
catch crops, fertilisation plans and nutrient balances
Soil health
Efforts to improve soil health, reclaim land or limit desertification; e.g. conservation tillage, soil
testing, humus management
Diversification
Efforts to promote diversity, e.g. crop rotations, preservation of agrobiodiversity, agroforestry


38 

Category and sub-category
Description
Agroecology
Efforts to advance agro-ecological systems, e.g. organic production, land conservation, land
retirement
Social, economic and institutional approaches
(SEI)
Enhancing the capacities of individuals, groups and institutions to respond to climate change
Climate services
Providing information to support improved decision making; e.g. early warning systems,
decision support tools, the provision of forecasts or climate scenarios, extension and outreach
Insurance
Creating or expanding insurance mechanisms to accommodate climate risks
Other financial mechanisms
Creating other non-insurance financial instruments; e.g. disaster recovery funding, payments
for environmental services; this category also includes funding programmes that support a
diversity of activities that potentially span other categories and subcategories (e.g. funding
instruments awarded by a national to regional or local governments to support various
adaptation activities
Capacity building
Investing in the capacity of individuals or institutions to adapt; e.g. research or research
funding, the development of partnerships, community based adaptation, changes in legal or
governance structures
Planning
Developing adaptation strategies or plans; e.g. local, regional, national or sectoral adaptation
plans, disaster or contingency planning
Figure 1.5. Agricultural adaptation actions and programmes by category and sub-category

Note: Size of rectangle is proportional to the share of the total number of adaptation actions and programmes identified by the Secretariat.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/ycrgt0
Social, economic, and institutional measures
The majority of activities reported by national governments fall within the realm of social, economic and
institutional (SEI) approaches. This is not surprising as the category covers the key functions of
governments, including developing strategic planning documents; the development of capacity via
governance changes, education and outreach; and the provision of information to support decision making.


 39

Also included in this category is the provision of insurance programmes targeted to climate risks and the
establishment of other financial mechanisms, such as ex post disaster relief.
Within the SEI category, activities predominantly fall into the categories of planning (20.7% of all activities
reported), capacity building (18.0%) and climate services (11.4%). Over three-quarters of the countries
covered in this monitoring report reported 124 planning activities relevant to agricultural adaptation. These
include general, high-level planning documents that address agriculture, such as Argentina’s National
Plan for Adaptation and Mitigation to Climate Change by 2030, the European Union’s New Strategy on
Adaptation to Climate Change: Forging a Climate-Resilient Europe, and the publication by the New
Zealand Government in August 2022 of its first National Adaptation Plan, which sets out actions to address
the priority and significant risks the country faces from the impacts of climate change.10 A number of
countries report regional-scale planning efforts, such as Australia’s Regional Drought Resilience Planning
Program, which supports the development of community led resilience plans, and Greece’s efforts to
incorporate consideration of climate change adaptation issues into regions’ rural development
programmes.
Planning also includes region-, sector-, resource- and event-specific guidance documents. Sector-specific
plans include Brazil’s Agricultural Policy for Climate Adaptation and Low Carbon Emissions (ABC+ Plan),
the Japan Ministry of Agriculture, Forests and Fisheries (MAFF) Climate Change Adaptation Plan and
Germany’s Agenda for Climate-change Adaptation in Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries and Aquaculture.
Resource-specific guidance covers soil health, e.g. Mexico’s National Soil Strategy for Sustainable
Agriculture (ENASAS), water resources, e.g. Hungary’s Watershed Management Plan, and the
development of organic agriculture, e.g. Croatia’s National Action Plan for the Development of Organic
Agriculture for the period 2023-2030.11 Event specific guidance includes the Netherlands’ Action Plan for
Heat Stress in Livestock, Poland’s Drought Counteraction Plan and France’s Wildfire Programme.
Efforts to track adaptation progress or plan implementation are also included in the planning category,
although there are relatively few examples. One is Ireland’s Adaptation Scorecard, which assesses
adaptation progress across sectors overall and with respect to three criteria: 1) risk, prioritisation and
adaptive capacity; 2) resourcing and mainstreaming; and 3) governance, co-ordination and cross-cutting
aspects. France also conducted an evaluation of the implementation of its National Climate Change
Adaptation Plan for the period 2011-2015, finding that the five actions related to agriculture were finished
or in process at the time of the assessment.12
Capacity building, cited in 108 activities, includes a broad range of investments and measures that
strengthen the capacity of farmers or institutions to adapt to climate change. Investments in agricultural
research and development (R&D) and knowledge transfer are critical for driving productivity improvements
and supporting the development of new cultivars, livestock breeds, and production technologies.
Community-based adaptation strategies involve building adaptive capacity through locally driven and
place-based approaches. Examples include community seed, feed or fodder banks, and community forest
management. Leveraging indigenous and local knowledge through participatory plant breeding can
support adaptation by facilitating interactions between indigenous knowledge systems and scientific
research. In livestock systems, pastoralists’ local knowledge can complement scientific research and help
to inform decision making.
The majority of activities in capacity building reported target investments in research or research funding
programmes, such as Israel’s Center for Agricultural Adaptation, which supports research on field crops
and vegetables, fruit trees, plant protection and animal sciences, and activities related to extension and
outreach, such as India’s National Mission on Agricultural Extension and Technology. New Zealand’s
new Centre for Climate Action on Agricultural Emissions was also established to achieve the objectives of
accelerating the development of high-impact technologies and practices to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions.13 This category also includes developing partnerships and promoting knowledge sharing, such
as Belgium’s Flemish Resilience Plan, which allocates EUR 2.8 million (USD 2.9 million) to improve co-


40 

operation between the agricultural sector and entrepreneurship, digitalisation and knowledge sharing.
Programmes in this category also support extension and outreach, such as the Chile Conscious Origin
(Chile Origen Consciente) programme, established in 2022, to provide a framework for farmers to
incorporate sustainability standards in their operations and to verify compliance through self-assessments
and independent audits. Several countries also reported participating in international efforts on R&D and
knowledge sharing. One such example is the Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases,
launched in 2009, which brings together leading scientists, researchers and policymakers from over
60 countries to share knowledge and improve agricultural productivity while reducing greenhouse gas
emissions. Another example is the OECD’s Co-operative Research Programme, a programme joined by
Israel in 2022, which contributes to climate change adaptation (Box 1.2).
Box 1.2. The OECD’s Co-operative Research Programme: Sustainable Agricultural and Food
Systems
The OECD's Co-operative Research Programme: Sustainable Agricultural and Food Systems (CRP)
aims to generate knowledge sharing and provide relevant scientific information and advice for policy
decisions related to the sustainable use of natural resources in agriculture, food, fisheries and forests.
To do so, it focuses on two activities: first, through its fellowships, the CRP funds short-term research
projects for individual scientists in other CRP member countries. Second, the CRP sponsors
international conferences and workshops. During 2010-2023, a total of 375 fellowships and
112 conference or workshop sponsorships were granted.
Climate change is one of the priority areas of research for the CRP and it has funded many activities
related to the issue. These recently included fellowships on, for example, related topics of peatland
restoration, land tenure models for carbon-positive land use, adapting crops to changing environments,
plant variety protection to drought tolerant varieties, and improved innovation and knowledge systems
for forests and natural resource management. Related recent workshops and conferences have
explored topics such as nitrogen losses and agricultural GHG emissions, synergies and trade-offs
between adaptation, mitigation and ecosystem services, the treatment of peatlands, sustaining soil
productivity, and the evaluation of agricultural management practices and infrastructures adapted to
climate change.
Further information about CRP fellowships and conferences is available at
www.oecd.org/agriculture/crp.
Climate services, in 68 reported programmes, can contribute to adaptation via the production, translation,
communication, and use of climate information in decision-making. The provision of tailored information to
decision makers can increase yields and promote changes in farmers’ practices. Improvements to weather
forecasting, crop monitoring and early warning systems can help farmers to prepare for extreme weather
events, manage risks and reduce losses.
Activities reported involve the collection and dissemination of data to support decision making. This
includes forecasts, such as the United States’ National Significant Wildland Fire Potential Outlook, which
features a monthly and 7-day fire potential outlook, and decision support tools, such as Australia’s My
Climate View online platform, which enables farmers, industry and regional communities to anticipate
future climate conditions, draw comparisons with recent weather, consider the implications for production
and prepare for future drought. In addition to addressing climate and adaptation possibilities, tools
developed by countries support enhanced sustainability in production, such as Estonia’s Big Data Project,
launched in 2022 to provide a free and publicly accessible tool to support precision fertilisation and nutrient
balancing, and Switzerland’s national Soil Mapping Implementation Strategy, which seeks to support
sustainable land use in a changing climate.


 41

Insurance mechanisms developed to target climate-related risks are cited as part of 26 programmes by
24 of the countries covered in this report. Indonesia, for example, has implemented insurance products in
collaboration with the insurance company PT Jasindo, rice farming insurance (AUTP) and cattle/buffalo
insurance (AUTS/K) to protect farmers against flood, drought, pests and disease outbreaks. Slovenia’s
Ministry of Agriculture co-finances insurance premiums at a rate of 55% with the goal of encouraging
farmers to insure crops against natural disasters as well as the risk of animal deaths due to disease.
Switzerland likewise promotes the market penetration of crop insurance through federal contributions to
protect against large-scale crop risks.
Other financial mechanisms include disaster recovery funding or payments for environmental services.
Market-based mechanisms that pay farmers for the preservation of biodiversity or other environmental
improvements can support transformative capacity by encouraging the development of new and diversified
income streams for farmers. Other financial mechanisms, cited as part of 32 programmes, most frequently
refer to financial support to recover from climatic events, such as Canada’s AgriRecovery framework and
the United States’ Livestock Forage Disaster Program (LFP) or Emergency Assistance for Livestock,
Honey Bees, and Farm-raised Fish Program (ELAP). Between mid-2021 and early 2023, New Zealand
endured a record six climate events that required a response under the Primary Sector Recovery Policy:
government funding allocated by the Ministry for Primary Industries in the amount of NZD 1.5 million
(USD 0.95 million) in the fiscal year ending June 2022 enabled rural support trusts (RSTs) to increase
psychosocial support, run information sessions and co-ordinate local recovery efforts. This category also
includes instruments such as the Netherlands’ Transition Fund (Transitiefonds landelijk gebied en natuur),
which anticipates spending EUR 24.3 billion (USD 25.6 billion) from 2022-2034 to reduce the negative
environmental impacts of farming operations, with a focus on ammonia emissions, but also targeting other
environmental concerns.
Nature- or ecosystem-based measures
Although ecosystem-based approaches (ECO) are cited in far fewer programmes, this is the second-most
frequently cited type of action or programme, with 112 references to efforts that seek to broadly advance
agro-ecology (7.0% of all references) or target specific ecosystem services, by improving soil
health (5.5%), diversification (3.8%) or water quality (2.3%).
Agroecology, a sub-category defined by the GAMI, includes actions or programmes that aim to advance
agro-ecological systems, such as organic production, land conservation or land retirement, among other
possibilities.14 Agroecology can help to improve resilience while providing important co-benefits through
climate change mitigation and ecosystem services, by increasing soil organic matter, enhancing soil and
water conservation, and diversifying food systems. Consistent with this reasoning, France has adopted a
holistic approach to reinforcing agricultural resilience by investing in soils, diversification, and agro-ecologic
infrastructure. The United States Farm Service Agency’s Soil Health and Income Protection Program
(SHIPP) seeks to enhance soil and water conservation. An area of focus within the category of agro-
ecological systems is on advancing organic production methods. Examples include Costa Rica’s support
payments for producers during the transition period toward certified organic and sustainable agriculture,
and India’s Organic Value Chain Development project for the Northeast Region, which supports the
purchase of inputs, including seeds, organic fertilisers, and liquid organic pesticides.
Soil health measures promote practices to limit soil erosion, improve soil fertility and enhance carbon
storage. This sub-category also includes programmes targeting soil erosion, land reclamation or
desertification. For example, Kazakhstan’s Republican Scientific and Methodological Center of
Agrochemical Activities provides landowners with soil testing to determine nutrient levels and provide
targeted recommendations for increasing soil fertility. The European Union’s Soil Observatory (EUSO)
synthesises evidence on soils to identify areas that are vulnerable to soil degradation.15


42 

Diversification of agricultural systems can strengthen resilience to climate change, while providing
important synergies with socio-economic and environmental objectives. Examples include expanding the
genetic diversity of crops or livestock or altering the mix of crop and livestock production. It also
encompasses variations to spatial and temporal arrangements through mixed planting, crop rotations, and
integrated crop, livestock and agroforestry systems. Diversification can help to strengthen ecosystem
services such as pest control, soil fertility and pollination, and regulate water and temperature extremes,
resulting in more stable yields and reduced risk of losses (Tibi et al., 2022[51]). Some practices such as
agroforestry can mitigate GHG emissions while improving food security and yield stability.
These measures most frequently target the adoption of agroforestry or integrated production systems or
greater landscape diversity. Brazil’s ABC+ programme seeks to move away from conventional cropping
and toward integrated crop-livestock-forestry systems (ILPF). The United Kingdom’s Countryside
Stewardship (CS) scheme provides incentives to increase biodiversity, improve habitat and expand
woodland areas. A small number of references seek to specifically address water quality degradation, such
as the introduction in Spain of regulation governing nutrient inputs to reduce greenhouse gas and ammonia
emissions and prevent water pollution, while maintaining soil fertility and agricultural productivity.
Switzerland’s programme for the enhanced use of land and water includes a component specifically
focused on diversification, including the experimental design and testing of integrated management
systems that combine crop rotation, choice of varieties, tillage and other measures.
Infrastructure and technological approaches
With 68 references to actions or programmes, the category of infrastructure and technological approaches
accounts for 11.4% of all programmes referenced. The majority of programmes in this area target either
irrigation and drainage (5.2% of all references) or crop and livestock technology (4.0%). A relatively small
number discuss regional water infrastructure (2.2%).
Irrigation and drainage infrastructure can improve overall water use efficiency at the basin level and
productivity on the farm, alleviating some of the adverse consequences of climate change by helping
farmers to cope with higher temperatures and drought. Investments in on-farm rainwater storage can
reduce pressures on off-farm water supplies. Programmes for irrigation typically provide support to adopt
more efficient technologies, with the goal of supporting adaptation to more variable water availability,
although their impact on water consumption will depend on the presence of effective water demand policies
(Grafton et al., 2018[52]; OECD, 2016[43]). China’s Farmland Irrigation Construction programme provides
payments to support the construction of small irrigation facilities, rainwater collection, sprinkler and drip
irrigation, pumps and small hydropower stations. The United Kingdom’s Water Management Grant,
round 2 provides grants for capital items to promote more efficient use of water for irrigation and support
to construct on-farm reservoirs to store water abstractions or harvested rainwater. Countries expected to
experience a surplus of water under climate change, such as Denmark, Norway and Sweden, have
invested in support to install and renovate drainage systems.
Crop or livestock production technology investments can facilitate adaptation on the farm, for example
through the installation of canopies to control the growing climate for tree crops. Strategies such as
providing shading, installing electric fans in sheds, bathing animals several times per day, or installing
ventilation and cooling systems can support adaptation in livestock systems by providing relief from heat
stress. Programmes also target on-farm investments in adapted crop and livestock technology. For
example, Austria’s Investment Loans in Agriculture provide an approach for investments in technologies,
such as biomass heating systems and equipment for manure management. Lithuania’s Modernization
Fund, initiated in 2022 with EUR 1 million already committed, supports the development of non-arable
technologies to reduce fuel and mineral fertiliser costs, preserve carbon deposits in the soil and reduce
the risk of spring drought. The Philippines’ Adaptation and Mitigation Initiative in Agriculture (AMIA) is its
national flagship programme, which seeks through an approach tailored to villages, to advance the delivery


 43

of productivity enhancing technologies, such as the use of coconut husk as mulch in the upland agro-
ecological zone. Colombia’s Climate-smart Initiatives for Climate Change Adaptation and Sustainability
in Prioritised Agricultural Production Systems (CSICAP) seeks to develop, validate and scale technologies
to increase resilience and low-carbon agriculture.
Regional water infrastructure such as flood control technology, or the construction of reservoirs or canals,
can play an important role in adaptation as complement to water policies (OECD, 2016[43]). The impacts of
climate change on infrastructure needed for agriculture is expected to increase, and it is therefore essential
to ensure that regional water infrastructure can withstand damage from climate-related natural hazards. At
the same time, not all investment will be conducive to adaptation: large-scale or groundwater-based
irrigation projects without effective water demand, including water pricing, policies can lead to
maladaptation, potentially resulting in increased water consumption  and surface or groundwater depletion
during periods of drought (OECD, 2015[42]; OECD, 2016[43]).16
A handful of programmes are targeted toward mitigating flood-related risks, such as Hungary’s efforts to
develop temporary flood water storage in agricultural areas of the Middle Tisza River Basin and the
Emergency Watershed Protection Program (EWP) of the United States. Others, primarily in emerging
economies, seek to expand water supply infrastructure, such as China’s expenditures to support large-
scale irrigation projects and Viet Nam’s Mekong River Delta water planning and supply projects.
Behavioural and cultural approaches
Behavioural and cultural approaches are cited in 56 programmes, accounting for 9.3% of the total. Among
these, attention is predominantly given to breeding or breed selection (3.3%), followed by livestock
operations or management (2.3%), pest, disease and invasive species management (2.2%) and crop
operations or management (1.5%).
Improvements in cultivars offer an effective means to combat climate change. Adaptation via conventional
crop breeding has demonstrated good progress but will require rapid incremental improvements to keep
pace with changes in temperatures and the environment. The IPCC states with high confidence that plant
breeding biotechnology will contribute to adaptation for large-scale producers, however the uptake of
climate-resilient crops may be limited by socio-economic and political factors (Bezner Kerr et al., 2022[45]).
Genome sequencing can help to identify agronomic traits that are relevant to climate change and develop
crop varieties that are resilient to stress from pests, diseases, temperature and water extremes. In the
livestock sector, a range of adaptation options are available including breeding for heat stress tolerance,
crossbreeding, and switching to more heat and drought-resilient species.
Programmes in breeding and breed selection emphasise the development and adoption of varieties
adapted to their particular climate challenges. The project Breeding Coffee for Agroforestry System
(BREEDCAFS) from 2017-2021, co-ordinated by France’s CIRAD and funded by the European Union,
seeks to develop varieties of Arabica coffee suited to agroforestry production, which reduces temperatures
in coffee plantations, preserves soil biodiversity, and enhances yield. India, Indonesia and Viet Nam are
experimenting with varieties of rice that are tolerant of increased salinity. Costa Rica’s Project for
Strengthening Capacities in Seed Production for Adaptive and Resilient Agriculture seeks to promote the
use of adapted seeds by family farmers to enhance agricultural productivity. In 2023, India promoted the
production and use of millets, which are drought resistant nutritious crop, during its Presidency of the G20
coinciding with the United Nations’ International Year of Millet. A special scheme was also established in
2023 by the OECD Seed Scheme to facilitate trade in pearl millets and sorghum seeds (Box 1.3). The
United Kingdom is exploring more environmentally efficient cattle breeds via its Ruminant Genetics
Programme in Northern Ireland.
Altering crop management and operations can involve changes in planting schedules or shifts in production
location. While shifting the location of crop production holds significant potential as an adaptation strategy,


44 

it may also be impeded by climatic, cultural, institutional and economic barriers, including support
payments that lock in production systems and discourage adaptation. Altering livestock management and
operations includes measures such as matching stocking rates with feed availability, managing diet quality,
rotational grazing, adjustments in animal husbandry and manure management.
While governments tend not to specify particular adaptation strategies, favouring instead the development
of adaptive capacity, there are some examples of programmes that support the adoption of crop or
livestock operations that are known to perform well under changing climate conditions. The Red Meat
Development Programme (for sheep) and the Dairy Improvement Programme of Wales (United Kingdom)
are examples of programmes that specifically target herd management. Australia’s Extension and
Adoption of Drought Resilience Farming Practices Grants Program funds grants ranging from
AUD 100 000 to AUD 3 million (USD 69 000 to USD 2.1 million) to support adoption of proven drought
resilient farming practices at a large scale (e.g. multiple farms, regions or industries).
Pest, disease, and invasive species management is essential to mitigate the potential increased impacts
of pests and diseases on agricultural production resulting from climate change. Some programmes
address pest and disease risk, either in general or in response to specific threats, typically by enhancing
monitoring. This category also includes efforts to reduce harmful effects from chemical pesticide use by
moving to alternative products or pest control systems. In Croatia, for example, the Phytosanitary
Information System (FIS) has been upgraded and a new Act passed that requires farmers to connect to
the FIS and to be trained in the safe handling and proper applications of pesticides. Japan’s strategy
MIDORI targets a 10% and 50% reduction in risk-weighted use of chemical pesticides through facilitating
a shift toward Integrated Pest Management (IPM) systems by 2030 and 2050, respectively.
Box 1.3. The OECD Seed Schemes for Sorghum and Pearl Millets
The OECD Schemes for the Varietal Certification of Seed (hereafter the “Seed Schemes”) aims to
facilitate the international trade of quality seeds by applying harmonised seed-certification standards
and procedures. The Seed Schemes play a key role in the distribution of plant-breeding innovations
from breeders to farmers by facilitating the distribution of seeds of adapted varieties worldwide. By
helping farmers improve and stabilise their crop yields, high-quality seeds may help reduce the need to
increase the area of agricultural land. New varieties also offer important opportunities for reducing
water, fertiliser and pesticide use by improving input efficiency.
Pearl millet is a highly nutritious and climate-resilient crop that thrives in arid and semi-arid regions. It
can be used as fodder, but its use as a staple cereal crop is gaining importance in Africa and Asia.
Having recognised the importance of pearl millet as a significant food crop and its exceptional resilience
to drought and high temperatures, the Seed Schemes agreed to establish a specific Sorghum and Pearl
Millet Scheme at its 2023 Annual Meeting in Türkiye. By incorporating these two species into this
specific scheme and facilitating their certification and trade, the OECD is working towards developing
further the potential of drought-tolerant crops to address food security challenges and mitigate the
negative effects of climate change.
More information on the OECD Seeds Schemes can be found at
https://www.oecd.org/agriculture/seeds/.
How do agricultural support policies influence climate change adaptation?
The above section discussed policies employed by countries that specifically deal with enabling agricultural
sectors to adapt to a changing climate. However, other agricultural support policies may unintentionally


 45

improve or hinder the ability of individuals to adapt to climate change. As discussed in Chapter 2, in
2020-22, support to agriculture across the 54 countries – totalled USD 851 billion per year, of which
USD 630 billion per year was provided as transfers to individual producers. The remainder was made up
of support for general services (USD 106 billion) and budgetary transfers to consumers (USD 115 billion).
Some emerging economies also implicitly taxed their producers by an average of USD 179 billion per year.
This section discusses the mechanisms by which these current support policies may impact climate
change adaptation and the potential effects.
Adaptation impacts of producer support policies
Agricultural support for the production of specific commodities can discourage adjustments
Agricultural policies that provide support coupled to production are among the most common forms of
support to the agricultural sector (around 65% of positive producer support). By distorting production
signals, these policies can worsen vulnerabilities to climate risk through a variety of mechanisms (Ignaciuk,
2015[36]). Policies that increase the price received by the producer (positive MPS), which represent the
largest share of overall producer support, incentivise production, the intensification of input use, the
allocation of land to supported crops and the entry of land to the agricultural sector, all of which can reduce
the capacity of agriculture to adapt to climate change. Other types of direct production support, including
coupled payments, have a similar effect as positive MPS. Some of these effects can be mitigated when
support is subjected to environmental conditionality. Conversely, negative MPS for a given commodity
shifts resources away from the production of that commodity, potentially altering the mix of commodities
produced relative to what would be optimal under given market and climatic conditions. Policies that distort
trade flows may reduce resilience: trade plays an essential role in supporting climate change adaptation
and ensuring stability by allowing goods to flow from food surplus to food deficit areas, and by helping to
absorb the impacts of local and regional supply shocks (Adenäuer, Frezal and Chatzopoulos, 2023[53];
OECD, 2017[25]; OECD, 2014[38]). Given that production tends to be more volatile in domestic than in global
markets, and that domestic shocks are becoming more frequent with climate change, trade will play an
increasingly important role in mitigating domestic supply volatility and enhancing global food security.
Most support policies also incentivise the production of specific agricultural commodities over others.17
These policies, here entitled single commodity transfers (SCT), can create barriers to changing production
systems away from subsidised commodities and potentially hamper the ability of farmers to adjust
production to a changing climate (Wreford, Ignaciuk and Gruère, 2017[35]; OECD, 2017[54]; OECD, 2014[38]).
Depending on the commodities that are subsidised and the conditions or regulations associated with these
payments, SCTs can reduce incentives to change to more resilient crops; reduce incentives to diversify
production; or can induce farming in more risky locations or with risky practices. For instance, support for
the production of water-intensive crops such as cotton or rice may increase farmers’ risk of loss due to
drought in a given season (OECD, 2015[42]; Wreford, Moran and Adger, 2010[55]). Modelling suggests that
removal of certain forms of SCTs could enable adaptation by facilitating a shift in production towards
regions with comparative advantage and increasing trade flows to areas affected by climate change
(Guerrero et al., 2022[56]). These measures are significant; across all 54 countries covered in this report,
governments provided USD 380 billion in positive transfers to individual commodities, as well as
USD 179 billion in implicit taxation.
Other targeted forms of direct payments not included in the SCTs may also favour certain types of products,
and ultimately hamper adaptation. For example, support for cereals or ruminants are included as Group
Commodity Transfers (GCT), but also create barriers to adaptation by limiting farmers’ ability to adjust their
production in response to changing climatic conditions. Ultimately the impact on adaptation is highly
context-specific and depend on the specific instrument used, the commodity subsidised, and the conditions
or regulations associated with these payments.


46 

Producer support for managing risk
Policies to help manage risk are a common form of producer support. Interest in these forms of support is
rising due to the uncertainties posed by climate change, as reflected in the adaptation actions and
programmes focused on insurance (4.4% of programmes from Figure 1.5) and other financial mechanisms
(5.5% of programmes). Subsidised agricultural insurance policies are largely used to help manage risks
and insurance markets can be useful mechanisms to transfer and pool risks. This can improve resilience
in the face of increasing extreme events by allowing farmers to build absorptive capacity to recover from
shocks (Cobourn, 2023[9]). Government insurance subsidy programmes can play an important role in
ensuring the functioning of insurance markets that allow farmers to manage small to medium business
risks. This is because insurance programmes can be economically unviable for insurance companies to
offer without subsidies due to high costs of administering, monitoring and adjusting losses which keeps
demand low (Glauber et al., 2021[57]).
However, insurance-related subsidies can also change producer behaviour and impede adaptation,
encouraging farmers to adopt riskier and unsustainable production strategies (Ignaciuk, 2015[36]; OECD,
2016[43]). Insurance which covers a farm for individual loss of yields may cause a moral hazard problem in
which the farmer undertakes fewer other risk mitigating activities and instead takes on more risk with less
diversification (OECD, 2011[58]; Antón et al., 2012[59]). For instance, insured corn and soybean crops have
been shown to be significantly more sensitive to extreme heat compared to uninsured crops, suggesting
farmers are less inclined to undertake other adaptation measures to mitigate these risks (Annan and
Schlenker, 2015[60]). Subsidies could be made less distortionary by, for example, shifting subsidies to cover
only insurance for catastrophic risk rather than normal farm business risks, refraining from restricting crop
choice, requiring minimum deductibles on claims and providing transparency over the level of subsidy in
each premium (Glauber et al., 2021[57]; OECD/FAO, 2021[8]). Likewise, switching support from schemes
based on individual losses to index-based schemes – facilitated by satellite and digital technologies – may
reduce the moral hazard problem and the administering costs (Sumner and Zulauf, 2012[61]). However,
under this approach indemnities may differ from actual loses, which may not be attractive for farmers.
Disaster assistance programmes are another commonly adopted form of risk management support. These
programmes are usually introduced in the form of a payment following a natural disaster. In most instances
producers are unaware they will be protected until the disaster occurs and the payment is announced.
However, there are some cases, such as the United States’ Livestock Forage Disaster Program, where
the conditions for disaster relief are known in advance. Expectations play a significant role in how
producers interact with disaster assistance, as producers may be willing to forego other forms of risk
management if there is a credible belief that governments will bail them out in the event of a loss. Disaster
assistance should therefore be limited to providing protection for catastrophic or uninsurable risk so as not
to discourage participation in other risk mitigating activities such as diversification, irrigation investment or
insurance (Glauber et al., 2021[57]). An optimal approach should emphasise capacities farmers need to
adapt or transform to climate risks, including exiting the sector altogether. Investment in public goods
including weather and climate information resources, research and development and knowledge
dissemination will build producers’ resilience and strengthen their ability to plan and prepare for, absorb,
recover from, and adapt to adverse events.
Payments for provision of environmental public goods can help adaptation
Agricultural policies can also be designed to incentivise adaptation directly, by linking payments to
providing environmental goods and services, such as preservation of rural landscapes, resilience to natural
disasters, habitat provision, and control of invasive species. Payments for ecosystem services can provide
nature-based solutions to some climate risks while also yielding co-benefits for climate mitigation and the
environment. For instance, payments for restoration and protection of wetlands reduce flood risk by
providing a store for excess water while also providing habitat for animals and sequestering carbon.


 47

However, only USD 1.6 billion of the USD 297 billion in budgetary producer support in 2020-22 across the
54 countries was purely for environmental public goods (i.e. payments based on specific non-commodity
outputs in the PSE data). The United Kingdom’s Countryside Stewardship programme and Korea’s direct
payments for land conservation are two examples of these types of policies. Some countries also require
compliance with certain environmental standards as a condition to other types of payments.
Adaptation impacts of general services support policies
Support for agricultural knowledge generation and transfer
Public funding for agricultural knowledge generation and innovation remains limited, despite the fact that
investments in these areas are often cited as one of the most important roles for public policy in aiding the
agricultural sector to adapt to a changing climate and build resilience (Ignaciuk, 2015[36]; Wreford, Ignaciuk
and Gruère, 2017[35]; OECD, 2020[39]). Spending on agricultural knowledge generation programmes
represented 0.4% of the value of agricultural production for the 54 countries covered in this report in
2020-22, while support for knowledge transfer programmes accounted for 0.2% of value of production.
There is a clear role for public R&D to provide accurate and detailed information that allows private agents
to make well-informed adaptation decisions. Modelling has suggested that directed innovation has offset
as much as 20% of the potential losses in agricultural land value from damaging climate trends in the
United States since the 1960s (Moscona and Sastry, 2022[62]). Equally important is to support research
on risk and vulnerability assessment. A number of countries already provide services which help producers
to assess their vulnerability to climate risks and adaptation needs, as captured by the 66 actions and
programmes dedicated to climate services. Examples include the Netherlands’ Climate Stress Test tool,
the Philippines’ Climate-Risk Vulnerability Assessment Maps, Portugal’s Climate Portal and the United
States Climate Hubs among others.
Weather forecasting or early warning systems are also important tools to prepare farmers to undertake
early action to minimise the negative effects of extreme events. Some countries already provide funding
for or are developing such services, including Australia’s Drought Early Warning System, Austria’s
contribution to a worldwide Database for Soil and Near Surface Temperatures, France’s Meteo-France
agro-climatic services, Ireland’s Forest Fire Danger Rating, New Zealand’s high resolution drought-
forecasting tool (NIWA35), and the United States’ Drought Monitor, among others. Services such as these
equip producers with necessary information to understand short and medium-term risks of climate change
and facilitate autonomous adaptation actions by producers without distorting production or trade signals.
In designing knowledge generation programmes, consideration should be given to “no-regrets” policies,
which are those that help farmers under a wide range of scenarios of worsening climate change, such as
those discussed above.
Knowledge transfer programmes targeting adaptation also play a key role in building capacity of the
agricultural sector to deal with future climate change. Knowledge gaps can play a contributing role in
creating barriers to uptake of adaptation and other climate-friendly practices on farms (Wreford, Ignaciuk
and Gruère, 2017[35]). Improved access to information helps farmers and other private agents to overcome
these barriers and make rational decisions in relation to adaptation actions. Capacity-building policies are
among the most common employed by countries in this report, for example Australia’s Farm Business
Resilience Program, Canada’s Agricultural Climate Solutions Living Labs and the Netherland’s Regional
online connection sessions all work to bring farmers together with the aim of exchanging best practices on
climate change.
Infrastructure
Provision of infrastructure projects will often be required to reduce barriers to the adoption of climate-
friendly practices in agriculture. In the context of this report, infrastructure spending is included under


48 

general support services for public good infrastructure, whereas subsidies to producers for the provision
of on-farm infrastructure projects are included in payments to producers for fixed capital formation.
Spending on these programmes totalled USD 49 billion across the 54 countries covered in this report in
2020-22, equivalent to 1.1% of the value of agricultural production.
Farmers rely directly or indirectly on public infrastructure, and its availability will influence how they respond
to climate change (Ortiz-Bobea, 2021[63]; Wreford, Ignaciuk and Gruère, 2017[35]). Infrastructure needs are
highly location specific and long-term sustainability assessments of each project are important to assess
their suitability. For example, irrigation infrastructure will be important to deal with the effects of climate
change in some regions, whereas in other regions, in the absence of adequate water management policies,
adoption of irrigation infrastructure may actually become a maladaptation mechanism and discourage the
move towards less water and emission-intensive production systems, which would increase the overall
resilience of the region. Faced with uncertainty in the viability of long-run adaptation projects, the economic
literature typically prescribes implementing “no-regret” policies – those which build resilience to risk under
a wide range of future scenarios and which will provide benefits to the sector even in the absence of shocks
(OECD/FAO, 2021[8]; OECD, 2020[39]; Mullan et al., 2013[64]; Hallegatte, 2009[65]; Antón et al., 2013[37]).
Biosecurity, prevention, management and control
Disease and pest outbreaks will be an increasing source of risk for agricultural producers under climate
change (Skendžić et al., 2021[12]). Producers typically manage some pest and disease risks on farm
through the use of pesticides, cropping practices, antibiotics and other forms of management actions.
However, some risks are outside the control of individual producers. For instance, outbreaks on farm can
harm producers directly through crop and livestock losses, however, outbreaks elsewhere can still impact
them if it results in closures of trade or changing consumer preferences. For this reason, there is also a
clear role for governments to continue providing a public good in preventing and managing these risks.
Many governments operate nationwide biosecurity systems which employ inspection and control measures
to prevent incursions from entering and spreading through agricultural areas. In 2020-22, these measures
accounted for USD 8 billion among the 54 covered countries in this report, equivalent to 0.2% of the value
of agricultural production.
There is also a role for more forward-looking activities, including systems to anticipate new pests and
diseases, developing response plans, and early notification systems that help producers and other actors
respond to threats. Knowledge transfer and extension programmes are also important to spread
information on best practices to manage disease and pests. For instance, as part of its Farm to Fork
Strategy, the European Union ran a pilot programme, Farmer’s Toolbox for Integrated Pest Management,
between 2020 and 2022 with the objective to provide background knowledge on the most promising ways
farmers could reduce pesticide dependency.
Reforming agricultural policies for climate change adaptation
Climate change is increasingly impacting global agriculture and food systems, through slowing agricultural
productivity growth, negative impacts on crop and grassland quality and harvest stability, and disruptions
to terrestrial ecosystem services. Higher temperatures and the increased frequency of droughts, floods
and natural disasters have negative consequences for food security and livelihoods; this includes a greater
frequency of sudden losses in food production, reduced food availability, and higher food prices. Climate
change is projected to make some areas unsuitable for food production, increasing the number of people
at risk of hunger, malnutrition and diet-related mortality (Bezner Kerr et al., 2022[45]). The agricultural sector
faces a formidable challenge: it needs to adapt to a changing climate while reducing GHG emissions,
preserving biodiversity and environmental quality, ensuring food security and nutrition, and supporting rural
incomes and livelihoods.


 49

A broad range of programmes have been developed to help agriculture adapt to climate
change, but more attention could be given to implementation, monitoring and evaluation
Governments are already taking significant steps to facilitate climate change adaptation in their agricultural
sectors: UNFCCC reports reflect greater attention to agricultural adaptation and adaptation-mitigation co-
benefits over time and a stocktake of measures indicates 587 adaptation programmes and activities across
the 54 M&E countries. However, a large proportion of reported activities focus on planning, with
120 strategic planning documents recorded across three-quarters of M&E countries. Moving beyond
planning to focus on implementation is imperative to support agricultural production systems in adapting
to climate change. While there is increasing evidence that many plans are being implemented, evidence
on the extent of implementation or documenting the outcomes of programmatic efforts is scant. Countries
should continue to implement, monitor and evaluate adaptation policies and programmes in an effort to
strengthen resilience by fostering absorptive, adaptive and transformative capacities.
Reform is needed so that producer support policies facilitate and do not hinder climate
change adaptation
Most agricultural producer support policies were not designed to address climate change adaptation
objectives. While some may support adaptation, the majority do little to facilitate, and in many cases hinder,
farmers’ efforts to adapt to climate change. Support to individual producers amounted to USD 630 billion
per year in 2020-22, of which USD 380 billion was provided in the form of support tied to the production of
specific commodities that discourage production adjustments. Governments should reduce and reform
market price support (MPS) and payments targeted to specific commodities that encourage farmers to
maintain pre-existing production systems and reduce incentives to shift production away from subsidised
commodities in response to changing climatic conditions. Dismantling policies that distort trade and impede
price transmission can also reduce supply volatility by allowing produce to flow from food surplus to food
deficit areas, helping to manage domestic food shortages driven by droughts, floods, and other
catastrophic events. To facilitate this, short-term non-trade-distorting measures may be required. Market
price support and payments linked to outputs or the unconstrained use of variable inputs also have the
greatest potential to increase GHG emissions, exacerbating the extent of adaptation required (OECD,
2022[48]). Reforming these policies would help to mitigate climate change and increase the resources
available to allocate to climate change adaptation. Developing coherent policy approaches involving all
agencies with policy levers is important in this regard so that the synergies and trade-offs are properly
understood.
Governments should provide support for catastrophic risks only, not impeding
adaptation while ensuring well-functioning markets for agricultural insurance
Well-functioning insurance markets can strengthen resilience to climate change by allowing farmers to
build absorptive capacity to recover from shocks. While small and medium-scale idiosyncratic risks can be
managed at the farm level and through market-based instruments such as insurance, agricultural policy
still has a role to play in covering large-scale systemic risks that cannot be covered by farmers themselves
or by risk markets, particularly in view of the increasing number of extreme weather events and catastrophic
disasters. Disaster assistance payments can generate maladaptation if they are not targeted to
catastrophic risks and not well designed. Governments should ensure that insurance subsidies and
disaster assistance payments do not cause moral hazard and impede on-farm adaptation, and policies
should be well-designed to avoid crowding out private sector activity. Better and more granular data on
risks and climate can help to reduce uncertainties surrounding climate change and support the
development of optimal local solutions and on-farm strategies. The development of index-based insurance
schemes for marketable risks can help to reduce moral hazard and make coverage more affordable for
small-scale producers.


50 

Targeted interventions to support climate change adaptation in agriculture are needed
Overall, agricultural support policies tend to be poorly targeted, inequitably distributed, and often result in
substantial leakages to unintended beneficiaries along the supply chain. This comes at considerable cost
not only to consumers and taxpayers, but also to farmers due to the low income transfer efficiency of
support policies. Policies should aim to offer multiple adaptation pathways for farm households: supporting
sustainable productivity improvements, diversifying income sources among household members, and
when necessary, facilitating the transition away from agriculture.
Better targeting of agricultural support can facilitate autonomous adaptation and free up scarce budgetary
resources that could be used to support planned adaptation initiatives or provide transitional assistance.
Investments in research and development, extension services, entrepreneurial skills, human capital, and
the uptake of resilience-enhancing technologies can build on-farm resilience capacity and reduce farmers’
risk exposure to climate change over the long-term. Payments can also be made conditional on the
provision of ecosystem services such as landscape preservation, biodiversity conservation and control of
invasive species – although care must be taken in design and implementation to ensure environmental
benefits. However, only USD 1.6 billion of the USD 297 billion per year of budgetary support to producers
in 2020-22 was purely dedicated to the provision of environmental public goods (i.e. payments based on
a specific non-commodity output).
Greater support should be provided for transformative capacity to help farmers build
long-run resilience to climate change
Investments in innovation, infrastructure and biosecurity can play an essential role in helping agriculture
adapt to climate change. However, support for these and other general services is low. Only
USD 106 billion in 2020-22 was spent on these areas, an amount accounting for just 2.5% of the value of
agricultural production, or 12.5% of total support directed to the sector. Channelling a greater share of R&D
spending towards adaptation can provide the foundation for stronger risk and vulnerability assessments,
support informed decision making, facilitate the emergence of new technologies and production practices
adapted to the changing climate, and build capacity via knowledge transfer programmes. Investments in
infrastructure should be climate-resilient, in that they are planned, designed, built, and operated in a way
that adapts to changing climate conditions. Investments in infrastructure may also support nature-based
solutions at a landscape scale, which have the potential to contribute simultaneously to objectives related
to adaptation, mitigation, and other ecosystem services. Biosecurity measures should be upgraded to
ensure farmers can prevent, respond to, and recover from emerging threats from pests and diseases.
Public-private partnerships can catalyse investment in innovation and infrastructure, allowing public and
private entities to share the risks and costs associated with projects. They can be particularly effective for
large-scale infrastructure projects with long time horizons, or in areas where the private sector may be less
active. Investments should be carefully designed to avoid maladaptation: for instance, the development of
irrigation infrastructure or water-efficient technologies should be complemented by additional measures to
discourage the adoption of water-intensive crops or the expansion of production into overly arid areas that
may become unsuitable for production in the long run.
In the long run, farmers will face increasing pressure for transformative change. This is particularly salient
in the context of tipping points, which are likely to irreversibly affect agriculture in certain regions, rendering
current agricultural systems untenable. Policies should aim to facilitate structural adjustment and support
the emergence of new and diverse income sources as complements to revenue from traditional cropping
and livestock production. Examples include renewable energy generation or payments for biodiversity
conservation, emissions reductions, and other ecosystem services, or moving towards off-farm
employment.


 51

Governments should prioritise adaptation measures that have co-benefits with
mitigation and other food system objectives
Policies to support climate change adaptation in agriculture can have important synergies with climate
change mitigation and other food systems objectives and require a coherent, whole-of-government
approach to policy making. Successful adaptation actions should be effective (anticipated or observed to
reduce climate risk), feasible (possible and desirable in a particular context), and just. Robust monitoring
and evaluation frameworks can help to assess the effectiveness of adaptation measures, prevent
maladaptation, and ensure consistency with climate change mitigation goals and wider objectives for food
systems. In 2022, signatories to the OECD Ministerial Declaration18 committed to “promote the
development and implementation of agricultural practices that conserve, sustainably use and restore
biodiversity, tackle negative effects of land conversion to agriculture on biodiversity, enhance ecosystem
services and improve soil health and water and air quality, including through agro-ecological and other
innovative, context specific, approaches.”




52 

References

Adenäuer, M., C. Frezal and T. Chatzopoulos (2023), “Mitigating the impact of extreme weather
events on agricultural markets through trade”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers
No. 198, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/aa584482-en.
[53]
Annan, F. and W. Schlenker (2015), “Federal Crop Insurance and the Disincentive to Adapt to
Extreme Heat”, American Economic Review, Vol. 105/5, pp. 262-266,
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20151031.
[60]
Antón, J. et al. (2013), “Agricultural risk management policies under climate uncertainty”, Global
Environmental Change, Vol. 23/6, pp. 1726-1736,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.08.007.
[37]
Antón, J. et al. (2012), “A Comparative Study of Risk Management in Agriculture under Climate
Change”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 58, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/5k94d6fx5bd8-en.
[59]
Ara Begum, R. et al. (2022), Point of Departure and Key Concepts, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_Chapter01.pdf.
[32]
Basso, B. et al. (2018), “Soil Organic Carbon and Nitrogen Feedbacks on Crop Yields under
Climate Change”, Agricultural &amp; Environmental Letters, Vol. 3/1, p. 180026,
https://doi.org/10.2134/ael2018.05.0026.
[22]
Bezner Kerr, R. et al. (2022), Food, Fibre, and Other Ecosystem Products, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_Chapter05.pdf.
[45]
Brás, T. et al. (2021), “Severity of drought and heatwave crop losses tripled over the last five
decades in Europe”, Environmental Research Letters, Vol. 16/6, p. 065012,
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abf004.
[11]
Bustamante, M. et al. (2014), “Co-benefits, trade-offs, barriers and policies for greenhouse gas
mitigation in the agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU) sector”, Global Change
Biology, Vol. 20/10, pp. 3270-3290, https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.12591.
[49]
Cai, W. et al. (2014), “Increasing frequency of extreme El Niño events due to greenhouse
warming”, Nature Climate Change, Vol. 4/2, pp. 111-116,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2100.
[15]
Cao, J. et al. (2023), “Forecasting global crop yields based on El Nino Southern Oscillation early
signals”, Agricultural Systems, Vol. 205, p. 103564,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2022.103564.
[16]
Cobourn, K. (2023), “Climate change adaptation policies to foster resilience in agriculture:
Analysis and stocktake based on UNFCCC reporting documents”, OECD Food, Agriculture
and Fisheries Papers No. 202, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/5fa2c770-en.
[9]
CRED (2023), EM-DAT: The international disaster database, https://www.emdat.be/ (accessed
on 13 June 2023).
[6]


 53

CRED and UNDRR (2020), The Human Costs of Disasters: An Overview of the Last 20 Years
(2000-2019), https://www.preventionweb.net/publications/view/74124.
[7]
Crumpler, K. et al. (2021), 2021 (Interim) Global update report: Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries in the Nationally Determined Contributions, https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7442en.
[71]
Deutsch, C. et al. (2018), “Increase in crop losses to insect pests in a warming climate”, Science,
Vol. 361/6405, pp. 916-919, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aat3466.
[23]
Gagnon-Lebrun, F. and S. Agrawala (2006), Progress on adaptation to climate change in
developed countries: An analysis of broad trends, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://www.oecd.org/env/cc/37178873.pdf.
[70]
Gaupp, F. et al. (2019), “Increasing risks of multiple breadbasket failure under 1.5 and 2 °C
global warming”, Agricultural Systems, Vol. 175, pp. 34-45,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2019.05.010.
[28]
Glauber, J. et al. (2021), “Design principles for agricultural risk management policies”, OECD
Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 157, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/1048819f-en.
[57]
Gowda, P. et al. (2018), Chapter 10 : Agriculture and Rural Communities. Impacts, Risks, and
Adaptation in the United States: The Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II, U.S.
Global Change Research Program, https://doi.org/10.7930/nca4.2018.ch10.
[19]
Grafton, R. et al. (2018), “The paradox of irrigation efficiency”, Science, Vol. 361/6404, pp. 748-
750, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aat9314.
[52]
Guerrero, S. et al. (2022), “The impacts of agricultural trade and support policy reform on climate
change adaptation and environmental performance: A model-based analysis”, OECD Food,
Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 180, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/520dd70d-en.
[56]
Hallegatte, S. (2009), “Strategies to adapt to an uncertain climate change”, Global Environmental
Change, Vol. 19/2, pp. 240-247, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.12.003.
[65]
Hsieh, H. and S. Shannon (2005), “Three Approaches to Qualitative Content Analysis”,
Qualitative Health Research, Vol. 15/9, pp. 1277-1288,
https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732305276687.
[68]
Ignaciuk, A. (2015), “Adapting Agriculture to Climate Change: A Role for Public Policies”, OECD
Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 85, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/5js08hwvfnr4-en.
[36]
Ignaciuk, A. and D. Mason-D’Croz (2014), “Modelling Adaptation to Climate Change in
Agriculture”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers 70,
https://doi.org/10.1787/5jxrclljnbxq-en.
[34]
Iizumi, T. et al. (2018), “Crop production losses associated with anthropogenic climate change
for 1981-2010 compared with preindustrial levels”, International Journal of Climatology,
Vol. 38/14, pp. 5405-5417, https://doi.org/10.1002/joc.5818.
[4]


54 

IPCC (2023), “Summary for Policymakers. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the
Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.”, in Climate
Change 2023: Synthesis Report. A Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_SYR_SPM.pdf.
[1]
IPCC (2022), “2022: Technical Summary. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change”, in Climate Change
2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK
and New York, NY, USA,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_TechnicalSummary.p
df.
[31]
IPCC (2022), “Chapter 10: Asia. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change”, in Climate Change 2022:
IMpacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New
York, NY, USA,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_Chapter10.pdf.
[13]
IPCC (2022), “Chapter 11: Australasia. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change”, in Climate Change 2022:
Imapcts, Adaptation and Vulnerability., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New
York, NY, USA,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_Chapter11.pdf.
[17]
IPCC (2022), “Chapter 12: Central and South America. Contribution of Working Group II to the
Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.”, in Climate
Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and VUlnerability, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_Chapter12.pdf.
[20]
IPCC (2022), “Chapter 13: Europe. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change”, in Climate Change 2022:
Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New
York, NY, USA,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_Chapter13.pdf.
[10]
IPCC (2022), “Chapter 14: North America. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change”, in Climate Change
2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK
and New York, NY, USA,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_Chapter14.pdf.
[18]
IPCC (2022), “Chapter 5: Food, Fibre and Other Ecosystem Products. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change”,
in Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability., Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingodm and New York, NY, USA,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_Chapter05.pdf.
[2]


 55

IPCC (2021), “Chapter 11: Weather and Climate Extreme Events in a Changing Climate.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change”, in Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_Chapter11.pdf.
[26]
Kummu, M. et al. (2021), “Climate change risks pushing one-third of global food production
outside the safe climatic space”, One Earth, Vol. 4/5, pp. 720-729,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2021.04.017.
[30]
Lankoski, J., A. Ignaciuk and F. Jésus (2018), “Synergies and trade-offs between adaptation,
mitigation and agricultural productivity: A synthesis report”, OECD Food, Agriculture and
Fisheries Papers, No. 110, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/07dcb05c-en.
[40]
Malik, A., X. Qin and S. Smith (2010), “Autonomous adaptation to climate change: a literature
review”, IIEP Working Paper, No. 2010-24, Elliott School of International Affairs, Washington,
D.C., https://www2.gwu.edu/~iiep/assets/docs/papers/Smith_Malik_IIEPWP2010-27.pdf.
[33]
Moore, F. (2020), The Fingerprint of Anthropogenic Warming on Global Agriculture, California
Digital Library (CDL), https://doi.org/10.31223/x5q30z.
[3]
Moscona, J. and K. Sastry (2022), “Does Directed Innovation Mitigate Climate Damage?
Evidence from U.S. Agriculture”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 138/2, pp. 637-
701, https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjac039.
[62]
Mullan, M. et al. (2013), “National Adaptation Planning: Lessons from OECD Countries”, OECD
Environment Working Papers, No. 54, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/5k483jpfpsq1-en.
[64]
Nardone, A. et al. (2006), “Climatic Effects on Productive Traits in Livestock”, Veterinary
Research Communications, Vol. 30/S1, pp. 75-81, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11259-006-0016-
x.
[24]
OECD (2023), Net Zero+: Climate and Economic Resilience in a Changing World, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/da477dda-en.
[47]
OECD (2022), Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2022: Reforming Agricultural
Policies for Climate Change Mitigation, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/7f4542bf-en.
[48]
OECD (2022), Climate Tipping Points: Insights for Effective Policy Action, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/abc5a69e-en.
[27]
OECD (2022), Declaration on Transformative Solutions for Sustainable Agriculture and Food
Systems, https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0483.
[74]
OECD (2020), Strengthening Agricultural Resilience in the Face of Multiple Risks, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/2250453e-en.
[39]
OECD (2020), Water and agriculture, Agriculture Policy Brief, OECD, Paris,
https://issuu.com/oecd.publishing/docs/water_and_agriculture.
[44]
OECD (2017), Adaptation to climate change in Philippine agriculture, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264269088-7-en.
[54]


56 

OECD (2017), Water Risk Hotspots for Agriculture, OECD Studies on Water, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264279551-en.
[25]
OECD (2016), Mitigating Droughts and Floods in Agriculture: Policy Lessons and Approaches,
OECD Studies on Water, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264246744-
en.
[43]
OECD (2015), Drying Wells, Rising Stakes: Towards Sustainable Agricultural Groundwater Use,
OECD Studies on Water, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264238701-
en.
[42]
OECD (2014), Climate Change, Water and Agriculture: Towards Resilient Systems, OECD
Studies on Water, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264209138-en.
[38]
OECD (2011), Managing Risk in Agriculture: Policy Assessment and Design, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264116146-en.
[58]
OECD (2010), Sustainable Management of Water Resources in Agriculture, OECD Studies on
Water, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264083578-en.
[72]
OECD/FAO (2021), Building Agricultural Resilience to Natural Hazard-induced
Disasters: Insights from Country Case Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/49eefdd7-en.
[8]
Ortiz-Bobea, A. (2021), “The empirical analysis of climate change impacts and adaptation in
agriculture”, in Handbook of Agricultural Economics, Elsevier,
https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.hesagr.2021.10.002.
[63]
Ortiz-Bobea, A. et al. (2021), “Anthropogenic climate change has slowed global agricultural
productivity growth”, Nature Climate Change, Vol. 11/4, pp. 306-312,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-021-01000-1.
[5]
Pauw, P., K. Mbeva and H. van Asselt (2019), “Subtle differentiation of countries’ responsibilities
under the Paris Agreement”, Palgrave Communications, Vol. 5/1,
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0298-6.
[50]
Perry, S. et al. (2017), “Future Changes to El Niño-Southern Oscillation Temperature and
Precipitation Teleconnections”, Geophysical Research Letters, Vol. 44/20, pp. 10,608-10,616,
https://doi.org/10.1002/2017gl074509.
[29]
Potter, W. and D. Levine-Donnerstein (1999), “Rethinking validity and reliability in content
analysis”, Journal of Applied Communication Research, Vol. 27/3, pp. 258-284,
https://doi.org/10.1080/00909889909365539.
[69]
Schipper, E. (2020), “Maladaptation: When Adaptation to Climate Change Goes Very Wrong”,
One Earth, Vol. 3/4, pp. 409-414, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2020.09.014.
[41]
Shukla, P. et al. (eds.) (2022), Introduction and Framing, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157926.003.
[46]
Skendžić, S. et al. (2021), “The Impact of Climate Change on Agricultural Insect Pests”, Insects,
Vol. 12/5, p. 440, https://doi.org/10.3390/insects12050440.
[12]


 57

Smith, L. et al. (2019), “The greenhouse gas impacts of converting food production in England
and Wales to organic methods”, Nature Communications, Vol. 10/1,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12622-7.
[73]
Sumner, D. and C. Zulauf (2012), Economic and Environmental Effects of Agricultural Insurance
Programs, C-FARE Reports, https://doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.156622.
[61]
Thirumalai, K. et al. (2017), “Extreme temperatures in Southeast Asia caused by El Niño and
worsened by global warming”, Nature Communications, Vol. 8/1,
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15531.
[14]
Tibi, A. et al. (2022), Protéger les cultures en augmentant la diversité végétale des espaces
agricoles. Synthèse du rapport d’ESCo, INRAE (France), 86 p.
[51]
UNFCCC (2022), Adaptation communications, https://unfccc.int/topics/adaptation-and-
resilience/workstreams/adaptation-communications (accessed on 10 October 2022).
[67]
UNFCCC (2022), Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs): The Paris Agreement and NDCs,
https://unfccc.int/ndc-information/nationally-determined-contributions-ndcs (accessed on
10 October 2022).
[66]
WMO (2022), State of the Climate in Latin America and the Caribbean 2021, World
Meteorological Organization, No. 1295.
[21]
Wreford, A., A. Ignaciuk and G. Gruère (2017), “Overcoming barriers to the adoption of climate-
friendly practices in agriculture”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 101,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/97767de8-en.
[35]
Wreford, A., D. Moran and N. Adger (2010), Climate Change and Agriculture: Impacts,
Adaptation and Mitigation, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264086876-
en.
[55]






58 

Annex 1.A.  Details of the analysis
Keyword frequency analysis based on UNFCCC reports
Each Party to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is required to
submit national communications in accordance with guidelines developed and adopted by the Conference
of the Parties (COP). The Convention defines three main groups: Annex I countries that were members of
the OECD as of 1992 plus economies in transition (EIT); Annex II parties that consist of OECD members
as of 1992 but excluding the EIT and Türkiye; and Non-Annex I parties. The distinction is important
because reporting requirements differ between groups, as do expectations with respect to climate
financing.
Annex I Parties are required to submit a national communication (NC) every four years, with the most
recent being the 8th national communication, due as of 31 December 2022. Non-Annex I Parties are
required to submit their first national communication within three years of entering the Convention and
every four years thereafter. For Annex I Parties, the COP adopted guidelines for a standardised national
communication format that includes a chapter specifically devoted to assessing climate change
vulnerabilities and adaptation measures. For Non-Annex I Parties, the reporting guidelines are more
flexible, but the national communications are expected to include sections on programmes that facilitate
adaptation to climate change, barriers to implementation of adaptation measures and information on how
support programmes through the Convention help to meet their adaptation needs.
A core component of the Paris Agreement is the preparation by each Party of a nationally determined
contribution (NDC), which embodies “efforts by each country to reduce national emissions and adapt to
the impacts of climate change” (UNFCCC, 2022[66]). Each Party is required to communicate an updated
NDC every five years starting in 2020, where each NDC represents a progression compared to its
predecessor and captures the Party’s “highest possible ambition.” As of October 2021, all 191 Parties to
the Agreement had submitted one or more NDCs to the UNFCCC.
In addition to the NDCs, Parties are encouraged to provide information on climate change impacts and
adaptation progress as part of an adaptation communication. Although not a formal requirement, article 7
of the Paris Agreement establishes the expectation that each Party submit and update a communication
on adaptation in order to: “(a) increase the visibility and profile of adaptation and its balance with mitigation;
(b) strengthen adaptation action and support for developing countries; (c) provide input to the global
stocktake; (d) enhance learning and understanding of adaptation needs and actions” (UNFCCC, 2022[67]).
While NDCs are mandatory under the Paris Agreement, reporting on adaptation within them is not. In
contrast, adaptation communications are not mandatory, but their content by design focuses exclusively
on adaptation. There is considerable flexibility in the form of the adaptation communication. Slightly more
than half of those submitted to date are unique documents. The remainder take the form of the most recent
NDC, national adaptation plan (NAP), or national communication to the UNFCC. Adaptation
communications are relatively new, with first version submission dates in 2020-2022.
The analysis of keyword frequencies in this chapter incorporates all versions of national communications,
NDCs and adaptation communications submitted to the UNFCCC prior to 1 February 2023 by 38 OECD
members, the European Union as a collective, 5 non-OECD EU members, and the 11 emerging economies
included in this report. In total, the quantitative portion of the analysis reviews 413 documents (329 national
communications, 67 NDCs, and 17 adaptation communications). The documents reviewed are listed in
Table 1.A.1.


 59

Annex Table 1.A.1. UNFCCC documents reviewed for keyword analysis
Country
Classification
National communications (NC)
Nationally determined
contributions (NDCs)
Adaptation
communications
Argentinae
Non-Annex I
NC1 (1999)-NC3 (2015)
v1 (2016)-v3 (2021)
v1 (2020)
Australia
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC8 (2022)
v1 (2016)-v4 (2022)
v1 (2021)
Austria
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC8 (2022)
n/a
v1 (2021)
Belgium
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC8 (2022)
n/a

Brazila,e
Non-Annex I
NC2 (2010)-NC4 (2020)
v1 (2016)-v3 (2022)
v1 (2022)
Bulgaria
Annex I
NC1 (1996)-NC8 (2022)
n/a

Canada
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC8 (2022)
v1 (2016)-v3 (2021)
v1 (2021)
Chile
Non-Annex I
NC1 (2000)-NC4 (2021)
v1 (2017)-v2 (2020)
v1 (2022)
Chinae
Non-Annex I
NC1 (2004)-NC3 (2019)
v1 (2016)-v2 (2021)
v1 (2021)
Colombiae
Non-Annex I
NC1 (2001)-NC3 (2017)
v1 (2018)-v2 (2020)
v1 (2020)
Costa Ricae
Non-Annex I
NC1 (2000)-NC4 (2021)
v1 (2016)-v3 (2020)
v1 (2020)
Croatia
Annex I
NC1 (2002)-NC7 (2018)
n/a

Cyprus
Annex I
NC6 (2013)-NC8 (2022)
n/a

Czech Republicb
Annex I
NC2 (1997)-NC8 (2023)
n/a

Denmark
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC7 (2018)
n/a

Estonia
Annex I
NC1 (1995)-NC8 (2022)
n/a

European Unionb
Annex II
NC2 (1998)-NC8(2022)
v1 (2016)-v2 (2020)
v1 (2021)
Finland
Annex II
NC1 (1995)-NC8 (2022)
n/a

France
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC8 (2023)
n/a

Germany
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC7 (2017)
n/a

Greece
Annex II
NC1 (1995)-NC8 (2022)
n/a

Hungary
Annex I
NC1 (1994)-NC7 (2018)
n/a

Iceland
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC7 (2018)
v1 (2016)-v2 (2021)

India
Non-Annex I
NC1 (2004)-NC2 (2012)
v1 (2016)-v2 (2022)

Indonesia
Non-Annex I
NC1 (1999)-NC3 (2018)
v1 (2016)-v3 (2022)
v1 (2022)
Ireland
Annex II
NC1 (1995)-NC7 (2018)
n/a

Israel
Non-Annex I
NC1 (2000)-NC3 (2018)
v1 (2016)-v2 (2021)

Italy
Annex II
NC1 (1995)-NC8 (2022)
n/a
v1 (2021)
Japan
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC8 (2022)
v1 (2016)-v4 (2021)
v1 (2021)
Kazakhstanc
Non-Annex I
NC1 (1998)-NC7 (2017)
v1 (2016)

Korea
Non-Annex I
NC1 (1998)-NC4 (2019)
v1 (2016)-v3 (2021)

Latviab
Annex I
NC1 (1995)-NC8 (2022)
n/a

Lithuaniaa
Annex I
NC1 (1996)-NC8 (2023)
n/a

Luxembourg
Annex II
NC1 (1995)-NC7 (2018)
n/a

Malta
Annex I
NC3 (2014)-NC8 (2022)
n/a

Mexico
Non-Annex I
NC1 (1997)-NC6 (2019)
v1 (2016)-v3 (2022)
v1 (2022)
Netherlandsa
Annex II
NC2 (1997)-NC8 (2022)
n/a
v1 (2021)
New Zealandf
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC8 (2022)
v1 (2016)-v2 (2021)
v1 (2017)-v2 (2022)
Norway
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC8 (2022)
v1 (2016)-v3 (2022)
v1 (2021)
Philippines
Non-Annex I
NC1 (2000)-NC2 (2014)
v1 (2021)

Poland
Annex I
NC1 (1994)-NC8 (2022)
n/a

Portugal
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC8 (2022)
n/a
v1 (2021)
Romania
Annex I
NC1 (1995)-NC8 (2022)
n/a

Slovak Republica
Annex I
NC1 (1995)-NC7 (2017)
n/a

Slovenia
Annex I
NC1 (2002)-NC7 (2018)
n/a

South Africae
Non-Annex I
NC1 (2003)-NC3 (2018)
v1 (2016)-v2 (2021)
v1 (2021)
Spainb
Annex II
NC2 (1997)-NC8 (2022)
n/a
v1 (2021)
Sweden
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC7 (2017)
n/a
v1 (2022)


60 

Country
Classification
National communications (NC)
Nationally determined
contributions (NDCs)
Adaptation
communications
Switzerland
Annex II
NC1 (1994)-NC8 (2022)
v1 (2017)-v3 (2021)
v1 (2020)
Türkiyed
Annex I
NC1 (2007); NC5 (2013)-NC7
(2019)
v1 (2021)

Ukrainec
Annex I
NC1 (1998)
v1 (2016)-v2 (2021)

United Kingdomb
Annex II
NC2 (1997)-NC8 (2022)
v1 (2016)-v3 (2022)
v1 (2020)
United Statesb
Annex II
NC2 (1997)-NC8 (2022)
v1 (2016)-v2 (2021)
v1 (2021)
Viet Nam
Non-Annex I
NC1 (2003)-NC3 (2019)
v1 (2016)-v3 (2022)

Notes: National communication notes: a) one or more national communications unreadable by keyword analysis software (NVivo), not reviewed;
b) one or more national communications available only in hard copy, not reviewed; c) one or more national communications published only in
Russian, not reviewed; d) Türkiye did not submit NC2-NC4
Nationally determined contribution notes: the EU submits an NDC as a collective, individual EU members are marked “n/a”
Adaptation communication notes: e) identical to NDC; f) identical to national communication(s); blank cells indicate no adaptation communication
submitted to date.
Source: UNFCCC submission registries for national communications, nationally determined contributions (NDCs) and adaptation
communications.
The approach taken to analyse the use of keywords is grounded in content analysis, established within the
social sciences as a method for analysing textual data. At its core, content analysis views words and the
context in which they are used as data (Hsieh and Shannon, 2005[68]). The analysis takes a mixed-methods
approach, which combines quantitative and qualitative approaches to content analysis. It begins with
quantification of the frequency of word use, which serves as an indicator of the extent of interest in, or
importance assigned to, particular words, without considering their contextual meaning (Potter and Levine-
Donnerstein, 1999[69]). For example, the number of instances in which keywords related to agriculture
appear in the UNFCCC documents may indicate the degree of concern over the consequences of climate
change for the sector (Gagnon-Lebrun and Agrawala, 2006[70]). The analysis then takes a qualitative
approach to examine the context within which keywords of interest are used. This second stage involves
examining the text near a keyword to determine, for example, if words related to agriculture are used in a
discussion of vulnerabilities, mitigation, or adaptation.
The keyword analysis is conducted using NVivo qualitative analysis software (release 1.7). Keyword
frequency analysis is executed by developing a set of search words that describe a concept of interest. In
this analysis, keywords for agriculture include “agriculture”, “food”, “farm”, “crop”, “livestock”, related
variants for each (e.g. agricultural, farming, crops, cropping). Contextual keywords used for mitigation
include “mitigation”, “emission”, “carbon”, “greenhouse”, “gas”, “enteric”, “fermentation” and “food waste”;
keywords for adaptation include “adaptation” and “resilience”; keywords for vulnerability include
“vulnerability”, “impact” and “pressure”. For each category, related word variants in English and the
Spanish and French equivalents for all keywords are included. To identify the context within which
agriculture is discussed, the analysis identified the intersection of agricultural keywords with each of the
categories of contextual words (mitigation, adaptation and vulnerability). The coding for each text excerpt
was then manually verified.
The results of the keyword search are reported as a percentage of the total number of words published,
which adjusts for differences in the lengths of documents by type (NDCs are generally shorter than
adaptation communications or national communications) and across UNFCCC classifications (the NDCs
of Non-Annex I Parties tend to be longer than those of Annex I parties).


 61

Annex Figure 1.A.1. Agricultural keywords in UNFCCC reports over time

Note: NC1 to NC8 refer to reporting rounds for the national communications (NC) to the UNFCCC, the timing of which is presented in Annex
Table 1.A.1. Left panel reports frequency of agricultural word references among total words published. Right panel reports the number of
reporting documents analysed. Graphic omits data on non-OECD member states of the European Union.
Source: Analysis based on national communications to the UNFCCC.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/itk97z
Stocktake of agricultural climate change adaptation programmes and activities
This chapter’s stocktake of current agricultural climate change adaptation programmes and activities uses
information collected by the Secretariat from each of the M&E countries, as reported in the individual
country chapters, as well as supplemental research to identify efforts implemented to support climate
change adaptation. The catalogue of activities reported herein is not exhaustive, but rather represents an
overview of areas of programmatic emphasis and investment across the M&E countries.
Each of the programmes and activities that were self-reported to the Secretariat by member countries was
manually reviewed and classified, first to ensure that activity is specifically focused on adaptation (rather
than a general programme that may touch incidentally on adaptation), then reviewed and classified based
on GAMI category and sub-category, as defined in Table 1.1. Where actions spanned more than one
category or sub-category, they were cross-listed. Each action was coded by at least two staff to ensure
consistency in the classification of programmes. Many actions undertaken by governments do not involve
direct intervention to facilitate adaptation, but rather the creation of institutions to support adaptation
decisions by individuals or groups. In most cases, these sorts of supporting actions fall into the realm of
social, economic and institutional (SEI) measures. For example, a decision support tool that provides
information on potential changes in crop operations in response to climate change would fall into the
category of “climate services”, not “crop operations and management.” Programmes that are planned for
implementation but have not yet been implemented were coded to the SEI category and the sub-category
that best fit the information available on the programme.


0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
NC1
NC2
NC3
NC4
NC5
NC6
NC7
NC8
% of words
All M&E countries
OECD countries
Emerging economies
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
NC1
NC2
NC3
NC4
NC5
NC6
NC7
NC8
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
NC1
NC2
NC3
NC4
NC5
NC6
NC7
NC8
No. reporting documents
Keyword count
Thousand


62 

Notes

1 Part of this increase in event frequency may be attributed to better recording and reporting of disaster
events since the 1980s. For more information, see CRED database documentation/publications.
2 Expressed in 2019 US dollar terms.
3 Increasing levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere have been shown to increase biomass growth and
drought resistance. This has the potential to benefit crop yields and pasture growth. However, it could also
increase the growth of weeds and invasive plant species. Increased carbon dioxide has also been
associated with declining nutrient content in many crops which may offset some of the potential benefits
of increased vegetation. The IPCC report finds that the positive impacts of climate are likely to be
outweighed by the negatives in most regions (IPCC, 2022[10]).
4 The speed of transformation may vary, but the underlying shift in the structure of the industry typically
corresponds to the economic notion of the long-run in which fixed costs become variable.
5 This analysis builds on OECD (2023[9]), Gagnon-Lebrun and Agrawala (2006[70]), Mullan et al. (2013[64]),
Pauw et al. (2019[50]), and Crumpler et al. (2021[71]) to analyse the text of documents submitted to the
UNFCCC by each of the M&E countries. Details of the analysis are presented in the chapter Annex.
6 As discussed in the Annex, the national communications contain a chapter that focuses on vulnerabilities
and adaptation. The NDCs for Annex I parties are largely focused on mitigation, whereas those of Non-
Annex I parties contain a wealth of information on adaptation. The adaptation communications are solely
focused on adaptation.
7 These documents cover many sectors and topics, and as a result do not present a comprehensive
catalogue of adaptation activities undertaken by the M&E countries.
8 The GAMI classification encompasses both autonomous and planned adaptation measures. As such,
not all of the categories are areas that are appropriate or desirable for government policy intervention, nor
are they all applicable to food and agriculture.
9 Cross-listed activities are counted in each category, meaning that the number of actions and programmes
summarised herein exceeds the number reported.
10 The European Climate Adaptation Platform Climate-ADAPT supports sharing of information on climate
change adaptation strategies across Europe (https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/).
11 The evidence on organic production systems with respect to adaptation and mitigation is mixed. These
systems certainly reduce the use of inputs and evidence suggests that they increase soil carbon
sequestration, but they also generate lower yields, potentially requiring an increase in production
elsewhere. For example, Smith et al. (2019[73]) find that at a national scale, a shift to organic farming
increases net emissions.
12 https://igedd.documentation.developpement-durable.gouv.fr/documents/Affaires-0009000/010178-
01_rapport.pdf



 63


13 The Centre has two key components: AgriZeroNZ (the Centre for Climate Action Joint Venture – an
innovation 50:50 government/private-funded mechanism), and the New Zealand Greenhouse Gas
Research Centre (NZAGRC).
14 Agroecological actions or programmes broadly refer to sustainable agricultural production systems.
There are a variety of approaches and practices that may fit into this category, including among others
regenerative agriculture, conservation agriculture, circular agriculture.
15 https://esdac.jrc.ec.europa.eu/esdacviewer/euso-dashboard/
16 Public investments should also not prevent self-financing as countries should aim to ensure full supply
cost recovery in irrigation (OECD, 2010[72])
17 This is the case with MPS and output payments but can also occur through policies such as payments
per head of specific livestock, or payments for area planted to specific crops, among others.
18 OECD (2022[74]), Declaration on Transformative Solutions for Sustainable Agriculture and Food
Systems, OECD/LEGAL/0483, https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0483.


64 

This chapter presents a cross-cutting analysis of agriculture policy trends
based on information and support estimates gathered for 54 countries
covered in OECD’s Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2023. It
provides an overview of recent economic and market developments that
influence the context for the implementation of agricultural policies. It then
outlines the implications on policies of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine
and of inflationary pressures more generally, with an overview of policy
responses by governments to help agricultural producers and consumers
cope with these challenges. The third section presents developments in
other agricultural policies in 2022-23, as well as an analysis of
developments in the level and structure of support to agriculture. Key
recommendations for reforms to better address public objectives conclude
this chapter.


2 Developments in agricultural policy
and support


 65

For the past several years, agricultural have been shaped by multiple crises. Policy makers were forced to
respond first to the pandemic caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 (henceforth referred to as the
COVID-19 pandemic), which initially disrupted production and later snarled supply chains. As the effects
of the pandemic faded, Russia’s1 illegal and unjustified invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 roiled markets
for specific agricultural inputs and outputs.
Alongside these acute consequences of war and pandemic, the effects of climate change were felt in the
increased prevalence of natural disasters such as floods, drought and storms in many of the countries in
this report. African Swine Fever and Avian Flu are two reoccurring biosecurity threats that also strongly
affected global markets in 2022.
All of this taken together has put the stability and resilience of the sector, the predictability of trade, food
security, and the stability of markets on the top of the policy agenda. These issues added to (and competed
with) existing priorities to improve the sustainability of food systems and mitigate their effects on climate
change. As this chapter will describe, policymakers took action to try to help the sector absorb and recover
from these events in the short run and undertook steps to address the impacts of future shocks. Temporary
export bans, tariff reductions (or increases) and other measures were used with the intention of securing
domestic food supplies and managing market disruptions. Overall, these and other actions taken by policy
makers increased total support to producers.
Agriculture policy in 2022 was also made in the context of a global economy weighed by value chain
disruptions and high energy prices. GDP growth both globally and in the OECD area dropped by close to
half in 2022, as did real global trade. These rates remained above those observed prior to the pandemic,
but fell short of earlier expectations after the contractions in 2020. Moreover, average inflation in the OECD
area climbed to more than 9%.
This chapter first presents the general economic and market context in which agricultural policies evolved
over 2022. The second section provides an overview of policies responding to the Russian war of
aggression in Ukraine and its consequences for agricultural input and output markets. This is
complemented by a discussion of other agricultural policy developments in 2022 and early 2023, while a
fourth section presents and analyses developments in agricultural support. The chapter concludes by
providing an overall assessment of the use of support against the main policy objectives for the agricultural
sector.
Key economic and market developments
Conditions in agricultural markets are strongly influenced by macro-economic factors such as economic
growth (measured by gross domestic product, GDP), which drives demand for agricultural and food
products, as well as by prices for crude oil, natural gas and other energy sources that underpin many
production inputs in agriculture, notably fuel, chemicals and fertiliser. Energy prices also affect the demand
for cereals, sugar crops and oilseeds through the market for biofuels produced from these feedstocks.
Global GDP, which had begun to recover from its 3% contraction following the COVID-19 pandemic and
grew by almost 6% in 2021, saw its growth reduced to just over 3% in 2022 (Table 2.1). Across the OECD,
deceleration was most significant in fast-growing economies, including Chile (2.5%, down from 11.9% in
2021), Estonia (-1.7% compared to +8%) and Türkiye (5.6% after 11.4%). Across the euro area, growth
remained comparatively robust at 3.5%, down from 5.2% in 2021. While output exceeded pre-pandemic
levels in most countries, GDP remained below 2019 levels in Spain, Japan, Mexico and the United
Kingdom.
Labour markets were a bright spot in the overall economic picture. Unemployment rates that had peaked
in 2020 fell over the course of 2021 and 2022 to average 5% across the OECD area, the lowest in more


66 

than 40 years. At the same time, shortages of qualified workers have sometimes dampened economic
growth.
Prices rose strongly over the same period and inflation reached an average 9.3% in 2022, a level not seen
for more than 30 years. Energy and food prices strongly contributed to such high inflation rates (see below).
Emerging economies were also affected. Growth in the countries covered by this report fell significantly
relative to their rebounds in 2021, but in most cases remained close to or above average growth rates
seen prior to the pandemic. The stark and obvious exception is Ukraine, where the war has wiped out
close to 30% of its economic output.
Global trade grew by 5% year on year, a deceleration relative to the 10% growth in 2021 but still slightly
higher than average pre-pandemic growth rates.
Table 2.1. Key economic indicators

Average 2010-19
2020
2021
2022
Real GDP growth1




World2
3.1
-3.1
6.1
3.3
OECD2
1.8
-4.4
5.7
3.0
United States
2.0
-2.8
5.9
2.1
Euro area
1.2
-6.2
5.2
3.5
Japan
0.8
-4.3
2.2
1.0
Non-OECD2
4.3
-2.0
6.5
3.7
Argentina
0.3
-9.9
10.4
5.2
Brazil
0.7
-3.6
5.3
3.0
China
6.6
2.2
8.4
3.0
India3
5.8
-5.8
9.1
7.2
Indonesia
4.8
-2.1
3.7
5.3
South Africa
1.4
-6.3
4.9
2.0
Ukraine
..
-3.8
3.4
-29.1
OECD area




Unemployment rate4
7.0
7.2
6.2
5.0
Inflation1,5
1.6
1.5
3.8
9.3
World real trade growth1
3.5
-8.0
10.4
5.0
1. Per cent; last three columns show the change over a year earlier.
2. Moving nominal GDP weights, using purchasing power parities.
3. Fiscal year.
4. Per cent of labour force.
5. Personal consumption expenditures deflator.
Source: OECD (2023), Economic Outlook N°113 - June 2023, OECD Statistics Database,
https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?lang=en&SubSessionId=943670ea-b9e0-4eb4-9447-2347c99584f5&themetreeid=4.
Inflation was driven notably by prices for energy and food. Energy prices, which had doubled already in
2021 relative to the comparatively low levels in 2020, rose by a further 64% year on year in 2022 and
began to fall only in the last third of the year (Figure 2.1). Sanctions against Russia following its war against
Ukraine, Russia’s decision to suspend gas deliveries to EU Member States and the continued relatively
robust economic growth have contributed to lower supplies and growing demand for primary energy
sources. Average prices for natural gas doubled again in 2022, after a 253% increase in 2021. Crude oil
also increased by almost 50% year on year. Prices for both declined in early 2023, approaching their pre-
pandemic levels.
Fertiliser prices, which had almost doubled in 2021, rose further after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and
averaged 74% higher in 2022 than in 2021, peaking only in November 2022, before slowly retreating. The


 67

run-up in fertiliser prices was driven not only by higher energy prices but also by the high pre-war market
share of exports from Russia, Belarus and Ukraine. Potash prices rose by 166% year on year, as Russia
and Belarus alone had accounted for more than a third of global potash exports in 2018-20.
Food prices had been on the rise before the war, driven by stronger demand due to the rebounding
economic activities post-COVID-19, harvest shortfalls in some major producing countries and higher input
costs. On average, food prices further increased by 14% in 2022, as lower exports from Ukraine and Russia
reduced supply and increased uncertainties on markets already affected by rising energy and fertiliser
costs. This increase, while significant, remains lower than the increase observed in 2021 and significantly
less pronounced than those for energy or fertilisers, although the extent of price increases differed by
commodity (FAO, 2022[1]).
Figure 2.1. Commodity world price indices, 2007 to 2023

Note: The top part of the graph relates to the left scale, while the bottom part of the graph to the right scale.
Source: IMF (2023), Commodity Market Review, for all commodities, food and energy indices (base year: 2016),
www.imf.org/external/np/res/commod/index.aspx; FAO (2023), FAO Food Price Index dataset, for meat, dairy and cereal indices (base period:
2014-16), www.fao.org/worldfoodsituation/foodpricesindex/en.
The growth rate of meat production slowed from over 4% in 2021 to 1% in 2022. Higher pig meat production
in the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”) was a factor for continued growth, as the sector
continues to recover from the African Swine Fever (ASF) disease. Production levels in North and South
America remained relatively stable, while Europe and Oceania observed a decline in meat output. Rising
input costs, the prevalence of animal diseases, and unfavourable weather conditions adversely affected
producer margins and disrupted meat production in various parts of the world. This, together with growing
import demand, has led to average meat prices rising by more than 10% in 2022, although prices started
to decline in the second half of the year as import demand slowed, and in December were only slightly
higher than a year earlier.
World milk production grew by just 0.6% in 2022. Output increased notably in India, Pakistan and China,
offset by contractions in Ukraine due to the ongoing war, and in several other countries due to extreme
weather events, shortages in labour supply and higher input costs. World dairy prices further increased


68 

and peaked in June before declining due to lower import demand. On average, dairy prices in 2022 were
almost 20% higher than in 2021.
Recovering demand for vegetable oils and rising feed demand for oilseed meals notably in China were
met by a 7% increase in oilseed production in 2022/23 compared to the previous season.2 Record world
soybean production was driven mainly by strong output growth in Brazil, while rapeseed production growth
factors included its recovery from the very low preceding harvest in Canada and increased output also in
Australia and the European Union, among others. In contrast, lower global sunflower seed production is
caused mainly by disrupted production in Ukraine. World oilseed prices, already high in 2021, increased
sharply in early 2022, peaking at record levels in March before declining by more than 40% towards the
end of the year. On average, oilseed prices in 2022 were 13% higher than in 2021 as stock-to-use ratios
remained low compared to historical levels. Prices for vegetable oils and for meals and cakes rose slightly
more strongly, by 14% and 15% respectively.
Global cereal production was down by almost 2% in 2022/23, as lower production of coarse grains and
rice more than offset a slight increase in global wheat output. Reductions in coarse grains were mainly
driven by declining maize harvests in the European Union, Ukraine and the United States, and lower
sorghum production in the United States, more than offsetting higher global barley production. Production
in the European Union and the United States was down also for rice, but the global decline was mainly
due to weather conditions in southern Asia, while other parts of Asia and Africa saw some increased output.
A 40% drop in Ukraine’s wheat output and declining production also in several other countries were more
than offset by significant recovery from the previous harvest in Canada and a second record harvest in a
row in Australia, among others. Overall, cereal prices increased by 18% year on year, with barley, maize
and wheat prices rising particularly strongly, while rice prices on average remained largely unchanged.
Prices have declined somewhat following the implementation of the Black Sea Grain Initiative,3 allowing
significant amounts of grains to be exported through three key Ukrainian ports.
Sugar production increased as a result of a significant recovery in Brazil’s output, the world’s largest sugar
producer and exporter, and increased production notably in Australia, China and Thailand, which more
than offset declines in the European Union, India and Pakistan. Overall, global sugar production increased
by more than 4% in 2022/23 and exceeded slightly increasing sugar demand, driven among others by
population growth and urbanisation in Africa and growing demand from the processing industry in Asia but
limited by lower economic growth. International sugar prices, which peaked in April, declined thereafter,
but rebounded strongly since October 2022. On average, prices in 2022 were 5% higher than in 2021, a
much less pronounced increase compared to other food commodities and dampened by the global supply
surplus.
Overall, average farm receipts (including budgetary transfers from agricultural policies) across the
54 countries covered in this report, which have been rising continuously since 2016, are estimated about
5% higher4 than in 2021, mostly driven by higher international commodity prices. This increase is slightly
above the average growth during the decade preceding the COVID-19 pandemic, but lower than growth
in the two years of the pandemic. This suggests that on average, farm revenues have not only proved
relatively resilient vis-à-vis the COVID-19 pandemic but also against the implications of the war in Ukraine.
However, farmers also faced significant increases in the prices for key production inputs such as fertilisers
and fuels, meaning that production margins and incomes have likely developed less favourably than
revenues.
Policy responses to the war in Ukraine and to inflationary pressures more
generally
As supply chains were recovering from the COVID-19 pandemic, inflationary pressures and the outbreak
of war had profound impacts on global agro-food systems in 2022. World prices for grains and oilseeds


 69

rose as tensions escalated and spiked following the outbreak of war (OECD/FAO, 2023[2]). These effects
were particularly important for commodities such as wheat, barley, maize and sunflower oil for which
Ukraine is among the largest global exporters (more context on Ukraine’s importance to global agricultural
markets is provided in Box 2.1). Input costs such as for fertiliser and energy also rose due to reduced
global supply. Russian exports of natural gas declined following the outbreak of war, and supply concerns
prompted some producing countries to restrict exports of fertiliser to ensure domestic availability.
Policy responses to these global challenges were introduced by most countries covered in this report in
2022. These included direct support measures to farmers, consumers, and food processors; measures
dealing with fertiliser supplies and prices; measures to facilitate imports and restrict exports of critical
materials. Countries also introduced measures to improve the prospects for Ukrainian agriculture.
Box 2.1. Impacts of the war on Ukraine's agricultural sector
On 24 February 2022, Russia started its large-scale invasion of Ukraine which marked the beginning of
the largest military conflict in Europe since World War II. The war has caused significant damage to
Ukraine’s economy which shrank by close to 30% in 2022.
Agriculture accounted for more than 10% of total GDP and almost 15% of employment in Ukraine prior to
the war, but production and trade have fallen considerably since. The impacts on the sector include
damage to infrastructure and material, labour shortages, loss of productive land, direct loss of production,
shortage and high costs of agricultural inputs, and reduced export capacity, among others.
More than USD 6.6 billion in agriculture and land resources have been damaged or lost (Kyiv School of
Economics, 2023[3]). This includes agricultural machinery and equipment on farms along with infrastructure
such as elevators and grain storage. More detailed estimates as of September 2022 suggest that
6.5 million tonnes of storage capacity had been destroyed, with another 2.9 million tonnes of capacity
having been partially damaged (Kyiv School of Economics, 2022[4]).
Agriculture may have lost up to 15% of its labour force1 as many former farm workers now serve in the
Ukrainian military. Land use is imperilled too as agricultural land has become part of the battleground,
impacted by artillery strikes and land mines that make sowing and harvesting potentially life-threatening
tasks. This touches farms not only in areas close to the combat zones but in large parts of the country.2
Estimates of the area affected differ widely, ranging from just over 1% of Ukraine’s farmland3 to as much
as 30% of the country’s territory, including in several highly agriculture dependent regions4, with other
estimates falling in-between.5 High concentrations of toxins from munitions and fuel pose an additional
threat to agricultural land. At least 10.5 million hectares of agricultural land in Ukraine could be degraded,
equivalent to a quarter of its total farm land.6
Economic losses to agriculture go well beyond destroyed or damaged property and were estimated to
exceed USD 34 billion as of October 2022 (Kyiv School of Economics, 2022[5]), which would correspond
to one-sixth of the country’s GDP in 2021. These losses include the effects of reduced crop production in
2022 (more than USD 11 billion), expected production shortfalls in the winter crop 2023 (USD 3 billion),
livestock losses, higher input costs (notably for diesel and fertilisers, close to USD 1 billion) and depressed
output prices due to disruptions in logistics and export facilities (more than USD 18 billion).
Before the war, Ukraine was an important producer and exporter of agricultural products, notably grains
and vegetable oil. Over the five years preceding the war, Ukraine produced 4% of the world’s wheat, 3%
of its maize and 6% of its barley. However, Ukraine’s shares in global exports were multiples of those at
9%, 14% and 12%, respectively (Figure 2.2), placing the country among the top five exporters for these
commodities. The country’s importance was even higher in some oilseeds, with production of sunflower
seed exceeding 25% of the world total. Ukraine was the world’s largest exporter of sunflower oil, originating


70 

43% of global sunflower oil exports. Due to the very good harvest in 2021, shares in the year just preceding
the war were even higher.
Figure 2.2. Ukraine's share in global production and exports of selected agricultural commodities

Source: FAO (2023[6]; 2023[7]).
The combined production of wheat, maize, barley and sunflower seed could fall by between one-fifth and
one-third relative to this five-year average due to the war, and by between one-third and a half relative to
the year preceding the war.7 Total agricultural production in 2022 is estimated to have been about 28%
below its 2021 level.8 This, combined with the damage to infrastructure and blockage of ports, significantly
hinders Ukraine’s exports of these products. While data for the full marketing year following the invasion
remain incomplete, exports of agricultural commodities are estimated to have fallen significantly in the
2022 marketing year and to be lower still in 2023 (OECD/FAO, 2023[2]), with future developments strongly
depending on the continuation of the Black Sea Grain Initiative (Figure 2.3). Wheat and barley (the most
important cereal in “other coarse grains”) exports are most strongly affected. Due to damage to
infrastructure, more sunflower seed was exported rather than processed domestically in 2022, leading to
some increased oilseed exports compared to historical averages.
Figure 2.xx: Ukraine's share in global production and exports of selected agricultural commodities
Share of world total, average 2017-21
Production
Exports
Wheat
Maize
Barley
Sunflower seed
Sunflower oil
Rapeseed
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%


 71

Figure 2.3. Ukraine’s exports 2022 and 2023 of selected agricultural commodities

Source: OECD/FAO, (2023[2]).

1. https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/ukraine-farms-lose-workers-war-complicating-tough-harvest-2023-05-08/
2. https://edition.cnn.com/2023/03/27/europe/farmers-land-mines-clearance-ukraine-russia-invasion-intl-hnk/index.html
3. Forbes Ukraine as reported by (USDA, 2023[8]).
4. Ukrainian authorities as reported by (UNOCHA, 2023[9]).
5. The Yale School of Environment estimates that “some 15 percent of farmland in Ukraine has been littered with land mines”
(https://e360.yale.edu/digest/russia-ukraine-war-environmental-cost-one-year), an assessment that is backed up by (GLOBSEC, 2023[10]) and
by the Agrarian Committee of the Parliament, as cited by d’Istria (2023[11]), which in March 2023 spoke of about 5 million hectares of farmland
that would be unusable due to landmines, explosive remnants and continued combat.
6. Ukraine’s Institute for Soil Science and Agrochemistry Research. https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/soils-war-toxic-legacy-ukraines-
breadbasket-2023-03-01/.
7. Estimates by USDA and the Ukrainian Grain Association (Martyshev, Nivievskyi and Bogonos, 2023[12]).
8. State Statistics Service and the Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine.
Many countries introduced or increased support for rising input costs….
The rising costs of farm inputs were a global concern for farmers and policymakers responded with a
number of different types of support to assist. Some countries introduced policy support targeting specific
inputs, such as the Philippines which provided fuel discount vouchers to farmers. Others provided support
to specific industries. For instance, China provided three rounds of direct subsidies to grain farmers
between March and August 2022. Certain provinces also provided additional area and/or production
payments to encourage higher production of soybean and intercropping of maize and soybean. Japan
provided payments to livestock farmers to compensate for higher feed costs.
Countries also introduced more general support to compensate for rising input costs. For instance, Canada
increased the interest-free limit on loans under its Advance Payment Program for 2022 and 2023, providing
interest rate relief to participating agricultural producers. Colombia provided input cost support to small-
Figure 2.3. Ukraine's exports 2022 and 2023 of selected agricultural commodities
Compared to 2017-21 average
2022 (est.)
2023 (proj.)
Wheat
Maize
Other coarse grains
Oilseeds other than soybeans
Vegetable oils
-50%
-40%
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%


72 

holder farms through a 20% refund on the value of purchases of agricultural inputs. Iceland increased
existing payments and introduced new payments to accommodate increased production costs. Norway
similarly increased the size of its annual support package to farmers by a substantial amount, including
one-off exceptional payments to compensate for rising input costs. Korea provided tax relief to farmers
and direct compensation for higher feed and fertiliser prices. In the United Kingdom, the government of
Northern Ireland expedited the delivery of direct payments to assist farmers with cash flow.
The European Union implemented an aid framework allowing individual Member States to implement
direct support to farmers and rural areas; exceptional market measures; actions to foster the overall
resilience of the sector; and exceptional flexibilities in the use of CAP funding. EU Member States
implemented their own suite of support measures, such as tax concessions, investment assistance, and
allowances to consumers and farm households to help farmers and agro-food enterprises cope with the
financial impacts.
…including support to farmers for fertiliser
Fertiliser supply was of particular concern for many countries and led to many measures to attempt to
either reduce costs to farmers or dependence on fertiliser. For instance, Chile both provided fertiliser and
gave per hectare payments to compensate for rising variable input costs as part of the country’s Sow for
Chile (Siembra por Chile) programme. India increased its fertiliser subsidies twice during 2022 and Mexico
increased its subsidy by 16-fold across 2022 and 2023. The Philippines implemented subsidies for
fertiliser in the form of fertiliser discount vouchers as part of its Plant, Plant, Plant Part 2 programme.
Switzerland released 20% of its strategic reserves of fertiliser in 2021 in response to early supply
difficulties in international and kept the measure in place throughout 2022 to mitigate the market effects of
Russia’s war of aggression, equal to roughly one third of the country’s annual needs for crop production.
Japan subsidised transportation and storage costs for fertiliser manufacturers to compensate for costs
associated with changing suppliers. The United States announced the new Fertiliser Production
Expansion Program to increase domestic fertiliser availability.
Internationally, a group of countries announced the Global Fertiliser Challenge in 2022. The challenge
seeks to both strengthen food security and reduce agricultural emissions by advancing fertiliser efficiency
and alternatives in low-and middle-income countries. It hopes to achieve this challenge through innovation
and knowledge sharing on fertiliser-efficient farming practices. US and European officials announced at
the 2022 United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP27) that USD 135 million in funding had been
raised for the effort.
Some countries suspended environmental requirements to encourage domestic
production
Several countries made decisions to postpone the implementation of sustainability measures as a
response to food security concerns stemming from the war in Ukraine. The European Union adopted an
exceptional flexibility to allow agricultural production on fallow land while still maintaining the full level of
the associated income support payments. This option was taken up by several EU Member countries,
including Austria, Belgium (Wallonia), the Czech Republic, France, Germany (partly), Italy, Latvia,
Luxembourg and Poland. Switzerland similarly postponed measures to fallow cropland for the promotion
of biodiversity by one year.
Additional support was provided for agricultural consumers
Rising inflation and cost of living was an issue for many countries in 2022. Some countries introduced
measures to specifically aid agricultural consumers. For instance, China began releasing strategic
supplies of pig meat with the objective of stabilising prices. The government in the Philippines imposed


 73

price ceilings for staple foods such as milk, beef, poultry and pork in an effort to counter food price inflation.
In the United States, additional food assistance was provided for children in eligible families as part of the
Consolidated Appropriations Act. Many more countries introduced other measures that were not
agriculture-specific and increased consumer incomes. These included actions such as reducing various
taxes; raising minimum wages and welfare payments for the poorest in society; energy price caps; and
one-off cash payments.
Other countries implemented policies to assist processing firms who use agricultural products as inputs.
For instance, Japan subsidised the costs of food producers to develop, manufacture, and source materials
for new food products. Belgium introduced emergency changes to labelling regulations allowing food
producers to more easily change the composition of food products and still abide by labelling requirements.
Trade restrictions were eased on some imports….
Several countries sought to make importing inputs and food easier to avoid domestic shortfalls. Brazil
temporarily suspended some agricultural tariffs from non-Mercosur countries, including on maize,
soybeans, soymeal and soy oil. China signed a protocol to allow imports of maize from Brazil as part of its
strategy to diversify its import sources of key commodities. Colombia removed tariffs on all agricultural
inputs and 163 basic household consumer products. Mexico similarly exempted tariffs on imports of
5 strategic agricultural inputs and 21 basic consumer goods. Switzerland reduced tariffs on animal feed
imports from 15 March 2022. Some EU Member States made use of existing flexibility in EU legislation to
make imports of animal feed easier, for example Spain relaxed maximum residue limits for pesticides in
maize. Korea reduced the tariff rate to 0% for wheat and flour imports within quota to alleviate upward
pressure on prices, and increased the quota for unhulled barley, wheat hull and root vegetables to secure
supplies of feed.
Countries also facilitated trade as a way of providing economic support for Ukraine. Australia, Canada,
Iceland, the European Union, the United Kingdom and the United States all implemented temporary
exemptions from tariffs on agricultural products imported from Ukraine.
….but trade restrictions were increased on some exports
India introduced export bans, duties or permits on commodities such as rice, wheat, sugar and related
products. China imposed a ban on state-owned phosphate producers from exporting phosphate starting
from October 2021 until June 2022 and introduced a new requirement for inspection certificates to ship
fertilisers. In addition, a quota limiting total phosphate exports to 3.16 million tonnes was introduced for the
second half of 2022. Mexico introduced a 50% export tariff on white maize for human consumption.
Countries also provided support for Ukraine and Ukrainian agriculture
Along with domestic measures to assist with the fallout from the war, many countries also took steps to
support Ukraine. As mentioned in Box 2.1, Ukraine was a significant exporter of grain and oilseeds before
the war and exports were significantly hampered following its outbreak. To assist with the challenges, the
Black Sea Grain Initiative was brokered with the assistance of Türkiye and the United Nations to allow
Ukraine to resume exports of grain through the Black Sea. A Joint Coordination Center with officials from
Türkiye, Russia and Ukraine and the United Nations was set up in Istanbul to oversee shipments of grain
from three Ukrainian Black Sea ports. The European Union also assisted in establishing “Solidarity Lanes”
to ensure Ukraine can export grain and import essential goods, such as animal feed, fertiliser, and
humanitarian aid. The “Solidarity Lanes” and the Black Sea Grain Initiative allowed the export of about
25 million tonnes of Ukrainian grain, oilseeds and related products between May 2022 and the end of
October 2022 (EC, 2022[13]). Despite these initiatives, logistics costs and bottlenecks have caused a larger-
than-usual amount of Ukrainian grain to be marketed in neighbouring countries. In April 2023, Poland,


74 

Bulgaria, Hungary, and the Slovak Republic all introduced measures to ban imports of a range of
agricultural products from Ukraine as a result. An agreement was soon made following intervention from
the European Commission which keeps the import bans in place but allows Ukrainian grain to transit
through these countries for export elsewhere. Romania joined this agreement later in April.
Countries worked together with private companies and international organisations to aid Ukraine with seed
and infrastructure investments. In February 2023, the United States (through the US Agency for
International Development, USAID) and biotechnology company Bayer provided a joint donation of
13.5 tonnes of high-quality vegetable seeds to Ukrainian farmers in advance of planting season. USAID
also partnered with agribusinesses Grain Alliance, Kernel and Nibulon to invest USD 44 million in storage
and infrastructure expansion to help enable Ukraine to increase its grain shipping capacity. Japan
partnered with the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) to provide maize and
sunflower seeds to agricultural producers and small farms during the 2023 spring-summer season. The
Netherlands included EUR 40 million (USD 42 million) for the purchase of seed and equipment as part of
its 2023 support package for defence and recovery.
To help address the challenges related to the large-scale contamination of Ukrainian agricultural land with
mines and other explosives (Box 2.1), the Netherlands provided EUR 10 million (USD 11 million) for
demining as part of its 2023 support package to Ukraine. Switzerland also included CHF 7.5 million
(USD 8 million) in targeted support for mine clearance in Ukraine over the next few years as part of its
“Action Plan on Mine Action 2023-2026
The United States and Ukrainian agricultural ministries issued a memorandum of understanding to co-
operate on areas of productivity data, shared expertise and guidance on new technologies, and enhanced
co-operation on bilateral trade and post-conflict capacity building. To date, technical assistance and other
initiatives have been launched in the areas of animal health, biosecurity, sanitary and phytosanitary
capacity building, agricultural and trade policy, wildfire control, water management, and preventing illegal
deforestation.
The European Union activated the Temporary Protection Directive, granting access to labour market,
housing, education and healthcare across the European Union to over 4 million people fleeing the war.
Poland extended the admissible period of employment for Ukrainian citizens involved in harvest
assistance. The Czech Republic supported inclusion of Ukrainian scientists, and students in research
teams, including providing CZK 6 million (USD 269 224) to subsidise salaries of Ukrainians joining certain
projects in agriculture, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture.
In addition to these activities, the OECD launched its Ukraine Country Programme to support Ukraine’s
agenda for reform, recovery and reconstruction, including related to agriculture (Box 2.2).
Box 2.2. OECD Ukraine Country Programme
The OECD and the government of Ukraine launched a four-year Country Programme that will support
Ukraine’s agenda for reform, recovery and reconstruction and will help Ukraine advance its ambitions
to join the OECD and the European Union. The programme will enable Ukraine to leverage OECD
expertise and best practices, strengthen institutions, and build capacity for successful policy reforms
aligned with OECD standards and best practices. It will consist of reviews and other projects resulting
in policy recommendations and capacity building activities; legal instruments for Ukraine to advance
alignment with the Organisation’s standards; and targets to enhance Ukraine’s participation in OECD
bodies.
Together with energy, agriculture will be one of the two focus areas of sectoral policy work within the
programme. The OECD has monitored developments in Ukraine’s agricultural policy and provided
recommendations and analysis as part of this publication since 2004 and will continue to do so into the


 75

future. The programme intends to build upon this work as the situation in Ukraine stabilises to conduct
an OECD Agricultural Policy Review. Ukraine could also consider being a potential new member of the
Co-operative Research Programme: Sustainable Agricultural and Food Systems.
Note: Further information about the Ukraine Country Programme is available at https://www.oecd.org/mcm/documents/Ukraine-Country-
Programme.pdf.
Other recent developments in agricultural policies
While policies for agriculture and food have been strongly influenced by the war in Ukraine, not all policy
changes introduced in 2022 were related to the war situation. This section provides a summary of some
other major trends in agricultural policies implemented by countries. More details on specific policies are
available within the relevant country chapters.
Several countries implemented changes to their policy frameworks
A number of countries updated their policy frameworks for agriculture during the year. The EU Common
Agricultural Policy (CAP) for 2023-27 entered into force in January 2023. This new CAP is built around ten
specific objectives: ensuring fair incomes for farmers; increasing competitiveness; improving the position
of farmers in the food chain; climate change action; environmental care; preserving landscapes and
biodiversity; supporting generational renewal; vibrant rural areas; protection of food and health quality; and
fostering knowledge and innovation. Under the new CAP, Member States play a key role in designing and
implementing their CAP 2023-27 Strategic Plans to achieve EU-level objectives. Canada agreed on its
new five-year agricultural policy framework for 2023-28, called the Sustainable Canadian Agriculture
Partnership. The framework focuses on five priorities: climate change and environment; market
development and trade; building sector capacity, growth, and competitiveness; resiliency and public trust;
and science, research and innovation.
In Colombia, the new administration introduced the Towards Agriculture for Life (Hacia Una Agricultura
Para La Vida) development plan for 2022-26. The plan focuses on five key strategies of comprehensive
land reform; addressing inequalities facing indigenous, black, women, and young people in the sector;
environmental protection and sustainability; market inclusion on agricultural value chains; and a territorial
approach. In the United Kingdom, both Wales and Northern Ireland introduced new policy framework
documents. The Agriculture (Wales) Bill was introduced by the Welsh parliament setting the overarching
framework for future support for agriculture with a major focus on sustainable land management. The
Northern Ireland ministry published the Future Agricultural Policy Decisions report along with 54 policy
decisions on the future of agricultural support. The Philippines published the National Agriculture and
Fisheries Modernisation Plan that serves as the directional plan for the agricultural sector for the next
decade.
Argentina launched the Plan GanAr with the aim of contributing to the sustainable development of
Argentine livestock. Australia drafted the National Agricultural Traceability Strategy 2023-28 and its five-
year implementation plan. The strategy aims to develop connected, aligned and interoperable world-class
traceability systems along supply chains to accelerate premium Australian exports and enhance
biosecurity and food security. The United States introduced a new rule, Requirements for Additional
Traceability Records for Certain Foods, which establishes traceability recordkeeping requirements for
participants in supply chains of certain foods in an effort to facilitate rapid identification and removal of
potentially contaminated food from the market.


76 

Costa Rica reduced market price support and liberalised trade in paddy and milled rice in 2022 as part of
its Rice Path strategy. In 2023, the government unveiled a new public policy governing the agricultural
sector for 2023-32 aiming for greater prominence of Costa Rican products in international markets; creating
decent jobs; and improving living conditions. Israel similarly underwent important sector reforms for egg,
dairy and beef production, and limited tariffs on selected produce. Production quotas for eggs and dairy
target price mechanisms will be progressively phased out over time, while tariffs for chilled beef were
eliminated and replaced with direct payment compensation and branding investments. Tariffs were also
cut on selected fruits and vegetables and agricultural inputs.
Some countries increased their climate mitigation ambitions
Countries unveiled new measures relating to climate change. Chapter 1 of this publication provides a
detailed discussion of the many adaptation policies implemented by countries. However, several countries
also took further steps to mitigate the contribution to climate change of their agricultural sectors. Australia
invested new funds into discovering technological solutions to reduce agricultural emissions and
announced knowledge transfer initiatives to encourage farmers to participate in carbon markets and
integrate low-emission technologies into their operations. Canada tabled its 2030 Emissions Reduction
Plan in March 2022 which outlines efforts it is undertaking across all sectors to meet its 2030 emissions
target and lay the foundation for achieving net-zero emissions by 2050. New Zealand published its first
Emissions Reduction Plan in May 2022. The plan contains several key actions including the introduction
of an agricultural emissions pricing mechanism by 2025, among others. The United States launched its
initiative Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities in 2022, providing USD 3.1 billion in funding for
141 pilot projects to expand markets for climate-smart commodities.
Several countries also pledged to increase the ambition of their climate mitigation targets. Australia, India,
Norway and Viet Nam all updated their emissions reductions targets, and Australia, Austria, the Czech
Republic, the Slovak Republic, and the United Kingdom all joined the Global Methane Pledge in 2022.
Of the 54 countries covered in this report, 19 have mitigations targets specifically for the agricultural sector.
A summary of emissions reductions targets of all 54 countries is provided below (Table 2.2).




 77

Table 2.2. Emissions reductions targets

Economy-wide emissions
reduction targets
Long-term
strategy
submitted to
UNFCCC
Agriculture-specific target
(base year/level)
Global methane pledge
(reduce global
anthropogenic CH4 30%
from 2020 levels by 2030)
2030 target (base
year/level)
2050 target
Argentina
Max 349 MtCO2eq
Net zero
Yes
None
Yes
Australia
-43% (2005)
Net zero
Yes
None
Yes
Brazil
-50% (2005)
Net zero
No
None
Yes
Canada
-40-45% (2005)
Net zero
Yes
-30% fertiliser emissions by 2030
(2020)
Yes
Chile
Max 95 MtCO2eq
Net zero
Yes
None
Yes
China
Peak CO2; -65%
GDP emission
intensity (2005)
Net zero by
2060
Yes
None
No
Colombia
Max 169.4
MtCO2eq
Net zero
Yes
None
Yes
Costa Rica
Max 9.11 MtCO2eq
Net zero
Yes
None
Yes
European Union
-55% (1990)
Net zero
Yes
None at EU level
Yes
EU Member States


19 out of 27
countries
(except
Bulgaria,
Estonia,
Greece,
Croatia,
Ireland, Italy,
Poland,
Romania)
2030 Targets:
Belgium -25% (1990);
Denmark -55-65% (1990);
Germany -31-34% (1990); Spain
-18% (2005); France -18%
(2015); Ireland -25% (2018);
Portugal -11% (2005);
Netherlands -3.5 MtCO2eq
22 out of 27 countries
(except Hungary, Lithuania,
Latvia, Poland, Romania)
Iceland
-55% (1990)
“Largely
neutral” by
2040
Yes
Carbon neutral by 2040
Yes
India
-45% GDP
emission intensity
(2005)
Net zero by
2070
Yes
None
No
Indonesia
-32% (BAU); up
to -43% conditional
on int. support
Net zero by
2060
Yes
None
Yes
Israel
-27% (2015)
-85% from
2015 levels
No
None
Yes
Japan
-46% (2013)
Net zero
Yes
49.5 MtCO2eq by 2030
Yes
Kazakhstan
-15% (1990)
None
No
None
No
Korea
-40% (2018)
Net zero
Yes
-27.1% by 2030; -37.7% by 2050
(2018)
Yes
Mexico
-25% (BAU); up
to -40% conditional
on int. support
None
Yes
-8% by 2030 (BAU)
Yes
New Zealand
-50% (2005)
Net zero
Yes
-24-47% reduction in biogenic
methane by 2050
Yes
Norway
-55% (1990)
-90-95%
(1990)
Yes
Voluntary agreement with
agriculture sector: -5 MtCO2eq
by 2030
Yes
Philippines
-2.7% (2020); up
to -72% conditional
on int. support
None
No
-29.4% by 2030 (BAU)
conditional on int. support
Yes
Russia
-30% (1990)
Net zero by
2060
Yes
None
No
South Africa
350-420 MtCO2eq
(BAU 398-614
MtCO2e)
Net zero
Yes
None
No
Switzerland
-50% (1990)
Net zero
Yes
-40% by 2050 (1990)
Yes


78 


Economy-wide emissions
reduction targets
Long-term
strategy
submitted to
UNFCCC
Agriculture-specific target
(base year/level)
Global methane pledge
(reduce global
anthropogenic CH4 30%
from 2020 levels by 2030)
2030 target (base
year/level)
2050 target
Türkiye
-21% (BAU)
Net zero by
2053
No
None
No
Ukraine
-65% (1990)
Net zero by
2060
Yes
None
Yes
United Kingdom
-68% (1990)
Net zero
Yes
-17-30% by 2030; -24-40% by
2035 (2019)
Yes
United States
-50-52% (2005)
Net zero
Yes
None
Yes
Viet Nam
Reduction of 15.8%
(BAU) or 146.3
MtCO2eq
(unconditional
distribution); 43.5%
or 403.7 MtCO2eq
(conditional
distribution with
international
financing)
Net zero
No
-43% (BAU) by 2030, Decision
No. 888/QD-TTg
Yes
Several countries responded to natural disasters with assistance to their agricultural
sectors
Several countries that experienced natural disasters implemented direct support to those affected within
the agricultural sector. Argentina adopted exceptional measures in 2022 and 2023 to compensate
territories affected by droughts, fires and frost. In October 2022, provincial governments in Canada
implemented programmes to provide additional support to agricultural producers significantly affected by
Hurricane Fiona. China provided disaster relief funds to 13 provinces affected by floods and droughts.
Several EU Member States, such as Croatia, the Czech Republic, France, Poland, Romania and the
Slovak Republic provided disaster relief funding for various adverse weather events in 2022, ranging from
droughts, floods, frost, hail, torrential rain, hurricanes, landslides and avalanches. New Zealand responded
to a record number of weather-related adverse events, including flooding, drought and cyclones, by
providing funding for psychosocial support, recovery and clean-up. The United States launched two
temporary programmes in 2022 to compensate for losses incurred in prior years – the Emergency
Livestock Relief Program and Emergency Relief Program.
Many worked on policies which will improve environmental sustainability
Australia launched several new measures that trial market-based approaches to incentivise landholders
to improve biodiversity as part of the Agriculture Biodiversity Stewardship Package. These include the
Carbon + Biodiversity Pilot, and the Enhancing Remnant Vegetation Pilot. A National Stewardship Trading
Platform was also established allowing landholders to plan and evaluate carbon and biodiversity projects,
and options are being explored to implement the Australian Farm Biodiversity Certification Scheme to
certify farm businesses for their biodiversity management. As of 30 April 2023, the European Union
completed 47 of the more than 100 actions committed to in the EU Biodiversity Strategy intended to halt
and reverse biodiversity loss by 2030. Several EU Member States also adopted new regulatory measures
to reduce the environmental impacts of agricultural inputs, including Austria, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, France, Poland, Romania, and Spain. The EU CAP 2023-27 introduced a new “green
architecture” with higher environmental ambitions, including stricter basic requirements (conditionality) in
cross-compliance. Twenty-five per cent of the direct payments budget is dedicated to eco-schemes, a new
policy tool that has been introduced to incentivise the adoption of farming practices with additional


 79

environmental benefits. These schemes are part of the CAP’s long-standing commitment to helping farms
make necessary ecological transitions.
Japan added nine key performance indicators to its 2030 MIDORI plan, including zero CO2 emissions from
fossil fuels combustion in agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors; reductions in risk-weighted use of
chemical pesticides and chemical fertiliser; and increases in organic farming. In the United Kingdom,
England launched a programme on sustainable farming standards for arable and horticultural soils,
improved grassland soils and the moorlands. Numerous conservation projects were introduced to restore
over 40 000 hectares of land to protect and provide habitats for wildlife as part of the Landscape Recovery
scheme. The United States gave a substantial funding increase of approximately USD 20 billion over ten
years to various conservation programmes as part of the Inflation Reduction Act. New initiatives were also
launched in 2022 to assist businesses to transition to organic farming. In 2022, Viet Nam approved the
National Green Growth Action Plan for 2021-2030 which includes goals to develop a sustainable and low-
emissions agricultural sector that is adaptable in the face of climate change.
Countries took steps to foster inclusion in the sector
To improve equity and inclusion, the United States undertook several actions focused on improving equity
for farmers from minority groups. These include new investments in Equity Conservation Cooperative
Agreements, funding various outreach and assistance programmes and releasing the USDA Equity Action
Plan. Canada renewed the AgriDiversity Program which aims to reduce barriers to participation for
indigenous peoples and increase economic development through capacity building activities. Most EU
Member States proposed to maintain higher rates of investment support for young farmers and the vast
majority include plans for additional income support and installation aid for young farmers in their Strategic
Plans. Some EU Member States, such as Austria, Germany, Ireland, Italy and Spain, included specific
measures supporting rural women in their CAP 2023-27 Strategic Plans. In particular, Spain included
direct payments for young female farmers who own or co-own their farm.
Countries implemented new programmes for innovation and the modernisation of
agriculture
Countries introduced a number of new initiatives aimed at knowledge generation in agriculture. In the
European Union, the European Commission presented four new partnership programmes as part of its
Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Framework. These are designed to bring together the European
Commission and a consortium of partners, structured around research funders and other public authorities,
to tackle some of the European Union’s most pressing challenges in agriculture by stimulating public and
private investment in research activities.
Korea announced new innovation measures to enhance smart agriculture, with goals to convert 30% of
horticultural and livestock facilities into smart facilities. The Philippines approved the Coconut Farmer and
Industry Development Plan, aimed at modernising the coconut industry and increasing incomes and
competitiveness of farmers. India introduced new support for the use of drones in agricultural activities to
modernise land records, check the state of crops and for pesticide and fertiliser application.
Other countries made changes to modernise programme delivery. Türkiye made additional efforts to
advance digital transformation, including the Tarim Cebimde mobile application deployment and the new
Farmer Registration System which both make it easier to register applications and receive product
notifications. The application also provides some functionality for livestock farmers to monitory herd
demographics. Kazakhstan introduced the Unified State Information System for Subsidies to streamline
subsidy registration and remove the need for farmers to pay subscription fees to apply for subsidies.


80 

New laws and programmes on biosecurity and animal health were introduced
A number of new and ongoing disease outbreaks prompted countries to tighten biosecurity regulations.
Australia passed the Biosecurity Amendment (Strengthening Biosecurity) Act 2022 to strengthen the
ability to manage and respond to emerging biosecurity risks. Canada provided new funding to enhance
efforts to prevent African Swine Fever (ASF) from entering the country and to prepare for a potential
outbreak. Outbreaks of avian influenza led several EU Member States to adopt policies such as bans on
outdoor poultry farming (the Czech Republic), vaccination programmes (France) and compensation
payments for affected producers (France, Poland). In 2022, Indonesia declared an outbreak of Foot-and-
Mouth disease for the first time in more than 30 years and introduced control measures including
decontamination, massive vaccination, and strengthened surveillance on areas with known infections.
Measures were also introduced targeting animal welfare. New Zealand passed legislation in 2022 ending
the export of livestock by sea from April 2023, although with an adjustment period for affected businesses.
New Zealand also had a ban on battery cages for layer hens come into effect on 1 January 2023 following
a period of adjustment since the ban was passed in 2012. In the United Kingdom, the Animals (Penalty
Notices) Act 2022 gives ministers powers to impose financial penalties for a wide range of animal health
and welfare offences in England and Wales. In the European Union, Austria and France ended the
culling of male chicks in egg-laying hen production as of 1 January 2023, one year after Germany became
the first to do so. Austria, Germany and Spain introduced new rules on the transportation of livestock.
Some COVID-19 measures were phased out while new and post-pandemic measures
were implemented
Countries generally scaled back some of the support provided in previous years for the COVID-19
pandemic. In June 2022, Australia concluded its temporary emergency freight assistance support that
had been introduced in response to the collapse of international airfreight capacity during the pandemic.
The EU rules allowing Member States to introduce COVID-19 aid to affected sectors ended on 30 June
2022.
New Zealand lifted the annual cap on Recognised Seasonal Employee Scheme workers from 16 000 to
19 000 places to address seasonal worker shortages experienced during the pandemic. China introduced
new disinfection requirements on imports of non-cold chain goods in September 2022. These and other
PCR testing requirements were then later removed in December 2022.
Progress was made on several trade deals and negotiations
Countries advanced several multilateral agreements in 2022 and early 2023. The Regional Comprehensive
Economic Partnership (RCEP) entered into force on 1 January 2022. The agreement covers 15 countries
in the Asia-Pacific region including Australia, China, Indonesia, Japan, New Zealand, the Philippines,
Korea and Viet Nam. The agreement foresees reductions to 8.4% of agricultural tariff lines, with an
average tariff reduction of 12.8 percentage points. With the introduction of RCEP, around 83% of
agricultural tariff lines are either subject to tariff reduction under the agreement or were already at zero
(UNCTAD, 2021[14]). The agreement also provides a framework for streamlining rules of origin and border
processes for perishable goods, as well as strengthening co-operation in the areas of standards, technical
regulations, and conformity assessment procedures.
In other multilateral agreements, in 2022 and 2023, Chile, Malaysia and Brunei became the final three
signatories to ratify the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership
(CPTPP). The CPTPP eliminates 98% of tariffs in the free trade area and contains a number of provisions
on agriculture. These include reduced Japanese beef tariffs; new access for dairy products into Japan,
Canada and Mexico; the elimination of all tariffs on sheep meat, cotton, wool and manufactured products;
and some elimination of tariffs on seafood, horticulture and wine. The United Kingdom concluded


 81

negotiations to join the CPTPP in 2023 pending ratification of their entry from all 11 signatories. South
Africa also ratified the African Continental Free Trade Agreement.
Several bilateral free trade agreements (FTAs) were finalised or came into effect in 2022, helping to
facilitate trade in agricultural products. These include: the Australia-United Kingdom FTA, the Australia-
India Economic Cooperation and Trade Agreement, the Israel-Korea FTA, the Cambodia-Korea FTA,
the Indonesia-Korea FTA and the New Zealand-United Kingdom FTA. Many other FTAs are awaiting
ratification, including the EU-Chile FTA, the EU-Mercosur agreement, the EU-New Zealand FTA, and the
Korea-Philippines FTA. Market access and tariff reductions or phase-outs on agricultural products formed
part of most trade agreements. However, products deemed domestically important continue to remain
excluded from agreements, such as rice in Korea or wheat, rice and maize in India. The European Union
agreements were notable for the novel inclusion of chapters on sustainable food systems, covering
co-operation on topics such as animal welfare, food waste, pesticides and fertilisers among others.
Developments in support to agriculture
This section provides an overview on developments in policy support in agriculture, building on the OECD
indicators of agricultural policy support that are comparable across countries and time. These indicators
show the diversity of support measures implemented across different countries and focus on different
dimensions of these policies. Definitions of the indicators used in this report are shown in Annex 2.A, while
Figure 2.4 illustrates the links between, and components of, the different indicators.
The Total Support Estimate (TSE) is the broadest of the OECD support indicators. It combines three
distinct elements: a) transfers to agricultural producers individually; b) policy expenditures for the primary
agricultural sector collectively; and c) budgetary support to consumers of agricultural commodities. The
TSE is expressed as a net transfer indicator, including both positive and negative elements.
The Producer Support Estimate (PSE) measures all transfers to agricultural producers individually. Two
major types of transfers can be distinguished: Market Price Support (MPS) represents transfers from
taxpayers and consumers to agricultural producers through domestic prices that are higher than their
international reference prices due to domestic and trade policies. MPS can also be negative, representing
transfers from producers to consumers through domestic prices that are lower than references prices.
Budgetary support is financed by taxpayers only and is further broken down into various categories
distinguished by the different implementation of the underlying policies. The PSE indicator is expressed as
a net transfer, including both positive and negative elements.
The General Services Support Estimate (GSSE) measures policy expenditures that benefit the primary
agricultural sector as a whole, rather than going directly to individual producers. Different types of
expenditures are represented in specific categories of the GSSE.
Similarly to the PSE, the Consumer Support Estimate (CES) reports support to consumers of agricultural
commodities, distinguishes between market transfers that mirror the MPS, and budgetary support. To
avoid double-counting, only the budgetary part of the CSE is included in the TSE.


82 

Figure 2.4. Structure of agricultural support indicators

Note: *Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost.
Source: Annex 2.A.
Total Support
Total support to agriculture remains around record highs despite recommendations for
reform
Across the 54 countries covered in this report, total support directed to the sector totalled USD 851 billion
per year on average over 2020-22 (Figure 2.5). This is considerably higher than the USD 696 billion
averaged in the three years preceding it from 2017 to 2019, largely reflecting policy responses to the
COVID-19 pandemic, inflationary pressure and fallout from the war in Ukraine. Transfers to producers rose
by 20% and budgetary consumer support for agriculture was nearly double in 2020-22 compared to
2017-19. Producer support is estimated to have declined in 2022 due to falling market price support, but
still remains higher than pre-pandemic levels.
Of the 2020-22 total, USD 630 billion (74% of total support) goes to producers individually either directly
from government budgets or implicitly through market price support (MPS). The remainder of support was
split nearly equally between support for general services (USD 106 billion, 12.5%) and budgetary transfers
to consumers of agricultural products (USD 115 billion, 13.5%). At the same time, some emerging
economies implicitly taxed their producers through measures such as export taxes and other actions which
suppress domestic market prices. This implicit taxation was valued at USD 179 billion per year on average
between 2020-22.
TOTAL SUPPORT ESTIMATE (TSE)
Producer Support Estimate
(PSE)
Budgetary
transfers to
consumers
General
Services
Support
Estimate
(GSSE)
Market transfers
to/from producers:
Market Price Support
(MPS)*
Budgetary
transfers
to producers
MARKET TRANSFERS
BUDGETARY TRANSFERS
Consumer Support Estimate
(CSE)
Market transfers
from/to consumers


 83

Figure 2.5. Breakdown of agricultural support, total of all countries, 2020-22

Notes: Data refer to the All countries total, including all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the 11 emerging economies.
“Implicit taxation” of producers refers to negative market price support, “General services” refers to the General services support estimate,
“Consumer support” is transfers to consumers from taxpayers, “Other pot. most dist.” refers to the potentially most distorting producer support
measures other than market price support (i.e. support based on output payments and on the unconstrained use of variable inputs).
Source: Based on OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/8uye61
Support in countries covered in this report has risen consistently over the past 20 years in nominal terms
(Figure 2.6). Much of this rise has been driven by emerging economies where support has increased
markedly from averaging USD 68 billion per year in 2000-02 to USD 497 billion per year in 2020-22. China
and India account for the vast majority of emerging economy support, valued at USD 310 billion and
USD 124 billion, respectively. Agricultural support among OECD countries has grown at a modest rate
from a higher base, rising from an average of USD 278 billion per year in 2000-02 to USD 349 billion per
year in 2020-22. The United States and the European Union combine for the largest share of OECD
support at USD 122 billion and USD 107 billion, respectively, in 2020-22.
Despite the rise in nominal support among OECD countries, total support has been declining consistently
relative to GDP. Support in the emerging economies covered in this report generally places a higher burden
on their respective economies. This reflects the larger relative importance of agriculture to these
economies and policy choices.
Implicit
taxation
of producers
USD 179 bn
Negative MPS
(lower prices)
USD 179 bn
Total support to agriculture:
USD 851 bn - 20% of agricultural value of production
USD 630 bn - 74 % of all support to agriculture
goes to producers individually
General
services:
USD 106 bn
12%
Consumer
support:
USD 115 bn
13%
Positive market price support (MPS)
(higher prices)
USD 333 bn - 39%
Other pot.
most dist.
USD 78 bn
9%
Other producer support:
USD 219 bn - 26%
General services and
consumer support:
USD 221 bn - 26%
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
850
900
USD billion per year
Most potentially distorting measures
Total budgetary support to agriculture: USD 518 bn


84 

Figure 2.6. Evolution of total support to agriculture in OECD and 11 emerging economies, 2000 to
2022

Note: Negative MPS for OECD countries, mostly reflecting adjustments for higher feed costs due to positive MPS for feed commodities, averaged
USD 423 million per year between 2000 and 2022, and is therefore too small to be visible on the graph.
The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States. Latvia and Lithuania are included only from 2004.
The 11 emerging economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa,
Ukraine and Viet Nam.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Expressing support as a share of the value of production adds important context to the data. For the
54 countries covered by this report, the total positive support provided in 2020-22 was equivalent to 20%
of the production value generated by the sector. This represents a decline from 29% of the production
value of the sector in 2000-02. Across the OECD area, support as a percentage of the value of production
fell from 41% in 2000-02 to 25% in 2020-22. In contrast, this percentage rose across the 11 emerging
economies from 13% to 17% over the same time frame. However, including the effects of negative MPS
(that is, the extent that countries implicitly tax the sector), this percentage rose from 9% to 11%.
The situation varies considerably for individual countries.5 For example, in 2020-22 support as a
percentage of production value was between 72% and 83% in Norway, Switzerland and Iceland; less than
5% in Brazil, South Africa, New Zealand and Ukraine; and negative in India, Viet Nam and Argentina
(Figure 2.7). The countries that provide the highest level of support relative to the sector’s size are not
always those with the highest economic burden of support. This reflects differences in levels of support,
levels of economic development and agricultural sector size between countries. For example, countries
such as Norway, Switzerland and Iceland have the highest levels of support based on value of production,
but because agriculture is a relatively small share of GDP, the economic burden is lower than countries
such as the Philippines, China and Türkiye. These latter three countries have the highest support relative
to GDP at 2.3%, 1.8% and 1.6%, respectively. In Australia, South Africa, New Zealand and Ukraine,
support is 0.25% or less of GDP. China and India, the world’s two most populous countries, are the largest
providers of positive support to agriculture (USD 310 billion and USD 124 billion per year in 2020-22,
respectively). However, the countries differ in how the support is provided. China provides almost all of its
support to the sector in the form of positive market price support, while India provides high levels of


 85

producer payments for the use of variable inputs as well as budgetary support to consumers. Although
gross support in India is high, its policies suppressing domestic prices result in negative net support to the
agricultural sector.
Figure 2.7. Total Support Estimate by country, 2000-02 and 2020-22


Notes: Countries are ranked according to TSE relative to the value of agricultural production (left panel) and relative to GDP (right panel) in
2020-22, respectively.
1. EU15 for 2000-02, EU27 and the United Kingdom for 2020, and EU27 from 2021.
2. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States. Latvia and Lithuania are included only for 2020-22.
3. The 11 emerging economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa,
Ukraine and Viet Nam.
4. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the Emerging Economies.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Producer Support
Reform to producer support has stalled in recent years
Preliminary estimates for 2022 across the 54 covered economies indicate that the level of support to
individual producers declined for a second year when measured relative to gross farm receipts (an indicator
referred to as %PSE). This decline largely reflects an estimated decline in market price support (and
increase in negative market price support) due to rising world prices rather than substantial policy reforms.
On a three-year average, the %PSE across the 54 countries equalled 10% of gross farm receipts in
2020-22, relatively unchanged from 2010-12 and down from 18% in 2000-02.
Figure 2.6A. Total Support Estimate by countr
y
, 2000-02 and 2020-22
Relative to agricultural value of production
2020-22
2000-02
Norway
Switzerland
Iceland
Korea
Japan
Philippines
United States
United Kingdom
European Union 1
Türkiye
China
Israel
Canada
Mexico
Indonesia
Colombia
Russia
Australia
Kazakhstan
Chile
Costa Rica
Brazil
South Africa
New Zealand
Ukraine
India
Viet Nam
Argentina
-
OECD 2
11 emerging economies 3
All countries 4
-50%
0%
50%
100%
150%
Figure 2.6B. Total Support Estimate by countr
y
, 2000-02 and 2020-22
Relative to GDP
2020-22
2000-02
Philippines
China
Türkiye
Korea
Indonesia
Switzerland
Japan
Iceland
Norway
Mexico
Colombia
European Union 1
Kazakhstan
United States
Brazil
Costa Rica
Canada
Russia
Israel
United Kingdom
Chile
Australia
South Africa
New Zealand
Ukraine
India
Viet Nam
Argentina
-
OECD 2
11 emerging economies 3
All countries 4
-3%
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%


86 

Producer support among OECD countries has been in long-term decline. However, the rate of decline has
slowed since the early 2010s (Figure 2.8). OECD producer support averaged 15% of gross farm receipts
in 2020-22, compared to 18% in 2010-12 and 28% in 2000-02. Levels of producer support among the
11 emerging economies rose markedly starting in the 2010s before stabilising at about half the OECD
average. The average %PSE in these economies averaged 7.1% in 2020-22, compared to 4.5% in 2010-12
and 3.9% in 2000-02. However, these figures for average support to producers include the effects of
negative market price support. Countries such as Argentina, India and Viet Nam employ measures such
as export taxes or other programmes which implicitly tax producers by suppressing domestic prices.
Excluding negative market price support, the %PSE among emerging economies was 13.0% in 2020-22,
close to but still below the OECD average, while across all 54 countries, the positive producer support
corresponded to 13.7% of gross farm receipts.
Figure 2.8. Evolution of the % Producer Support Estimate, 2000 to 2022

Notes: The two bars relate to the 11 Emerging Economies and represent a decomposition of PSE into its positive and negative parts.
1. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the 11 emerging economies.
2. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States. Latvia and Lithuania are included only from 2004.
3. The 11 emerging economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa,
Ukraine and Viet Nam.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Only four economies – China, Japan, the European Union, and the United States – account for roughly
70% of all positive producer support over the past 20 years. However, the relative shares among these
economies have changed dramatically over this time (Figure 2.9). In 2000-02, the European Union6
accounted for the largest share with 30% of all positive producer support, followed by Japan (17%), the
United States (17%) and China (7%). In 2020-22, China now represents just under 44% of producer
support, followed by the European Union7 (15%), United States (7%) and Japan (5%). India has accounted
for a majority and growing share of all implicit taxation among countries, from 61% of all negative support
in 2000-02 to 76% in 2020-22.


 87

Figure 2.9. Producer support by country, 2000 to 2022

Note: European Union refers to EU15 for 2000-03, EU25 for 2004-06, EU27 for 2007-13, EU28 for 2014-19, EU27 and the United Kingdom for
2020, and EU27 from 2021.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
While China provides the most support in terms of value transferred, the countries with the highest levels
of producer support as a share of gross farm receipts are all found in the OECD area (Figure 2.10). In
Norway, Iceland, Switzerland, Korea, and Japan, the benefits arising from direct budgetary support as well
as implicit support from measures such as protective tariffs on imports represent between 35% and 55%
of the revenue received by farmers. Conversely, support accounts for about 15% of farm receipts in China
and less than 5% in New Zealand, South Africa, Chile, Brazil, Costa Rica, Australia, and Kazakhstan
(including the negative effects of implicit taxation from policies in Kazakhstan).
Figure 2.9. Producer support by countr
y, 2000 to 2022
USD billion
China
European Union
United States
Japan
India
All others
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800


88 

Figure 2.10. Producer Support Estimate by country, 2000-02 and 2020-22

Notes: Countries are ranked according to the 2020-22 levels.
1. EU15 for 2000-02, EU27 and the United Kingdom for 2020, and EU27 from 2021.
2. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States. Latvia and Lithuania are included only for 2020-22.
3. The 11 emerging economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa,
Ukraine and Viet Nam.
4. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the Emerging Economies.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Governments use a mix of different types of policies in order to achieve their objectives and support
farmers, and each may emphasise different types of policies. For instance:
•
Market price support (MPS) arises as a result of domestic or trade policies that raise or lower
domestic market prices, such as border tariffs, export taxes and price ceilings or floors. Excluding
policies that depress prices, MPS accounts for the majority of positive support provided to farmers
across all covered economies both in aggregate as well as within a majority of the covered
economies (counting the European Union collectively as one economy).
•
Payments based on output are payments made to farmers per unit of production, often through
measures such as strategic stabilisation funds or deficiency payments. These types of payments
were between 10% and 25% of support in Iceland and Norway between 2020 and 2022.
•
Payments based on use of variable inputs, such as subsidies on the use of fertiliser, electricity,
animal feed or credit. These types of payments were between 20% and 40% of positive support in
South Africa, Viet Nam and Australia, and 70% of positive support in India in 2020-2022.
•
Payments made on the basis of production area or animal numbers, or to top up farmers’ receipts
or incomes. This approach was the largest share of support provided to producers in the OECD in
2020-22, reflecting its prominence in the support packages provided in economies such as the
European Union, the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States.
Figure 2.8. Producer Support Estimate by countr
y, 2000-02 and 2020-22
Percentage of gross farm receipts
2020-22
2000-02
India
Argentina
Viet Nam
Ukraine
New Zealand
South Africa
Chile
Brazil
Costa Rica
Australia
Kazakhstan
Russia
Colombia
Indonesia
United States
Canada
Mexico
Israel
China
Türkiye
European Union 1
United Kingdom
Philippines
Japan
Korea
Switzerland
Iceland
Norway
-
OECD 2
11 emerging economies 3
All countries 4
-20
0
20
40
60
80


 89

•
Payments made to subsidise the acquisition of fixed capital like farm equipment, land, or breeding
stock. This approach accounted for over 30% of the positive support provided to producers in
Australia, Chile, and Kazakhstan.
•
Payments are provided to individual farmers to reduce the cost of on-farm services such as
technical, accounting, commercial, training and sanitary or phytosanitary assistance. This type of
support made up between 10-25% of total producer transfers in New Zealand, Chile, and the United
States.
•
Payments can be based on variable input use, but with constraints, limits or restrictions. Brazil was
the only country which used this form of support for more than 10% of their transfers to producers.
•
Payments for non-commodity criteria, which include payments for long-term resource retirement
or for non-commodity based output such as reducing pesticide or fertiliser use, or linked directly to
supply of environmental public goods. This type of support was 10-20% of producer transfers in
Mexico and Switzerland.
The majority of producer support still takes the form of the potentially most distorting
measures
Different types of support have different impacts on producer behaviour. Producers respond to the
incentives provided by support policies and adjust their production decisions accordingly. This changes
the overall level of agricultural production, the mix of agricultural products produced, farm incomes and
social and environmental outcomes.
In 2020-22, USD 411 billion, or two-thirds of the USD 630 billion in positive support to producers across
the 54 countries covered in this report, was in forms considered to be the potentially most distorting to
production and trade (9% of gross farm receipts). Across the OECD, such support amounted to
USD 103 billion, while for the 11 emerging economies such transfers to producers totalled to
USD 308 billion per year. Negative MPS policies additionally gave rise to USD 179 billion in implicit
taxation in 2020-22 and these also have a distorting effect. The OECD has consistently recommended the
phase out of potentially most distorting policies. More recent OECD work has shown that these measures
also have a particularly high potential to harm the environment (Henderson and Lankoski, 2019[15]).8
Based on past and ongoing OECD work, the types of support considered to have the potential to be the
most distorting are market price support, payments based on output, and payments based on the
unconstrained use of variable inputs. These forms of support are also known for being both inefficient and
untargeted to providing support to those households in need as a large share of the transfers are leaked
in the form of higher prices for and larger use of inputs, or capitalised into land values. On average, these
forms of support are much more prevalent in emerging economies than in OECD nations. In the
11 emerging economies, potentially most distorting policies generated positive support to producers
equalling 10% of gross farm receipts and implicit taxation equal to 6% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22.
In OECD countries, potentially most distorting policies generated positive support equalling 7% of gross
farm receipts in 2020-22, but did not implicitly tax producers (Figure 2.11).


90 

Figure 2.11. Potentially most distorting transfers and other support by country, 2020-22

Notes: Countries are ranked according to the %PSE levels.
1. Support based on output payments and on the unconstrained use of variable inputs.
2. EU27 and the United Kingdom for 2020, and EU27 from 2021.
3. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States.
4. The 11 emerging economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa,
Ukraine and Viet Nam.
5. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the emerging economies.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Recent macroeconomic factors drove a decline in market price support
Preliminary estimates indicate that net market price support declined for a second year in 2022. Positive
MPS fell by an estimated USD 22 billion and negative MPS became USD 24 billion further negative. This
means that both farmers benefitting from supported domestic prices and those already implicitly taxed
experienced an estimated reduction in support equivalent to 0.5% of their 2021 receipts. This decline has
been largely driven by the recent period of exceptional spikes in agricultural prices (Figure 2.1). Market
price support can fall or become increasingly negative when there are sudden increases in world prices if
supported domestic prices do not change to match. This is because supported domestic prices lose some
of their premium and suppressed domestic prices become increasingly unfavourable compared to border
prices. This phenomenon of falling net MPS was also observed in 2008 and 2011 during instances of
sudden and rapid rises in the prices of agricultural products (Figure 2.12). MPS subsequently rebounded
as price spikes abated and emergency measures were eased, and this may be the case as well in 2023
depending on the path of global prices and the corresponding responses by countries.
Measures providing positive MPS to producers provided USD 333 billion per year on average between
2020-22 across all covered economies. This was equivalent to 7% of annual gross farm receipts over the
same period. Negative MPS caused by policies which reduce domestic prices was worth USD 179 billion
or 4% of gross farm receipts over that time. Import tariffs and tariff rate quotas are the most frequently
Figure 2. 11. Potentially most distorting transfers and other support by countr
y, 2020-22
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Market price support
Other potentially most distorting support 1
Other support
Producer Support Estimate
India
Argentina
Viet Nam
Ukraine
New Zealand
South Africa
Chile
Brazil
Costa Rica
Australia
Kazakhstan
Russia
Colombia
Indonesia
United States
Canada
Mexico
Israel
China
Türkiye
European Union 2
United Kingdom
Philippines
Japan
Korea
Switzerland
Iceland
Norway
-
OECD 3
11 emerging economies 4
All countries 5
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70


 91

applied policies which give rise to positive MPS, whereas export restrictions, quotas, bans or taxes are
most frequent for negative MPS.
Figure 2.12. Market price support for all 54 covered countries and global wheat indicator price,
2000 to 2022

Note: Wheat indicator price refers to export price of wheat from Ukraine with less than 11% protein content. The price is free on board
denominated in USD per tonne. Both positive and negative market price support include MPS for all 54 countries and all commodities.
Source: International Grains Council (2023), OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics
(database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.
MPS declines estimated in 2022 were largest in China, where most commodities tracked in the MPS data
are subject to domestic market price support and most of which saw declines, in particular cotton, maize,
groundnuts, and milk. These declines more than offset a significant increase in MPS for pig meat that
reflects policies implemented to encourage pig herd rebuilding following recent outbreaks of African Swine
Fever. Japanese farmers also experienced a significant reduction in market price support. The value of
MPS in Japan declined by over 50% for rice and over 25% for pork. This reflected a narrowing of the gap
between domestic and border prices and a depreciation of the Japanese Yen.
Changes in India drove movements in negative MPS estimated in 2022. India introduced export bans,
duties or permits on several commodities to stabilise prices following the outbreak of war in Ukraine. While
this kept domestic prices from rising by the same rate as border prices, it also meant that producers’
receipts were lower than they would have been had these policies not been in place. The effect of these
new and other existing policies was particularly pronounced for the MPS of Indian wheat, causing implicit
taxation to increase by close to USD 10 billion. Indian wheat single commodity transfers were estimated
to have risen from -48% to -74% of 2022 wheat receipts.9
The significance of MPS varies strongly across countries. In Norway, Switzerland, the Philippines, Iceland,
Japan, and Korea, MPS accounts for around 20% to 40% of gross farm receipts. In 16 other countries,
MPS represents less than 5% of gross farm receipts. While in Argentina, India, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, and
Viet Nam, producers are implicitly taxed, with negative MPS values of anywhere from -1% to -26%.


92 

Levels of support also differ between commodities in a given country. Countries can have a low rate of
average MPS that masks the fact that particular commodities are highly supported while others are
relatively unsupported or implicitly taxed. For example, in Indonesia, MPS represented 2.6% of gross farm
receipts in 2020-22. However, MPS represented 55% of the gross farm receipts specifically related to the
production of beef and veal, and -52% of those related to the production of palm oil. Gross farm receipts
for a specific commodity are referred to as “commodity gross receipts”, which includes the value of
production of that specific commodity plus any transfers arising from policies specifically targeting that
commodity.
In Korea, Japan, Iceland and Switzerland, MPS on the most supported product is between 68% to 80% of
commodity gross receipts. Whereas, in countries such as India, Kazakhstan and Viet Nam, MPS on the
most implicitly taxed product is between -91% and -138% of commodity gross receipts (Figure 2.13) (see
Box 2.3 for interpretation).
Figure 2.13. Variation of product-specific market price support by country, 2020-22
Percentage of commodity gross receipts

Notes: A. Number of MPS commodities. B. Number of MPS commodities with non-zero MPS values.
The ends of the whiskers represent the minimum and maximum values across commodities, while the boxes indicate ranges between the first
and the third quartiles with the horizontal line inside indicating the median. Diamonds represent the MPS share in GFR for total agriculture.
The minimum value for Kazakhstan is -138%
EU27 and the United Kingdom for 2020, and EU27 from 2021.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/th42ld
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
-100
-75
-50
-25
0
25
50
75
100
KOR JPN
ISL
PHL CHE NOR ISR CHN TUR MEX GBR COL CAN CRI
IDN
E27
ZAF BRA NZL USA RUS CHL AUS UKR KAZ VNM ARG IND
11
19
7
11
11
10
20
18
16
15
11
13
16
10
13
21
14
11
11
16
13
16
17
13
13
12
10
20
11
17
4
7
10
9
10
16
10
6
9
8
3
4
9
7
2
8
2
2
12
2
0
7
12
12
9
19
%
A.
B.


 93

Box 2.3. Market price support – concept and interpretation
Simply put, market price support (MPS) is the benefit or loss farmers receive by having domestic prices
that do not reflect those of world prices. Specifically, MPS is defined as the “annual monetary value of
gross transfers from consumers and taxpayers to agricultural producers, arising from policy measures
that create a gap between domestic market prices and border prices of a specific agricultural
commodity, measured at the farm gate level” (OECD, 2016[16]). It is calculated for individual
commodities as the gap between the domestic price paid to producers and the equivalent price at the
border. This is multiplied by the quantity produced and aggregated to the national level.
This definition contains three key elements. First, it measures the transfers that arise from policy
measures that create a price gap (e.g. import tariffs, minimum prices, export taxes, etc.). Second, it
measures gross transfers (positive or negative) to agricultural producers from consumers and
taxpayers. Third, it is measured at the farm gate level to ensure that MPS values are consistent with
the production and price data for the farming sector overall.
The price gap for a specific commodity measures the difference between two prices: the average
domestic price and a reference price calculated at the same level in the value chain (generally at the
farm gate). This reference price corresponds to the country’s border price, i.e. the import price (for net-
imported commodities) or the export price (for net-exported commodities). In the absence of a border
price, another price indicative of them is used which could be a world price or another country’s border
price, adjusted for transportation costs and any differences in quality, weight or processing level, to
make them comparable to the average domestic price (see below).
If the price gap is such that the domestic price is twice the border price, the MPS as a share of
commodity gross receipts should be 50% and producers receive double the revenue they would have
otherwise. If domestic prices are five times border prices, the MPS as a share of commodity gross
receipts would be 80%--an amount observed for some commodities. For negative MPS, if the MPS as
a share of commodity gross receipts is -138%, the implicit tax on revenue would be 58%.
The price gap is calculated only if policies exist that can could cause such a gap, such as border
measures that restrict or promote imports or exports, and government purchases, sales and intervention
prices in the domestic market. If countries do not implement such policies, the price gap is assumed to
be zero. A non-zero price gap, whether positive or negative, originates from price-distorting policies. It
is important to note that MPS measures the “policy effort” (or level of support to prices), not the policy
effect (e.g. the impact on farm income). In addition to policy instruments that restrict price transmission
(say, a target price), market developments (such as exchange rate movements affecting world prices
expressed in local currencies) may influence the implied policy effort and, hence, the resulting transfers.
The calculation of the price gap for individual commodities requires information not only on product
prices, but also on differences in product qualities, processing and transportation margins, to compare
like with like. In some cases, difficulties in identifying and obtaining relevant prices or other required
information prevent the price gap calculation used to calculate MPS from being based on observed
price gaps. An alternative option for calculating the price gap is the use of import tariffs or export taxes,
which is likely to provide accurate MPS estimates only if a uniform tariff or tax rate is the sole border
measure in place.
The use of tariffs rather than price gap data comes with a number of complex measurement issues,
covering issues such as the composition of product groups across tariff lines and the seasonality of
production and trade. Moreover, in order to capture the marginal rather than the average import
protection rate, the statutory applied most-favoured nation (MFN) tariffs are used. In light of the growing
number of preferential trade agreements (PTAs) engaged in by countries covered in this report, an


94 

important caveat therefore relates to the fact that the statutory applied MFN tariffs remain unchanged
even when increased quantities of products are imported under preferential tariffs or duty-free within
such PTAs. As a consequence, potential liberalising effects of new PTAs are not reflected in the MPS
estimates when tariffs are used to calculate them. With the increased relevance of PTAs for international
trade, it therefore becomes even more important to base the MPD calculations on price gap calculations
whenever data allow.
When interpreting MPS values, it is important to bear in mind that MPS is not a measure of public
expenditures but an estimation of implicit or explicit transfers. MPS estimates published by the OECD
therefore often differ from, and should not be confused with, those published by other organisations,
including by the World Trade Organization, which may use very different concepts to calculate their
indicators, despite similar names.
Source: OECD (2020[17]).
The gap between domestic prices and world prices has narrowed over the past 20 years on average across
the OECD (Figure 2.14). To measure this, the OECD uses the indicator Nominal Protection Coefficient
(NPC), which is the ratio between average effective producer prices and the border price. The effective
producer price is the price received plus any payments provided per unit of output. Declining price gaps,
measured by NPC, imply that producers are receiving price signals that more closely reflect world prices.
On average over all OECD countries, the NPC averaged 1.07 in 2020-22. This means that effective prices
received by farmers were on average 7% higher than world prices. This represents a decline of
19 percentage points from the 26% higher prices averaged in 2000-02. Price gaps have declined in almost
all countries between 2000-02 and 2020-22. Change has been particularly substantial in countries such
as Switzerland, Norway, Japan, and Iceland where price gaps have reduced by between 55 and
110 percentage points.
China is the only country to have seen a rising positive NPC over the past 20 years, with the gap widening
from 1.03 to 1.15 over that time. This reflects the introduction of several measures that have increased
domestic prices, such as minimum purchase prices for rice and wheat. Price gaps in India and Argentina
are increasingly negative. The NPC in India has fallen from 0.91 to 0.78, meaning prices are now 22%
below international levels. Likewise, the NPC of Argentina has fallen from 0.89 to 0.86, putting prices 14%
below world prices.


 95

Figure 2.14. Producer Nominal Protection Coefficient by country, 2000-02 and 2020-22

Notes: Countries are ranked according to 2020-22 levels.
1. EU15 for 2000-02, EU27 and the United Kingdom for 2020, and EU27 from 2021.
2. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States. Latvia and Lithuania are included only for 2020-22.
3. The 11 emerging economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa,
Ukraine and Viet Nam.
4. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the emerging economies.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
The use of partly or fully decoupled producer support has increased
Payments based on production factors (area, animal numbers, revenue or income) or other non-commodity
criteria have declined as a share of gross farm receipts across the 54 countries from 4.6% in 2000-02 to
3.8% in 2020-22. This has been driven by countries opting to remove or reorient policies which use current
area, animal numbers, farm receipts or income as the criteria for determining the eligibility or amount of
payments. Payments from policies of this type have declined from 3.2% to 1.9% of gross farm receipts in
the last 20 years. This is a welcome development as payments that use current production factors as a
criterion for payment provide a direct production incentive to farmers that can have a distorting effect, even
if generally less so than MPS and other measures previously discussed.
Payments based on current production factors have in many cases been replaced by payments based on
historical production factors (both those requiring and not requiring production), which rose from 1.1% to
1.7%. Payments based on historical production factors like this are generally said to be “decoupled” from
production because they have no direct link to current production decisions, even though they tend to slow
Figure 2.10. Producer Nominal Protection Coe
fficient by countr y, 2000-02 and 2020-22
2020-22
2000-02
India
Argentina
Viet Nam
Kazakhstan
Ukraine
Russia
Australia
Chile
New Zealand
United States
South Africa
Brazil
European Union 1
Costa Rica
Indonesia
Canada
Colombia
Mexico
United Kingdom
Türkiye
Israel
China
Philippines
Switzerland
Norway
Japan
Iceland
Korea
-
OECD 2
11 emerging economies 3
All countries 4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6


96 

structural change and hinder the conversion of agricultural land to other uses. About 96% of payments
based on historical production factors do not require current production.
The move from current to historical production factor payments has been particularly visible in the
European Union. Payments based on current production factors accounted for 11.6% of gross farm
receipts in 2000-02 and there were none based on non-current production factors. Following the Fischler
Reform from 2003 much of the support in the European Union was decoupled from production and in
2020-22, payments on current production factors had fallen to 4.1% of the total and those on non-current
production factors represented 6.8%. A similar pattern of decoupling has occurred to lesser degree in
Korea and Norway (Figure 2.15).
Figure 2.15. Use and composition of support that is less coupled to production, selected countries,
2000-02 and 2020-22
Percentage of gross farm receipts

Notes: Figure presents countries having share of payments based on area, animal numbers, farm receipts or farm income and on non-commodity
criteria above 1% for 2020-22 period. Countries are ranked according to the total share of payments for 2020-22.
1. EU15 for 2000-02, EU27 and the United Kingdom for 2020, and EU27 from 2021.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/t6z9x5
Producer support tied to specific commodities also declined
As well as the structure of support, another important lens to investigate producer support is to examine
which commodities (or groups of commodities) are being supported. Policies are often designed to result
in benefits or losses that are commodity specific. For example, a tariff put on imports of wheat results in
market price support which advantages domestic producers of wheat to the exclusion of producers of other
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2000-02
2020-22
2000-02
2020-22
2000-02
2020-22
2000-02
2020-22
2000-02
2020-22
2000-02
2020-22
2000-02
2020-22
2000-02
2020-22
2000-02
2020-22
2000-02
2020-22
2000-02
2020-22
2000-02
2020-22
2000-02
2020-22
2000-02
2020-22
Norway
Switzer-
land
Iceland
European
Union 1
United
Kingdom
Japan
United
States
Korea
Canada
Mexico
China
India
Türkiye
Israel
%
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
of which are with mandatory or voluntary constraints
Payments based on non-commodity criteria


 97

commodities. By their construction, policies providing MPS and payments for outputs are commodity
specific, while other budgetary payments may or may not be targeted to a specific commodity. For
example, payments based on inputs or other production factors often stipulate terms that make them
commodity specific such as when a fertiliser subsidy is granted only for production of maize, or a payment
that is made per head of livestock. The total value of such payments taken together with MPS are reported
for each commodity as single-commodity transfers (SCT).
On average across all countries in this report, SCTs averaged 4.4% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22,
roughly half of the 9.8% averaged in 2000-02. Preliminary estimates for 2022 indicate that SCTs declined
in 2022 for the second year in a row. MPS policies account for most commodity-specific support, so SCTs
followed a similar pattern to those described in the section on MPS above.
SCTs are particularly high for sugar, maize and rice where they each represented over 15% of the gross
receipts for the respective commodity in 2020-22 (Figure 2.16). However, there is significant variation in
the level of commodity support among the covered countries. Support averaged 8.7% of egg receipts, but
this average is the net effect of significant price support in some countries and significant implicit taxation
in others. In countries that subsidised egg production through supported domestic prices and other
measures, support averaged 36% of egg receipts. Conversely in countries that penalised egg production
through depressed market prices, implicit taxation averaged 27% of egg receipts. Egg production has been
negatively affected by avian flu which has decimated flocks in recent years. As a result, the gap between
domestic and border prices has been volatile, a fact that is reflected in the changed values of MPS.
Figure 2.16. Transfers to specific commodities (SCT), all countries, 2020-22

Note: Data refer to the All countries total, including all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the 11 emerging economies.
Commodities are ranked according to their net percentage Specific Commodity Transfers (PSCT).
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Commodity-specific support can influence production choices by changing the relative returns of
commodities or groups of commodities. For example, a payment per bale of cotton produced can lead to
Figure 2.12. Transfers to specific commodities (SCT), all countries, 2020-22
% of commodity gross receipts
Market price support
Payments based on output
Other commodity-specific support
PSCT
Milk
Oats
Sunflower
Wheat
Barley
Wool
Sheep meat
Soybeans
Sorghum
Pig meat
Eggs
Beef and veal
Rapeseed
Poultry meat
Rice
Maize
Sugar
-40
-20
0
20
40


98 

more area being planted to cotton instead of other alternatives. In this way, support that is targeted to a
few specific commodities can be more distorting of production than the same level of support that is
distributed evenly across commodities or that is not commodity specific. To the extent the commodities
targeted by SCTs are more intensive users of natural resources or generate higher pollution than those
not benefitting from this support, commodity-specific support can also increase environmental pressures.
Farm revenues continued to increase, despite lower levels of producer support in 2022
Despite falling levels of producer support in 2022, gross farm receipts are estimated to have increased for
a sixth consecutive year. Higher world market prices for agricultural products in 2022 drove a significant
increase in the value of agricultural production which more than offset declines in market price support and
budgetary payments to producers. Overall, gross farm receipts were 20% higher in 2020-22 compared to
2017-19 before the COVID-19 pandemic.
Consumers support
Consumers are implicitly taxed on average due to market price support
Agricultural policies can increase the price of food bought by consumers, as when positive MPS is in place,
or they can reduce food costs through food assistance programmes (which usually target poor consumers).
The Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) in India and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP) in the United States are two examples. Consumer support includes both support to final
consumers of agricultural products as well as industry consumers who transform agricultural commodities
into processed products. India, Argentina, Viet Nam and Kazakhstan also support consumers via
depressed commodity prices.
Budgetary consumer support rose dramatically following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2020,
governments provided USD 131 billion in budgetary support to agricultural consumers, roughly double the
USD 65 billion provided one year earlier. Consumer budgetary support declined to an estimated
USD 112 billion in 2022, still higher than pre-pandemic levels. Food subsidies in India accounted for a
large share of this increase, with temporary measures in 2020 increasing budgetary consumer support
5-fold to USD 74 billion.
While the pandemic brought about temporary increases in consumer support, the normal situation is that
consumers pay higher than world prices for food. In 2020-22, policy support to consumers
represented -3.7% of gross expenditures as measured at farm gate prices (an indicator referred to as
%CSE) (Figure 2.17). This implies that consumers were implicitly taxed on purchases of agricultural
products. In most countries, the %CSE mirrors the level of market price support provided to producers.
Korea, Iceland, Japan, Switzerland, Norway, and the Philippines all have %CSE of -20% or above of gross
expenditures reflecting high levels of market price support to producers. Norway and Indonesia provide
some level of budgetary support to consumers to partially offset these negative effects.


 99

Figure 2.17. Composition of the Consumer Support Estimate by country, 2020-22

Notes: Countries are ranked according to percentage CSE levels. A negative percentage CSE is an implicit tax on consumption.
1. EU27 and the United Kingdom for 2020, and EU27 from 2021.
2. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States.
3. The 11 emerging economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa,
Ukraine and Viet Nam.
4. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the emerging economies.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Declining rates of MPS have reduced the effect of agricultural policies on consumers over time. Across all
54 countries, the %CSE has risen from an average of -10.3% in 2000-02 to -3.7% in 2020-22. This is most
notable in OECD countries, where the %CSE rose from -18.3% in the early 2000s to -3% in the recent
data. Conversely, consumers in emerging economies have become worse off over time, with %CSE falling
from near zero 20 years ago to average -4.1% in 2020-22. This largely reflects increasing market price
support in China which drove %CSE to average -12.7% in 2020-22.
General Services Support
Support to general services is declining in real terms
Countries provided USD 106 billion in support for general services to the agricultural sector on average
over 2020-22. While this spending has increased in nominal terms over the past 20 years, it has declined
as a share of total support to the sector. This share had fluctuated between 15% and 17% of support since
2000 but fell significantly after 2018 and averaged 12.5% in 2020-22. General services support has also
declined relative to the size of the sector, from an average of 4.6% of the value of agricultural production
in 2000-02 to 2.5% in 2020-22. This trend is observed both in the OECD and among emerging economies.
In 2020-22, spending on general services was the equivalent of 3.4% of the value of production in OECD
countries and 2% in the 11 emerging economies.
General services support arises from policies that are aimed to benefit the broader agricultural sector,
rather than producers or consumers individually. Investments in general services can help the agricultural
Figure 2.15. Composition of the Consumer Support Estimate by countr
y
, 2020-22
Percentage of consumption expenditure at farm gate
Market transfers
Budgetary transfers
Consumer Support Estimate
Korea
Iceland
Japan
Switzerland
Norway
Philippines
Indonesia
Israel
China
Costa Rica
United Kingdom
Colombia
Türkiye
Canada
Mexico
Russia
European Union 1
South Africa
Brazil
New Zealand
Chile
Australia
Ukraine
Kazakhstan
Viet Nam
Argentina
United States
India
-
OECD 2
11 emerging economies 3
All countries 4
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50


100 

sector to become more productive, sustainable and resilient. For example, infrastructure development and
maintenance can include building hydrological assets which make irrigation more accessible, or other
physical infrastructure such as rail or port storage which makes transport and marketing of products easier
and reduces wastage. It can also include institutional infrastructure such as support for farm organisations
or payments relating to structural transformation of the industry, such as financing new entrants, exits or
diversification strategies outside of agriculture. Infrastructure spending was almost half of general services
support in the most recent data, worth 46% in 2020-22, most of which was for irrigation-related projects.
Agricultural innovation systems, covering both the generation and transfer of knowledge; and inspection
and control measures are also important for enabling productivity growth and accounted for 23% and 8%,
respectively. These three types of investment will be crucial for preparing agriculture to adapt to a changing
climate. However spending across all three has declined relative to the size of the agricultural sector,
accounting for under 10% of total support.
Other forms of general service spending have the potential to distort markets, but also generally account
for a low, and decreasing, percentage of general service spending. Marketing and promotion was 8% of
general service spending and the cost of public stockholding10 was 13%.
Figure 2.18. Composition of General Services Support Estimate, 2020-22

Notes: “AIS” refers to the Agricultural knowledge and innovation system. “Other” includes the marketing and promotion, cost of public
stockholding, and miscellaneous categories of the GSSE. Countries are ranked according to the share of total GSSE in agricultural value of
production.
1. EU27 and the United Kingdom for 2020, and EU27 from 2021.
2. The OECD total does not include the non-OECD EU Member States.
3. The 11 emerging economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa,
Ukraine and Viet Nam.
4. The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the emerging economies.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Summary and conclusions
Agricultural support policies generated USD 851 billion per year in transfers towards agriculture in 2020-22
across the 54 countries covered in this report. This is the highest level since records began and 2.5 times
Figure 2.16. Composition of General Services Support Estimate, 2020-22
Percentage of agricultural value of production
AIS
Infrastructure
Inspection and control
Other
Argentina
Ukraine
Brazil
Mexico
Indonesia
Colombia
South Africa
Costa Rica
Kazakhstan
New Zealand
Russia
China
Viet Nam
Australia
United States
United Kingdom
European Union 1
Israel
Canada
Iceland
Chile
India
Norway
Türkiye
Philippines
Korea
Switzerland
Japan
-
OECD 2
11 emerging economies 3
All countries 4
0
10
5
15


 101

larger than aggregate transfers observed in 2000-02, although it represents a decline as a share of the
agricultural value of production. Almost three-quarters of transfers, USD 626 billion, was transferred to
individual producers through higher prices and budget payments. Some countries continue to implicitly tax
their producers through policies that depress domestic market prices, generating transfers away from
producers worth USD 179 billion per year.
Overall, total net support to the sector (TSE) is equivalent to 0.6% of GDP across the 54 countries, down
from 1.0% in the early 2000s. As a share of the agricultural sector, total net support was 16% of agricultural
value of production in 2020-22, compared to 27% in 2000-02.
Net producer support across all 54 countries has declined as a share of gross farm receipts (%PSE) over
the past 20 years, from 18% in 2000-02 to 10% in 2020-22. This reflects declining producer support
amongst OECD countries, which fell from 28% of gross farm receipts in the early 2000s to 15% in 2020-22.
Conversely, producer support rose in emerging economies between 2000-02 and 2020-22 from 4% to 7%.
Most of the decline in OECD support occurred in the 2000s, driven by declining market price support.
Progress in reducing support has been slower in recent years and there has been some increase in
payments based on current production factors in recent years, despite consistent recommendations to
reduce notably the potentially most distorting forms of support. The rise in emerging economy support
largely reflects a significant increase in the prominence of China as an agricultural producer and the vast
market price support it provides to producers. China now accounts for around 44% (USD 276 billion) of all
the producer support among the 54 countries covered in this report after accounting for only 7% in 2000-02.
Market price support is still the dominant form of support to producers. MPS generated USD 333 billion or
roughly half of the positive support to agriculture in 2020-22. It has declined as a share of gross farm
receipts from 11.5% at the start of the century to 7.3% today. At the same time, several countries utilise
policies which caused negative market price support worth USD 179 billion. This implicit tax was equivalent
to 3.9% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22, up from 1.8% of GFR two decades earlier. This implies that
across all 54 countries, positive producer support accounted for 13.7% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22.
Other support to farmers included USD 11 billion in payments based on production output and
USD 67 billion in input subsidies without use constraints. These payments have a similar tendency as
market price support to create production distortions. This means that USD 411 billion was transferred to
producers in forms that are potentially the most distorting, or around two-thirds of positive producer support.
The remaining USD 219 billion was provided for in payments that were less coupled to production
decisions. This includes USD 77 billion in decoupled payments based on historical production factors such
as area, animal numbers, receipts or income. Although they tend to be less harmful than coupled
payments, decoupled payments may slow structural change and hinder the conversion of agricultural land
to other uses.
Aside from support to individual producers, governments provided USD 106 billion to assist the sector
more broadly through general services in 2020-22. This equates to around 12.5% of positive transfers to
agriculture, down from 16.0% two decades earlier. Expenditures for general services also declined relative
to the sector’s size, from 4.6% of the value of production in 2000-02 to 2.5% in 2020-22. Investments in
agricultural knowledge and innovation, inspection and control, and infrastructure development and
maintenance, which represent general services with a particularly strong potential to facilitate sustainable
productivity growth and resilience, totalled USD 82 billion or about three-quarters of all support to general
services. Relative to the total value of production, spending on these services fell from 3.1% in 2000-02 to
1.9% in 2020-22.
Consumers were also supported with direct budgetary assistance of USD 115 billion per year on average
in 2020-22. This was mostly in the form of food assistance programmes. On average, however, consumers
were still implicitly taxed on agricultural products through price policies that support farmers. These implicit
taxes more than offset the direct budgetary assistance from government.


102 

The level of support varied greatly among countries. On average during 2020-22, producer support ranged
from 5% or less of the value of agricultural production in Brazil, South Africa, New Zealand, and Ukraine,
to more than 70% in Norway, Switzerland, and Iceland. Net support was negative in Argentina, Viet Nam,
and India.
Countries introduced a range of emergency measures in response to recent global
shocks including inflationary pressures as well as the war in Ukraine and its effects.
Countries should now act to build resilience to future shocks
Prices for agricultural products and inputs rose significantly following the outbreak of war due to the
prominence of Ukraine and Russia in global trade markets for these goods. This happened in the context
of global value chains that had already been tested by COVID-19 in the two years prior. Governments
responded to these new global challenges by implementing a wide range of different policies aimed at
supporting farmers and consumers, securing critical supplies, and providing assistance to Ukraine.
The shocks experienced have led some governments to rethink their approach to securing strategic
supplies. Many countries reduced tariffs on imports of animal feed and agricultural goods as a means of
taming rising input costs and consumer prices. Others put restrictions on exports of food and fertiliser to
protect domestic supplies. Countries also took steps to help Ukraine and its agricultural sector. These
included efforts to resume Ukrainian exports through the Black Sea and via road or rail through Europe,
easing restrictions on trade with Ukraine, and providing employment opportunities to Ukrainian refugees
in the agricultural sector. Countries are also taking steps now to prepare the Ukrainian agricultural sector
to be able to rebound swiftly once hostilities end. Such efforts include bi- or plurilateral government-to-
government collaboration, public-private partnerships, and international efforts such as the recently
launched OECD Ukraine Country Programme.
Looking ahead, countries should draw on the experiences of the past few years and seek to build resilience
to risks in the future. Governments should look to implement policies and investments that enhance the
ability of the sector to absorb, adapt and transform in response to future shocks. For example, they should
seek out “no-regrets” policies that provide these benefits under a wide range of future scenarios, while also
contributing to agricultural productivity and sustainability. Temporary measures are often hard to dismantle
once in place and long-term objectives need to be balanced with short-term responses. Risk management
policies should be developed with stakeholders to ensure a common understanding of the risk landscape
and responsibilities for managing risks.
Market price support has fallen in response to macroeconomic factors, but more reform
is needed
Preliminary estimates indicate that market price support declined in 2022. This decline has been largely
driven by the recent period of exceptional spikes in agricultural prices which caused prices of supported
products to become relatively less valuable compared to if it were valued at world prices. This is a similar
experience to what occurred during price spikes in 2008 and 2011. Market price support will likely rebound
in 2023 depending on actions taken by governments implementing MPS policies and the path of global
prices.
Two countries, Costa Rica and Israel, took steps in 2022 to reduce market price support as part of an effort
to liberalise some of their agricultural industries in line with OECD recommendations. These are positive
steps to reduce production and trade distortions within their agricultural sectors. However, policies which
create market price support remains particularly prevalent in the portfolio of agricultural support for many
economies and more should be done to reform.
Reforms in OECD countries have largely stalled in the past ten years, with little change in the level or
composition of support over this period. In 2022, signatories to the OECD Ministerial Declaration11


 103

committed to “intensify efforts as appropriate to reform or reorient agricultural policy, and in particular to
address those support measures that are harmful to the environment, to move towards more sustainable
agriculture and food systems”. Meanwhile, support, which had increased significantly in the past, has
remained high over the past decade in large emerging economies. Across the 54 countries, two-thirds of
support is still provided through price interventions and other distorting support. These are known for their
negative implications for food security and the environment, and for being both inefficient and untargeted
to providing support to those households in need. Countries should look to reinvigorate domestic policy
reform efforts to reduce the use of these measures. At the same time, more stringent multilateral disciplines
may be required to facilitate such reforms.
Countries should not lose sight of the need to do more to mitigate and adapt their
agricultural sectors to climate change
The recent few years has seen significant challenges for agriculture between the COVID-19 pandemic and
now the fallout from the war in Ukraine. Countries have largely managed to respond effectively to these
crises and absorb the shocks rapidly. However, countries should not lose sight of the existing and coming
challenges posed by climate change.
Some countries pledged more ambitious climate targets in 2022. Others, such as New Zealand have taken
positive new steps to price carbon. These are welcome developments that will help countries to respect
their Paris Agreement commitments. More could be done to increase ambitions, however. Only 19 out of
the 54 countries in this report have a mitigation target specific to the agricultural sector, and three do not
have targets to reach or get close to net zero emissions for their overall economies.
The structure of much agricultural policy support is at odds with the actions needed to mitigate and adapt
to climate change. USD 411 billion of support is in forms that are potentially most distorting, comprising
market price support and payments linked to output or the unconstrained use of inputs. These policies may
encourage over-production and can contribute to GHG emissions if they lead to the overuse of polluting
inputs, degradation of soils and increased land clearing. They can also contribute to increasing pressure
on resources, biodiversity and the environment that are already adversely affected by climate change.
Many of these policies also have the potential to hinder climate change adaptation by reducing incentives
for farmers to change production systems away from subsidised commodities in response to changing
climatic conditions. Countries may need to collaborate to avoid possible environmental leakages and other
issues that may arise from asymmetries in policies across countries.
The role of support for livestock production is particularly sensitive in this regard. Livestock is responsible
for the largest share of agricultural GHG emissions and a strong contributor to the global methane footprint.
Livestock is highly supported, typically in the form of MPS. Support to poultry, beef and veal and pig meat
are all around 10% of their gross commodity receipts. Combined, market price support to these three
commodities were worth USD 71 billion or 11% of all positive producer support. Rice also contributes
significantly to emissions relative to other crops due to methane from flooded areas. Support to rice
production totalled USD 54 billion in 2020-22. These forms of support to highly emitting commodities
should be reduced and reformed as much as possible while taking into consideration national conditions
and policy design.




104 

References

d’Istria, T. (2023), In Ukraine, once the fighting stops, the demining begins,
https://www.lemonde.fr/en/international/article/2023/03/10/in-ukraine-once-the-fighting-stops-
the-demining-begins_6018785_4.html.
[11]
EC (2022), Joint Declaration - 1 billion euro mobilised for Solidarity Lanes,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/statement_22_6825 (accessed on
19 April 2023).
[13]
FAO (2023), FAOSTAT Production dataset Crops and Livestock Products,
https://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/QCL.
[6]
FAO (2023), FAOSTAT Trade dataset Crops and Livestock Products,
https://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/TCL.
[7]
FAO (2022), Food Outlook – Biannual Report on Global Food Markets,
https://doi.org/10.4060/cc2864en.
[1]
GLOBSEC (2023), Walking on Fire: Demining in Ukraine,
https://www.globsec.org/sites/default/files/2023-04/Demining in Ukraine report ver5 web.pdf.
[10]
Henderson, B. and J. Lankoski (2019), “Evaluating the environmental impact of agricultural
policies”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 130, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/add0f27c-en.
[15]
Kyiv School of Economics (2023), The total amount of damage caused to Ukraine’s
infrastructure due to the war has increased to almost $138 billion, https://kse.ua/about-the-
school/news/the-total-amount-of-damage-caused-to-ukraine-s-infrastructure-due-to-the-war-
has-increased-to-almost-138-billion/.
[3]
Kyiv School of Economics (2022), Agricultural War Losses Review Ukraine - Rapid Losses
Assessment Issue 2, https://kse.ua/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/Losses_report_issue2-1.pdf.
[5]
Kyiv School of Economics (2022), Assessment of damages in Ukraine due to Russia’s military
aggression as of September 1, 2022, https://kse.ua/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/ENG-
Sep22_Working_Sep1_Damages-Report.docx.pdf.
[4]
Martyshev, P., O. Nivievskyi and M. Bogonos (2023), Regional war, global consequences:
Mounting damages to Ukraine’s agriculture and growing challenges for global food security,
https://www.ifpri.org/blog/regional-war-global-consequences-mounting-damages-ukraines-
agriculture-and-growing-
challenges#:~:text=The%20total%20agricultural%20losses%20associated,output%20the%20
previous%20agricultural%20year.
[12]
OECD (2022), Declaration on Transformative Solutions for Sustainable Agriculture and Food
Systems, OECD/LEGAL/0483, https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-
LEGAL-0483.
[18]
OECD (2020), Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2020, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/928181a8-en.
[17]


 105

OECD (2016), OECD’S Producer Support Estimate and Related Indicators of Agricultural
Support - Concepts, Calculations, Interpretation and Use (The PSE Manual),
https://www.oecd.org/agriculture/topics/agricultural-policy-monitoring-and-
evaluation/documents/producer-support-estimates-manual.pdf.
[16]
OECD/FAO (2023), OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2023-2032, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/08801ab7-en.
[2]
UNCTAD (2021), An Assessment of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
(RCEP) Tariff Concessions, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/ser-rp-2021d16_en.pdf.
[14]
UNOCHA (2023), Ukraine Humanitarian Response 2023 Situation Report 29 May 2023,
https://reports.unocha.org/en/country/ukraine/card/vxxNhuJBA5/ (accessed on 19/06/2023).
[9]
USDA (2023), Grain and Feed Annual Ukraine,
https://apps.fas.usda.gov/newgainapi/api/Report/DownloadReportByFileName?fileName=Gra
in%20and%20Feed%20Annual_Kyiv_Ukraine_UP2023-0012.pdf.
[8]



Notes

1 This report does not contain a country chapter on the Russian Federation, nor any tables with support
indicators in the Statistical Annex. However, aggregate data for the 11 emerging economies and for all 54
countries covered in this report continue to include those for Russia.
2 Crop production developments are expressed on a crop year basis.
3 The Initiative on the Safe Transportation of Grain and Foodstuffs from Ukrainian ports, also known as
Black Sea Grain Initiative, is an agreement between Russia and Ukraine facilitated by Türkiye and the
United Nations and creating procedures to safely export grains from certain Ukrainian ports, after Russia
had blocked such exports following its invasion of Ukraine. The agreement was originally signed in
July 2022 for a period of 120 days and renewed several times thereafter. The initiative was not renewed
after its third term, which expired on 17 July 2023.
4 This refers to total gross farm receipts expressed in current US dollar.
5 Any variation in support levels across EU Member States is not presented in the support database OECD
(2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.
6 Includes 15 countries.
7 Includes all current EU27 countries for all three years. United Kingdom is included for 2020 only.



106 


8 Further analysis is needed on the environmental impacts of market price support when limits on
production are in place.
9 Single Commodity Transfers (SCTs) are the annual monetary value of gross transfers from consumers
and taxpayers to agricultural producers arising from policies linked to the production of a single commodity,
such that the producer must produce the designate commodity in order to receive the transfer. In this
instance it is the monetary value of the gross transfers from Indian producers of wheat to consumers and
taxpayers as a result of policies affecting wheat production. SCTs are measured at the farm gate level.
10 Cost of public stockholding are expenditures to cover the cost of storage or disposal of agricultural
commodities, as well as their depreciation.
11 OECD (2022[18]), Declaration on Transformative Solutions for Sustainable Agriculture and Food
Systems, OECD/LEGAL/0483, https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0483.


 107

Annex 2.A. Definition of OECD indicators of
agricultural support
Nominal indicators used in this report
Producer Support Estimate (PSE): The annual monetary value of gross transfers from consumers and
taxpayers to agricultural producers, measured at the farm gate level, arising from policy measures that
support agriculture, regardless of their nature, objectives or impacts on farm production or income. It
includes market price support, budgetary payments and budget revenue foregone, i.e. gross transfers from
consumers and taxpayers to agricultural producers arising from policy measures based on: current output,
input use, area planted/animal numbers/receipts/incomes (current, non-current), and non-commodity
criteria. PSE categories are defined in Box 2 A.1.
Market Price Support (MPS): The annual monetary value of gross transfers from consumers and
taxpayers to agricultural producers arising from policy measures that create a gap between domestic
market prices and border prices of a specific agricultural commodity, measured at the farm gate level. MPS
is available by commodity, and sums of negative and positive components are reported separately where
relevant along with the total MPS.
Producer Single Commodity Transfers (producer SCT): The annual monetary value of gross transfers
from consumers and taxpayers to agricultural producers, measured at the farm gate level, arising from
policies linked to the production of a single commodity such that the producer must produce the designated
commodity in order to receive the payment. This includes broader policies where transfers are specified
on a per-commodity basis. Producer SCT is also available by commodity.
Group Commodity Transfers (GCT): The annual monetary value of gross transfers from consumers and
taxpayers to agricultural producers, measured at the farm gate level, arising from policies whose payments
are made on the basis that one or more of a designated list of commodities is produced, i.e. a producer
may produce from a set of allowable commodities and receive a transfer that does not vary with respect to
this decision.
All Commodity Transfers (ACT): The annual monetary value of gross transfers from consumers and
taxpayers to agricultural producers, measured at the farm gate level, arising from policies that place no
restrictions on the commodity produced but require the recipient to produce some commodity of their
choice.
Other Transfers to Producers (OTP): The annual monetary value of gross transfers from consumers and
taxpayers to agricultural producers, measured at the farm gate level, arising from policies that do not
require any commodity production at all.
Consumer Single Commodity Transfers (consumer SCT): The annual monetary value of gross
transfers from (to) consumers of agricultural commodities, measured at the farm gate level, arising from
policies linked to the production of a single commodity. Consumer SCT is also available by commodity.
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE): The annual monetary value of gross transfers from (to) consumers
of agricultural commodities, measured at the farm gate level, arising from policy measures that support
agriculture, regardless of their nature, objectives or impacts on consumption of farm products. If negative,
the CSE measures the burden (implicit tax) on consumers through market price support (higher prices),
that more than offsets consumer subsidies that lower prices to consumers.


108 

General Services Support Estimate (GSSE): The annual monetary value of gross transfers arising from
policy measures that create enabling conditions for the primary agricultural sector through development of
private or public services, institutions and infrastructure, regardless of their objectives and impacts on farm
production and income, or consumption of farm products. The GSSE includes policies where primary
agriculture is the main beneficiary, but does not include any payments to individual producers. GSSE
transfers do not directly alter producer receipts or costs or consumption expenditures. GSSE categories
are defined below.
Total Support Estimate (TSE): The annual monetary value of all gross transfers from taxpayers and
consumers arising from policy measures that support agriculture, net of the associated budgetary receipts,
regardless of their objectives and impacts on farm production and income, or consumption of farm
products.
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE): The annual monetary value of all gross budgetary transfers
from taxpayers arising from policy measures that support agriculture, regardless of their objectives and
impacts on farm production and income, or consumption of farm products.
Gross Farm Receipts (GFR): The annual monetary value of production, to which budgetary transfers to
individual producers are added (i.e. VP + PSE – MPS).
Commodity Gross Receipts: The annual monetary value of production for an individual commodity, to
which budgetary transfers to producers of that commodity are added (i.e. VP + producer SCT – MPS).
Ratio indicators and percentage indicators
Percentage PSE (%PSE): PSE transfers as a share of gross farm receipts (including support in the
denominator).
Percentage SCT (%SCT): Single Commodity Transfers as a share of gross receipts for the specific
commodity (including support in the denominator).
Share of SCT in total PSE (%): Share of Single Commodity Transfers in the total PSE. This indicator is
also calculated by commodity.
Producer Nominal Protection Coefficient (producer NPC): The ratio between the average price
received by producers (at farm gate), including payments per tonne of current output, and the border price
(measured at farm gate). The Producer NPC is also available by commodity.
Producer Nominal Assistance Coefficient (producer NAC): The ratio between the value of gross farm
receipts including support and gross farm receipts (at farm gate) valued at border prices (measured at farm
gate).
Percentage CSE (%CSE): CSE transfers as a share of consumption expenditure on agricultural
commodities (at farm gate prices), net of taxpayer transfers to consumers. The %CSE measures the
implicit tax (or subsidy, if CSE is positive) placed on consumers by agricultural price policies.
Consumer Nominal Protection Coefficient (consumer NPC): The ratio between the average price paid
by consumers (at farm gate) and the border price (measured at farm gate). The Consumer NPC is also
available by commodity.
Consumer Nominal Assistance Coefficient (consumer NAC): The ratio between the value of
consumption expenditure on agricultural commodities (at farm gate) and that valued at border prices.
Percentage TSE (%TSE): TSE transfers as a percentage of GDP.
Percentage TBSE (%TBSE): TBSE transfers as a percentage of GDP.


 109

Percentage GSSE (%GSSE): Share of expenditures on general services in the Total Support Estimate
(TSE).
Share of potentially most distorting transfers in aggregated gross producer transfers (%):
represents the sum of positive MPS, the absolute value of negative MPS, payments based on output and
payments based on unconstrained use of variable inputs, relative to the sum of positive MPS, the absolute
value of negative MPS, and all budgetary payments to producers.
Annex Box 2.A.1. Definitions of categories in the PSE classification
Definitions of categories
Category A1, Market price support (MPS): Transfers from consumers and taxpayers to agricultural
producers from policy measures that create a gap between domestic market prices and border prices
of a specific agricultural commodity, measured at the farm gate level.
Category A2, Payments based on output: Transfers from taxpayers to agricultural producers from
policy measures based on current output of a specific agricultural commodity.
Category B, Payments based on input use: Transfers from taxpayers to agricultural producers arising
from policy measures based on on-farm use of inputs:
•
Variable input use that reduces the on-farm cost of a specific variable input or a mix of variable
inputs.
•
Fixed capital formation that reduces the on-farm investment cost of farm buildings, equipment,
plantations, irrigation, drainage, and soil improvements.
•
On-farm services that reduce the cost of technical, accounting, commercial, sanitary and
phytosanitary assistance and training provided to individual farmers.
Category C, Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required: Transfers from taxpayers
to agricultural producers arising from policy measures based on current area, animal numbers, revenue,
or income, and requiring production.
Category D, Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required: Transfers from
taxpayers to agricultural producers arising from policy measures based on non-current (i.e. historical or
fixed) area, animal numbers, revenue, or income, with current production of any commodity required.
Category E, Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required: Transfers from
taxpayers to agricultural producers arising from policy measures based on non-current (i.e. historical or
fixed) area, animal numbers, revenue, or income, with current production of any commodity not required
but optional.
Category F, Payments based on non-commodity criteria: Transfers from taxpayers to agricultural
producers arising from policy measures based on:
•
Long-term resource retirement: Transfers for the long-term retirement of factors of production
from commodity production. The payments in this subcategory are distinguished from those
requiring short-term resource retirement, which are based on commodity production criteria.
•
A specific non-commodity output: Transfers for the use of farm resources to produce specific
non-commodity outputs of goods and services, which are not required by regulations.
•
Other non-commodity criteria: Transfers provided equally to all farmers, such as a flat rate or
lump sum payment.


110 

Category G, Miscellaneous payments: Transfers from taxpayers to farmers for which there is a lack
of information to allocate them among the appropriate categories.
Note: A (area), An (animal numbers), R (receipts) or I (income).
Definitions of labels
With or without current commodity production limits and/or limit to payments: Defines whether
or not there is a specific limitation on current commodity production (output) associated with a policy
providing transfers to agriculture and whether or not there are limits to payments in the form of limits to
area or animal numbers eligible for those payments. Applied in categories A–F.
With variable or fixed payment rates: Any payments is defined as subject to a variable rate where
the formula determining the level of payment is triggered by a change in price, yield, net revenue or
income or a change in production cost. Applied in categories A–E.
With or without input constraints: defines whether or not there are specific requirements concerning
farming practices related to the programme in terms of the reduction, replacement, or withdrawal in the
use of inputs or a restriction of farming practices allowed. Applied in categories A–F. The payments
with input constrains are further broken down to:
•
Payments conditional on compliance with basic requirements that are mandatory (with
mandatory);
•
Payments requiring specific practices going beyond basic requirements and voluntary (with
voluntary).
o
Specific practices related to environmental issues.
o
Specific practices related to animal welfare.
o
Other specific practices.
With or without commodity exceptions: defines whether or not there are prohibitions upon the
production of certain commodities as a condition of eligibility for payments based on non-current
A/An/R/I of commodity(ies). Applied in Category E.
Based on area, animal numbers, receipts or income: defines the specific attribute (i.e. area, animal
numbers, receipts or income) on which the payment is based. Applied in categories C–E.
Based on a single commodity, a group of commodities or all commodities: defines whether the
payment is granted for production of a single commodity, a group of commodities or all commodities.
Applied in categories A–D.
Drivers of the change in PSE
Decomposition of PSE
Per cent change in PSE: Per cent change in the nominal value of the PSE expressed in national currency.
The per cent change is calculated using the two most recent years in the series.
Contribution of MPS to per cent change in PSE: Per cent change in nominal PSE if all variables other
than MPS are held constant.
Contribution of price gap to per cent change in the PSE: Per cent change in nominal PSE if all variables
other than gap between domestic market prices and border prices are held constant.


 111

Contribution of quantity produced to per cent change in the PSE: Per cent change in nominal PSE if
all variables other than quantity produced are held constant.
Contribution of budgetary payments (BP) to per cent change in PSE: Per cent change in nominal PSE
if all variables other than BP are held constant.
Contribution of BP elements to per cent change in PSE: Per cent change in nominal PSE if all variables
other than a given BP element are held constant. BP elements include Payments based on output,
Payments based on input use, Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required, Payments based
on non-current A/An/R/I, production required, Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not
required, Payments based on non-commodity criteria and Miscellaneous payments.
Change in Producer Price
Per cent change in Producer Price: Per cent change in Producer Price (at farm gate) expressed in
national currency. The per cent change is calculated using the two most recent years in the series.
Decomposition of the change in the Border Price
Per cent change in Border Price: Per cent change in Border Price (at farm gate) expressed in national
currency. The per cent change is calculated using the two most recent years in the series.
Contribution of Exchange Rate to per cent change in Border Price: Per cent change in the Border
Price (at farm gate) expressed in national currency if all variables other than Exchange Rate between
national currency and USD are held constant.
Contribution of Border Price expressed in USD to per cent change in Border Price: Per cent change
in the Border Price (at farm gate) expressed in national currency if all variables other than Border Price (at
farm gate) expressed in USD are held constant.
Note: The change in Producer Support Estimate (PSE) is not decomposed when PSE is negative for the
current and/or previous year.  The producer price change and the border price change are not calculated
when both negative and positive market price support (MPS) occur at the commodity level for the previous
year.  Note that negative MPS estimates for livestock products may arise in cases of aligned product prices
if there is positive MPS for feed commodities.
Definition of GSSE categories
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
•
Agricultural knowledge generation: Budgetary expenditure financing research and development
(R&D) activities related to agriculture, and associated data dissemination, irrespective of the
institution (private or public, ministry, university, research centre or producer groups) where they
take place, the nature of research (scientific, institutional, etc.), or its purpose.
•
Agricultural knowledge transfer: Budgetary expenditure financing agricultural vocational schools
and agricultural programmes in high-level education, training and advice to farmers that is generic
(e.g. accounting rules, pesticide application), not specific to individual situations, and data
collection and information dissemination networks related to agricultural production and marketing.
Inspection and control
•
Agricultural product safety and inspection: Budgetary expenditure financing activities related
to agricultural product safety and inspection. This includes only expenditures on inspection of


112 

domestically produced commodities at first level of processing and border inspection for exported
commodities.
•
Pest and disease inspection and control: Budgetary expenditure financing pest and disease
control of agricultural inputs and outputs (control at primary agriculture level) and public funding of
veterinary services (for the farming sector) and phytosanitary services.
•
Input control: Budgetary expenditure financing the institutions providing control activities and
certification of industrial inputs used in agriculture (e.g. machinery, industrial fertilisers, pesticides,
etc.) and biological inputs (e.g. seed certification and control).
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
•
Hydrological infrastructure: Budgetary expenditure financing public investments into
hydrological infrastructure (irrigation and drainage networks).
•
Storage, marketing and other physical infrastructure: Budgetary expenditure financing
investments to off-farm storage and other market infrastructure facilities related to handling and
marketing primary agricultural products (silos, harbour facilities – docks, elevators; wholesale
markets, futures markets), as well as other physical infrastructure related to agriculture, when
agriculture is the main beneficiary.
•
Institutional infrastructure: Budgetary expenditure financing investments to build and maintain
institutional infrastructure related to the farming sector (e.g. land cadastres; machinery user groups,
seed and species registries; development of rural finance networks; support to farm organisations,
etc.).
•
Farm restructuring: Budgetary payments related to reform of farm structures financing entry, exit
or diversification (outside agriculture) strategies.
Marketing and promotion
•
Collective schemes for processing and marketing: Budgetary expenditure financing investment
in collective, mainly primary, processing, marketing schemes and marketing facilities, designed to
improve marketing environment for agriculture.
•
Promotion of agricultural products: Budgetary expenditure financing assistance to collective
promotion of agro-food products (e.g. promotion campaigns, participation on international fairs).
•
Cost of public stockholding: Budgetary expenditure covering the costs of storage, depreciation
and disposal of public storage of agricultural products.
•
Miscellaneous: Budgetary expenditure financing other general services that cannot be
disaggregated and allocated to the above categories, often due to a lack of information.
More detailed information on the indicators, their use and limitations is available in OECD’s Producer
Support Estimate and Related Indicators of Agricultural Support: Concepts, Calculation, Interpretation
and Use (the PSE Manual) available on the OECD public website
(http://www.oecd.org/agriculture/topics/agricultural-policy-monitoring-and-
evaluation/documents/producer-support-estimates-manual.pdf).


 113

This part contains an overview of the developments of support in the OECD
area and selected Emerging Economies overall, followed by chapters on
agricultural policy developments and support to agriculture in each of the
countries covered in this report. Each country chapter includes a brief
summary of policy developments and support to agriculture, with a special
focus on climate adaptation action for agriculture, and related assessments
and recommendations; a brief outline of historical policy trends; a more
detailed description of climate change adaptation policies in agriculture; a
presentation of the main policy developments in 2022-23; and information
on the context in which agricultural policies are implemented.
Developments in Agricultural Policy and
Support by Country


114 

OECD countries
Total support to agriculture (Total Support Estimate, TSE) in OECD countries1 represented USD 349 billion
(EUR 311 billion) per year on average in 2020-22, of which 67%, or USD 234 billion (EUR 208 billion), was
provided as support to producers individually (Producer Support Estimate, PSE). Producer support across
the OECD represented 15.2% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22, down from around 28% in 2000-02 and
more than 35% in 1986-88 (Table 3.1). These averages mask significant variations within the OECD,
details on which are presented in Chapter 2 of this report.
There has been long-term decline in the use of Market Price Support (MPS) and output-based payments
across OECD countries. Payments based on the unconstrained use of variable inputs slightly increased
across the OECD compared to the beginning of the millennium. OECD work finds that these three types
of support have the greatest potential to distort agricultural production and trade, and can induce negative
impacts on the environment.
Overall, MPS represents the largest share of support to individual commodities, driven by a range of
domestic and trade policies. Rice is by far the most supported commodity in the OECD area, followed by
sugar, sunflower seed, and several livestock products (Figure 3.2). For several commodities – particularly
maize, sorghum, soybeans, and sheep meat – support also comes through other types of transfers,
including payments less directly coupled to production.
Some countries apply less-distorting forms of support, such as payments based on parameters not linked
to current production, or based on non-commodity criteria such as land set-aside, or payments for specific
environmental or animal-welfare outcomes (Chapter 2, Figure 2.15). Payments based on historical
entitlements – generally crop area or livestock numbers during a reference period in the past2 – increased
in the last two decades, representing more than 3% of Gross Farm Receipts (GFR) and about 22% of PSE
during 2020-22. The share of payments based on current crop area, animal numbers, receipts, or income
has fallen since 2000-02; these now represent around 23% of PSE (Table 3.1).
Expenditures financing general services to the sector (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) in the
OECD area increased in nominal terms from USD 37 billion (EUR 40 billion) per year in 2000-02 to
USD 48 billion (EUR 43 billion) in 2020-22. However, this increase fell short of the sector’s growth, and
expenditures for general services declined as a share of the agricultural value of production from 5.4% to
3.4%. In 2020-22, most of this went to infrastructure (USD 18 billion), a slight increase from 2000-02, and
to agricultural knowledge and innovation (USD 15 billion), an increase of 87% in nominal terms, almost in
line with the sector’s growth. Expenditures for inspection and control services more than doubled, while
spending for marketing and promotion increased less and public stockholding declined substantially over
the period. But all these accounted for comparatively small shares of the GSSE expenditure (Table 3.1).
Total support to agriculture as a share of GDP declined significantly over time.
3 Overall trends in agricultural
support


 115

Figure 3.1. OECD: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
OECD - Total - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
OECD - Total - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
OECD - Total - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
OECD - Total - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
OECD - Total - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%


116 

Figure 3.2. OECD: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.


OECD - Total - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Barley
Maize
Rapeseed
Sorghum
Rice
Soybeans
Oats
Sunflower
Sugar
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Sheep meat
Eggs
Wool
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%


 117

Table 3.1. OECD: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
594 108
673 504
1 390 641
1 229 916
1 417 426
1 524 583
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
71.27
70.22
74.92
72.75
74.99
77.03
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
557 842
664 944
1 265 647
1 125 813
1 266 415
1 404 713
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
230 224
217 203
234 352
237 239
250 577
215 239
Support based on commodity output
187 284
139 467
90 132
100 402
93 483
76 511
Market Price Support1
174 689
124 508
83 451
89 220
88 224
72 907
Positive Market Price Support
178 990
125 109
83 506
89 265
88 306
72 948
Negative Market Price Support
-4 302
-600
-56
-45
-81
-41
Payments based on output
12 596
14 959
6 681
11 181
5 259
3 604
Payments based on input use
19 571
19 523
34 256
35 948
32 340
34 480
Based on variable input use
9 146
8 012
13 947
15 662
12 212
13 967
with input constraints
1 146
342
990
900
767
1 304
Based on fixed capital formation
6 882
5 079
10 822
11 356
10 482
10 626
with input constraints
1 638
629
2 237
2 321
2 219
2 171
Based on on-farm services
3 543
6 431
9 487
8 930
9 645
9 887
with input constraints
439
967
1 903
1 765
1 907
2 038
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
19 377
41 382
53 201
46 285
60 968
52 349
Based on Receipts / Income
2 052
3 173
5 720
4 963
6 320
5 877
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
17 325
38 209
47 481
41 322
54 648
46 473
with input constraints
4 093
16 898
41 550
36 612
48 075
39 964
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
533
71
3 093
1 983
4 829
2 468
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
2 080
13 721
47 690
47 027
52 505
43 538
With variable payment rates
181
4 318
4 001
2 882
6 619
2 504
with commodity exceptions
0
4 079
3 778
2 699
6 366
2 270
With fixed payment rates
1 899
9 403
43 689
44 146
45 886
41 034
with commodity exceptions
1 561
6 081
2 806
2 593
2 883
2 943
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
1 078
3 206
5 403
5 047
5 722
5 439
Based on long-term resource retirement
1 076
2 900
3 684
3 386
3 926
3 740
Based on a specific non-commodity output
2
237
1 592
1 536
1 658
1 583
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
69
127
126
138
117
Miscellaneous payments
300
-166
577
548
729
453
Percentage PSE (%)
35.44
28.35
15.20
17.22
15.86
12.91
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.46
1.26
1.07
1.09
1.07
1.05
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.55
1.40
1.18
1.21
1.19
1.15
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
25 594
36 575
47 947
48 333
48 358
47 149
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
4 872
8 018
15 029
14 165
16 109
14 813
Inspection and control
1 076
1 931
4 600
4 380
4 754
4 665
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
10 223
16 400
17 692
18 436
17 177
17 462
Marketing and promotion
2 156
5 572
7 939
8 846
7 556
7 416
Cost of public stockholding
5 872
2 282
553
535
531
593
Miscellaneous
1 395
2 371
2 134
1 971
2 231
2 200
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
9.28
13.19
13.72
14.23
13.23
13.75
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-155 058
-117 599
-35 831
-54 972
-42 555
-9 965
Transfers to producers from consumers
-163 991
-121 895
-78 902
-83 863
-83 778
-69 065
Other transfers from consumers
-22 443
-19 819
-24 806
-26 152
-26 569
-21 696
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
19 956
23 580
67 046
54 100
66 529
80 507
Excess feed cost
11 420
534
831
943
1 262
289
Percentage CSE (%)
-28.83
-18.34
-2.99
-5.13
-3.55
-0.75
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.50
1.27
1.09
1.11
1.10
1.07
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.41
1.22
1.03
1.05
1.04
1.01
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
275 774
277 358
349 344
339 673
365 464
342 896
Transfers from consumers
186 434
141 714
103 708
110 015
110 347
90 761
Transfers from taxpayers
111 782
155 463
270 442
255 810
281 686
273 830
Budget revenues
-22 443
-19 819
-24 806
-26 152
-26 569
-21 696
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.95
1.00
0.62
0.65
0.63
0.58
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
101 085
152 850
265 894
250 453
277 240
269 988
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.71
0.55
0.47
0.48
0.47
0.45
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
The OECD total for 1986-88 includes all 38 OECD member countries except Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Israel, Latvia, Lithuania and Slovenia,
for which data are not available. The OECD total for 2000-02 includes all 38 OECD member countries except Latvia and Lithuania. TSE as a
share of GDP for 1986-88 for the OECD is an estimate based on available data.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities: see notes to individual country tables.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en




118 

Emerging economies
Agricultural policies in the 11 emerging economies3 in this report generated positive transfers to their
agricultural sectors, averaging USD 497 billion (EUR 443 billion) per year in 2020-22, of which
USD 391 billion (EUR 349 billion) went to individual producers. At the same time, policies in a few countries
such as Argentina, India, and Viet Nam, suppressed domestic prices for certain products, generating an
implicit tax in the form of negative MPS, averaging USD 179 billion (EUR 160 billion) per year in the same
period.
Net support for the sector (TSE) amounted to 319 billion (EUR 283 billion) per year during 2020-22
(Table 3.2). Within this, the net producer support (PSE) averaged USD 213 billion (EUR 189 billion), or
7.1% of gross farm receipts (13% of positive support, -5.9% of negative MPS), up from 3.9% in 2000-02.
These averages mask significant variations among the 11 economies included in this group, details on
which are presented in Chapter 2 of this report.
The share of potentially most-distorting transfers (including positive and negative MPS, output-based
payments and payments for unconstrained variable input use) in gross producer support still averaged
85% in 2020-22, slightly down from 89% in 2000-02. Maize, sugar, and rapeseed were the most supported
commodities in emerging economies, with transfers amounting to 19-28% of commodity gross farm
receipts, while oats and milk were the most taxed in 2020-22 (Figure 3.4). Almost all these transfers to
specific commodities operate through MPS, and are a result of domestic or trade policies such as minimum
support prices or import tariffs (in the case of positive transfers) or export taxes and other restrictions (in
the case of negative transfers).
Among the remaining forms of producer support, the most prominent are payments based on other input
use (mainly fixed capital formation), payments to areas planted and animal numbers, and payments based
on historical entitlements. Payments based on areas and animal numbers were almost non-existent across
emerging economies in 2000-02 but reached more than 16% of aggregate net support to producers in
2020-22. Similarly, payments based on historical entitlements account for more than 11% of net producer
support. In contrast, the relative size of support for investments,4 often related to irrigation, declined over
time to represent just over 9% of PSE. All other forms of support to producers remain small (Table 3.2).
Expenditure on GSSE in emerging economies reached an annual average of USD 59 billion
(EUR 52 billion) in 2020-22. Most of this went to infrastructure projects (USD 31 billion), often related to
irrigation, and public stockholding (USD 13 billion). The remaining expenditure mainly went to agricultural
knowledge and innovation (USD 9 billion) (Table 3.2). Relative to the value of agricultural production,
expenditures for general services declined and remain lower than the OECD average. Aggregate total
support to agriculture as a share of GDP decreased slightly to 1.2% in 2020-22, and is mainly driven by
producer support, which represents 67% of total support.


 119

Figure 3.3. Emerging Economies: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
11 emerging economies - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
11 emerging economies - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
11 emerging economies - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
11 emerging economies - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
11 emerging economies - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.25%
0.5%
0.75%
1%
1.25%
1.5%


120 

Figure 3.4. Emerging Economies: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity
gross farm receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.


11 emerging economies - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Barley
Maize
Rapeseed
Rice
Soybeans
Oats
Sunflower
Sugar
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Sheep meat
Eggs
-35%
-30%
-25%
-20%
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%


 121

Table 3.2. Emerging Economies: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
522 032
2 875 036
2 589 973
2 935 662
3 099 475
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
75.01
81.11
76.79
83.25
83.28
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
520 727
2 850 025
2 554 904
2 929 572
3 065 599
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
20 929
212 741
234 515
216 945
186 764
Support based on commodity output
1 665
75 516
108 457
74 407
43 683
Market Price Support1
1 249
71 405
103 796
70 423
39 996
Positive Market Price Support
24 762
250 024
223 027
266 867
260 179
Negative Market Price Support
-23 513
-178 620
-119 231
-196 444
-220 184
Payments based on output
416
4 111
4 661
3 984
3 687
Payments based on input use
17 321
76 779
66 252
80 372
83 714
Based on variable input use
11 479
54 874
46 717
56 519
61 385
with input constraints
0
1 251
730
950
2 073
Based on fixed capital formation
4 466
19 380
17 298
20 937
19 905
with input constraints
1
1 071
661
1 090
1 463
Based on on-farm services
1 377
2 525
2 236
2 916
2 423
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
813
34 169
32 611
35 200
34 696
Based on Receipts / Income
813
1 704
1 960
1 613
1 538
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
32 465
30 651
33 587
33 158
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
370
23 733
24 127
24 430
22 640
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
370
23 733
24 127
24 430
22 640
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
458
1 300
1 550
1 189
1 162
Based on long-term resource retirement
458
1 300
1 550
1 189
1 162
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
302
1 245
1 519
1 347
869
Percentage PSE (%)
3.86
7.05
8.62
7.04
5.75
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.01
1.04
1.05
1.04
1.02
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.04
1.08
1.09
1.08
1.06
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
18 949
58 529
60 766
57 251
57 570
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
2 978
9 199
10 264
8 744
8 590
Inspection and control
784
3 876
4 381
3 550
3 697
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
6 955
31 214
29 747
31 909
31 988
Marketing and promotion
28
684
699
645
707
Cost of public stockholding
8 102
13 386
15 575
12 233
12 350
Miscellaneous
103
170
102
169
238
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
42.48
18.36
16.33
18.56
20.89
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-1 228
-114 068
-110 183
-143 297
-88 723
Transfers to producers from consumers
-4 177
-130 790
-142 606
-143 442
-106 322
Other transfers from consumers
-2 855
-54 459
-62 341
-64 893
-36 144
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
4 735
47 494
76 918
34 265
31 298
Excess feed cost
1 069
23 688
17 846
30 772
22 446
Percentage CSE (%)
-0.24
-4.07
-4.45
-4.95
-2.92
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.01
1.07
1.09
1.08
1.05
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.00
1.04
1.05
1.05
1.03
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
44 613
318 764
372 199
308 461
275 632
Transfers from consumers
7 033
185 249
204 947
208 335
142 466
Transfers from taxpayers
40 436
187 974
229 593
165 020
169 310
Budget revenues
-2 855
-54 459
-62 341
-64 893
-36 144
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.30
1.20
1.62
1.12
0.95
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
43 364
247 359
268 403
238 038
235 637
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.26
0.93
1.16
0.86
0.82
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
The Emerging Economies include Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Ukraine and
Viet Nam.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities: see notes to individual country tables.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




122 

All countries
Agricultural policies across all 54 countries in this report generated positive transfers to the agricultural
sector, averaging USD 851 billion (EUR 758 billion) per year in 2020-22, of which USD 630 billion
(EUR 561 billion) went to individual producers. Considering implicit taxation of producers in some emerging
economies – which created transfers away from producers (negative MPS) worth USD 179 billion
(EUR 160 billion) per year over the same period – net support for the sector (TSE, Table 3.3) amounted to
USD 672 billion (EUR 598 billion) per year during 2020-22. Around 71% or USD 452 billion
(EUR 401 billion) of this was provided as net support to producers individually (PSE).
Aggregate support to producers in all 54 countries represented 9.8% of gross farm receipts on average in
2020-22. This is a significant reduction from 18.2% in 2000-02 (Table 3.3) and is composed of 13.7% of
gross farm receipts in positive support, and -3.9% of negative MPS. These averages mask significant
variations among the economies covered by this report, details on which are presented in Chapter 2 of this
report.
Changes to the structure of aggregate support were relatively moderate between 2000-02 and 2020-22 in
all countries. The share of potentially most-distorting transfers (MPS, payments based on output or
unconstrained use of variable inputs) declined slightly, but these policies continue to represent around
73% of gross producer transfers (positive or negative) in absolute terms across all countries. Transfers
based on output became less prominent while those based on unconstrained input use increased. Sugar
is the most strongly supported commodity, followed by maize and rice. Several livestock products,
particularly poultry meat, pig meat, sheep meat, and beef, also receive substantial transfers (Figure 3.6).
Among the remaining forms of support to producers, the most significant are payments based on area
planted and animal numbers (20% of all producer support), and those based on historical parameters not
requiring production. The latter, which are decoupled from current production, increased significantly to
represent 16% of all producer support (Table 3.3).
Aggregate expenditures for general services to the sector (GSSE) reached an annual average of
USD 106 billion (EUR 95 billion) in 2020-22, almost twice that spent in nominal terms by the 54 countries
in 2000-02. Most went to infrastructure projects (USD 49 billion), agricultural knowledge and innovation
(USD 24 billion), and public stockholding (USD 14 billion) (Table 3.3). Despite the growth, expenditures for
general services declined in relative terms as the value of agricultural production more than tripled in
nominal terms since 2000-02. Total support to agriculture as a share of Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
declined over time, driven by the shrinking relative size of the sector within economies.


 123

Figure 3.5. All countries: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
All countries - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
All countries - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
All countries - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
All countries - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
All countries - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.25%
0.5%
0.75%
1%
1.25%


124 

Figure 3.6. All countries: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.


All countries - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Barley
Maize
Rapeseed
Sorghum
Rice
Soybeans
Oats
Sunflower
Sugar
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Sheep meat
Eggs
Wool
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%


 125

Table 3.3. All countries: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
1 195 537
4 295 259
3 843 793
4 385 751
4 656 235
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
72.31
78.99
75.44
80.43
81.09
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
1 185 671
4 164 684
3 730 377
4 246 657
4 517 018
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
238 131
451 706
476 609
472 516
405 992
Support based on commodity output
141 132
165 585
209 469
167 550
119 736
Market Price Support1
125 757
154 768
193 566
158 299
112 438
Positive Market Price Support
149 871
333 443
312 843
354 824
332 662
Negative Market Price Support
-24 114
-178 675
-119 277
-196 525
-220 224
Payments based on output
15 374
10 818
15 903
9 252
7 299
Payments based on input use
36 843
111 700
102 792
113 468
118 839
Based on variable input use
19 491
69 101
62 655
69 025
75 623
with input constraints
342
2 242
1 631
1 717
3 377
Based on fixed capital formation
9 545
30 508
28 888
31 793
30 841
with input constraints
630
3 336
2 982
3 353
3 673
Based on on-farm services
7 808
12 091
11 249
12 650
12 375
with input constraints
967
1 903
1 765
1 907
2 039
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
42 194
88 972
80 279
98 001
88 636
Based on Receipts / Income
3 986
7 612
7 103
8 129
7 604
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
38 209
81 360
73 176
89 872
81 032
with input constraints
16 898
42 618
37 580
49 291
40 985
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
71
3 093
1 983
4 829
2 468
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
14 091
73 780
73 377
79 619
68 343
With variable payment rates
4 318
4 001
2 882
6 619
2 504
with commodity exceptions
4 079
3 778
2 699
6 366
2 270
With fixed payment rates
9 773
69 778
70 496
73 000
65 839
with commodity exceptions
6 081
2 806
2 593
2 883
2 943
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
3 664
6 739
6 628
6 954
6 636
Based on long-term resource retirement
3 358
4 984
4 935
5 115
4 902
Based on a specific non-commodity output
237
1 625
1 565
1 697
1 614
Based on other non-commodity criteria
69
130
128
142
120
Miscellaneous payments
136
1 836
2 080
2 095
1 333
Percentage PSE (%)
18.21
9.84
11.55
10.05
8.20
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.13
1.05
1.06
1.05
1.03
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.22
1.11
1.13
1.11
1.09
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
55 525
106 059
107 906
105 616
104 655
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
10 996
24 300
24 461
24 959
23 479
Inspection and control
2 715
8 486
8 774
8 315
8 368
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
23 355
48 992
48 268
49 184
49 524
Marketing and promotion
5 600
8 038
8 220
7 995
7 901
Cost of public stockholding
10 384
13 939
16 110
12 764
12 944
Miscellaneous
2 475
2 304
2 073
2 400
2 438
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
17.25
15.78
15.08
15.56
16.81
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-118 827
-149 922
-165 648
-185 704
-98 414
Transfers to producers from consumers
-126 073
-209 716
-226 973
-227 068
-175 107
Other transfers from consumers
-22 674
-79 279
-88 498
-91 481
-57 858
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
28 315
114 554
131 034
100 810
111 817
Excess feed cost
1 604
24 519
18 789
32 035
22 734
Percentage CSE (%)
-10.27
-3.70
-4.60
-4.48
-2.23
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.14
1.07
1.09
1.08
1.05
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.11
1.04
1.05
1.05
1.02
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
321 972
672 318
715 548
678 943
622 464
Transfers from consumers
148 747
288 995
315 470
318 549
232 965
Transfers from taxpayers
195 899
462 602
488 576
451 875
447 357
Budget revenues
-22 674
-79 279
-88 498
-91 481
-57 858
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.03
0.80
0.94
0.79
0.70
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
196 214
517 551
521 982
520 644
510 026
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.63
0.62
0.69
0.60
0.58
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
The All countries total includes all OECD countries, non-OECD EU Member States, and the Emerging Economies: Argentina, Brazil, China, India,
Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Ukraine and Viet Nam. The All countries total for 2000-02 includes data for all
countries except Latvia and Lithuania, for which data are not available.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities: see notes to individual country tables.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




126 

Notes

1 The OECD total does not include non-OECD EU Member States.
2 Payments based on non-current Area, Animal numbers, Revenues or Income, whether production is
required or not (Table 3.1).
3 Argentina, Brazil, the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”), India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, the
Philippines, the Russian Federation, South Africa, Ukraine, and Viet Nam.
4 Payments based on fixed capital formation (Table 3.2).



 127

Support to agriculture
Argentina’s overall support to the agricultural sector has been negative since the beginning of the 2000s
due to export taxes that depress domestic prices received by producers. However, some budgetary
payments are provided to producers based on input use, mainly in the form of credit at preferential rates.
Fluctuations in support are driven by changes in export tax rates and macroeconomic conditions such as
the steep depreciation of the Argentine peso since 2018 and high inflation. Support to producers (Producer
Support Estimate, PSE) averaged -14.6% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22, compared to -11.8% two
decades earlier, but has been as negative as -51.1% in 2008. Negative market price support has been the
main component of producer support, such that 98.8% of policy transfers were considered most-distorting
in 2020-22. The ratio of producer to border price (National Protection Coefficient, NPC) reached 0.86 in
2020-22, making producers’ prices on average 14% below world market prices.
Soybeans are the main export commodity and face the highest export tax rate. As a consequence, Single
Commodity Transfers (SCT) are most negative for this product, representing 39.5% of commodity gross
farm receipts. Price support and SCTs are only positive for pig meat and eggs. Mirroring the negative PSE,
consumers enjoyed a positive Consumer Support Estimate (CSE) of 18.5% of expenditure at farm-gate
prices in 2020-22.
Starting from a level well below that of most other emerging economies covered in this report, support to
general services (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) decreased relative to the value of agricultural
production, falling from 0.6% in 2000-02 to 0.5% in 2020-22. Expenditure on the agricultural innovation
system and extension services represents the biggest component but has been decreasing relative to the
size of the total GSSE budget, falling from 57% in 2000-02 to 50% in 2020-22. Agricultural production and
exports grew dynamically in the last two decades due to an innovative private sector, despite negative
price support and a relatively lower increase of support by public services, particularly for knowledge,
research and extension, and sanitary inspection, in terms of share of government spending.
In 2020-22, 61% of total budgetary support targets GSSE rather than individual producers. Total budgetary
support to farmers and the sector overall was 0.1% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2020-22, well
below the absolute value of negative market price support, making the Total Support Estimate (TSE)
negative throughout the period: -1.0% of GDP in 2000-02 and -1.6% in 2020-22.
Recent policy changes
During 2022, Argentina set standards for bovine meat marketing, launched the Plan GanAr to develop
livestock, and created the Economic Compensation Programme for Small and Medium Sheep Wool
Producers. An organic sector strategic plan was implemented, comprising a new law to promote organic
production and the creation of a voluntary label for products in the conversion process. Programmes such
as “En nuestras manos” (“In our hands”) continued to promote sustainable agri-food systems for family
farming and to reduce gender gaps in rural areas.
4 Argentina


128 

SENASA, the main agency in charge of plant and animal health and food safety, issued a national sanitary
alert due to African Swine Fever outbreaks and implemented measures to mitigate its spread. Efforts were
made to improve infrastructure, with execution agreements signed with several provinces to improve rural
roads, electrify remote areas, and develop agriculture within the framework of the Regional Plan for
Irrigation Reservoirs.
The government engaged into actions to support the bioeconomy. It introduced the BIODESARROLLAR
and CoopAR programmes to stimulate innovation and competitiveness in regional agro-industrial value
chains. Commercial authorisation was granted for a vaccine against Bovine Leukosis and four genetically
modified organisms for plants were approved. Argentina agreed with Brazil to link their respective
regulatory bodies responsible for biosafety regulations of biotechnological products, with the aim of
reducing delays in bilateral trade of biotechnological products.
Exchange rate controls in place since 2019 have led to a widening gap between official and market
exchange rates, affecting the price received by farmers. In response, the government launched the Export
Increase Programme, in which soybean producers are paid at a higher exchange rate than the official one.
This intends to make exports more attractive, to promote soybean sales and strengthen international
currency reserves. Export taxes were reduced for organic products.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Argentina should strengthen its efforts to develop and disseminate climate information to enhance
climate-change adaptation in the agricultural sector. The Inter-institutional Protocol for Information
Management should be strengthened and expanded to include comprehensive climate information
and research findings related to agriculture. Leveraging research projects such as those
implemented by the National Institute for Agricultural Technology (INTA) can contribute to the
adoption of mitigation practices and improve adaptation policies.
•
Building on the Rural Change Programme and the Territorial Agroecological Nodes Project, further
investment should be made to provide technical assistance, training, and capacity building for
farmers to become more resilient and improve their sustainability performance. The government
should encourage farmers to adopt climate-smart practices, crop diversification, and sustainable
land-management techniques through targeted support programmes and financial incentives.
•
More investment in irrigation infrastructure and improved water-management systems is needed
to deal with persistent drought. The government should extend the Regional Plan for Irrigation
Reservoirs to cover water-deficit regions. Promoting the adoption of drought-tolerant crops and
sustainable farming practices can also enhance resilience in the face of changing climate patterns.
•
Given agriculture’s high share (28%) of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and Argentina’s
commitment to reduce national emissions in 2030 and achieve net zero in 2050, the government
would benefit from introducing mitigation targets for the agricultural sector and proposing measures
to achieve those targets.
•
To help small and medium-sized producers, the government should expand financial assistance
programmes and provide easy access to credit with preferential interest rates. Investing in training
programmes, knowledge-sharing platforms, and the development of regional agro-industrial value
chains can boost the competitiveness and resilience of these producers.
•
The government should provide technical assistance and training to improve livestock production,
enhance value-added at origin, and modernise the beef marketing system. Emphasising
environmental sustainability within the Argentine cattle system through better land-management
practices can also contribute to long-term success.


 129

•
Unpredictable export restrictions and uncertainty with respect to exchange rates and inflation
disincentivise long-term investment and reduce food security. A more balanced and transparent
approach to export taxes should be adopted, accounting for the economic viability of producers
and the competitiveness of the agricultural sector, as part of an economy-wide tax-system review
considering alternative sources of fiscal revenue.
•
Agricultural policy could be better anchored in a broad, long-term policy framework, moving
towards more neutral, stable, predictable, and targeted policies. The execution of policy must be
delivered in a timely manner, avoiding legislative and implementation delays, for farmers to plan
their economic activities more efficiently.
•
To deliver research, extension, and other public goods for agricultural innovation, Argentina should
develop systematic monitoring of efforts and results in R&D and innovation and define and
implement strategic priorities. Innovation policy should emphasise public goods such as those
related to sustainability and improving value chains, or for regional economies.
Figure 4.1. Argentina: Development of support to agriculture



Argentina - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
-20%
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
Argentina - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Argentina - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
0.85
0.9
0.95
1


130 





Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Figure 4.2. Argentina: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Argentina - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%
Argentina - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
-2%
-1.5%
-1%
-0.5%
0%
Argentina - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Maize
Soybeans
Sunflower
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Eggs
-45%
-40%
-35%
-30%
-25%
-20%
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%


 131

Table 4.1. Argentina: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
16 296
57 559
45 922
55 065
71 689
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
82.55
86.14
85.68
86.48
86.27
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
7 417
39 932
33 283
37 870
48 643
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
-971
-8 439
-4 989
-10 863
-9 463
Support based on commodity output
-1 005
-8 558
-5 076
-10 978
-9 621
Market Price Support1
-1 067
-8 642
-5 239
-11 002
-9 684
Positive Market Price Support
156
329
205
426
355
Negative Market Price Support
-1 223
-8 971
-5 444
-11 428
-10 040
Payments based on output
62
83
163
24
64
Payments based on input use
34
117
85
111
155
Based on variable input use
2
9
6
11
11
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
23
85
59
79
116
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
8
23
20
21
28
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
3
2
3
2
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
3
2
3
2
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
-11.79
-14.64
-10.81
-19.68
-13.16
Producer NPC (coeff.)
0.89
0.86
0.90
0.82
0.88
Producer NAC (coeff.)
0.89
0.87
0.90
0.84
0.88
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
116
300
264
266
371
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
66
150
150
120
179
Inspection and control
33
115
80
113
151
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
17
31
31
31
31
Marketing and promotion
0
5
3
1
10
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
..
..
..
..
..
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
455
7 200
4 191
8 334
9 076
Transfers to producers from consumers
482
7 573
4 318
9 125
9 276
Other transfers from consumers
-6
160
110
14
356
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
-21
-533
-238
-805
-556
Percentage CSE (%)
13.44
18.48
12.59
22.01
18.66
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
0.87
0.83
0.88
0.81
0.83
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
0.88
0.84
0.89
0.82
0.84
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
-855
-8 139
-4 726
-10 598
-9 093
Transfers from consumers
-476
-7 733
-4 429
-9 139
-9 632
Transfers from taxpayers
-373
-565
-407
-1 473
184
Budget revenues
-6
160
110
14
356
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
-1.02
-1.62
-1.21
-2.16
-1.45
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
212
503
513
404
592
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.10
0.10
0.13
0.08
0.09
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
10 684
6 208
9 570
16 273
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
1.70
98.79
70.64
95.08
130.66
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Argentina are: wheat, maize, soybean, sunflower, fruit
and vegetables, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database). http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




132 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Argentina has a history of macroeconomic instability and policy volatility, switching from open markets to
import substitution in a way that has led to overall poor long-term economic performance (OECD, 2019[1]).
The main exception has been the agricultural sector which, despite policy impediments, has innovated and
grown. Driven by higher international agricultural prices, Argentinian agriculture – in particular, in the
extended Pampas region – has experienced a major structural transformation. This has been reflected in
changing land use, the emergence of soybean as a major commodity, and diversified and growing export
markets, especially toward Asia. However, outside of the Pampas, other crops like tobacco, cotton and
fruits and vegetables have been less successful.
Argentina liberalised trade in the late 1970s and explored ways to increase trade with its neighbours and
other economies from the second half of the 1980s. In the 1990s, the Argentine economy became more
integrated in international trade, including the liberalisation of the agri-food sector, through the creation of
MERCOSUR in 1991 and the 1994 WTO Agreement. However, after the financial crisis in 2001, Argentina
reverted to increasing tariffs, establishing price controls for food products, and re-introducing export taxes
on agricultural products such as soybeans to raise revenue and reduce basic food prices. Further export
restrictions in the form of quotas for wheat, maize, milk, and beef were imposed in 2008. Between 2007
and 2011, a consumer price subsidy was implemented. The National Office of Agricultural Commercial
Control (ONCCA) agency provided payments to processors purchasing wheat, maize, soybeans, and
sunflower products from the local market.
In December 2015, the government began to gradually re-open markets again: it reduced export taxes on
soybeans and soybean oil, eliminated export taxes on all other agricultural products, removed all export
quotas, and free-floated the exchange rate of the Argentine peso to other currencies. But following the
2018-19 depreciation of the local currency and the subsequent economic recession, export taxes were re-
established not only for agri-food products but for all goods by the government that had reduced or
eliminated them. By early 2020, agricultural-specific export taxes were re-instated for most products in
early 2020. Simultaneously, the exchange-rate controls introduced in the beginning of 2020 resulted in a
widening gap between the official exchange rate and other market exchange rates.
Table 4.2. Argentina: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1990
Alternate free trade and
import substitution policies
Price interventions on main agricultural products, mandatory public stockholding, export
taxes on agricultural trade, tariffs on imports of agricultural inputs such as fertiliser, low levels
of investment in private agricultural R&D and infrastructure in general
Several attempts to liberalise trade
Creation of agricultural R&D and extension services institute INTA (1956); private institutions
such as AACREA (1960) and AAPRESID (1989) created to provide services to farmers
1991-2001
Shifts to open the economy
Dismantling stockholding and price-setting public institutions, reduction of import and export
tariffs, free trade agreements (Mercosur and WTO)
Price stabilisation, reduction of barriers to trade, privatisation and deregulation of markets
Dissolution of National Commercial Boards (1991)
Creation of animal and plant health and food safety SENASA (1996)
Creation of the seed regulatory institution INASE (1991)
2002-2015
Return to a closed
economy
Implementation of export taxes, import restrictions, value chains subject to regulations as
export quotas and price controls at the retail level
The National Office of Agricultural Commercial Control (ONCCA) dismantled (2011)


 133

Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
2016-2017
Gradual shifts to open the
economy
Elimination of export taxes for all agricultural commodities, except reduced taxes on soybean
exports
Elimination and reforms to the Register of Export Operations ROEs (2015)
Federal Agricultural Council (CFA) reformed (2017)
2018-present
Reintroduction of export
taxes
Export taxes established for all exports including agriculture in response to the economic
crisis of 2018
Reintroduction of specific taxes on agricultural products and exchange rate controls since
2019
Prior to the economic crisis of 2001, producer support fluctuated around zero. With the reintroduction of
export taxes and other trade restrictions after the 2001-02 financial crisis, the PSE turned negative due to
substantial negative market price support and absence of any significant budgetary support to farmers.
Negative producer support peaked with price spikes in world markets in 2008, reaching -51.6% of gross
farm receipts. Lower export taxes in 2015 reduced negative support. Budgetary support to farmers
remained limited and mainly in the form of subsidies for tobacco. Around 60% of total expenditures on
agriculture in the last ten years financed general services to the sector. From 2007 to 2010, Argentina
provided subsidies to food processors (primary consumers), to compensate for high prices of agricultural
products.
Figure 4.3. Argentina: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1997 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Unlike most countries covered by this report, producers of main agricultural products are taxed through
negative price support. Export taxes are by far the most important market intervention and the major source
Argentina - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-55
-50
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10


134 

of policy-driven transfers from producers to the government. The Ministry of Finance designs and
implements these export taxes and adjusts their rates by decree. Export taxes for soybeans, soybean
products (meal and oil), maize, wheat, other cereals, sunflower grain and oil, maize and wheat flour,
several milk products, and beef raised 8.3% of total tax revenues for the national budget in 2022.
Additionally, the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries implements the so-called “equilibrium
volumes of exports” (VEE) to meet the demand of the Argentine market for maize, wheat, and beef. All
these measures continue to substantially depress domestic prices below international reference prices.
A relatively small amount of input subsidies are provided, mostly in the form of implicit interest rate
subsidies through preferential credits that finance investment and working capital in the production of a
range of commodities. For example, the fund FONDAGRO, which was established in 2017, finances
investment in the sector at preferential interest rates for specific groups with a limited scope. The Ministry
of Productive Development provides credit financing for capital investments by micro, small, and medium-
sized enterprises in the poultry and pig sectors.
Very small direct payments are provided occasionally as disaster assistance in response to extreme
weather events, mainly drought. There are no national direct payments for agri-environmental services,
and few at provincial level.
The Special Tobacco Fund (FET) was created in 1972 to provide additional revenue and support to tobacco
producers in certain northern provinces. The fund is financed by a 7% tax on tobacco retail prices and
managed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries. The federal government transfers 80%
of collected funds to tobacco-producing provinces based on their share of production. After signing the
WTO agreement in 1994, Argentina committed to reducing this support, and FET payments to tobacco
producers were reduced to USD 75 million. The remaining funds are used for technical assistance,
investing in local infrastructure, and providing social and health assistance.
Public expenditures in agriculture are mainly for general services to the sector such as the agricultural
knowledge and innovation system and inspection control services. INTA is the federal agency responsible
for research and promoting technological innovation in agriculture, livestock, and agri-food. The institute
conducts scientific and technological research, provides technical assistance and training to farmers and
other stakeholders in the agricultural sector, and develops and disseminates knowledge and technologies
related to agricultural production, agro-industrial processes, and rural development. INTA also collaborates
with national and international organisations, universities, and private companies to promote innovation
and competitiveness in the agricultural sector.
SENASA is responsible for ensuring the safety and quality of agricultural and livestock products. It
develops and enforces regulations and standards for the production, processing, and transport of
agricultural products, it provides certification, inspection, and laboratory services to ensure compliance
with these standards. SENASA also works to prevent and control the spread of animal and plant diseases,
and it monitors and controls the use of pesticides and other agricultural chemicals to protect human health
and the environment.
The Agricultural Provincial Services Programme (PROSAP) invests mainly in large-scale agricultural
infrastructure. In addition, it provides support services for competitiveness with projects aimed at improving
agri-food chains.
Since 2016, Argentina is party to the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
Agriculture (ITPGRFA) for the conservation and sustainable use of all plant genetic resources for food and
agriculture. The National Advisory Committee on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture
(CONARGEN) co-ordinates public agencies on genetic resources and biodiversity for food and agriculture.
Agri-environmental regulations and policies in Argentina are mostly legislated and implemented at the
provincial level. For example, the province of Córdoba has a Law of Good Agricultural Practices that sets
standards for sustainable agricultural production and compliance with the programme gives farmers


 135

access to lump-sum payments. Santa Fe also started a Good Agricultural Practices Programme in 2021,
and Entre Ríos enacted a Law on Soil Conservation in 2018, which requires mandatory soil conservation
for areas with soil degradation. In Buenos Aires, the Buenas Prácticas Agrícolas - Suelos Bonaerenses
Programme of 2020 provides training and supports extensive producers of crops to carry out crop rotation,
practices reducing water and wind erosion, and plans to reduce pesticide use.
Mandatory blending of biofuels in diesel and gasoline has been in effect since 2010. The blending rates
have been frequently adjusted within a range between 5 and 12.5% and has been fixed at 7.5% since
October 2022. Also in October 2022, the Secretary of Energy established quality specifications for biofuels
and their blends and created the Registry of Biofuel Operators and Mixers, which registers the main actors
in the biofuel production and marketing chain.
Since January 2020, the social programme “Argentina Against Hunger” provides financial support for
children, pregnant women and disabled people. Support is provided through an electronic food card
(ALIMENTAR Card) that can be used in any grocery store. The food card is given to parents of children
under the age of six who receive the Universal Allowance per Child (AUH), pregnant women who receive
the Universal Pregnancy Allowance (AUE), and people with disabilities who receive the AUH. In 2022, the
programme reached over 2.5 million adult beneficiaries and 4.4 million children.1 Beneficiaries receive
different amounts depending on the number of children in the family.
The agricultural sector contributes 28% of GHG emissions in Argentina (Ministerio de Ambiente y
Desarrollo Sostenible, 2021[2]). Argentina’s second NDC in the framework of the 2015 Paris Agreement on
Climate Change was submitted in December 2020 and updated in October 2021. Argentina is committed
to an absolute, economy-wide and unconditional net emission limit of 349 MtCO2eq by 2030 – equivalent
to a decrease of 19% compared to the peak reached in 2007. Some of the tools that Argentina employs to
reach this goal are expansion of renewable energies (at least 30% of the total energy matrix will have to
be from renewable sources by 2030), lower subsidies for fossil fuels, expanded protected areas, and
improved efficiency in agriculture, industry, transport and construction among others. In addition to its
active commitment and participation in the primary multilateral competent fora on climate change, i.e. the
UNFCCC, Argentina participates in other initiatives, such as the Global Bioenergy Partnership and the
Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases (GRA) and the Global Methane Pledge
initiative, among others. The National Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA) plays an important role in
research and innovation to reduce GHG emissions from agriculture. It has a portfolio of research projects
related to climate change mitigation and adaptation.2
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
The National Plan for Adaptation and Mitigation to Climate Change by 2030 is designed to align with the
objectives of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) under the Paris
Agreement. The plan includes mitigation and adaptation measures for the sector based on risk
management. An inventory of GHGs from agriculture, livestock, forestry, and other land uses was
completed to monitor and evaluate the sector’s emissions.
The Smart Climate and Inclusive Agri-food Systems project began in 2022 with a budget of
USD 400 million financed by the World Bank (Ministerio de Agricultura, Ganadería y Pesca, 2022[3]). The
general objectives of the project relate to adaptation and resilience. It invests in coverage and quality of
rural public infrastructure; promotes the sustainability of small and medium-sized agri-food producers and
their organisations through climate-smart practices; and supports the reorientation of INTA towards climate
issues. The project is implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, through the
General Directorate of Sectoral and Special Programmes and Projects (DIPROSE).
Various adaptation policies have been implemented, targeting short-, medium-, and long-term goals.
Policies for short-term action include:


136 

•
The Inter-institutional Protocol for Information Management, which addresses the threat of
meteorological and agricultural droughts in Argentina by articulating access to data and
information, and promotes research and development of new technologies, for the evaluation of
fire-danger conditions.
•
The Integral Risk Management Programme (GIRSAR) Component 3 focuses on risk transfer and
the improvement of agricultural emergencies. It includes an insurance programme for family
horticultural and floricultural producers under greenhouse in the province of Buenos Aires, and an
incentive programme to promote drought insurance.
•
The National System for the Prevention and Mitigation of Agricultural Emergencies and/or
Disasters extends the deadline for tax obligations to pay sworn declarations or advances related
to taxes on income, personal assets and presumed minimum profit, and provides funds for
education and cooperative promotion until the end of the productive cycle following a state-of-
emergency or disaster.
•
The 2020 Critical and Direct Assistance Programme for Peasant and Indigenous Family Farming
(PACyD) grants non-refundable contributions in a direct and timely manner for peasant and
indigenous family farmers. Potential beneficiaries are those affected by situations of productive risk
caused by extreme climatic or social events.
Measures to support incremental change over the medium-term aim to modify production practices,
including changes in planting dates, crop-mix adjustments, and technology adoption:
•
The Rural Change Programme established in 1994 promotes agroecological livestock practices
through technical and organisational advice, training, and experience sharing among producers.
•
The Territorial Agroecological Nodes Project launched in 2022 promotes the development of
agroecological livestock practices in partnership with institutions such as INTA and universities by
creating exchange nodes for discussion.
•
Other initiatives focus on building the capacity of beneficiaries through technical assistance,
training, and investments in innovation and adaptation. For example, the Programme for the
Promotion of Resilient and Sustainable Agri-Food Systems for Family Farming, the Argentine
Agricultural Bio-inputs Programme (PROBIAAR), the Comprehensive Plan for Women in Peasant
and Indigenous Family Farming, Sustainable AgroSMEs, the Smart Climate and Inclusive Agri-
food Systems, the Programme for the Development of the Goat Chain (PRODECCA), and the
Economic Insertion Programme for Family Farmers in Northern Argentina (PROCANOR).
Efforts to support long-term transformational change in agriculture include moving production to new
regions, developing new value chains, and investing in large infrastructure projects. New governance
structures, collaborative planning, and multi- and trans-disciplinary research are also important. Examples:
•
Smart Climate and Inclusive Agri-food Systems
•
direct public investment projects in rural roads of the Provincial Agricultural Services Programme
(PROSAP) IV
•
Plan for Access to Water for Family, Peasant and Indigenous Agriculture AFCI-DIPROSE-INTA
(2020-2023)
•
Project for Socio-Economic Inclusion in Rural Areas (PISEAR) to promote socioeconomic inclusion
of rural families living in poverty
•
GIRSAR Programme
•
land registration and land regularisation programmes
The National Institute of Viticulture (INV) promotes sustainable practices in the sector since 2009, including
through the Protocol of Self-Assessment of Wine Sustainability of Wineries of Argentina, the
Methodological Guide for the Estimation of the Carbon Footprint in Wine, and the Argentine Wine


 137

Sustainability Guide. The INV works with academics, research institutions, and the private sector to
promote a National Training Programme on wine sustainability, which has reached a significant number of
participants from all over the country.
The INTA’s framework of the Medium-Term Plan (PMP) 2021-25 includes two guidelines related to climate-
change adaptation:
•
“Adaptation to climate variability and climate change mitigation” includes actions to contribute to
the strengthening of climate governance. These are designed to increase adaptation capacity,
collectively manage risks and boost the resilience of production systems and territories. It also
develops mitigation strategies that reduce GHG emissions.
•
“Sustainable management of natural resources and the territory linked to the care of the
environment” provides proactive and integrated institutional actions for the sustainable
management of natural resources and the territory.3
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
Argentina has been facing extreme drought conditions since 2019, with only 44% of the average
precipitation received in the last four months of 2022, the lowest value in 35 years. Thus, Argentina's
domestic policy in 2022-23 was marked by extreme drought conditions, which resulted in poor agricultural
yields and production. Simultaneously, the country showed macroeconomic instability with high inflation,
exchange rate volatility, devaluation, and difficulties to keep the level of necessary foreign currency.
Production and marketing practices
In April 2021, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Productive Development and the Ministry of Labour
determined that bovine meat for retail may only be marketed in units resulting from the division of half
carcasses into pieces not exceeding 32 kilos. The objective is to increase quality and health standards and
market transparency. A transition period of between three months and one year was agreed for meat
packing plants to implement the new marketing standard. The implementation of the measure was
postponed several times and in 2023 is still pending. Currently, the only measure that was maintained was
the ban of any transfer by workers of a product weighting more than 32 kilos, which needs to be done with
the assistance of mechanical means.
The Plan GanAr was launched in 2022 with the aim of contributing to the development of Argentine
livestock through the intensification of primary production, the increase of value added at origin, the
modernisation of the beef marketing system, and the strengthening of livestock policies. The plan includes
technical assistance, training, the improvement of productive financing conditions, and the development of
a strategy to demonstrate the environmental sustainability of the Argentine cattle system.
In 2023, the Economic Compensation Programme for Small and Medium Sheep Wool Producers in the
Patagonian Region (LANAR) was created. It has a total investment of ARS 1.5 billion (USD 11.5 million)4
from the “Export Increase Fund” to finance programmes that stimulate the production and development of
small and medium producers and regional economies.
Following the 2021 strategic plan for the organic sector by 2030, several actions took place in 2022. These
include a new law promoting organic production, the creation of a voluntary label for products in the
conversion process, events and contests to promote organic products, and a platform providing information
about certified organic operators.
Animal and plant health and safety
In November 2021, SENASA, the main agency in charge of plant and animal health and food safety, issued
a national sanitary alert due to African Swine Fever (ASF) outbreaks in domestic pigs in the Dominican


138 

Republic and Haiti and its potential spread throughout the American continent. This alert remains in force,
and SENASA has implemented new prevention measures and strengthened existing ones to reduce the
risk of entry, exposure, and dissemination of the ASF virus in domestic pigs. In 2022, SENASA updated
the documentation and infrastructure requirements that must be met by transporters of live animals and
established the responsibilities and obligations of the owner and driver of the transport related to animal
welfare standards.5 Also, in 2022, SENASA created the “Strategic Table of Cannabis and Industrial Hemp”
to advance in the development of this sector.
Irrigation
In 2022, several execution agreements were signed with several provinces, including Chaco, Corrientes,
Neuquén and Misiones to improve rural roads, electrify remote areas, and develop agriculture. These
agreements were signed within the framework of the Regional Plan for Irrigation Reservoirs that started in
2021. The plan includes a diagnosis of the situation of irrigation in San Juan and Mendoza and proposals
for improvement in irrigation efficiency using water reservoirs for pressurised irrigation, promoting the
construction and use of reservoirs for small and medium-sized producers. Other water deficit regions such
as Patagonia are to be included in the next stage of the plan. The project is implemented by the Ministry
of Agriculture, the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of Productive Development and the Provincial
Governments.
Bioeconomy and Biotechnology
The Ministry of Economy’s Secretariat of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries launched two programmes
in 2022: “BIODESARROLLAR” and “CoopAR”. BIODESARROLLAR aims to promote the development,
innovation, adoption, and production of bioproducts by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises, co-
operatives, and public research entities. CoopAR aims to improve the competitiveness of regional agro-
industrial value chains, promote differentiation, technological modernisation, and transformation of agro-
industrial co-operatives.
The Advisory Commission of the Bioeconomy Promotion Programme approved the Action Plan for
2022-2026, and the Argentine Bioproduct Programme was relaunched with a modified definition of
bioproducts to promote innovative companies. In 2022, twelve Argentine Bioproduct Seals were awarded,
and the technical and administrative criteria for the incorporation of bio-inputs for agricultural use have
been unified.
In 2022 a commercial authorisation was granted for a vaccine to combat Bovine Leukosis that was
developed by the National Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA).
Four genetically modified plants were approved in 2022 in Argentina: two soybeans resistant to pests and
herbicides, one herbicide-tolerant maize, and one drought and herbicides tolerant wheat.6 Soybeans and
wheat with drought tolerance characteristics offering solutions for water stress in some regions, developed
by the Institute of Agrobiotechnology of Rosario (INDEAR S.A), have been authorised in the main export
destinations of Argentina (the People’s Republic of China and Brazil). These are the first genetically
modified crops entirely developed by Argentine entities to obtain commercial authorisation in the export
market.
Biofuels
The blending rates of biofuels have been fixed at 7.5% since October 2022. The Secretariat of Energy set
the acquisition prices of biodiesel in the domestic market for its mixture with diesel, for the months of
November 2022 to the end of March 2023.


 139

Risk Management
In 2022, SENASA adopted exceptional measures for territories affected by droughts or fires. In 2023, the
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries will provide financing to assist the 11 provinces that
suffered from frost damage. The Agricultural Emergency Fund will be executed, providing a total of
ARS 1.5 billion (USD 11.5 million) to support affected producers in La Pampa, Río Negro, Neuquén,
Mendoza, San Juan, La Rioja, Catamarca, Tucumán, Salta, Jujuy and Santa Cruz. In addition,
FONDAGRO received ARS 1 billion (USD 7 million) to offer a credit line at a 0% interest rate to small
producers in these provinces, with a maximum amount of ARS 900 000 (USD 6 888) per producer and a
term of 30 months, including an 18-month grace period.
Rural development, family farms and indigenous agriculture
The project “En nuestras manos” that aims to reduce gender gaps in rural areas and assist agricultural
producers in the context of the COVID-19 crisis. In 2022, the project assisted 2 229 families with an
expenditure of EUR 4 million.
The Programme for the Promotion of Resilient and Sustainable Agri-food Systems for Family Farming
(PROSAF) supports sustainable, inclusive production and marketing systems for peasants and family
farmers. The programme, which was launched in June 2022, is financed by the International Fund for
Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Development Bank FONPLATA. The executing agency is the
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, through DIPROSE and the Secretariat of Family, Peasant
and Indigenous Agriculture. Between September and December 2022, training activities with the provincial
technical teams were organised. The programme is expected to advance in 2023 with the realisation of a
call for integral projects with INTA.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
Export taxes were “temporarily” increased for some products in March 2022, including in particular for
soybean products (meal and oil) from 31% to 33% (until December 2022), and for biodiesel from 29% to
30%. At the same time, a special fund was created with the objective of stabilising the price of wheat paid
by Argentine mills. The fund is to be financed by the additional resources resulting from the temporary
modification of export duties. The government has the possibility to adjust export tax rates by decree using
a special authorisation from Congress based on “economic emergency” considerations since 2018. Thus,
in 2023, export taxes are of 33% for soybean, 31% for soybean products (meal and oil), 12% for maize,
wheat and other cereals, and 7% for sunflower grain and sunflower oil, 5% for maize flour, 7% for wheat
flour, 4.5% for milk products, 9% for milk powder, and 9% for beef. Export taxes on other products from
outside the Pampas region, such as wine, pears, apples, grapes, and cotton are 5%, and they were
eliminated for a group of products, including ovine and caprine meat. The tariff scheme for dirty, washed
and carded wool was set between 3% and 5%. For hair of different species, it was established between
3% (dirty) and 0% (washed).
In contrast, export duties on organic products were reduced. As from 15 January 2022, export duties for
certified agro-ecological, biological and organic products were eliminated, and were reduced by five
percentage points for wheat, soybeans and maize certified as organic.
Exchange-rate controls in place since 2019 have resulted in a widening gap between the legal (so called
official) exchange rate and other market exchange rates. Agricultural exports are settled at the official
exchange rate, which is lower than the rest and implies an additional reduction in the price received by
farmers in ARS. Within the framework of the current programme with the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) regarding exchange rate policy, to strengthen international reserves the government launched the
“Export Increase Programme” in September and December 2022, aimed at promoting soybean sales and
strengthening international currency reserves. Exporters of soybeans, flour, oil, and biodiesel made with


140 

soybean oil, have agreed to bring foreign currency into the country at a higher exchange rate than the
official rate, which implies that they receive a higher price in ARS. The programme allowed the Central
Bank of the Republic of Argentina (BCRA) to acquire USD 7 292 million because of a greater export sale,
which in the months of the programme reached USD 12 416 million.
Since January 2021, maize and wheat exporters are required to comply with administrative export permits
that are granted by the Ministry of Agriculture depending on the quantity available and the price in the
domestic market. In December 2021, the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries established a
framework regulating exports based on a “equilibrium volumes of exports” (VEE) and limiting export
permits. The ministry publishes the VEE for maize and wheat based on the government’s projection of
production, domestic consumption and stocks. Exporters can request export declarations (DJVE) for up to
90% of the VEE. Once this limit is reached, additional export permits will only be granted within 30 days of
the expected exporting date. Between December 2022 and February 2023, there was an exceptional
automatic extension of 360 calendar days for requiring the DJVE to export wheat and of 180 calendar days
for foreign sales DJVE with expiration of the declared shipping period, plus the automatic extension, for
maize.
In October 2022, Argentina and Brazil signed an agreement to establish a link between their regulatory
bodies responsible for biosafety regulations of modern biotechnological products for agriculture, with the
aim of reducing delays in biotechnological product trade between the two countries. The Memorandum of
Understanding seeks to promote the development, authorisation, and commercialisation of national
biotechnological products with the support of public policies of both nations, affecting industries such as
flour, oil, pellet, and biofuels.
The MERCOSUR-EU free trade agreement involving EU Member States and the members of Mercosur
(Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay) continues with its legal revision and public debate for its
approval by the parliaments of the European Union, its Member States, and Mercosur countries.
Contextual information
Argentina is an upper middle-income country with a dynamic agricultural sector that has been making a
growing contribution to the GDP, from 4.7% of the GDP in 2000 to 7.1% in 2021. In contrast, agriculture’s
share of employment decreased from 12.5% in 2000 to 7.7% in 2021. The country is one of the world’s
largest agricultural exporters, and agro-food exports have been growing significantly in the last decades,
representing 41.5% of total exports in 2000, and 48.5% in 2021. In contrast, agro-food imports represent
only 7.7% of total imports.
Argentina has abundant agricultural land representing almost 4% of the total agricultural area of all
countries covered in this report, with a large share of this area composed of pastureland. The share of
livestock in the total value of production was 35% in 2021.




 141

Table 4.3. Argentina: Contextual indicators

Argentina
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
428
1 083
1.1%
0.9%
Population (million)
37
45
0.9%
0.9%
Land area (thousand km2)
2 737
2 737
3.4%
3.3%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
128 510
108 382
4.3%
3.7%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
13
16
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
11 543
23 650
9,350
23,401
Trade as % of GDP
9.1
14.4
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
4.7
7.1
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
12.5
7.7
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
41.5
48.5
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.4
7.7
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
57
65
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
43
35
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
22
30
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
The Argentine economy began to stall when the peso came under pressure in April 2018. The value of the
peso vis-à-vis the USD was reduced by 40% in 2018, and by 70% in the period 2018-2021, and the
economy plunged into recession and inducing annual inflation rates above 40%. The year 2022 ended with
an annual inflation rate of 94.8%. Due to exchange rate controls, there exist exchange market rates that
have been increasingly diverging from the official rate. Adversely affected by COVID-19, GDP declined by
9.9% in 2020, increased by 10.4% in 2021 and increased by 4.4% in 2022.


142 

Figure 4.4. Argentina: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Argentina runs a significant agro-food trade surplus having exceeded USD 30 billion for most of the past
decade. Most of agro-food exports (80%) are primary or processed products used as inputs in downstream
industries abroad, whereas the much smaller bundle of agro-food imports is mostly composed of primary
products for use by industry (61%).


 143

Figure 4.5. Argentina: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Argentine agricultural production has grown at an annual rate of 2.4% between 2011 and 2020, above the
world average of 1.9%. Within this total growth, 2.1% was due to an increased use of intermediate inputs,
while only a small portion of production growth (0.5%) was due to Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth,
that is, innovations and technical improvements in the way resources are used in production. With this, the
TFP growth was well below the world average.
Argentina - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
10
20
30
40
50
Argentina - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
39
39
11
11
41
41
61
61
16
16
16
16
4
4
12
12
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


144 

Agricultural nutrient balances in Argentina, and in particular its average nitrogen balance, are
comparatively low, albeit increasing. The shares of agriculture in energy use and in greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions are, at 7.3% and 30.6% respectively in 2021, well above the OECD average, with the high
emissions reflecting the large number of ruminants. Notably the emissions share is well above the sector’s
contribution to the economy. With more than 74% of total water abstractions, agriculture also is a major
water user.
Figure 4.6. Argentina: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 4.4. Argentina: Productivity and environmental indicators

Argentina
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.7%
0.5%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
-1.4
5.2
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
1.7
2.8
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
5.8
7.3
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
40.5
30.6
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
..
2.2
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
70.9
74.1
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
..
..
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.
Argentina - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
0.50%
0.50%
1.12%
1.12%
-0.23%
-0.23%
0.35%
0.35%
2.12%
2.12%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Argentina
World
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%


 145

References

Ministerio de Agricultura, Ganadería y Pesca (2022), Climate Intelligent and Inclusive Agri-food
Systems Project. Ministerio de Agricultura, Ganadería y Pesca, República Argentina,
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/agro_xxi_-_mgas_-_anexo_3_pppi.pdf
(accessed on  May 2023).
[3]
Ministerio de Ambiente y Desarrollo Sostenible (2021), Inventario Nacional de Gases de Efecto
Invernadero, https://inventariogei.ambiente.gob.ar/files/Booklet_INGEI-2022_entero.pdf
(accessed on  March 2023).
[2]
OECD (2019), Agricultural Policies in Argentina, OECD Food and Agricultural Reviews, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264311695-en.
[1]



Notes

1 https://www.anses.gob.ar/sites/default/files/2022-
08/Informe%20de%20Estad%C3%ADsticas%20de%20la%20Seguridad%20Social%202022.pdf
2 https://inta.gob.ar/paginas/proyectos.
3 https://inta.gob.ar/documentos/plan-de-mediano-plazo-2021-2025
4 In this chapter, the official average exchange rate of 2022 is used for transforming ARS to USD at a rate
of ARS 130.66 for USD 1.
5 http://servicios.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/370000-374999/370218/norma.htm
6 https://www.argentina.gob.ar/agricultura/alimentos-y-bioeconomia/ogm-vegetal-eventos-con-
autorizacion-comercial


146 

Support to agriculture
Australia’s support to agricultural producers (Producer Support Estimate, PSE) is among the lowest in the
OECD, estimated at 4.3% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22, slightly higher than the 3.7% observed
20 years before. Policy settings are characterised by a strong emphasis on market openness, building
resilience, and investments in public goods, including R&D, hydrological infrastructure, and biosecurity.
Market Price Support (MPS) to producers ended in 2000 and domestic prices for Australia’s main
agricultural outputs have been at parity with world prices since then. Most producer support in 2020-22
was provided in the form of payments based on input use. Much of these went to concessional loans for
on-farm investments, including in response to adverse events. The bulk of remaining producer support
(about 20% of the PSE) went mainly to disaster relief payments, income support, and income-smoothing
programmes that address cashflow fluctuations, such as the Farm Management Deposits and income-tax-
averaging arrangements.
The General Services Support Estimate (GSSE) averaged 2.4% of the value of agricultural production
during 2020-22, higher than the 1.9% of the early 2000s but below the OECD average of 3.4% for the
period. More than half of this went to support for R&D, innovation, and extension services (corresponding
to 1.3% of agricultural production value, compared with 1.1% in the OECD on average). Public expenditure
to develop and upgrade infrastructure (mostly hydrological) and strengthen biosecurity represented most
of the remaining general services expenditure. Overall support to agriculture (Total Support Estimate, TSE)
represented 0.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2020-22 and has barely changed since 2000-02.
Recent policy changes
Several climate-related initiatives were introduced. New funding was provided for investments in climate-
smart and sustainable agriculture under the next phase of the Natural Heritage Trust. Also, the On-farm
Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate Scheme was extended to 30 June 2024 to allow farmers impacted
by natural disasters to repair and replace damaged infrastructure.
Australia set a new target to reduce economy-wide greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions to 43% below 2005
levels by 2030, and signed up to the Glasgow Breakthrough Agenda on Agriculture, the Forests and
Climate Leaders Partnership, and the Global Methane Pledge. A new Carbon Farming Outreach Program
offers a training package and tools for farmers to participate in carbon markets and integrate low-emission
technologies and practices into their operations.
Increased funding for the Agriculture Biodiversity Stewardship Package supports market-based
approaches to pay farmers for biodiversity improvements through the Carbon + Biodiversity Pilot and the
Enhancing Remnant Vegetation Pilot. The government also launched a National Stewardship Trading
Platform to connect farmers with buyers of biodiversity outcomes, and is exploring options to implement
an Australian Farm Biodiversity Certification Scheme to certify farms and farm businesses for their
biodiversity management.
5 Australia


 147

The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) agreement entered into force on
1 January 2022, establishing a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between 15 Asia-Pacific nations. An FTA
between Australia and the United Kingdom entered into force on 31 May 2023, and the Australia-India
Economic Co-operation and Trade Agreement (AI-ECTA) was signed on 2 April 2022. Several initiatives
aim to improve transparency in agricultural supply chains. A newly established Inspector-General of Animal
Welfare aims to increase accountability and transparency for animal welfare in livestock exports. The
National Agricultural Traceability Strategy 2023-33 aims to develop interoperable traceability systems
along supply chains to support exports and strengthen biosecurity and food safety.
Biosecurity remains critical for the Australian Government, with the Bolstering Australia’s Biosecurity
System package introducing emergency funding to strengthen domestic biosecurity preparedness, support
biosecurity outcomes in neighbouring countries, support improvements in livestock traceability systems,
and expand detector dog and handler capabilities. Additional funding was allocated to combat pest animals
and weeds through the Supporting Communities Manage Pest Animals and Weeds Program and the
National Forest Pest Surveillance Program.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Adaptation is imperative for Australian agriculture as the sector is increasingly vulnerable to the
effects of climate change. The current suite of adaptation policies includes a focus on strengthening
drought resilience under the Future Drought Fund. Investment in the Climate Services for
Agriculture platform, its online platform My Climate View and the Drought Resilience Self-
Assessment Tool are crucial for encouraging long-term adaptation and could support the
development of drought insurance markets using new approaches such as index-based insurance.
Concessional loans, income-support schemes and ex post drought relief measures should be
monitored to ensure they do not inhibit structural adjustment and long-term transformative change.
•
Research and development are a major component of support to the sector and play an important
role in building farmers’ capacity to adapt to climate change. Extension services and agricultural
education receive less funding. Scaling up knowledge-transfer services in partnership with the
private sector can facilitate uptake of innovations, support sustainable productivity growth, and
strengthen on-farm capacity to manage risks.
•
While Australia’s rural research and development corporations (RDCs) are well positioned to
support adaptation in traditional crop and livestock production systems, research effort should also
be directed towards facilitating long-term resilience and transformative change. New investments
in climate-smart agriculture are welcome in this regard. The development of carbon and biodiversity
markets could provide farmers with new and diversified sources of income, if carefully designed
with robust performance and integrity standards.
•
Sustainable management of water resources is essential for Australian farmers to adapt to higher
temperatures, lower winter rainfall, and increased frequency of drought and extreme weather
events. Support goes to upgrading hydrological infrastructure and improving water-use efficiency
at farm level and in wider water-management basins. However, infrastructure modernisation for
water recovery in the Murray Darling Basin should be closely linked to environmental outcomes,
while accounting for the impacts of improved irrigation efficiency on increased water consumption
and reduced return flows to groundwater and surface water. Irrigation infrastructure subsidies
should be weighed against alternatives such as direct purchases of water entitlements, which have
proven to be more efficient and cost-effective for delivering environmental water recovery.
•
The Australian Carbon Credit Unit (ACCU) scheme (formerly known as the Emissions Reduction
Fund) supports projects to reduce or avoid GHG emissions or store carbon, but has yet to
demonstrate significant impact on reducing agricultural emissions, with just 1.1 MtCO2eq of


148 

abatement delivered as of April 2022. In the absence of a national carbon-pricing scheme, efforts
to scale up the ERF could strengthen progress in mitigating agricultural emissions.
•
While ACCUs enjoy a strong reputation both domestically and internationally, questions have been
raised regarding the additionality of certain ACCUs, such as those generated by human-induced
regeneration and avoided deforestation projects. A recent independent review of ACCUs
highlighted these issues and produced a list of 16 recommendations, which the government has
accepted in principle. Efforts to strengthen confidence in the transparency and integrity of ACCUs
will be essential to sustain confidence in the ACCU scheme and its ability to help Australia meet
its emissions-reduction targets.
•
Funding to accelerate the development and commercialisation of technological solutions to reduce
emissions rightly focuses on methane emissions from livestock, which represent 79% of Australia’s
agricultural emissions. However, the extent to which technologies such as feed supplements can
be feasibly deployed at scale to grazing cattle and sheep remains uncertain. To support the red
meat industry’s target of carbon neutrality by 2030, a stronger policy response, comprising a mix
of abatement subsidies, emissions taxes, standards, and regulations will be needed to create
sufficient incentives for farmers to adopt low-emission technologies.




 149

Figure 5.1. Australia: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Australia - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
Australia - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Australia - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.025
1.05
1.075
1.1
Australia - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
Australia - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%


150 

Figure 5.2. Australia: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.


Australia - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Milk
0%
0.005%
0.01%
0.015%
0.02%
0.025%
0.03%
0.035%
0.04%
0.045%


 151

Table 5.1. Australia: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
14 358
19 605
59 529
50 299
65 873
62 414
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
82.36
74.30
73.91
72.49
74.33
74.90
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
5 072
7 514
21 342
19 299
23 063
21 664
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
1 411
761
2 655
2 085
3 057
2 824
Support based on commodity output
1 000
0
0
0
0
0
Market Price Support1
1 000
0
0
0
0
0
Positive Market Price Support
1 002
0
0
0
0
0
Negative Market Price Support
-2
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
230
309
2 068
1 590
2 399
2 216
Based on variable input use
217
14
1 057
682
1 294
1 195
with input constraints
0
4
19
30
14
13
Based on fixed capital formation
4
145
869
775
952
879
with input constraints
0
0
1
4
0
0
Based on on-farm services
9
149
143
133
153
142
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
11
268
214
307
283
Based on Receipts / Income
0
11
268
214
307
283
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
181
442
291
255
321
297
With variable payment rates
181
343
287
251
318
293
with commodity exceptions
0
110
71
76
71
66
With fixed payment rates
0
99
4
4
4
3
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
28
26
30
28
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
7
2
11
10
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
21
24
20
18
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
9.65
3.74
4.26
3.98
4.44
4.33
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.08
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.11
1.04
1.04
1.04
1.05
1.05
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
98
370
1 407
1 469
1 605
1 148
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
95
252
762
721
813
751
Inspection and control
3
39
120
116
130
114
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
0
75
294
354
274
253
Marketing and promotion
0
4
225
270
382
24
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
7
9
6
5
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
6.48
36.45
34.67
41.34
34.43
28.90
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-513
-116
0
0
0
0
Transfers to producers from consumers
-513
0
0
0
0
0
Other transfers from consumers
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
-116
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-10.12
-1.52
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.11
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.11
1.02
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
1 509
1 015
4 063
3 554
4 662
3 971
Transfers from consumers
513
0
0
0
0
0
Transfers from taxpayers
996
1 015
4 063
3 554
4 662
3 971
Budget revenues
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.65
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.27
0.24
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
509
1 015
4 063
3 554
4 662
3 971
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.22
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.27
0.24
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
150
263
249
262
280
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
1.40
1.83
1.41
1.45
1.33
1.44
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Australia are: wheat, barley, oats, sorghum, rice,
soybean, rapeseed, sunflower, sugar, cotton, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, wool, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




152 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Before the 1980s, Australian agriculture was supported by a range of measures designed to maintain and
stabilise farm income, and to provide farmers with support to offset the perceived disadvantages of
remoteness. In 1980, Australia had 65 statutory marketing boards that used border protection through
tariffs and import controls to divide domestic and international markets, and set higher prices in domestic
markets (Table 5.2).
Price stabilisation schemes assisted export industries such as wheat, manufactured dairy products, sugar,
and dried vine fruit. Other policy measures included fertiliser subsidies, income tax incentives, rural credit,
subsidies for agricultural research and extension, and public investment in land and water development
and rural infrastructure.
Australia’s agricultural policy evolved significantly starting in the mid-1980s. Competition policy reforms in
the 1980s and 1990s led to the removal of policies that distort agricultural production and trade. The
National Drought Policy introduced in 1992 formalised the transfer of drought risk management to farmers
and repurposed government support towards resilience-strengthening activities. Trade practices and anti-
dumping legislation ensured competitive markets across the whole economy, reducing the need for sector-
specific measures. Price stabilisation policies were relaxed, with price and output controls removed and
centralised marketing schemes gradually dismantled (Gray, Oss-Emer and Sheng, 2014[1]). Tariffs were
reduced. Floating exchange rates and trade liberalisation reduced price volatility in agricultural
commodities.
Table 5.2. Australia: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1980s
Closed economy (interventionist agricultural
policy)
High tariffs
Production quotas
Price controls
Tariff protection and import controls carried out by 65 statutory commodity
marketing boards
1980-Present
Reforms and trade liberalisation
Floating exchange rates
Removal of agricultural price and output controls
Gradual dismantling of Statutory marketing authorities
Reduction of agricultural tariffs on both outputs and inputs
Sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures strengthened
In Australia, total support to the sector is composed of general services and budgetary payments to
producers. Market price support was progressively phased out during the 1990s, and support to producers
(PSE) is now among the lowest in the OECD. Producer support is mostly delivered through payments
based on inputs and payments not requiring production.


 153

Figure 5.3. Australia: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Australia’s agricultural sector is market-oriented, and domestic and international prices are generally
aligned. Support to agriculture comprises a mix of direct budgetary outlays, concessional loans and tax
concessions. Direct support is provided to upgrade on-farm infrastructure that aims to improve the
efficiency of natural resource use. Several programmes also support the development and uptake of
farming practices to enhance sustainability, including through innovation take-up and pilot testing of
certification schemes.1
Concessional loan schemes create incentives for investments in new farm businesses, farm succession
arrangements, drought resilience and preparedness, and plantations. The Regional Investment
Corporation (RIC) has administered the Australian Government’s concessional farm business loans since
2018. Income stabilisation tools such as the Farm Management Deposits Scheme and income tax
averaging arrangements are designed to strengthen financial risk management by helping primary
producers to deal more effectively with fluctuations in cash flows. For producers experiencing hardship,
regardless of the cause, there is the safety net of the farm household income support. This is supplemented
with natural disaster assistance provided through the Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements that came
into force in 2018.2 Primary producers experiencing financial hardship can also access free, confidential
financial counselling under the Rural Financial Counselling Services Program. The Drought Response,
Resilience and Preparedness Plan was released in 2019, and focuses on immediate action and support
as well as long-term resilience and preparedness for farmers and communities affected by drought –
including through the AUD 5 billion (USD 3.5 billion) Future Drought Fund launched in July 2020
(Australian Government, 2022[2]). Central and regional funding supports large-scale water infrastructure
Australia - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-5
0
5
10
15


154 

investments, and programmes support farmers and land managers in pest and weed control during
drought.
Research and development (R&D) programmes are a major component of Australian support to
agriculture. Rural research and development corporations (RDCs) are one of the Australian Government’s
primary vehicles to support rural innovation. RDCs are a partnership between the government and industry
created to share funding and strategic direction-setting for primary industry R&D, investment in R&D and
subsequent adoption of R&D outputs. A levy system collects contributions from primary producers to
finance RDCs, and the Australian Government provides matched funding for the levies, up to legislated
caps.
A smaller portion of public expenditure goes to the development and maintenance of infrastructure and
inspection services, including pest and disease control activities. Industry and governments cost-share
actions to address pest and disease outbreaks, while trade-related costs of biosecurity and food safety
inspection services are covered by industry.
Australia’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) commits to achieving net zero emissions by 2050
and reducing GHG emissions to 43% below 2005 levels by 2030. While agriculture is included under
Australia’s economy-wide emissions reduction targets, no specific emissions reduction targets have been
defined for the agricultural sector. Investments in climate-smart and sustainable agriculture projects have
increased in recent years, providing support for technological solutions to reduce methane emissions from
livestock, improve soil health, build resilience to climate change, and protect natural capital and
biodiversity.
The Australian Carbon Credit Unit (ACCU) scheme, formerly known as the Emissions Reduction Fund,
was established in 2015 under the Carbon Credits (Carbon Farming Initiative) Act of 2011. The ACCU
scheme provides incentives for businesses to undertake voluntary emissions reductions and carbon
sequestration projects that meet strict integrity requirements, including in relation to additionality.
Agricultural landowners and farmers can earn income by generating ACCUs for every tonne of emissions
reduced or carbon stored through a project and selling these to the government or third parties. As of
March 2023, the scheme had committed AUD 2.7 billion (USD 1.9 billion) through 15 auctions for a total
of 217.3 MtCO2eq of abatement, including 14.8 MtCO2eq of agricultural emissions (of which just
1.1 MtCO2eq of abatement has been delivered as of April 2022).
Improving market transparency is also part of the government’s assistance to the food sector. One example
is the mandatory dairy code of conduct under the authority of the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (ACCC), which came into force in January 2020 (Australian Government, 2019[3]).
Australia’s agriculture is export-oriented with 18 comprehensive regional or bilateral free trade agreements
in force.3 Policies support access to export markets, including helping small exporters overcome market
access barriers and costs associated with exports registration. Imports of agriculture and food products,
on average, face lower tariff rates than non-agricultural goods (WTO, 2022[4]). A number of SPS measures
are in place to manage pest and disease risks that could harm the sector and affect Australia’s plant,
animal and human health as well as Australia’s environment more broadly. These SPS measures mean
that several conditions are in place for imports of agricultural products and other goods from certain
regions.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
Climate change is impacting Australian agriculture through increased variability of rainfall and
temperatures, and greater frequency of extreme weather events, including drought, floods, and bushfires.
According to estimates from the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences
(ABARES), changes in seasonal conditions over 2001-20 (relative to 1950-2000) reduced annual average
farm profits by 23% or around AUD 29 200 (USD 20 253) per farm. Climate conditions have also


 155

contributed to increased variability in farmers’ cash income and profits, with the most pronounced impacts
observed in south-western and south-eastern Australia.
The government recently scaled up its support for investments in climate-smart and sustainable
agriculture. The October 2022-23 federal budget provides AUD 302 million (USD 209 million) over five
years for sustainable agriculture investments under the next phase of the Natural Heritage Trust. The
climate-smart agriculture package includes AUD 159 million (USD 110 million) for sustainable agriculture
projects that encourage climate adaptation practices, emissions reduction technologies, greater
engagement in carbon and biodiversity markets, and sustainable management of natural resources. In
addition, AUD 36 million (USD 25 million) will be invested to design and deliver a new National Soil
Monitoring Program and to facilitate extension services, and knowledge sharing through the Regional Soil
Coordinators Program and the National Soil Community of Practice. The package also provides
AUD 41 million (USD 28 million) for a network of Sustainable Agriculture Facilitators, and AUD 36 million
(USD 25 million) for a network of delivery partners to deliver climate-smart agriculture actions efficiently
and at scale. An additional AUD 31 million (USD 22 million) is earmarked for programme design and
implementation.
Drought preparedness continues to be a focus for the Australian government, particularly in the context of
a changing climate, which is resulting in an increasing frequency and severity of droughts. The
October 2022-23 federal budget provided AUD 6.6 million (USD 4.6 million) to improve planning, tools,
and systems to help the government and farmers prepare for drought. This includes delivery of two key
policies: the next Australian Government Drought Plan and a new National Drought Agreement with states
and territories.
The On-farm Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate Scheme launched in December 2018 and includes
AUD 100 million (USD 69 million) in funding for farmers to improve drought preparedness through the
installation of on-farm water infrastructure (e.g., buying and laying pipes, installing water storage devices,
desilting dams and water bores). The October 2022-23 budget extended the scheme to 30 June 2024, and
expanded the scheme to allow farmers impacted by natural disasters to repair and replace damaged
infrastructure for improved water-use efficiency and flexibility.
The AUD 5 billion (USD 3.5 billion) Future Drought Fund (FDF) provides AUD 100 million (USD 69 million)
in returns from the fund each year to help farmers and communities build drought resilience. Since its
establishment in July 2020, the FDF has allocated a total of AUD 420 million (USD 291 million) to drought-
resilience initiatives, structured around four themes: better climate information; better planning; better
practices; and better-prepared communities.
•
Better climate information
o
My Climate View is a free, online platform that makes climate information more accessible,
enabling farmers, industry, and regional communities to anticipate future climate conditions,
draw comparisons with recent weather, consider the implications for production, and prepare
for future drought.
o
The Drought Resilience Self-Assessment (DRSAT) is an online tool that enables farmers to
add farm-scale data to regional-scale data, helping them understand their own farm-scale
resilience, see farm-level climate-change projections, view satellite data for their farm and see
suggested tailored pathways to improve resilience.
•
Better planning
o
The Farm Business Resilience Program builds the capacity of farmers to plan for and manage
risks, including drought. The programme supports learning and development opportunities in
areas such as strategic business skills, risk management, natural-resource management, and
personal resilience. It also supports farm-business planning and provides farmers with
professional feedback on their plans. The Australian government committed AUD 16 million


156 

(USD 11 million) to the programme’s initial rollout and announced an additional AUD 60 million
(USD 42 million) in the 2021-22 Federal Budget for the next three years.
o
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program supports regions to develop drought-
resilience plans to drive proactive management of drought risks. Plans are community-led and
owned through partnerships of local governments, regional organisations, community
organisations and industry. The Australian Government committed AUD 9.85 million
(USD 6.8 million) to the initial rollout of the programme and announced a further AUD 31 million
(USD 22 million) in the 2021-22 Federal Budget for the next three years.
•
Better practices
o
Eight Regional Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hubs support primary producers
in building drought resilience through on-ground extension and adoption activities, and to drive
uptake of new on-farm and local innovations.
o
A range of National Enabling Activities help farmers and regional communities build drought
resilience through investments in collaboration, greater information-sharing, knowledge
management, First Nations engagement, and the Science to Practice Forum.
o
The Drought Resilience Innovation Grants Program provides AUD 29 million (USD 20 million)
to support projects that will drive the development and adoption of new and innovative
technologies and practices to improve the drought resilience of farmers and agriculture-
dependent communities. Three types of grants are offered to cater for projects and ideas at
different stages of development: (1) ideas grants providing AUD 50 000 (USD 35 000) to help
develop good ideas; (2) proof-of-concept grants providing up to AUD 120 000 (USD 83 000)
for 12 months to test the feasibility of innovative projects; and (3) innovation grants providing
AUD 30 000 (USD 21 000) to AUD 1.1 million (USD 763 000) per year for up to three years for
mature ideas.
o
The Natural Resource Management Drought Resilience Program provides AUD 13.4 million
(USD 9.3 million) for the trial and adoption of transformative on-ground practices that contribute
to landscape-scale drought resilience.
o
The Drought Resilient Soils and Landscapes Program will invest AUD 23.1 million
(USD 16 million) to support projects that focus on demonstrating drought-resilient land
management practices at broad scale that will help Australia’s farmers prepare for and recover
quicker from drought and make agricultural landscapes more resilient to drought.
o
The Long-Term Trials of Drought Resilient Farming Practices Program will invest
AUD 40 million (USD 27.7 million) into establishing a national network of farm laboratories that
will conduct trials of drought resilience farming practices until 2028.
o
The new AUD 14.3 million (USD 9.9 million) Extension and Adoption of Drought Resilience
Farming Practices Grants Program will deliver grants ranging from AUD 100 000 (USD 69 000)
to AUD 3 million (USD 2.1 million) to support adoption of proven drought-resilient farming
practices and technologies at a large scale, either across multiple farms, a farming system,
landscapes, regions or industries.
o
The Drought Resilience Commercialisation Initiative is a two-year, AUD 10 million
(USD 6.9 million) pilot programme designed to help innovators turn their good ideas into
commercially viable, drought-resilient products and services. The initiative will help increase
market readiness by offering one-on-one facilitation services and commercialisation planning.
o
The Drought Resilience Scholarship Program was developed to recognise and reward
innovators and leaders in the field of drought resilience and encourage ongoing learning and
uptake within the agricultural sector. The Future Drought Fund is investing AUD 1.6 million
(USD 1.1 million) through Nuffield Australia to provide farmers with drought-resilience
scholarships valued at up to AUD 35 000 (USD 24 000).


 157

•
Better prepare communities
o
The Networks to Build Drought Resilience Program is delivered by the Foundation for Rural
and Regional Renewal. Projects support drought preparedness by building the capacity and
capabilities of community organisations, holding community events, and strengthening ties
across community networks, including through funding for First Nations organisations and
projects to benefit rural youth and women.
o
The Drought Resilience Leaders Program provides opportunities for individuals from
agriculture-dependent communities in 12 regions to gain leadership knowledge and skills to
support their communities in tackling drought and climate change.
o
The Helping Regional Communities Prepare for Drought Initiative is the next phase of
investment in community drought resilience and will expand existing programmes to support a
national cohort of community organisations to benefit of agriculture-dependent communities.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry was created in July 2022 following the election of a
new federal government. The former Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment was dissolved,
and the water and environment functions were transferred to a new Department of Climate Change,
Energy, the Environment and Water.
Australia submitted an update to its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement
of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in June 2022. The updated
NDC reaffirms Australia’s target to achieve net zero emissions by 2050 and commits to reducing GHG
emissions to 43% below 2005 levels by 2030. The government continued its support for technological
solutions to reduce agricultural emissions, in particular methane emissions from livestock, which made up
79% of agricultural emissions in 2020-21. Under stages 2 and 3.1 of the AUD 29 million (USD 20 million)
Methane Emissions Reduction in Livestock (MERiL) programme, AUD 11 million (USD 7.6 million) was
awarded through 14 grants to support R&D for low-emissions feed supplements for grazing animals. The
government is also investing AUD 8.1 million (USD 5.6 million) over three years in the Australian seaweed
industry to progress research, support commercialisation and scale up production of emissions-reducing
seaweeds for use as a livestock feed supplement. Furthermore, several grants were awarded under the
three-year AUD 38.9 million (USD 27 million) National Soil Carbon Innovation Challenge: stage one
provided over AUD 1 million (USD 694 000) for 17 projects to determine the feasibility of proposed
technology solutions for soil carbon stock measurement, and stage 2 awarded AUD 29 million
(USD 20 million) to 8 projects in an initial funding round, for proof of concept, validation and deployment
activities to further test and develop a technology solution in Australian landscapes. A second funding
round opened in 2023.
The Carbon Farming Outreach Program was announced in October 2022 and will develop a training
package and tools for farmers and land managers, including First Nations peoples, to participate in carbon
markets and integrate low-emission technologies and practices into their operations. The programme has
an overall budget of AUD 20.3 million (USD 14.1 million) over four years, of which AUD 17.5 million
(USD 12.1 million) will be provided as grants for independent and trusted advisers to deliver the training
package across Australia.
Australia joined three global initiatives related to climate change in 2022, namely:
•
The Glasgow Breakthrough Agenda on Agriculture, which aims to make climate-resilient
sustainable agriculture the most attractive and widely adopted option for farmers everywhere by
2030.


158 

•
The Forests and Climate Leaders Partnership, which supports the goals of the Glasgow Leaders
Declaration on Forests and Land Use, to halt and reverse forest loss and land degradation by 2030,
and promote sustainable production and trade.
•
The Global Methane Pledge, a voluntary commitment with 122 signatories working collectively to
reduce global methane emissions across all sectors by at least 30% below 2020 levels by 2030.
Continued progress was made in implementing the Agriculture Biodiversity Stewardship Package, with the
total investment in the programme increasing to AUD 91.6 million (USD 63.4 million). This includes the
Carbon + Biodiversity Pilot and the Enhancing Remnant Vegetation Pilot, which are trialling market-based
approaches for landholders to improve biodiversity and inform the development of a national nature repair
market. A National Stewardship Trading Platform was established allowing landholders to plan and
evaluate carbon and biodiversity projects, connect farmers with potential buyers of biodiversity and carbon
services, and apply for government-funded biodiversity stewardship pilot programmes. The government is
exploring options to implement the Australian Farm Biodiversity Certification Scheme to certify farms and
farm businesses for their biodiversity management and is consulting on legislation to support a voluntary
biodiversity stewardship market, supporting new income streams for farmers who improve biodiversity
outcomes on their land.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
Australia’s trade policy seeks further market opening through multilateral, bilateral and regional trade
agreements (DFAT, 2023[5]). Recent developments were mainly related to progress in trade agreements,
export promotion and strengthening biosecurity.
The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (RCEP) entered into force on 1 January
2022. Australia ratified RCEP on 2 November 2021 and was an original party to the agreement along with
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Japan, Laos, New Zealand, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
RCEP is a comprehensive free trade agreement that provides Australian exporters and importers with a
single set of rules of origin to access tariff preferences across the region. RCEP also includes improved
mechanisms to tackle non-tariff barriers, expand trade in services, support the movement of business
people across the region, and improve the investment environment.
The Australia-United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement (A-UK FTA) was signed on 17 December 2021 and
passed by the Australian Parliament on 22 November 2022. Following ratification by the UK Parliament
and Royal Assent on 23 March 2023, the agreement entered into force on 31 May 2023. Under the A-UK
FTA, more than 99% of Australia’s exports to the United Kingdom are now duty free, providing new and
enhanced market access for Australian farmers and exporters of beef, sheep meat, wine, sugar, dairy,
grains, horticulture, and seafood. The agreement also eliminates tariffs on 98% of Australia’s imports from
the United Kingdom, will facilitate the mobility of skilled workers between Australia and the United Kingdom,
and will enhance technical collaboration on biosecurity, animal welfare and antimicrobial resistance.
Negotiations on an Australia-European Union FTA, launched in 2018, are ongoing.
Negotiations for the Australia-India Comprehensive Economic Co-operation Agreement launched in
May 2011, were suspended in 2015, and re-launched in September 2021. An interim agreement called the
Australia-India Economic Co-operation and Trade Agreement (AI-ECTA) was signed on 2 April 2022 and
entered into force on 29 December 2022. Negotiations have now resumed for a Comprehensive Economic
Co-operation Agreement (CECA), which will build upon ECTA outcomes. Key exports of Australian
agricultural products to India include lentils, wool, cotton, and almonds. Under the AI-ECTA, tariffs on a
range of Australian crops will be bound at zero, providing Australian exporters with more certainty on Indian
tariffs when planning their crops.


 159

Australia also engages in the plurilateral Environmental Goods Agreement (EGA) negotiations, undertaken
in conjunction with 45 other WTO member countries to reduce tariffs on goods that benefit the environment
(DFAT, 2023[5]).
The October 2022-23 federal budget provides AUD 12.3 million (USD 8.5 million) over three years to
support regional agricultural trade events including Beef Australia 2024, Casino Beef Week, the second
Dairy Symposium, LambEx, Hort Connections 2023 and 2024, and other horticulture conferences and
agritech industry events. Regional trade events and forums provide opportunities for producers to learn
about new on-farm practices that foster innovation, gain direct access to export expertise, connect with
businesses and form new partnerships with key international trading partners. In addition, AUD 4 million
(USD 2.8 million) has been allocated over four years for the establishment of an Inspector-General of
Animal Welfare to strengthen animal welfare assurance, and increase accountability and transparency for
animal welfare in livestock exports.
A 10-year National Agricultural Traceability Strategy 2023-33 and its five-year implementation plan aim to
put in place interoperable traceability systems along supply chains to support Australian exports and
strengthen responses to biosecurity and food safety, while supporting emerging ESG reporting
requirements. The government is also offering several new Agricultural Traceability Grants. The
AUD 6 million (USD 4.2 million) National Agricultural Traceability Regulatory Technology (RegTech)
Research and Insights Grant round opened for applications from 9 November to 14 December 2022, and
provides funding for projects lasting up to two years for the investigation of how RegTech (i.e. the use of
technology to better achieve regulatory objectives) can assist in streamlining agricultural compliance
obligations, and for feasibility assessments of traceability RegTech systems. The AUD 4 million
(USD 2.8 million) National Traceability Sustainability Reporting Uplift Grants round opened for applications
from 19 January to 23 February 2023 and will aim to deliver projects that support the agricultural sector
through consistent collection, measurement and reporting of data to demonstrate sustainable practices to
meet increasing expectations from international markets and consumers.
Biosecurity remains a critical focus for the Australian Government and is key for preventing, responding
to, and recovering from pest and disease outbreaks. The Biosecurity Amendment (Strengthening
Biosecurity) Act 2022 was passed through parliament in November 2022 and introduced key measures to
strengthen Australia’s ability to manage and respond to emerging biosecurity risks. In addition, the 2022-
23 budget provides AUD 134.1 million (USD 93 million) over four years for the Bolstering Australia’s
Biosecurity System package, including:
•
AUD 14 million (USD 9.7 million) in emergency funding for biosecurity preparedness in Australia,
as well as funding to support Indonesia, Timor Leste and Papua New Guinea to prevent and
respond to the spread of foot and mouth disease (FMD) and lumpy skin disease (LSD).
•
AUD 61.6 million (USD 42.7 million) to strengthen Australia’s biosecurity capability, including in
Northern Australia, and to support domestic preparedness and biosecurity outcomes in
neighbouring countries.
•
AUD 46.7 million (USD 32.4 million) to support continuous improvements in livestock traceability
by maintaining systems and ensuring quick recovery from any disease incursions.
•
AUD 11.7 million (USD 8.1 million) to expand detector dog and handler capabilities at the border.
Additional funding was announced for the Supporting Communities Manage Pest Animals and Weeds
Program, which provides AUD 49.1 million (USD 34 million) over four years to deliver better solutions to
combat established pest animals and weeds that pose a significant threat to agricultural production, the
environment and biodiversity. The National Forest Pest Surveillance Program was launched in
December 2022 and will improve the early detection of exotic forest pests and the likelihood of their
subsequent eradication. A national action plan for production animal health, Animalplan 2022 to 2027, was
developed and approved following extensive stakeholder engagement with government, industry
organisations and animal health experts. It aims to strengthen emergency animal disease preparedness,


160 

bolster on-farm biosecurity systems, support diagnostic and surveillance capabilities, minimise the risk of
antimicrobial resistance, foster sustainable industry practices and further enhance traceability systems.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
The International Freight Assistance Mechanism was an AUD 1.04 billion (USD 721 million) temporary
emergency measure that was introduced in response to the collapse of international airfreight capacity in
and out of Australia as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. IFAM supported and maintained domestic and
global supply chains by helping to restore key airfreight routes, ensuring the flow of time-sensitive,
perishable products and vital medical supplies. The mechanism concluded in June 2022 when international
airfreight movements resumed.
Contextual information
Australia is the world’s 19th largest economy in purchasing power parity (PPP) terms and the sixth largest
country by land area, accounting for 12% of all agricultural land in the 54 countries included in this report,
but only 0.5% of the total population of these countries. The country’s GDP per capita is more than twice
the average of the countries covered in this report (Table 5.3). Agriculture represents a small share of the
economy, accounting for just 3.4% of GDP and 2.4% of total employment in 2021. Australia is an important
producer of agricultural commodities. In 2021, the country ranked as the world’s second-largest producer
of sheep meat and wool, the seventh-largest producer of beef, and is also among the world’s top-ten
producers of wheat, barley, oats, rapeseed and sugar cane.
Table 5.3. Australia: Contextual indicators

Australia
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
539
1 595
1.3%
1.3%
Population (million)
19
26
0.4%
0.5%
Land area (thousand km2)
7 682
7 692
9.4%
9.3%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
455 469
355 775
15.1%
12.1%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
2
3
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
28 313
61 977
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
16.5
17.4
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
3.8
3.4
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
4.8
2.4
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
23.1
12.3
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
4.3
6.2
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
55
59
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
45
41
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
5
9
32
34
Note: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.


 161

After 28 years of uninterrupted GDP growth, the COVID-19 pandemic brought Australia’s economy to a
halt in 2020. After a sharp contraction, real GDP growth rebounded quickly and has been strong at 4.0%
in 2022, while the unemployment rate has fallen from 6.5% in 2020 to 3.7% in 2022 (Figure 5.4). Inflation
also increased to 6.6% in 2022, its highest level in more than three decades, driven by rising costs for
energy, housing and food.
Figure 5.4. Australia: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Australia is a net exporter of agricultural products. Around 72% of the value of agricultural production is
exported, and the country is a major exporter of wheat, barley, oats, cattle, beef, sheep meat, wool,
rapeseed, and chickpeas. Primary goods for final consumption and further processing make up 53% of the
country’s agro-food exports. Approximately three-quarters of Australia’s agro-food imports go to domestic
final consumption and the remaining share (24%) is destined for the processing industry (Figure 5.5).


162 

Figure 5.5. Australia: Agro-food trade


Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Over the 2011-20 period, agricultural output declined by 0.5% per year, compared to a 1.9% per year
increase globally (Figure 5.6). This was partly due to a decline in total factor productivity (TFP), which fell
by -0.6% per year (compared with the global average of 1.1% growth). Primary factor growth also declined
at -0.3% per year, driven by a decline in the agricultural land area. These declines were partly offset by an
intensification of intermediate input use, which grew at 0.4% per year.
Australia - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
10
20
30
40
50
Australia - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
7
17
17
44
44
7
40
40
65
65
9
9
11
11
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 163

Agriculture accounted for 16.8% of Australia’s GHG emissions (78.3 out of 464.8 MtCO2eq) in 2020-21
and can play an important role in helping the country to achieve its economy-wide target of net-zero
emissions by 2050 (Table 5.4). Agriculture’s contribution to GHG emissions has declined over the past two
decades but remains above the OECD level. The share of agriculture in total energy use has increased
slightly since 2000 and was above the OECD average in 2021, despite the small share of the sector in the
economy.
Compared to the OECD area, agriculture accounts for a relatively high share of total water abstractions.
While aggregate national indicators suggest that water stress is less of a problem than in many OECD
countries, water availability and competition for natural resources with other sectors remains a significant
constraint that is likely to be exacerbated by climate change. Estimates also indicate a relatively low
nitrogen surplus balance and point to a low phosphorous balance.
Figure 5.6. Australia: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.


Australia - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
-0.60%
-0.60%
1.12%
1.12%
-0.28%
-0.28%
0.35%
0.35%
0.40%
0.40%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Australia
World
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%


164 

Table 5.4. Australia: Productivity and environmental indicators

Australia
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.4%
-0.6%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
20.7
17.3
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
1.3
0.6
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.3
2.5
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
16.8
12.9
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
0.5
0.4
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)¹
67.7
67.0
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
5.5
3.4
8.3
7.4
Note: *or closest available year.
1. Data are not comparable between time periods, 2020 data from (Australian Bureau of Meteorology, 2021[6]).
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.

References

Australian Bureau of Meteorology (2021), Water in Australia 2019-20, Bureau of Meteorology,
http://www.bom.gov.au/water/waterinaustralia/files/Water-in-Australia-2019-20.pdf.
[6]
Australian Government (2022), Drought Policy, Department of Agriculture, Water and the
Environment, https://www.awe.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/drought-
policy.
[2]
Australian Government (2019), Competition and Consumer (Industry Codes—Dairy) Regulations
2019, https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/F2019L01610.
[3]
DFAT (2023), Australia’s free trade agreements (FTAs), Australian Government Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade, https://www.dfat.gov.au/trade/agreements/trade-agreements
(accessed on 20 March 2023).
[5]
Gray, E., M. Oss-Emer and Y. Sheng (2014), Australian agricultural productivity growth: past
reforms and future.
[1]
WTO (2022), Tariff profiles: Australia, World Trade Organization,
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/daily_update_e/tariff_profiles/AU_E.pdf.
[4]






 165

Notes

1 Examples include the Smart Farms programme and Smart Farming Partnerships under the second
phase of the National Landcare Program 2019-23 (https://www.awe.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-
drought/natural-resources/landcare/national-landcare-program/australian-government-investment-in-
landcare) and the Agriculture Biodiversity Stewardship Package
(https://www.agriculture.gov.au/about/reporting/budget/sustaining-future-australian-farming).
2 Depending on the scale of the disaster, a range of assistance can be made available to primary producers
impacted by natural disasters. For example, in the 2019-20 Black Summer Bushfires and 2022 NSW and
Queensland floods, primary producers were eligible for AUD 75 000 (USD 56 300) clean up grants,
concessional loans along with continued access to the Farm Household Allowance.
3 These are agreements with New Zealand (ANZCERTA 1983), Singapore (SAFTA 2003), Thailand
(TAFTA 2005), the United States (AUSFTA 2005), Chile (ACI-FTA 2009), the ASEAN-Australia-New
Zealand Free Trade Area (AANZFTA 2010), Malaysia (MAFTA 2013), Korea (KAFTA 2014), Japan
(JAEPA 2015), the People’s Republic of China (ChAFTA 2015), the Comprehensive and Progressive
Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP 2018), Hong Kong (A-HKFTA 2020), Peru (PAFTA
2020), Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (IA-CEPA 2020), the Pacific
Agreement on Closer Economic Relations (PACER Plus 2020), the Regional Comprehensive Economic
Partnership Agreement (RCEP 2022), the Australia-India Economic Co-operation and Trade Agreement
(ECTA 2022) and the United Kingdom (A-UKFTA 2023).


166 

Support to agriculture
Brazil is a competitive agricultural exporter, with low levels of support and protection to the sector. The
Producer Support Estimate (PSE) fell from 7.6% of gross farm receipts in 2000-02 to 3.1% in 2020-22.
PSE has been relatively low over the past decade, not surpassing 5% and below the OECD average.
Domestic prices align with international markets almost fully, with a ratio of producer to border price
(Nominal Protection Coefficient, NPC) of 1.025%.
Average Market Price Support (MPS) decreased from 2021 to 2022 due to higher domestic prices for
certain commodities, but still accounted for more than 50% of PSE. The highest rates of positive Single
Commodity Transfer (SCT) are seen for cotton, maize, and rice.
Support to producers is also provided through input payments, in particular credit at preferential rates and
crop insurance. Concessional credit is available for farm marketing, working capital, and fixed capital
investment. Since the late-2000s, all support based on input use – mainly credit and insurance – is
conditional on environmental criteria and specific farming practices.
Support to general services (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) fell from 3.4% of the agricultural
value of production in 2000-02 to 0.7% in 2020-22. More than 90% of that goes to agricultural research
and development (R&D), technology transfer, and extension services, with the rest used for infrastructure,
inspection and control, and land-restructuring. However, GSSE is small relative to the sector’s size, and
expenditures on R&D and extension services relative to the value of production is only just above the
OECD average. The Total Support Estimate (TSE) declined from 0.7% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
in 2000-02 to 0.5% in 2020-22, suggesting little burden on the economy.
Recent policy changes
The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAPA) annual Harvest Plan (PAP) defines maximum funding
and guidelines for the main policy instruments for 2021-22. Total credit allocation under this plan was
BRL 341 billion (USD 66 billion) or 36% more than under the previous plan. Working capital and
commercialisation credit represent 72% of the total, with the remainder directed to investment credit.
Resources available for the Programme ABC+ increased from BRL 5 billion (USD 968 million) in 2021 to
BRL 6.2 billion (USD 1.2 billion) in 2022. The Programme ABC+ was adjusted to comply with the newly
updated ABC+ Plan. The Programme provides financing for a variety of activities related to sustainable
production, such as bio-inputs, biofertilisers, recovery of degraded areas, no tillage, etc.
Expenditures on subsidies for rural insurance premiums (PSR) reached BRL 1.11 billion (USD 215 million)
in 2022. This covers approximately 7.25 million hectares (3.1% of agricultural land), benefiting more than
78 000 producers, and resulting in a total insurance coverage of BRL 43.9 billion (USD 8.5 billion).
After reviewing 30 crops and production systems in 2021, the new rules for Agricultural Climate-Risk
Zoning (ZARC) were published in 2022, establishing the method for classifying soil based on water
6 Brazil


 167

availability (AD). Soybeans is the first crop to use the new rules for the 2023-24 harvest; studies are being
updated for other crops. Moreover, the programme continued to implement ZARC 4.0, which integrates
various technical risk data: agro-climatic, management, water activity in soils, and indications of
productivity losses.
The Ministry of Rural Development and Family Farming (MDA) was reconstituted in January 2023. This
institutional adjustment means that MDA will deal with key challenges such as land reform; sustainable
rural development for indigenous, black, and traditional communities; local food supply systems;
agricultural sustainable development of family farms, etc. While MAPA is in charge of public policies to
promote sustainable agriculture and livestock in general, and of regulating and standardising services
linked to the sector. Furthermore, a new structure was established for MAPA, including the new
Department of Reforestation and Recovery of Degraded Areas to promote reforestation and agroforestry
systems in agricultural production units.
In 2022, some agricultural tariffs were reduced to curb food-price inflation caused by the COVID-19
pandemic and exacerbated by the war in Ukraine. Import tariffs were reduced to zero until 2023 for non-
Mercosur imports, which had been at 8% for maize and soybeans, 6% for soymeal and 10% for soy oil.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Brazil has a well-developed legal framework and guidelines for adapting its agricultural sector to
climate change. The Brazilian Agricultural Policy for Climate Adaptation and Low Carbon Emission
(ABC+), has the national sectorial strategy to cope with climate change in agriculture. Moreover,
agricultural credit – Brazil’s main form of support – is conditioned on implementation of
conservation, mitigation, and adaptation practices. However, the implementation of tailored
adaptation practices needs to be monitored and evaluated to ensure progress in the sustainable
transformation of production systems.
•
Brazil’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) does not set sector-specific greenhouse-gas
(GHG) emission-reduction targets. However, since 2010, the country started incorporating
agricultural, forestry, and land-use policies that contribute to climate-change mitigation and
adaptation. Sector-specific targets could accelerate the low-carbon transition of agriculture,
forestry, and other land use (AFOLU) sector, and provide mitigation goals for measuring progress
– particularly given that AFOLU contributes 43% of national GHG emissions.
•
Brazil is one of the most biodiverse countries in the world, but this biodiversity could be at risk,
notably from land-clearing for agriculture. Agricultural policy instruments, particularly related to
land-use change involving deforestation such as the Forest Code, must be legally binding and
better enforced.
•
Agricultural credit at preferential interest rates represents a main source of agricultural support in
Brazil. A reform of the credit system could consider decreasing concessional loans for working
capital to commercial farms. Moreover, simplified regulations and procedures could facilitate
access by rural borrowers increasing credit access to small-scale and medium size farms.
•
Credit programmes that provide incentives for sustainable agriculture could be expanded.
Increasing the share of supported credit for technological packages that focus on innovation,
modernisation, climate-change mitigation and adaptation, and increased productivity can reach
more farmers and accelerate the transition to an environmentally sustainable sector.
•
Insurance-subsidy programmes need further improvement of monitoring and evaluation to
determine their impact and ensuring efficient use of public funds, while confirming that they do not
crowd out market solutions.


168 

•
Insurance and credit support are conditional on environmental criteria and zoning rules that
promote environmental improvements such as preservation of forests and native vegetation. The
impact of environmental conditionality set by the Environmental Rural Registry (CAR), ZARC, and
the Forest Code should continue being assessed with respect to outcomes such as targets related
to deforestation and GHG emissions. Better law enforcement is needed to halt deforestation rates.
This should remain the basis for improving policy design for environmental conditionality, along
with specific programmes such as the ABC and initiatives against deforestation.
•
Budgetary support to GSSE is mostly invested in R&D, technology transfers, and extension
services. But these public outlays represent less than 1% of the value of agricultural production. It
is important to increase Brazil’s significant research and extension capacity to match sector growth,
notably through the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (EMBRAPA), by focusing on
sustainability as much as on productivity growth, and increasing the diffusion and creation of
innovation networks for medium- and small-scale farmers.




 169

Figure 6.1. Brazil: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Brazil - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
Brazil - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Brazil - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
Brazil - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
Brazil - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%


170 

Figure 6.2. Brazil: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency. The producer price change and the border price change
are not calculated when both negative and positive market price support (MPS) occur at the commodity level for the previous year. Note that
negative MPS estimates for livestock products may arise in cases of aligned product prices if there is positive MPS for feed commodities.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Figure 6.3. Brazil: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts,
2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
%
Brazil - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE change decomposition
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
Brazil - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Maize
Rice
Soybeans
Sugar
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Coffee
Cotton
-6%
-4%
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
22%


 171

Table 6.1. Brazil: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
35 538
193 947
149 777
200 503
231 561
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
77.53
89.60
88.53
90.60
89.65
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
34 563
115 359
89 447
120 633
135 997
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
2 869
6 107
2 352
7 740
8 230
Support based on commodity output
1 013
3 704
851
5 636
4 626
Market Price Support1
973
3 702
850
5 634
4 622
Positive Market Price Support
1 179
4 369
1 020
7 465
4 622
Negative Market Price Support
-206
-667
-171
-1 831
0
Payments based on output
40
2
2
1
4
Payments based on input use
1 856
2 342
1 410
2 059
3 557
Based on variable input use
825
1 251
730
950
2 073
with input constraints
0
1 251
730
950
2 073
Based on fixed capital formation
955
1 071
661
1 089
1 463
with input constraints
0
1 071
661
1 089
1 463
Based on on-farm services
76
20
19
20
21
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
61
91
46
48
Based on Receipts / Income
0
61
91
46
48
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
7.56
3.12
1.55
3.82
3.50
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.04
1.03
1.01
1.04
1.02
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.08
1.03
1.02
1.04
1.04
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
1 242
1 439
1 487
1 489
1 340
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
663
1 347
1 414
1 390
1 237
Inspection and control
51
18
18
17
18
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
471
46
48
44
46
Marketing and promotion
5
3
1
3
4
Cost of public stockholding
53
25
6
34
36
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
29.78
17.18
31.80
14.88
12.91
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-1 176
-1 486
3
-2 505
-1 956
Transfers to producers from consumers
-1 175
-3 218
-880
-6 148
-2 625
Other transfers from consumers
-277
-114
-143
-60
-140
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
31
807
838
775
809
Excess feed cost
245
1 039
189
2 928
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-3.34
-1.31
0.00
-2.09
-1.45
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.04
1.03
1.01
1.05
1.02
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.03
1.01
1.00
1.02
1.01
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
4 142
8 353
4 677
10 004
10 380
Transfers from consumers
1 452
3 332
1 024
6 207
2 765
Transfers from taxpayers
2 967
5 136
3 796
3 856
7 754
Budget revenues
-277
-114
-143
-60
-140
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.72
0.51
0.32
0.62
0.56
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
3 169
4 651
3 827
4 369
5 757
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.55
0.28
0.26
0.27
0.31
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
427
389
430
461
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
2.37
5.24
5.15
5.39
5.16
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Brazil are: wheat, maize, rice, soybean, sugar, milk,
beef and veal, pig meat, poultry, cotton, coffee.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




172 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Before the 1990s, Brazil had a history of government intervention in the agricultural sector. Price
interventions were first introduced in the 1940s amid food security concerns (OECD, 2015[1]; OECD,
2005[2]), and starting in the 1950s, Brazil adopted an import-substitution industrialisation strategy with wide-
ranging controls over supply and prices in the agro-food sector. Prices were both supported for producers
and subsidised to consumers.
The National Agency for Food Supplies (SUNAB) regulated distribution of basic foodstuffs and set prices
and profit margins for all levels of the food chain, including low prices for consumers. SUNAB also
controlled agro-food imports and exports. At the producer level, a general price support system existed for
rice, maize, soybeans, beans, cassava, and cotton. Another government agency, the Company for
Production Financing (CFP), carried out direct purchases of these commodities at minimum guaranteed
prices. Marketing boards were created for wheat, sugar, and coffee. They set overall production volumes,
administered marketing quotas, and controlled prices and trade.
These policies continued until the late 1980s, when the government undertook a general restructuring of
the economy. Trade was liberalised, state owned enterprises privatised, domestic markets deregulated,
and a customs union established with other South American countries (Mercosur). Agricultural policies
were no exception to this move towards openness and less state intervention. State enterprises related to
agriculture were dismantled or their functions reduced. Agricultural import tariffs were substantially
reduced. Export licensing for primary agricultural products was removed. Brazilian producers faced fewer
controls and obtained freer access to world commodity and input markets.
Since the mid-2000s, policy has emphasised support to smallholders and setting minimum prices for
staples produced in the poorest regions of the country. Purchases of staple foods to be distributed to poor
populations has been enhanced, and mandatory sugar cane ethanol fuel-blending continue to be imposed.
The National Programme for the Production and Use of Biodiesel was established in 2005 and the blending
of biodiesel with mineral diesel became mandatory in 2008. Currently, the blend percentage varies
between 6% and 15%. Biodiesel is sold through public auctions, where preference is given to
manufacturers that support family farming. In addition to prioritising the acquisition of raw materials from
family farms, technical assistance by the government is targeted to these farms (Table 6.2).




 173

Table 6.2. Brazil: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1990s
Import substitution
Industrialisation model
Closed economy
Fixed exchange rates
High agricultural tariffs
Production and marketing control of agricultural products (CFP state company)
Minimum agricultural prices for producers (CFP state company)
Subsidised prices of agricultural products for consumers (SUNAB state company)
Creation of the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (EMBRAPA)
Consumption of sugar cane ethanol stimulated through obligatory blending of ethanol with
gasoline
1990-2005
Reforms to trade liberalisation
Floating exchange rates
Removal of agricultural price and output controls
Reduction of agricultural tariffs of both outputs and inputs
Dismantling of marketing boards for wheat, sugar and coffee
Dismantling of SUNAB and CFP
WTO agreement and Mercosur signed
Minimum prices of basic products kept but reduced
Subsidised credits (working capital and marketing loans) enhanced as the financial crisis hit
farmers
Liberalisation of the wheat, coffee and sugar sectors
Creation of the Ministry of Rural Development and Family Farming (MDA)
Consumption of sugar cane ethanol was also stimulated by the growth of the flex fuel vehicle
fleet. Flex Fuel cars have represented more than 85% of new vehicle sales in Brazil since
the late 2000s.
2005-2015
Continuing reforms
Subsidised agricultural credit and insurance subsidies as main agricultural policy, supported
by the Law of agribusiness bonds 11076/2004.
Minimum prices of basic products set for smallholders through government purchases of
staple foods
Sugar cane ethanol ratio policy continues to apply
Government purchases of staples kept in order to provide food to poor populations
Institutionalisation of the National Programme for the Production and Use of Biodiesel.
Current regulations of blending ranged between 6% and 15%.
2015-present
Institutional changes
Incorporation of the structure of the Ministry of Rural Development and Family Farming
(MDA) into the into the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAPA) in 2019, then reinstated
as an independent Ministry in 2023.
Relatively low support, with subsidised credit continuing as key agricultural policy tool.
New competences of the 2023 MDA include family farming, agrarian reform, incorporation
of several state enterprises such as CONAB (national supply), CEASA-Minas (wholesale
Minas), CEAGESP (warehouse company), ANATER (extension services) and INCRA
(agrarian reform).
In 2023, MAPA created under its structure the Department of Reforestation and Recovery
of Degraded Areas.
Brazil’s support to agricultural producers included market price support and input subsidies in the 2000s,
up to 10% of gross farm receipts. Market price support has gradually disappeared and is dominated by
subsidised credit and insurance subsidies. In recent years, total support in Brazil is mostly in the form of
budgetary support, in particular for producers’ inputs and for the provision of general services. Brazil
provides a relatively low aggregate level of support and protection to agriculture, reflecting its position as
a competitive exporter and price maker for a range of commodities (Figure 6.4).


174 

Figure 6.4. Brazil: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The annual Agricultural and Livestock Plan (PAP) administered by the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
(MAPA) defines the key parameters of agricultural policy (MAPA, 2022[3]). Family farming policy is
managed by the newly reinstated Ministry of Rural Development and Family Farming (MDA). Innovation,
R&D services are provided by the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (EMBRAPA), created in
1973. Extension services are provided by the National Agency for Technical Assistance and Rural
Extension (ANATER) that has agencies in each state.
Agricultural policy has been stable over the past decade, with a focus on:
•
rural credit (since the 1960s)
•
risk management programmes including subsidised insurance programmes (since 2005)
•
limited use of minimum and reference prices and marketing interventions (e.g. government
purchases of food)
•
agricultural land zoning with environmental compliance and promotion of biofuels.
While price support is low overall, minimum guaranteed prices are used regionally. These cover a broad
range of crops and a few livestock products such as cow and goat milk and honey. Minimum prices are
set by the National Monetary Council (CMN) based on domestic and international prices, and the evolution
of production costs in different locations. These are implemented through several price support
mechanisms on the domestic market, including premiums to commercial buyers who pay minimum fixed
prices to producers, and public and private options contracts backed by a private risk premium option. In
addition, producers receive reduced-interest marketing loans, which enable them to withhold the sale of a
Brazil - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15


 175

product in anticipation of a higher market price. The National Food Supply Company (CONAB) operates
these programmes on behalf of MAPA. Several programmes offer deficiency payments calculated as the
difference between the market price and the minimum (reference) price (e.g. the Rural Equity Prize
programme called PEPRO, and the Product Reward Prize programme known as PEP).
One of the main agricultural policy instruments is credit at preferential interest rates provided to large,
medium, small-scale, and family farms. It is designed in co-operation between the Central Bank, the
Treasury, the Secretariat of Economic Policy (Ministry of the Economy) and the MAPA. Most rural credit is
allocated under the National Rural Credit System (SNCR) and provided at preferential interest rates with
differentiated conditions for family farmers (PRONAF), small and medium size farmers (PRONAMP) and
commercial farms. The main sources of preferential rural credit are Compulsory Resources or lending
quotas, equivalent to around 25% of sight deposits in commercial banks and 59% of Rural Saving deposits,
Constitutional Funds and loans from the National Bank for Economic and Social Development (BNDES).
Agricultural credit is provided as short-term credit for commercialisation and working capital and long-term
credit for investments on fixed capital formation. Long-term credit is provided through the Programme
ABC+ used on investments on adaptation and mitigation, Moderfrota used for machinery and equipment,
the PRONAF and PRONAMP with their investment component, and Inovagro. Additional sources of rural
credit are the Coffee Fund (FUNCAFÉ) and the Agribusiness Credit Notes called LCAs (Letras de Crédito
do Agronegócio).
Two agricultural insurance programmes target commercial farmers. The rural insurance premium
programme (PSR) provides insurance premium subsidies to a diverse range of producers including
commercial producers who establish contracts with insurance companies listed by the government, and
the general agriculture insurance programme (PROAGRO) offers farmers partial compensation for
investment losses on working capital loans. Most resources from this programme are allocated to the
southern region for grain crops, mainly soybeans. Small-scale family farms can benefit from the
PROAGRO-Mais or family farming insurance (SEAF) and the crop guarantee programme in the north-east
of the country (Garantía Safra, GS).
Rural credit and subsidies insurance programmes must comply with environmental criteria defined by the
Environmental Rural Registry (CAR), a mandatory digital registration. Working capital credit is conditional
on agricultural zoning of climatic risks (Agricultural Risk Zoning, ZARC), which links agricultural support to
farming practices and activities adapted for the environmental sustainability of each geographical zone.
Compliance with zoning is also required to access both PRS and PROAGRO programmes. Rural
environmental registration of geo-referenced information on rural property, including property perimeters,
location of Permanent Preservation Areas, Legal Reserves, Restricted Use Areas, and areas of agricultural
production is compulsory across the country since 2012.
Brazil’s central initiative on adaptation and mitigation in agriculture is the National Low Carbon Agriculture
Plan (ABC+ Plan), which seeks to disseminate technologies that mitigate GHG emissions in agricultural
production and promote adaptation to climate change. A key programme under this ABC Plan, with a
strong environmental component on mitigation, is the Low Carbon Agricultural Programme (ABC
Programme), providing credit to farmers for activities that reduce GHG emissions; as well as promote
adaptation to climate change. Brazilian agricultural policies related to climate change mitigation are
embedded in the country’s agricultural policy instruments such as credit, insurance and zoning. For
example, credit provided by PRONAF such as PRONAF-Agroecologia, PRONAF-Bioeconomia, FNE
Verde, FNO Verde and FCO Verde, incorporate mitigation and adaptation features.
The ABC Programme is subdivided into the following subprogrammes: a) Recovery of degraded pastures
(ABC Recovery); b) Implementation and improvement of organic agricultural production systems (ABC
Organic); c) Implementation and improvement of no-tillage systems in straw (ABC No-Till); d) Implement
and improve crop-livestock, crop-forest, livestock-forest or crop-livestock-forest integration systems and
agroforestry systems (ABC Integration); e) Implementation, maintenance and improvement of commercial


176 

forest management, including those destined for industrial use or charcoal production (ABC Florestas);
f) adequacy or regularisation of rural properties concerning environmental legislation (ABC Ambiental);
g) implementation, maintenance and improvement of waste treatment systems and waste from animal
production for energy generation and composting (ABC Waste Treatment); h) plantation, improvement and
maintenance of oil palm forests, primarily in degraded productive areas (ABC Dendê); i) encouraging the
use of biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) (ABC Fixation); j) adoption of conservation practices for the use,
management.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
Brazilian agricultural policies related to climate-change adaptation (and mitigation) are mainstreamed into
core agricultural policy instruments such as credit, insurance, and the land-management tool of zoning.
The 2009 National Policy on Climate Change (NPCC) formalised Brazil’s voluntary commitment on GHG
emissions to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). As part of the
2010 NPCC, the Sectorial Low Carbon Emission and Adaptation to Climate Change Agriculture Plan (ABC
Plan) was developed to reduce GHG emissions and adapt agriculture to climate change.
The ABC Plan was updated in 2022 and published the Brazilian Agricultural Policy for Climate Adaptation
and Low Carbon Emission (ABC+ Plan). Its overarching objective is to promote adaptation to climate
change and reduce GHG emissions in Brazilian agriculture by increasing the efficiency and resilience of
production systems and integrated landscape management (MAPA, 2022[4]). It has the following specific
objectives:
•
support the adoption and conservation of sustainable agricultural production systems that increase
productivity, income, and resilience while controlling GHG emissions
•
improve the transfer and dissemination of technologies, training, and technical assistance for
production systems, practices, products, and sustainable processes (SPS-ABC) within the
agricultural sector
•
promote and support applied research for SPS-ABC, SPS-ABC-development or -improvement,
focusing on increasing resilience, productivity and income, and controlling GHG emissions
•
create and strengthen mechanisms to recognise and appreciate farmers who adopt SPS-ABC
•
expand and diversify sources for financing initiatives linked to SPS-ABC
•
improve the ABC+ Plan’s information-management system to measure, report, and verify SPS-
ABC, and monitor and evaluate its portfolio of actions and results
•
promote agriculture that is integrated with the landscape to encourage farms’ environmental
compliance and sustainable production in farming areas
Actions of the ABC+ Plan are divided between three new concepts: (1) an Integrated Landscape Approach
(ILA) focused on increasing the resilience of agricultural production systems; (2) synergy between GHG
mitigation and adaptation; and (3) adoption and maintenance of SPS-ABC (Table 6.3).
Brazil also has programmes and policies to support climate-change adaptation over a range of time
horizons:
•
Measures to buffer the short-term impact of shocks include early-warning systems, monitoring,
seasonal forecasts, emergency-preparedness planning, and support for recovery after climate-
change related events, such as the PROAGRO and PSR climate disaster-insurance programmes.
•
Measures to address medium-term adaptation include new production practices as those financed
by the ABC+, shifting planting dates according to ZARC, which considers among other things water
availability for different type of soils, adjusting crop mix, decision-support tools, extension and


 177

outreach programmes, developing inter-cropping systems (ILPF), monitoring production systems
with the GEO-ABC platform, among others.
•
Measures to address long-term adaptation include moving production affected by changing climate
to new regions (for example adaptation of soybean production from subtropical to tropical areas),
developing new value chains like pulses cultivation, investing in major infrastructure, developing
new governance structures, collaborative planning, and multi/transdisciplinary research. The ABC+
credit programme plays an important role in long-term initiatives, as it finances the acquisition and
use of new agricultural technologies.
Table 6.3. Brazil’s commitments under SPS-ABC for mitigation and adaptation in agriculture
SPSABC
Targeted outcomes
Mitigation potential of GHG
emissions
(MtCO2eq millions)
CC adaptation supported
Practices for Recovery of Degraded
Pastures (PRPD)1
30 million ha
113.702
Increasing the carbon stock and allows
greater infiltration and storage of water by
increasing the amount, proportional
distribution, depth, and decomposition of
roots along the soil profile. Reducing
erosion and increases adaptive capacity to
prolonged droughts.
No-Till System
No-Till System
for Grain
Production
12.5 million ha3
12.114
Promoting conservation of natural
resources, maintains permanent soil
cover, and improves its chemical, physical
and biological quality. Promoting greater
availability of water and a favourable
environment for crop root growth,
increasing efficiency of water use.
Reducing productivity losses and the
vulnerability of grains to pests by reducing
water availability for long periods.
Contributing to reducing the negative
impacts of extreme rainfall events on soil
and water conservation.
No-Till System
for Horticulture
(NTSH)
0.08 million ha5
0.886
Increasing efficiency in the use of inputs,
reducing the loss of soil, water and
nutrients by erosion, and reducing the
thermal amplitude and temperature of the
soil. Promoting less dependence on
external inputs, and less use of fossil fuels.
Making it possible to improve the use of
irrigation water. Reducing losses to
erosion.
Integrated
Systems (SIN)
Integrated
crop-livestock-
forestry
systems (ILPF)
10 million ha7
37.90
Reducing the effects of water-deficit,
increasing thermal comfort and animal
welfare, improving the productivity of
system components and the use of natural
resources, especially soil and water, and
minimising pasture losses in regions
subject to sudden thermal inversions.
Agroforestry
systems (SAF)
0.10 million ha
0.38
Improving physical, chemical and
biological properties of soils, reducing
erosion, increasing water-stock and
quality, intensifying nutrient cycling,
reducing the need for fertilisers and
pesticides, increasing biomass production,
increasing biodiversity, climate stability
and microclimate of production systems.
Promoting diversification of production and
increasing farmers’ level of employment
and income.


178 

SPSABC
Targeted outcomes
Mitigation potential of GHG
emissions
(MtCO2eq millions)
CC adaptation supported
Commercial Forestry (PF)
4 million ha
51010
Increasing water-capture and depth, and
streamlining water cycles in their
surroundings. Creating habitats for several
animal and plant species, with increased
biodiversity. High potential to generate
products and bioproducts for different
uses.
Bio-inputs (BI)
13 million ha
23.4011
Increasing root growth, allowing greater
use of water available in the soil.
Improving physical and chemical attributes
of the soil. Reducing the use of chemical
fertilisers based on nitrogen, phosphorus
and potassium, both via the supply of
nutrients via microbes and by increasing
the efficiency of fertiliser use by plants.
Inducing plants’ defence system.
Irrigation Systems (SI)
3 million ha12
5013
Reducing the vulnerability of production
systems to dry spells and the risk of crop
loss due to extreme events. Increasing the
stability and supply of food throughout the
year.
Animal Production Waste
Management (APWM)14
208.4 million m3
118.2015
Decreasing external dependence on
fertilisers and energy. Is a complementary
source of income.
Sustainable Intensive Cattle
Finishing (ICF)
5 million cattle heads16
16.2417
Promoting the best use of forage
resources. Increasing productivity.
TOTAL SPSABC
72.68 million ha
208.4 million m3
5 million cattle heads
1 042.41
Decreasing vulnerability and increasing
resilience of agricultural production
systems. Promoting conservation of
natural resources, increasing biodiversity
and climate stability of production systems.
Notes: ‘SPS-ABC’ means production systems, practices, products, and sustainable processes of the ABC+ Plan. SPS-ABC by 2023, considering
2020 as baseline year. (1) Considering recovery or reclaiming degraded pastures; (2) Considering a default emission/removal factor of 3.79
MtCO2eq ha-1 year-1); (3) Considering 4.5 million ha in NTS and 8.0 million hectares in NT; (4) Considering carbon sequestration rates of 1.75
Mg C ha-1 year -1 for SPD and 0.53 Mg C ha-1 year -1 for PD, and conversion factor for CO2eq of 3.67; (5) Considering at least 10% of the
horticultural production area being converted from conventional to Reduced Revolving Systems (RRS) or NTSH; (6) Calculated based on the
reduction of the use of 200 kg ha-1 of nitrogen fertilisers, in 8 annual cycles, and considering IPCC default emission/removal factors of 0.01 for
N2O, and conversion factor for CO2eq 3.67; (7) Considering 1 million hectares with tree species; (8) Considering emission/removal factor of
33.79 Mg CO2 eq ha-1 year-1); (9) Considering default emission/removal factor of 3.79 MtCO2 eq ha-1 year-1; (10) Considering default
emission/removal factor for eucalyptus, pine, and other commercial tree species; (11) Reduction calculated based on the replacement of
chemical fertilisers by the adoption of microbial processes; (12) Considering areas of intensification, with aggregation of areas under rainfed
agriculture, and expansion, aggregating areas of pastures, especially degraded pastures; (13) Considering emission/removal factor of 3.03 Mg
CO2 eq ha-1 year-1; (14) Whereas 27% of total waste generated by agricultural production systems is treated by bio-digestion or composting;
(15) Calculated according to the methodology used in the Technical Note: “Diagnosis of the expansion of using technology for animal waste
treatment (TDA) in Brazil between 2010 and 2019” ; (16) Considering cattle finished in feedlot and dry feeding on pasture, although there is no
official data on how much they represent of the total number of animals slaughtered in the country; (17) Considering growth in herd under
Intensive Finishing is 500 000 cattle per year, with mitigation potential of approximately 11.4 kg CO2 eq/kg carcasses, equivalent to 3,250 kg
CO2 eq/animal of 19.
Source: (MAPA, 2022[4]).
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
Each year, MAPA releases its annual Harvest Plan that defines the maximum resources and guidelines
for main policy instruments: 1) rural credit; 2) agricultural insurance; 3) commercialisation support; 4) the
zoning programme; and 5) the minimum and reference prices for each production year. While the new


 179

government that took office in 2023 continued implementing the Harvest Plan 2022/23, new emphasis has
been given to small-scale agriculture, sustainability, conservation, and environmental protection.
For the 2022/23 harvest plan, the total credit allocation was BRL 341 billion (USD 66 billion), an increase
of 36% compared to the 2021/22 harvest plan. Working capital and commercialisation credit represent
72% of the total with the remainder directed to investment credit. This total credit allocation is divided
between small-scale farmers who receive 16% (PRONAF), medium-size producers who receive 13%
(PRONAMP), and other producers who receive 71%. Preferential interest rates increased by between 1.5
and 4.5 percentage points depending on the type of credit provided to farmers.
The available resources for the Programme ABC+ increased from BRL 5 billion (USD 968 million) in 2022
to BRL 6.1 billion (USD 1.2 billion) in 2023; moreover, the Programme ABC+ had to be adjusted to comply
with the newly updated ABC+ Plan. Some activities financed under the Programme ABC+ are biomass-
based inputs and organic fertilisers, renewable energy systems, power generation from biogas and bio-
methane, restoring degraded areas and pastures, implementing integrated crop-livestock-forestry
systems, adopting conservation practices, managing, and protecting natural resources, organic
agriculture, among many others. These measures are driven by concessional loans provided through the
Programme ABC+. Moreover, of the total resources of the Harvest Plan, 47% are directed to financing
sustainable production systems.
In 2022 expenditures on rural insurance subsidies (PSR) reached BRL 1.11 billion (USD 215 million). This
subsidy covers approximately 7.25 million hectares (3.1% of total agricultural land), benefiting
78 574 producers, and resulting in a total insurance coverage of BRL 43.9 billion (USD 8.5 billion). The
Minimum Price Policy (PGPM) for the 2022/23 harvest identified 27 regional and national products
including main grains, as well as 17 local products for the domestic market.
A new rule document for the Agricultural Risk Zoning (ZARC) was published in 2022, establishing the
method for classifying soil, based on water availability (AD). Soybeans is the first crop to use the new rules
for the 2023/24 harvest; studies are being updated for other crops. Moreover, the ZARC continued to
implement “ZARC 4.0” that integrates various technical risk data: agro-climatic, management, soils and
indications of productivity losses. MAPA, EMBRAPA and the Central Bank agreed to jointly provide funds
for research on the ZARC programme, with the objective of expanding harvested areas and production
systems in the country through new zoning. These funds also aim at modernising the information collection
and methods to determine the most suitable planting periods, and minimising the risks related to adverse
climatic events. By 2022, 30 crops and production systems were researched by the ZARC.
The 2022 Agro Law 2 aims at the simplification of the registration of guarantees for rural credit operations.
An additional Decree in July 2022 sets mandatory procedures for the traceability of products of plant origin
for agents of the supply chains, including control measures for food safety and quality.
In January 2023, the Ministry of Rural Development and Family Farming (MDA) was reinstated. Key
competences of MDA are: 1) sustainable rural development aimed at family farms and other traditional
communities; 2) agricultural policy for family farms covering production, credit, insurance, promotion and
productive inclusion; 3) conservation and management of natural resources linked to family farms ;
4) biodiversity, conservation, protection and use of the genetic resources of interest to family farms; and
5) production and dissemination of information on agricultural and livestock systems, including socio-
biodiversity products. Also in January 2023, a new structure of MAPA was established, including the
creation of the Department of Reforestation and Recovery of Degraded Areas. The new Department
oversees promoting reforestation and the agroforestry systems in agricultural production units.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
The country has been incentivising the use of biomass-based inputs and organic fertilisers, to reduce the
dependency on the world market of chemical fertilisers. The bio-input portfolio is wide and includes


180 

inoculants, plant growth promoters, ingredients for plant and animal nutrition, plant extracts, pest, parasites
and diseases control agents.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
In 2022, some agricultural tariffs were reduced to curb food price inflation caused by COVID-19 and
exacerbated by the war in Ukraine. Import tariffs for non-Mercosur imports, which had been at 8% for
maize and soybeans, 6% for soymeal and 10% for soy oil, were temporarily reduced to zero.
Contextual information
Brazil is one of the ten biggest economies of the world, and it is the largest country in Latin America in
terms of area and population. It has abundant land and water resources and is a major agricultural producer
and exporter. The share of agriculture in Brazil’s GDP increased from 5.5% in 2000 to 6.9% in 2021, while
its share in employment decreased from 16.3% to 9.7% during the same period. These shares remain
higher than in most other countries covered in this report. Agro-food exports have grown in importance for
Brazil, representing 37% of its total exports in 2021. Arable land accounts for 24% of Brazilian agricultural
land.
Brazil is among the world’s leaders in the production of soybeans, poultry, beef, cotton, corn, and orange
juice, being the third biggest exporter of agro-food products after the European Union and the United
States. Around two-thirds of the total value of agricultural production are crop products, and one-third
livestock products. The main product in Brazilian exports is soybeans in grain, meal, and oil.
Table 6.4. Brazil: Contextual indicators

Brazil
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
1,582
3 436
4.0%
2.8%
Population (million)
176
214
4.1%
4.1%
Land area (thousand km2)
8 358
8 358
10.2%
10.1%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
228 324
236 879
7.6%
8.1%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
21
26
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
8 995
16 031
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
8.8
16.0
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
5.5
6.9
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
16.3
9.7
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
23.4
37.0
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.1
5.4
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
67
68
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
33
32
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
20
24
32
34
Note: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.


 181

After the recession in 2015 and 2016, Brazilian GDP grew moderately at just below 2% between 2017 and
2019. The economy shrank by 4% in 2020 during the COVID-19 and rebounded in 2021 reaching a 4.4%
growth rate. However, in 2022 the economy witnessed a deceleration growing 2.8%. At the same time,
unemployment decreased to 9.3% in 2022 from 13.2% in 2021; but inflation increased to reach 9.3% in
2022.
Figure 6.5. Brazil: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Agro-food exports in Brazil have exceeded USD 80 billion per year since 2017, generating an annual agro-
food trade surplus of more than USD 100 billion in 2021. Around 53% of Brazilian agro-food exports are
primary products for industry (including soybeans), and more than 58% of the country’s imports are
processed products.


182 

Figure 6.6. Brazil: Agro-food trade


Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Between 2011 and 2020, Brazilian agricultural production increased at an annual rate of 3.1%, above the
world average. Increases in production were driven by Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth of 2% per
year, again well above the global average, while increased use of intermediary inputs was offset by the
declining use of primary factors in agricultural production.
Agriculture accounted for 43% of GHG emissions in 2021, which is below the level observed in 2000, but
still high compared to the OECD average. The use of energy by the agricultural sector has increased up
to 5.6% of total use in 2021, also above the OECD average. The larger share of the agricultural sector in
the Brazilian economy and the importance of pasture-based livestock contribute to these outcomes. Even
though the agriculture’s share of water abstractions remained high at 61%, water stress is low (0.8).
Brazil - Figure 6A. Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
25
50
75
100
125
Brazil - Figure 6B. Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
20
20
28
28
53
53
34
34
24
24
30
30
2
2
8
8
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 183

Nutrient surpluses in Brazil have increased since 2000, and the phosphorous balance is more than five
times the OECD average.
Figure 6.7. Brazil: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 6.5. Brazil: Productivity and environmental indicators

Brazil
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
2.5%
2.0%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
21.0
26.0
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
11.8
18.0
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
4.8
5.6
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
45.3
43.3
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
1.4
2.2
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
58.3
61.1
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
0.5
0.8
8.3
7.4
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


Brazil - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
1.97%
1.97%
1.12%
1.12%
-0.86%
-0.86%
0.35%
0.35%
1.11%
1.11%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Brazil
World
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%


184 

References

MAPA (2022), Brazilian agricultural policy for climate adaptation and low carbon emission.
[4]
MAPA (2022), Plano Safra 2022/2023.
[3]
OECD (2015), Innovation, Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability in Brazil, OECD Food and
Agricultural Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264237056-en.
[1]
OECD (2005), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Brazil 2005, OECD Review of Agricultural
Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264012554-en.
[2]



 185

Support to agriculture
Canada significantly reduced support to agriculture since the late 1980s. Producer support as a share of
gross farm receipts halved from 1986-88 to 2000-02, largely because Market Price Support (MPS) to the
grains industry was discontinued in 1995. This decline halted in recent years, with support stabilising over
the last decade, averaging 9.4% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22, below the OECD average.
Despite past reductions, MPS continues to dominate support to producers, specifically targeting the dairy,
poultry, and egg sectors. These commodities benefit from a supply-management system with tariffs,
production quotas, and administered prices maintaining domestic prices above international prices. Milk
received particularly high single commodity transfers in 2020-22, amounting to 32% of its gross-farm-
receipts value. Average MPS was lower in 2022 than previous years due to higher border prices for eggs
and poultry meat relative to domestic farm prices as a result of avian flu in the United States.
Canada also uses payments based on unconstrained use of variable inputs, notably fuel. Together with
MPS, these potentially most-distorting support measures represented 47% of aggregated gross producer
transfers in 2020-22, or 4% of gross farm receipts. Risk-management tools constitute the other main types
of budgetary payments and played a more prominent role in the past two years due to adverse weather
conditions. Other categories of payments represent a minor share of Canadian farm revenues.
Support to general services (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) amounted to 3% of agricultural
production value in 2020-22, slightly below the OECD average and down from 6% in 2000-02.
Expenditures on inspection and control systems, and agricultural knowledge and innovation each
accounted for about 40% of GSSE in recent years. The Total Support Estimate (TSE) represented 0.4%
of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2020-22.
Recent policy changes
The Sustainable Canadian Agriculture Partnership 2023-28 came into effect on 1 April 2023. This five-year
policy framework includes CAD 500 million (USD 384 million) of additional funds, representing a 25%
increase over the previous framework in the federal-provincial-territorial cost-shared envelope. This new
framework has a strong focus on climate change and environment, including a political commitment to
contribute to reducing greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions in agriculture by 3 to 5 MtCO2eq – for a sector
that emitted 55 MtCO2eq in 2020.
The 2030 Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) launched in March 2022 announced additional funding of
CAD 1 billion (USD 0.8 billion) over six years to support sustainable agriculture and encourage the sector
to significantly reduce GHG emissions. Almost half of the additional budget is dedicated to on-farm
programmes that help farmers adopt climate-change mitigation practices, including nitrogen management,
cover cropping, and rotational grazing, by providing a combination of training, technical support, and
7 Canada


186 

financial incentives. Another 30% will be devoted to supporting the development and adoption of clean
technologies in the fields of green energy and energy efficiency, precision agriculture, and the bioeconomy.
Financial incentives for investment and direct payments in the dairy, poultry, and egg sectors were
strengthened to compensate market losses from new market access granted to trade partners under recent
regional trade agreements.
In response to the impacts of Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, in particular the rise of input
prices, Canada increased the interest-free limit on loans under its Advance Payment Program for 2022
and 2023, providing interest rate relief to participating producers.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Canada’s climate-change adaptation strategy outlines actions for the agricultural sector, ranging
from short-term risk-management measures to medium-term support for adopting on-farm resilient
management practices and long-term initiatives focused on research and innovation. Although all
three levels of the resilience framework are addressed, measures focused on buffering the effects
of climate change (particularly to support recovery from a climate event) play a major role in the
policy architecture and budget. More attention and resources could be devoted to longer-term
actions that enhance the adaptive capacity of farmers and the transformation of production
systems. It will also be essential to monitor the progress of policy implementation.
•
Canada strengthened efforts to reduce agricultural GHG emissions, including additional funding
for mitigation actions and a political commitment to reduce emissions under the new agricultural
policy framework. However, agriculture remains largely excluded from the carbon pricing scheme
– an effective policy tool for achieving the country's targets. Wider coverage of agricultural
emissions by the system could encourage adoption of practices that reduce emissions and
increase soil carbon storage.
•
The Canadian approach to risk management has evolved towards a more proactive policy
framework – less reliant on ad-hoc policy responses to adverse events – which is a positive step
towards increased agricultural resilience. The set of reviews of the Business Risk Management
programmes will provide an opportunity to assess and further improve the risk-management policy
toolkit, which accounts for almost half of total budgetary support. Evidence is needed to evaluate
the system’s effectiveness and the effects of cash transfers to farmers through low-interest loans,
subsidised savings accounts, co-financed insurance premiums, and direct payments. Evidence-
based assessment could enable wider adoption of the most cost-effective programmes, stimulate
the development of market-based tools where the opportunity-costs of public support are higher,
and encourage farmers to improve risk management at farm level. This holistic assessment should
also consider the linkages and trade-offs between risk-management programmes and
environmental outcomes, to maximise the sector’s long-term resilience and minimise unintended
negative effects, including potential forms of maladaptation to climate change (OECD, 2020[1]).
•
The Canadian agricultural policy framework continues to provide significant general services
support to the sector through programmes that target industry-led research and development,
adoption of innovation, and inspection and control systems. The new policy framework should
reinforce this focus, which accounts for almost a third of total budgetary support (well above the
OECD average) to strengthen the sector's long-term competitiveness and sustainability.
•
Potentially most-distorting transfers remain the main component of transfers to producers. The
dairy, poultry, and egg sectors continue to be protected from international competition via market
price support measures that distort production and trade and inflate domestic prices. Supply
management for these commodities should be reduced by increasing production quotas and
gradually declining price support for the dairy, poultry, and egg sectors. This would encourage


 187

market responsiveness and stimulate innovation to increase efficiency and diversify towards
higher-value products.
Figure 7.1. Canada: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Canada - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
Canada - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Canada - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Canada - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
Canada - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%


188 

Figure 7.2. Canada: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 7.3. Canada: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
Canada - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Border price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
Border price change decomposition
Change in producer price
PSE change decomposition
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
Canada - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Barley
Maize
Rapeseed
Soybeans
Oats
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Eggs
Dried beans
Dried peas
Lentils
Potatoes
Flax
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
22%
24%
26%
28%
30%
32%
3…


 189

Table 7.1. Canada: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
14 083
20 696
60 242
51 198
61 602
67 926
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
85.57
81.97
81.79
81.13
81.55
82.70
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
11 833
15 014
40 852
32 694
44 688
45 175
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
5 855
3 897
6 000
4 727
7 808
5 465
Support based on commodity output
3 214
1 629
2 383
2 378
3 059
1 712
Market Price Support1
2 851
1 608
2 383
2 378
3 059
1 712
Positive Market Price Support
2 997
1 608
2 383
2 378
3 059
1 712
Negative Market Price Support
-146
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
364
20
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
1 091
368
619
583
606
667
Based on variable input use
622
242
415
422
396
427
with input constraints
0
0
8
0
0
24
Based on fixed capital formation
448
108
188
147
202
214
with input constraints
0
0
15
3
6
35
Based on on-farm services
20
18
16
14
8
25
with input constraints
0
0
8
0
0
24
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
1 336
1 307
2 603
1 375
3 729
2 705
Based on Receipts / Income
467
586
634
581
550
770
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
869
721
1 969
793
3 178
1 935
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
1
4
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
553
356
343
367
360
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
553
356
343
367
360
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
8
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
8
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
206
41
38
45
47
22
Percentage PSE (%)
34.44
16.95
9.36
8.83
11.77
7.62
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.34
1.09
1.04
1.05
1.05
1.03
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.53
1.20
1.10
1.10
1.13
1.08
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
1 153
1 260
1 821
1 746
1 940
1 778
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
483
536
676
645
675
708
Inspection and control
283
348
758
746
831
695
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
268
182
199
172
221
204
Marketing and promotion
85
179
133
121
152
126
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
34
15
56
62
61
45
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
16.30
24.44
23.09
26.36
19.66
24.52
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-2 533
-1 719
-2 660
-2 593
-3 435
-1 952
Transfers to producers from consumers
-2 766
-1 602
-2 383
-2 378
-3 059
-1 712
Other transfers from consumers
-31
-117
-370
-365
-496
-248
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
31
0
93
150
120
8
Excess feed cost
234
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-21.54
-11.44
-6.52
-7.97
-7.71
-4.32
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.31
1.13
1.07
1.09
1.09
1.05
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.27
1.13
1.07
1.09
1.08
1.05
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
7 039
5 157
7 914
6 623
9 869
7 251
Transfers from consumers
2 798
1 720
2 753
2 743
3 555
1 960
Transfers from taxpayers
4 273
3 555
5 531
4 245
6 810
5 540
Budget revenues
-31
-117
-370
-365
-496
-248
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.61
0.69
0.41
0.40
0.49
0.34
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
4 188
3 549
5 531
4 245
6 810
5 540
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.96
0.47
0.29
0.26
0.34
0.26
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
138
213
196
212
230
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
1.32
1.53
1.30
1.34
1.25
1.30
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Canada are: wheat, maize, barley, oats, soybean,
rapeseed, flax, potatoes, lentils, dried beans, dried peas, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




190 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Prior to the mid-1980s, Canada heavily supported the agricultural sector through measures such as
import tariffs, export and production subsidies, and price and production controls. The dominant features
of agricultural policy were supply management measures in the dairy and poultry sectors, collective
marketing in grains and oilseeds (notably by the Canadian Wheat Board, or CWB), and income stabilisation
programmes (Barichello, 1995[2]). Support varied between eastern and western provinces, partly due to
Canada’s decentralised political system, and the independence of provincial governments in policies such
as marketing legislation (Anderson, 2009[3]).
In the mid-1980s, Canada began agricultural policy reform, particularly in the grain sector. In 1990, the
Western Grains Stabilization Program, which was intended to stabilise net margins for major grains and
oilseeds from western Canada, was terminated (Anderson, 2009[3]). This was replaced by the National
Tripartite Stabilization Program (NTSP), which established federal-provincial cost-sharing of programmes
(Antón, Kimura and Martini, 2011[4]). The Farm Income Protection Act of 1991 changed Canada’s approach
to supporting producers by moving from commodity-specific policies towards programmes supporting farm
incomes. The Act established two safety-net programmes: (1) the Gross Revenue Insurance Plan (GRIP,
1991-1996/2002) to protect against reductions in revenues and yields; and (2) the Net Income Stabilization
Account (NISA, 1991-2009) to subsidise savings accounts for individual producers (Anderson, 2009[3];
Klein and Storey, 1998[5]). Furthermore, compliance with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) and free trade agreements of the early 1990s (NAFTA) accelerated the reform process, eliminating
most commodity-based policies (e.g. NTSP) except those targeting supply-managed commodities (Antón,
Kimura and Martini, 2011[4]). In 1995, transport subsidies to grains (the Western Grain Transport
Assistance and the Feed Freight Assistance) were abolished (Anderson, 2009[3]), ending the period of high
market price support1 to these commodities (Figure 7.2).
The Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance (AIDA) programme introduced in 1998 was the first to comply
with criteria for income insurance and safety-net programmes under the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Agriculture. AIDA was established to serve as a core income stabilisation policy, reducing
the need for ad hoc programmes. The “disaster” component was integrated into subsequent programmes:
the Canadian Farm Income Program (CFIP, 2001-03); the Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization
(CAIS, 2004-08); and AgriStability (Anderson, 2009[3]; Statistics Canada, 2021[6]; Antón, Kimura and
Martini, 2011[4]).
Since 2003, agricultural policy objectives and approaches are set out in longer-term agricultural policy
frameworks developed through co-operation by federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) governments. The
first framework covered five areas: (1) business risk management, (2) food safety and quality,
(3) environment, (4) science and innovation, and (5) renewal (skills and training) (Agriculture and Agri-
Food Canada, 2005[7]). Initially, the federal government delivered programmes directly. This evolved with
the Growing Forward framework (2008-13) which transferred programme implementation to the provinces
and territories, allowing for more flexibility and better adaptability to local needs (OECD, 2015[8]). During
this time, the AgriStability and AgriInvest programmes replaced CAIS and NISA, respectively, continuing
to provide farmers with income stabilisation products and subsidised saving accounts. The Growing
Forward 2 framework (2013-18) strengthened the role of these programmes and incorporated additional
initiatives, such as AgriInsurance (previously referred to as the Crop Insurance) and the AgriRecovery
disaster programme framework (Anderson, 2009[3]; Statistics Canada, 2021[6]; Antón, Kimura and Martini,
2011[4]). Risk-management programmes have continued to evolve under the Canadian Agricultural
Partnership (2018-23) and the Sustainable Canadian Agriculture Partnership (2023-2028) (see next
section).


 191

Table 7.2. Canada: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1985
Import barriers for competing imported products and
support for traded products
Domestic market control
Agricultural tariffs for competing imported products
Import quotas/tariff-rate quotas
Export subsidies for agricultural products
Transportation subsidies for agricultural products
Supply management for dairy and poultry products
Grains policy featured by a one-desk selling marketing board and
significant transportation subsidy
Price controls for agricultural products using marketing boards such as
the collective marketing of wheat and barley (CWB)
1985-2000
Gradual reforms and trade liberalisation
Increasing emphasis on income and revenue support
Reduction of agricultural tariffs and quotas
Diminishing reliance on marketing boards, supply management, price
controls
GATT, free trade agreements
Dismantling of Western Grains Stabilization Program
Termination of Western Grains Transportation Assistance and Feed
Freight Assistance
Gradual dismantling of payments coupled to production
Introduction of “whole farm” income stabilisation programmes
Introduction of insurance subsidies
2000-2020
Income stabilisation emphasis implemented through
federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) co-operation
Continued supply management of the dairy, poultry and eggs sectors:
price-setting mechanisms, production quotas and tariffs
Privatisation of the CWB
Agricultural policy frameworks developed through the cooperation of
FPT governments
Subsidies for farm income stabilisation
Subsidies for farm savings
Insurance subsidies
Disaster relief framework
2020-present
Climate ambition and emphasis on sustainability
Fertiliser emissions reduction target of 30% below 2020 levels by 2030
Support to agricultural clean technologies and climate solutions
Sustainable Canadian Agriculture Partnership (2023-2028)
Support to agricultural producers in Canada decreased over the last three decades, with government
support declining from over 34% of farmers’ revenues in the mid-1980s to around 9% in recent years
(Figure 7.4). This resulted from the discontinuation of market price support to grains and oilseeds in the
mid-1990s, and the reduction or phase-out of several programmes offering payments based on output
(e.g. support to dairy farmers under the Agriculture Stabilization Act) and input use (e.g. Federal Fuel Tax
Rebates) between the late 1980s and the early 2000s. Market price support for supply-managed
commodities, particularly in the dairy sector, accounted for the largest share of transfers to producers up
to 2020. Payments based on current production, including multiple risk-management programmes
(e.g. AgriInsurance), were the second largest contributor. Over the past two years, this trend has been
reversed. In 2021, the share of payments based on current production was particularly high due to a larger
budget devoted to cope with the impacts of adverse weather conditions. In 2022, the share of market price
support was lower than usual due to very high reference prices for certain supply-managed commodities,
particularly egg prices – and to some extent poultry meat prices – in the United States, as a result of avian
flu. Other categories of payments play a relatively minor role in Canadian farm revenues.


192 

Figure 7.4. Canada: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Canada’s agriculture is a shared jurisdiction between federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) governments
who collaborate and co-ordinate on issues of mutual interest. This includes an agreed agricultural policy
framework which reflects national priorities while providing flexibility for provinces and territories to design
and deliver programmes that respond to their regional priorities. In addition, the federal government,
provinces and territories can develop and fund their own agriculture programmes outside of this framework.
The structure of agricultural policy has remained largely unchanged over the past two decades. It is
characterised by the separate treatment of supply-managed commodities (dairy, poultry and eggs), which
are protected and oriented towards the domestic market, and other commodities (e.g. field crops, red meat,
horticulture) that have less market interventions and are generally export-oriented.
The three protected sectors (dairy, poultry and eggs) benefit from a national supply management system
that provides market price support through customs tariffs (import control) and production quotas
(production control), tradable within provinces, combined with domestic price-setting according to
production costs and consumer price index, among others (pricing mechanism). Supply managed
commodities are governed by their own FPT agreements – the national marketing plans – and are
administered by more than 80 provincial agricultural marketing boards operating in coordination with the
national agencies.
General policies and programmes to support Canada’s agriculture and agro-food sector are mainly
provided through multilateral policy frameworks. The Canadian Agricultural Partnership (CAP) 2018-23
(Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 2018[9]), which is superseded by the Sustainable CAP 2023-28, is a
Canada - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45


 193

five-year agreement between FPT governments and finances business risk management programmes
along with strategic initiatives that are either federal programmes or cost-shared activities by FPT
governments.
The business risk management (BRM) programmes support producers in managing risks that threaten
the viability of their farm or are beyond their capacity to control and build on the backbone of programmes
delivered during the previous frameworks. Their design attempts to balance ex ante and ex post measures
and seeks to limit ad hoc forms of assistance. Under the CAP 2018-23, FPT governments jointly provide
approximately CAD 1.5 billion (USD 1.15 billion) per year to finance the five following BRM programmes:
•
AgriStability, an income stabilisation programme to support producers in years of significant whole-
farm margin declines.
•
AgriInvest, a savings tool that matches the contributions of producers who make annual deposits
into an AgriInvest account, to help them manage moderate income declines, make investments in
farming operations to mitigate risks or improve market income, although there is no restriction on
withdrawing funds at any time and for any purpose.
•
AgriInsurance, a federal-provincial-producer cost-shared insurance programme that makes
production insurance more affordable by sharing the cost of premiums with producers and reduces
the financial impact of production or asset losses due to natural hazards.
•
AgriRecovery, a disaster relief framework to help producers with the cost of activities necessary to
recover from natural disasters.
•
AgriRisk, a programme to support the development of new risk-management tools by the private
sector.
Additionally, the federal government provides support to the allocation of credits to farmers as well as to
the marketing of farm products. For example, the Advance Payments Program (APP) is a financial loan
guarantee programme under which the federal government guarantees cash advances of up to
CAD 1 million (USD 770 000) to producers based on the anticipated value of their farm products. For each
programme year, the government pays the interest on the first CAD 100 000 (USD 77 000) advanced to a
producer, with preferential interest rates on amounts over this threshold. The APP seeks to help producers
anticipate, mitigate and respond to market volatility by improving their cash flow and their ability to manage
risks in commodity markets. Unlike Federal, Provincial and Territorial BRM programmes which are based
on the Farm Income Protection Act (FIPA), the APP is fully federally funded outside the CAP budget and
has the Agricultural Marketing Programs Act (AMPA) as its legislative base.
The federal-only funded strategic initiatives under CAP 2018-23 provide CAD 1 billion (USD 0.8 billion)
for federal programmes that focus on three pillars:
•
Growing trade and expanding markets through the AgriMarketing programme, which supports
industry-led market development activities by helping the sector identify and seize domestic and
international opportunities; and the AgriCompetitiveness programme, which helps the sector adapt
to changing commercial and regulatory environments, share best practices, and provide
mentorship opportunities.
•
Fostering innovative and sustainable growth in the sector through the AgriScience programme,
which supports innovation driven by industry research priorities, including pre-commercialisation
activities and investments in cutting-edge research to benefit the agriculture and agro-food sector;
and the AgriInnovate programme, which supports projects that accelerate the demonstration,
commercialisation or adoption of innovative products, technologies, processes or services that
increase the sector’s competitiveness and sustainability.
•
Supporting diversity and a dynamic, evolving sector through the AgriAssurance programme, which
aims to foster public trust by helping industry develop and adopt systems, standards and tools to
make verifiable claims about the health, safety and quality of Canadian agricultural products, and


194 

the manner they are produced; and the AgriDiversity programme, which aims to increase the
capacity of youth, women, Indigenous Peoples and persons with disabilities to better participate in
the agricultural sector. It supports skills, leadership, and entrepreneurial development; and
facilitates knowledge sharing and best management practices.
The cost-shared strategic initiatives are funded 60% by the federal government and 40% by the
provincial/territorial governments, and provide CAD 2 billion (USD 1.5 billion) under current CAP 2018-23
for activities that focus on the following six priority areas:
•
Science, research and innovation to help farmers, food processors and agri-businesses adopt
innovative products and practices in order to improve resiliency and productivity through research,
innovation and knowledge transfer.
•
Markets and trade to facilitate the maintenance and expansion of domestic and international
markets and help farmers and food processors improve their competitiveness through skills
development and improved export capacity.
•
Environmental sustainability and climate change to build the sector’s capacity to protect natural
resources, mitigate agricultural GHG emissions and adapt to the anticipated impacts of climate
change by enhancing sustainable growth.
•
Value-added agriculture and agro-food processing to foster continued growth by supporting
targeted actions aiming to increase productivity and competitiveness.
•
Public trust to build a firm foundation for the sector through improved assurance systems in food
safety and plant and animal health, stronger traceability and effective regulation.
•
Risk management to enable proactive and effective risk mitigation and adaptation and strengthen
the resilience of the sector by ensuring comprehensive, responsive and accessible programmes.
These programmes are primarily based on cost-share funding i.e. the reimbursement of expenses, most
often on a 50-50 basis between the grant and the applicant. Some also offer technical assistance and
extension services.
Most farm-level environmental programmes are designed and administered by provincial and territorial
governments. There are two programmes (cost-shared between federal and provincial governments) that
are designed to advance environmentally sustainable agriculture: the Environmental Farm Plans (EFP)
Programs and the Environmental Stewardship Incentive Programs. The EFP consists of an environmental
assessment of farm management practices, and an action plan that details identified risks, and actions or
practices to mitigate them. The Environmental Stewardship Incentive Programs provide cost-shared
financial assistance to farms with an EFP to adopt specific beneficial management practices, such as
nutrient management, manure storage and soil erosion controls (OECD, 2015[8]).
More recently, climate policies have come to complement agricultural policies in fostering the sector’s
contribution to achieving the country’s ambitious climate goals. In its 2021 updated Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC) to the Paris Agreement, Canada committed to reducing national net GHG emissions
40-45% below 2005 levels by 2030, to achieving net-zero emissions by 2050 and to reaching a national
fertiliser emissions reduction target of 30% below 2020 levels by 2030 (Government of Canada, 2021[10]).
Canada also signed the Global Methane Pledge and committed to reducing its economy-wide methane
emissions by 2030 (Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2021[11]). However, agricultural emissions
remain largely excluded from Canada’s main emissions reduction tool of pricing carbon pollution.
Building on the Pan-Canadian Framework (PCF) on Clean Growth and Climate Change established in
2016, the government of Canada created in 2020 its A Healthy Environment and a Healthy Economy plan
(Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2020[12]), which contains agriculture-specific actions
including:


 195

•
The Agricultural Clean Technology (ACT) initiative supports farmers and agro-food businesses in
developing and adopting clean technologies. Two funding streams focus on achieving a low-carbon
economy and promoting sustainable growth. The Research and Innovation Stream (2021 to 2028)
supports the development and the spreading out of transformative clean technologies in three
areas (green energy and energy efficiency, precision agriculture and bioeconomy). Support is
provided in the form of non-repayable contributions up to 50% of the costs of research,
development and demonstration projects and in the form of repayable contributions where activities
involve commercialisation and scale-up. The Adoption Stream (2021 to 2026) aims to support
farmers in the purchase and installation of commercially available clean technologies and
processes, primarily those reducing GHG emissions and generating other environmental co-
benefits. Green energy and energy efficiency, precision agriculture and bioeconomy solutions are
eligible activities funded through non-repayable contributions up to 50% of the costs for for-profit
and 75% for non-profit organisations.
•
The Agricultural Climate Solutions (ACS) initiative supports the development and implementation
of farming practices to tackle climate change (Government of Canada, 2021[13]), a multi-stream
programme under the Natural Climate Solution Fund. While the Living Labs Stream, aims to co-
develop, test and monitor beneficial management practices on farms that sequester carbon and
mitigate GHG emissions, through regional collaboration hubs that bring together farmers,
scientists, and other sector partners, the On-Farm Climate Action Fund (2021-2024) helps farmers
adopt such practices, including nitrogen management, cover cropping and rotational grazing,
providing a combination of training, technical support and financial incentives.
While the main focus of these measures is on green growth and climate mitigation, there are some cross-
cutting approaches with climate adaptation and resilience that are developed in the following section.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
The Government of Canada released its first National Adaptation Strategy: Building Resilient Communities
and a Strong Economy in November 2022. This strategy presents a shared vision for climate resilience in
Canada, resulting from the engagement of ministries, provincial and territorial governments, academia,
national indigenous organisations, industry organisations, and other relevant stakeholders since 2021. It
focuses on the following five priority areas (Government of Canada, 2022[14]):
•
improving health and well-being (minimising climate-change risks to health, and better preparing
the health system to manage increased demand for health services)
•
building and maintaining resilient public infrastructure (regarding transportation, healthcare,
utilities, communications, and trade)
•
protecting and restoring nature and biodiversity
•
supporting the economy and workers (generating incentives for adaptation and developing a skilled
and resilient workforce)
•
reducing the impacts of climate-related disasters
The strategy stands as a framework for measuring progress at the national level. Agriculture is one of the
sectors most at risk from climate change, and actions related to the sector are embedded in the “economy
and workers” priority area, with linkages to “disaster resilience”, “health and well-being”, and “nature and
biodiversity”.
The Government of Canada Adaptation Action Plan (GOCAAP) released in 2022 outlines the federal
government’s contributions to implementing the National Adaptation Strategy and provides a framework
for organising federal adaptation actions going forward. The federal action plan complements the work and
strategies of provinces, territories, and indigenous peoples on adaptation to climate change. In addition to


196 

the federal plan, and separate provincial and territorial action plans aim to advance efforts on shared
priorities, and Indigenous climate leadership will support self-determined action.
The six actions targeting the agricultural sector contained in the GOCAAP are all existing policy
developments. The BRM) programmes, the AgriRecovery framework, the Living Labs initiative, the On-
Farm Climate Action fund, the Environment and Climate Change cost-shared strategic initiatives, and the
federal science and innovation programmes contribute to the sector’s adaptation to climate change in
complementary ways, described below (Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2022[15]).
Short-term measures can help farmers buffer the impact from a shock. The BRM programmes provide
producers with protection against income and production losses, including losses from severe weather
events (e.g. droughts, wildfires, and floods). They include the AgriRecovery Framework, designed to help
agricultural producers recover from natural disasters when the assistance required for the agricultural
sector to return to production exceeds what is covered by the other BRM programmes.
In the medium term, the Agricultural Climate Solutions (ACS) initiative supports development and
implementation of practices that could tackle climate change, contributing to both mitigation and
adaptation. The Living Labs stream is a 10-year, CAD 185 million (USD 138 million) programme
establishing a Canada-wide network of farmers, scientists, and other partners to co-develop, test and
monitor beneficial management practices on farms. This is complemented by the CAD 670 million
(USD 515 million) On-Farm Climate Action fund that supports adoption of beneficial management practices
(BMPs) that store carbon, reduce GHG emissions, and enhance climate resilience in three areas:
(1) nitrogen management; (2) cover cropping; and (3) rotational grazing practices. While the main objective
of these programmes is reducing GHG emissions (climate-change mitigation), secondary benefits relate
to adaptation.
Environmental Sustainability and Climate Change is one of the six priorities of the Strategic Initiatives
under the 2018-2023 Canadian Agricultural Partnership. Support provided under this partnership helps the
sector adapt to anticipated impacts of climate change (e.g. changing growing conditions, extreme weather
events, reduced or excess water availability, water quality, soil degradation, and new and increased pests
and disease outbreaks). Funds support adoption of beneficial management practices that enhance climate
resilience. The budget available for this priority over the five-year agreement represents 24% of total
expenditures for the Strategic Initiatives, totaling CAD 438 million (USD 336 million).
On-farm actions are encouraged by the development of Environmental Farm Plans and supported by
incentive programmes for the adoption of on-farm BMPs. A total of 10 263 BMP projects have been
completed as of 31 March 2021, of which 2 961 (29%) are directly relevant to climate adaptation, including
actions such as improved on-farm water supply and retention, more efficient irrigation equipment and
management, and adopting soil health practices such as conservation and no-till seeding.
Long-term measures are contained in programmes such as AgriScience, with CAD 338 million
(USD 260 million), AgriInnovate, with CAD 128 million (USD 98 million), and Foundational Science, with
CAD 224 million (USD 172 million), which contribute to supporting the climate resilience and sustainability
of the sector through science, research, and adoption of innovative practices and technologies.
Various initiatives at the provincial level complement the national climate adaptation framework. The British
Columbia (BC) Government announced the Climate Preparedness and Adaptation Strategy in June 2022,
which provides CAD 11 million (USD 8 million) in 2022-23 and 2023-24 for actions targeting food security
and resilient local agriculture, among other things. Under this strategy, the Extreme Weather Preparedness
for Agriculture programme helps BC farmers reduce risk from extreme weather by developing climate-
change adaptation tools and projects. It also supports on-farm water infrastructure and irrigation equipment
through the Agricultural Water Infrastructure Program and invests in weather monitoring and related
decision-support tools (Government of British Columbia, 2022[16]).


 197

The New Brunswick Government renewed its Climate Change Action Plan in September 2022. One
identified action was to develop and implement a strategy to improve climate-change knowledge in the
agricultural sector, increase adaptation capacity and resilience, improve soil health by increasing soil-
carbon sequestration, reduce GHG emissions through technological and best-management solutions,
improve energy efficiency, and increase renewable energy production. The Plan also targets a 40-
80 ktCO2eq reduction of GHG emissions by 2027 (Government of New Brunswick, 2022[17]).
Quebec’s Ministerial Initiative Program of Agri-Environmental Practices Reward (Programme d’Initiative
ministérielle de rétribution des pratiques agroenvironmentales) entered into force in February 2022.
Supporting accelerated adoption of agro-environmental practices such as crop diversification, off-season
protection, reduced use of herbicides, use of seed not treated with insecticides, and developments
favourable to biodiversity, this plan is a key measure of the 2020-2030 Sustainable Agriculture Plan that
seeks to reduce GHG emissions and adapt to the repercussion of climatic changes (Government of
Quebec, 2022[18]).
The Government of Nova Scotia announced the Season Extension Enhancement Program in December
2022, a CAD 5 million (USD 3.8 million) programme to support fruit and vegetable growers who invest in
innovative and labour-saving technologies to extend their growing season, adapt to a changing climate,
and open new market opportunities (Government of Nova Scotia, 2022[19]).
In Manitoba, the Watershed Ecological Goods and Services activity helped watershed districts work with
farmers to implement sustainable environmental practices, including climate-change adaptation.
(Government of Manitoba, n.d.[20]). Eligible projects include activities related to water retention and runoff
management, wetland restoration and enhancement, soil health improvement, and land rehabilitation,
among others.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
New agriculture policy framework
The 2022-23 fiscal year is the final year of the 2018-23 Canadian Agricultural Partnership (CAP). The
Sustainable Canadian Agriculture Partnership (Sustainable CAP), the next five-year agricultural policy
agreement, took effect on 1 April 2023. The Sustainable CAP includes CAD 500 million (USD 384 million)
in additional funds, which correspond to a 25% increase in the cost-shared envelope under the 2018-2023
CAP (Government of Canada, 2023[21]).The new policy framework focusses on five priorities that were
already part of the CAP agenda – climate change and environment; market development and trade;
building sector capacity, growth and competitiveness; resiliency and public trust; science, research and
innovation – with a stronger emphasis on the sustainability performance of the sector, its resiliency and
the participation of underrepresented groups.
The Sustainable CAP reflects a more robust results-based strategy with improved data sharing, reporting
on results and a commitment to achieve measurable outcomes over the duration of the new framework.
Goals of the Sustainable CAP include contributing to the reduction of GHG emissions by 3 to 5 MtCO2eq,
reaching CAD 250 billion (USD 192 billion) in sectoral revenues and CAD 95 billion (USD 73 billion) in
sectoral export revenues by 2028, and increasing the proportion of funded recipients who are indigenous
peoples, women and youth.
Climate change mitigation policies
The 2030 Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP), tabled on 29 March 2022, outlines the additional efforts the
government of Canada is undertaking across all sectors to meet its 2030 GHG emissions target and lays
the foundation for achieving net-zero emissions by 2050. In the Budget 2022, the government announced
an investment of more than CAD 1 billion (USD 770 million) in new funding to support sustainable


198 

agriculture and encourage the sector to significantly reduce GHG emissions, although without a specific
target for the sector. This new funding is distributed as follows across four initiatives (Environment and
Climate Change Canada, 2022[22]):
•
CAD 470 million (USD 361 million) over six years starting in 2022-23 in addition to the
CAD 200 million (USD 154 million) from the current Agricultural Climate Solutions – On-Farm
Climate Action Fund, in order to complete funding for some of the current successful applicants,
expand support for other key climate-change mitigation practices, extend the programme beyond
its current end date of 2023/24, and support the adoption of practices that contribute to Canada’s
fertiliser emissions target and the Global Methane Pledge.
•
CAD 330 million (USD 254 million) over six years starting in 2022-23 to triple the size of the
Agricultural Clean Technology programme, which had initial funding of CAD 165.7 million
(USD 127.3 million).
•
CAD 150 million (USD 115 million) from the federal budget to contribute, as part of the next policy
framework (2023-2028), to the cost-shared CAD 250 million (USD 192 million) Resilient
Agricultural Landscape programme that seeks to support ecological goods and services provided
by the agricultural sector.
•
CAD 100 million (USD 77 million) over six years starting in 2022-23 to the federal granting councils
to support post-secondary research in the development of technologies and crop varieties that
enable net-zero emission agriculture.
The government expects GHG emissions from the agricultural sector to be reduced by 13 MtCO2eq once
the ERP programmes are fully implemented and the national fertiliser emission reduction target is met
(Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2022[22]).
Business risk management programmes
As part of the Sustainable CAP, some changes have been made to BRM programmes. The AgriStability
compensation rate was raised from 70% to 80% providing up to CAD 72 million (USD 55 million) per year
of additional income support to farmers (Government of Canada, 2022[23]). Eligibility rules for receiving the
government AgriInvest contribution will become more restrictive from 2025, when participants with
allowable net sales of CAD 1 million (USD 770 000) or more will be required to undergo an agri-
environmental risk assessment (e.g. Environmental Farm Plan). This requirement will act as a cross-
compliance tool to incentivise the sustainability performance of large-scale farms benefiting from the
income stabilisation programme (Newswire, 2022[24]).
The new policy framework provides for reviews of the BRM programmes. A review within the first year of
the Sustainable CAP will assess how to proactively integrate beneficial management practices that reduce
production risks with AgriInsurance premiums. Based on the review, each province/territory will pilot an
AgriInsurance premium project within the framework timeline. A broader review of how best to integrate
climate risks into BRM programmes will also be carried out, using the information obtained through the
AgriInsurance review (Realagriculture, 2022[25]).
Additional support was granted at provincial level to cope with the effects of the Hurricane Fiona that hit
the country on 24 September 2022. In October 2022, the governments of Prince Edward Island (PEI) and
of Nova Scotia announced a range of financial support to recover from the impacts of this natural disaster.
The Fiona Agriculture Support Program of PEI and the Fiona Agriculture Disaster Assistance Program of
Nova Scotia provide direct financial assistance to help producers cover extraordinary costs caused by the
storm on equipment, infrastructure, crops, livestock, debris clean up, among others. The On-Farm
Electrical Interruption Assistance Program implemented in both provinces assists farmers in the purchase
and installation of a backup electrical generator, helping farms overcome food safety, biosecurity, and
animal welfare issues that occur during extended electrical power interruptions. In Nova Scotia, the Fiona


 199

Greenhouse Replacement Program helps farm owners build or buy new greenhouses and other related
infrastructure and the Farm Emergency Response Grant Program provides a one-time grant of CAD 2 500
(USD 1 920) to registered farms in some specific areas of Nova Scotia that were most impacted by financial
losses. (Government of Prince Edward Island, 2022[26]) (Government of Nova Scotia, 2022[27]; Government
of Nova Scotia, 2022[28]; Government of Nova Scotia, 2022[29]; Government of Nova Scotia, 2022[30]).
Pest and disease management
In August 2022, a new CAD 45.3 million (USD 34.8 million) investment was announced to prevent African
Swine Fever (ASF) from entering the country and prepare for a potential outbreak. Approximately half of
the budget will go to the African Swine Fever prevention and preparedness program (ASFIPP) to address
identified gaps in industry preparedness, developing tools, partnerships and activities to ensure early
detection and effective emergency response. The other half will support the Canadian Food Inspection
Agency’s prevention and preparedness efforts and strengthen the control activities of the Canada Border
Services Agency (Government of Canada, 2022[31]). In May 2022, the New Brunswick Government
developed the Swine Market Interruption Response Plan to provide guidance and resource information to
the New Brunswick pig meat industry and the provincial government in the event of a market interruption.
The Plan was created specifically to address ASF and outlines considerations for depopulation and
disposal of pigs during the initial six-month period following detection.
In February 2022, the governments of Canada and PEI announced details of the Surplus Potato
Management Response plan to support PEI potato farmers affected by trade disruptions arising from
discovery of potato wart, including CAD 28 million (USD 22 million) provided by federal budget and
CAD 12.2 million (USD 9 million) provided by the Province (Government of Canada, 2022[32]). The plan
diverts potatoes to domestic use to minimise the amount of surplus potatoes to be destroyed. Producers
will also receive up to CAD 17.6 cents (USD 13.5 cents) per kg for environmentally-sound destruction of
surplus potatoes. In May 2022, the PEI Government announced the Soil Building for Seed Producers
Project, a CAD 3 million (USD 2.3 million) project to support seed potato producers in adapting to ongoing
trade suspensions by planting soil-building crops, considered as a BMP (Government of Prince Edward
Island, 2022[33]).
Supporting the wine sector
In November 2022, the government of Canada launched the Wine Sector Support Program, a two-year
programme of CAD 166 million (USD 128 million), to provide short-term financial support to Canadian
licensed wineries. Through non-repayable grants based on their production of bulk wine fermented in
Canada from domestic and/or imported primary agricultural products, the government aims to support their
transition and adaptation to current and emerging challenges affecting the financial resilience and
competitiveness of the wine industry (Government of Canada, 2022[34]).
Compensatory measures for supply-managed commodities
Launched in March 2022, the Supply Management Processing Investment Fund provides non-refundable
contributions to dairy, poultry and egg processors to mitigate the impacts of the Canada-European Union
Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) and the Comprehensive and Progressive
Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP). The programme aims to compensate the processing
sector for market losses due to new market access granted to imports for various goods in the dairy, poultry
and egg sectors.  The programme will provide CAD 292.5 million (USD 225 million) over six years to help
existing processors – who buy domestic raw commodities in the supply-managed sectors – increase their
competitiveness through the purchase of new automated equipment and technology. Each organisation
who applies to this instrument can receive up to CAD 5 million (USD 3.8 million) subsidies over the life of
the programme (Government of Canada, 2022[35]).


200 

Through the 2022 Fall Economic Statement and Budget 2023, the government of Canada announced up
to CAD 1.75 billion (USD 1.3 billion) in compensation to supply-managed sectors for the impacts of market
access commitments made under of the Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement (CUSMA). Starting in
2023-24, these additional funds will be distributed through new and existing programmes over multiple
years (Government of Canada, 2022[36]).
Promoting greater diversity in the sector
The government of Canada has developed policies, programmes and initiatives that promote diversity in
the agricultural sector by enabling indigenous peoples and other underrepresented and marginalised
groups to participate in the sector. It also works with Provincial and Territorial counterparts to improve data
collection, monitoring, analysis and reporting on programmes. The AgriDiversity Program (ADP), which
aims to reduce barriers to participation and increase economic development opportunities through capacity
building activities, will be renewed under the new Sustainable Canadian Agricultural Partnership. At
provincial level, the new 2022 British Columbia’s Indigenous Food Systems and Agriculture Partnership
(IFSAP) programme supports First Nations and Indigenous communities, businesses and organisations in
increasing food security and sovereignty over their food systems and funds activities related to agriculture,
food processing, food systems planning, training and skills development, technological adoption,
productivity and profitability improvements, and climate-change adaptation.
Relevant new regulations for the sector
In April 2022, the government announced the Temporary Foreign Worker (TFW) Program Workforce
Solutions Road Map, which modifies the former TFW Program to respond to current labour and skill
shortages affecting the agricultural and food sectors, among others. Approximately 50 000 to 60 000
foreign agricultural workers come to work in Canada each year, which accounts for more than 60% of all
foreign workers entering Canada under the TFW Program. This new Road Map removes limits on the
number of low-wage positions that employers in seasonal industries can fill through the TFW Program and
increases the maximum duration of employment. Employers in food and beverage processing are now
allowed to hire up to 30% of their workforce through the TFW Program for low-wage positions for one year
(Government of Canada, 2022[37]).
In May 2022, Health Canada published an updated regulatory guidance to address the latest innovations
in plant breeding, with the goal of improving the transparency, clarity and predictability of Canadian novel
food regulations. By clearly defining which plant breeding products require a pre-market food safety
assessment and by outlining an expedited service standard for products that are very similar to previously
assessed products, this new guidance aims to create a predictable regulatory environment for the
development of innovative agricultural products (Government of Canada, 2022[38]).
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
In part to address higher input costs, the government of Canada increased the interest-free limit for
advances under the Advance Payment Program from CAD 100 000 to CAD 250 000 (from USD 77 000 to
USD 192 000) for the 2022 and 2023 programme years in June 2022. As a result, and taking into account
recent interest rate increases, the government expects participating producers to save up to CAD 8 600
(USD 6 600) in interest costs over the next two years on average representing total savings of
CAD 84 million (USD 65 million) over two years for some 11 000 producers (Government of Canada,
2022[39]).


 201

Trade policy developments in 2022-23
In March 2022, Canada and India formally relaunched the negotiations of the Canada-India
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) and agreed to consider an interim agreement,
the Early Progress Trade Agreement (EPTA), as a transitional step towards the CEPA. Both parties
committed to strengthen trade and commercial ties through enhanced partnerships and co-operation in
identified areas including agricultural and agri-food products. Market access for Canadian and Indian agri-
food products is under discussion (Government of Canada, 2022[40]). The Canadian Government expects
this agreement to help diversify its trade beyond the United States and the People’s Republic of China
(hereafter “China”) (Asia-Pacific Foundation of Canada - Pia Rozario, 2022[41]).
In November 2022, the government of Canada unveiled its Indo-Pacific Strategy (IPS), which represents
a whole-of-government shift in Canada’s international focus. The Indo-Pacific comprises 40 countries and
economies, including Australia, India, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, all ASEAN countries and China, among
others. The government will invest CAD 2.3 billion (USD 1.8 billion) over five years to intensify regional
engagement and deepen diplomatic, security, economic and sustainable development partnerships,
including the establishment of an Indo-Pacific Agriculture and Agri-Food Office foreseen for 2023 to help
Canadian farmers and producers diversify their exports and position Canada as a preferred supplier in
those emerging markets (Government of Canada, 2023[42]).
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
In response to Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, on 2 March 2022, Canada withdrew Most
Favoured Nation (MFN) tariff treatment eligibility for virtually all products originating in Russia and Belarus,
resulting in the application of the 35% General Tariff on these imports (Government of Canada, 2022[43]).
To address the exceptional circumstances of the war and its impact on the Ukrainian economy, on 9 June
2022, Canada also implemented a temporary one-year exemption from tariffs and countervailing duties on
all imports originating in Ukraine (Government of Canada, 2022[44]). This time-limited exemption is
independent of the extended market access for imports from Ukraine under the Canada-Ukraine Free
Trade Agreement (CUFTA), as well as the ongoing modernisation of this agreement.
Contextual information
Canada is a large, wealthy country with a small population relative to its land area and has relatively
abundant land and water available to the agricultural sector. Primary agriculture accounts for less than 2%
of GDP and employment (Table 7.3) but contributes to a larger share of economic output in some of the
country’s regions. Crop production, concentrated in the western prairies – where the typical farm is twice
as large as the national average – is highly productive and largely oriented to export. Most milk production
is located in eastern Canada, which has relatively smaller farms and a larger variety of crops. Red meat
industries are present across Canada, with beef cattle production being especially prominent in western
Canada, and hog production concentrated in Quebec, Ontario and Manitoba.




202 

Table 7.3. Canada: Contextual indicators

Canada
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
901
2 030
2.3%
1.7%
Population (million)
31
38
0.7%
0.7%
Land area (thousand km2)
8 966
8 966
11.0%
10.9%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
61 287
57 743
2.0%
2.0%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
3
4
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
29 362
53 074
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
33.2
23.7
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
2.3
1.8
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
3.3
1.7
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
6.0
12.7
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.0
8.7
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
43
61
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
57
39
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
67
66
32
34
Note: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
For most of the past two decades, with the exception in 2009 related to the financial crisis, Canada enjoyed
a stable macroeconomic environment characterised by relatively low inflation rates, fluctuating around its
2% target, and positive economic growth. However, the economy has been heavily affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions, which caused a recession in 2020. After a significant
recovery in 2021, Canada’s GDP growth declined slightly from 4.5% to 3.2% in 2022, remaining above
pre-pandemic growth rates. Besides, the unemployment rate, which had declined from its 2020 peak in
2021, kept falling to reach 5.4%. However, inflation, which was already rising in 2021, doubled to 6.8% in
2022 (Figure 7.5).


 203

Figure 7.5. Canada: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Canada’s economy is well integrated in international markets – as measured by the ratio of trade to GDP
at 24% in 2021 (Table 7.3). Agro-food products represent 13% of total Canadian exports and 9% of
imports. Canada is a large net exporter of agro-food products and access to export markets is highly
important for the sector. More than half of Canada’s agro-food exports are destined for the United States.
Most of Canada’s agro-food exports are either processed products intended for direct consumption (37%),
or primary products for processing (34%). Canadian households’ final consumption absorbs 72% of
agriculture and food imports, of which two-thirds are processed goods (Figure 7.6).


204 

Figure 7.6. Canada: Agro-food trade


Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
At 3%, Canada’s agricultural output growth over the decade 2011-20 was above the global average. It was
driven by the rapid growth in Canada’s agricultural productivity, as measured by total factor productivity
(TFP), combined with further intensification in the use of intermediate inputs (Figure 7.7). The agricultural
output growth over the past decade has been achieved without a clear relationship being established with
the level of pressure exerted on natural resources, as shown by various environmental indicators. Average
Canada - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Canada - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
19
19
17
17
34
34
11
11
37
37
50
50
10
10
22
22
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 205

nutrient surplus intensities have been increasing by 28% since 2000 for nitrogen and decreasing by 20%
for phosphorous. The pressure on water resources is also very low, ten to twenty times lower than the
OECD average (Table 7.4).
Figure 7.7. Canada: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 7.4. Canada: Productivity and environmental indicators

Canada
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
2.4%
1.8%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
23.8
30.5
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
1.5
1.2
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.2
3.5
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
7.0
8.2
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
1.2
1.1
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
9.7
8.6
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
..
0.9
8.3
7.4
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


Canada - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
1.81%
1.81%
1.12%
1.12%
-0.32%
-0.32%
0.35%
0.35%
1.56%
1.56%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Canada
World
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%


206 

References

Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (2018), Canadian Agricultural Partnership,
https://agriculture.canada.ca/en/department/initiatives/canadian-agricultural-partnership
(accessed on 8 March 2023).
[9]
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (2005), Agricultural Policy Framework: Federal–Provincial–
Territorial Programs, http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=9.687269&sl=1.
[7]
Anderson, K. (2009), Distortions to Agricultural Incentives: A Global Perspective, 1955-2007,
World Bank and Palgrave Macmillan, Washington, DC,
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/9436.
[3]
Antón, J., S. Kimura and R. Martini (2011), “Risk Management in Agriculture in Canada”, OECD
Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 40, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/5kgj0d6189wg-en.
[4]
Asia-Pacific Foundation of Canada - Pia Rozario (2022), A Free Trade Agreement for Canada
and India: Is the Time Finally Right?, https://www.asiapacific.ca/publication/free-trade-
agreement-canada-and-india-time-finally-right (accessed on 20 March 2023).
[41]
Barichello, R. (1995), “Overview Of Canadian Agricultural Policy Systems”, Proceedings of the
1st Agricultural and Food Policy Systems Information Workshop, 1995: Understanding
Canada\United States Grain Disputes, https://doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.16747.
[2]
Doan, D., B. Paddock and J. Dyer (2003), Grain Transportation Policy and Transformation in
Western Canadian Agriculture, Agriculture and Agri-food Canada, Wye,
https://ageconsearch.umn.edu/record/15748/files/cp03do01.pdf.
[45]
Environment and Climate Change Canada (2022), 2030 Emissions Reduction Plan,
https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2022/eccc/En4-460-2022-eng.pdf.
[22]
Environment and Climate Change Canada (2022), Government of Canada Adaptation Action
Plan, https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/eccc/documents/pdf/climate-change/climate-
plan/national-adaptation-strategy/GCAAP-Report-EN.pdf.
[15]
Environment and Climate Change Canada (2021), Canada confirms its support for the Global
Methane Pledge and announces ambitious domestic actions to slash methane emissions,
https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/news/2021/10/canada-confirms-its-
support-for-the-global-methane-pledge-and-announces-ambitious-domestic-actions-to-slash-
methane-emissions.html (accessed on 16 March 2023).
[11]
Environment and Climate Change Canada (2020), A Healthy Environment And A Healthy
Economy: Canada’s strengthened climate plan to create jobs and support people,
communities and the planet,
https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/eccc/documents/pdf/climate-change/climate-
plan/healthy_environment_healthy_economy_plan.pdf.
[12]
Government of British Columbia (2022), Climate Preparedness and Adaptation Strategy -
Actions for 2022-2025, https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/environment/climate-
change/adaptation/cpas.pdf.
[16]


 207

Government of Canada (2023), Canada’s Indo-Pacific Strategy,
https://www.international.gc.ca/transparency-transparence/indo-pacific-indo-
pacifique/index.aspx?lang=eng (accessed on 8 March 2023).
[42]
Government of Canada (2023), Sustainable Canadian Agricultural Partnership,
https://agriculture.canada.ca/en/department/initiatives/sustainable-canadian-agricultural-
partnership (accessed on 8 March 2023).
[21]
Government of Canada (2022), Canada cuts Russia and Belarus from Most-Favoured-Nation
Tariff treatment, https://www.canada.ca/en/department-finance/news/2022/03/canada-cuts-
russia-and-belarus-from-most-favoured-nation-tariff-treatment.html (accessed on
8 March 2023).
[43]
Government of Canada (2022), Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy will protect communities
and build a strong economy, https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-
change/news/2022/11/canadas-national-adaptation-strategy-will-protect-communities-and-
build-a-strong-economy.html.
[14]
Government of Canada (2022), Federal, Provincial and Territorial Ministers of Agriculture reach
a new partnership agreement, https://agriculture.canada.ca/en/agri-info/federal-provincial-
and-territorial-ministers-agriculture-reach-new-partnership-agreement (accessed on
8 March 2023).
[23]
Government of Canada (2022), Government of Canada announces interest relief for agriculture
producers, https://www.canada.ca/en/agriculture-agri-food/news/2022/06/government-of-
canada-announces-interest-relief-for-agriculture-producers.html (accessed on 8 March 2023).
[39]
Government of Canada (2022), Government of Canada announces up to $45.3 million to
enhance African swine fever prevention and preparedness,
https://www.canada.ca/en/agriculture-agri-food/news/2022/08/government-of-canada-
announces-up-to-453-million-to-enhance-african-swine-fever-prevention-and-
preparedness.html (accessed on 8 March 2023).
[31]
Government of Canada (2022), Government of Canada invests in wine industry,
https://www.canada.ca/en/agriculture-agri-food/news/2022/11/government-of-canada-invests-
in-wine-industry.html (accessed on 8 March 2023).
[34]
Government of Canada (2022), Governments of Canada and Prince Edward Island deliver
funding for the diversion of surplus potatoes, https://www.canada.ca/en/agriculture-agri-
food/news/2022/02/governments-of-canada-and-prince-edward-island-deliver-funding-for-the-
diversion-of-surplus-potatoes.html (accessed on 8 March 2023).
[32]
Government of Canada (2022), Guidelines for the Safety Assessment of Novel Foods,
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/food-nutrition/legislation-
guidelines/guidance-documents/guidelines-safety-assessment-novel-foods-derived-plants-
microorganisms/guidelines-safety-assessment-novel-foods-2006.html (accessed on
8 March 2023).
[38]
Government of Canada (2022), Joint Statement issued at conclusion of the 5th India-Canada
Ministerial Dialogue on Trade & Investment, https://www.international.gc.ca/country_news-
pays_nouvelles/2022-03-11-india-inde.aspx?lang=eng (accessed on 8 March 2023).
[40]


208 

Government of Canada (2022), Supply Management Processing Investment Fund,
https://agriculture.canada.ca/en/programs/supply-management-processing-investment-fund
(accessed on 8 March 2023).
[35]
Government of Canada (2022), Supporting Canada’s supply-managed sectors,
https://agriculture.canada.ca/en/department/initiatives/supporting-supply-managed-sectors
(accessed on 8 March 2023).
[36]
Government of Canada (2022), Temporary Foreign Worker Program Workforce Solutions Road
Map, https://www.canada.ca/en/employment-social-
development/news/2022/04/backgrounder-temporary-foreign-worker-programworkforce-
solutions-road-map.html (accessed on 8 March 2023).
[37]
Government of Canada (2022), Ukraine Goods Remission Order: SOR/2022-127,
https://www.gazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p2/2022/2022-06-22/html/sor-dors127-eng.html (accessed on
8 March 2023).
[44]
Government of Canada (2021), Agricultural Climate Solutions,
https://agriculture.canada.ca/en/agriculture-and-environment/agricultural-climate-solutions
(accessed on 7 March 2023).
[13]
Government of Canada (2021), Canada’s 2021 Nationally Determined Contribution under the
Paris Agreement, https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-
06/Canada%27s%20Enhanced%20NDC%20Submission1_FINAL%20EN.pdf (accessed on
16 March 2023).
[10]
Government of Manitoba (n.d.), Financial Assistance - Ag Action Manitoba Program - Assurance:
Watershed Ecological Goods and Services,
https://www.gov.mb.ca/agriculture/environment/ecological-goods-and-services/watershed-
egs.html.
[20]
Government of New Brunswick (2022), Our Pathway Towards Decarbonization and Climate
Resilience - New Brunswick’s climate change action plan 2022-2027,
https://www2.gnb.ca/content/dam/gnb/Corporate/Promo/climate/climate-change-action-
plan.pdf.
[17]
Government of Nova Scotia (2022), Financial Support for Agriculture and Forestry,
https://novascotia.ca/news/release/?id=20221014003 (accessed on 8 March 2023).
[27]
Government of Nova Scotia (2022), Fiona Agricultural Disaster Assistance Program,
https://novascotia.ca/programs/fiona-agricultural-disaster-assistance/ (accessed on
8 March 2023).
[28]
Government of Nova Scotia (2022), Government funding supports local food production,
https://novascotia.ca/news/release/?id=20221216001.
[19]
Government of Nova Scotia (2022), New Program Helps Greenhouse Growers Recover,
https://novascotia.ca/news/release/?id=20230209001 (accessed on 8 March 2023).
[30]
Government of Nova Scotia (2022), On-Farm Electrical Interruption Assistance Program,
https://novascotia.ca/programs/on-farm-electrical-interruption-assistance/ (accessed on
8 March 2023).
[29]


 209

Government of Prince Edward Island (2022), Soil Building for Seed Producers Project,
https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/en/information/agriculture-and-land/soil-building-for-seed-
producers-project (accessed on 8 March 2023).
[33]
Government of Prince Edward Island (2022), Support available for PEI farmers dealing with
impacts from Hurricane Fiona, https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/en/news/support-available-
for-pei-farmers-dealing-with-impacts-from-hurricane-fiona (accessed on 8 March 2023).
[26]
Government of Quebec (2022), Initiative ministérielle de rétribution des pratiques
agroenvironnementales, https://www.fadq.qc.ca/documents/initiative-ministerielle-de-
retribution-des-pratiques-agroenvironnementales/.
[18]
Klein, K. and G. Storey (1998), “Structural Developments In The Canadian Grains And Oilseeds
Sector”, Proceedings of the 4th Agricultural and Food Policy Systems Information Workshop
1998: Economic Harmonization in the CanadianU.S.Mexican Grain-Livestock Subsector,
https://doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.16758.
[5]
Newswire (2022), Federal, Provincial and Territorial Ministers of Agriculture reach a new
partnership agreement and inject new funds to support the sector,
https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/federal-provincial-and-territorial-ministers-of-
agriculture-reach-a-new-partnership-agreement-and-inject-new-funds-to-support-the-sector-
880396062.html (accessed on 8 March 2023).
[24]
OECD (2020), “Resilience to natural disasters in Canada”, in Strengthening Agricultural
Resilience in the Face of Multiple Risks, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/d1b84788-en.
[1]
OECD (2015), Innovation, Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability in Canada, OECD Food
and Agricultural Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264238541-
en.
[8]
Realagriculture (2022), Agriculture ministers reach agreement-in-principle on new “Sustainable
Canadian Agricultural Partnership”, https://www.realagriculture.com/2022/07/agriculture-
ministers-reach-agreement-in-principle-on-new-sustainable-canadian-agricultural-partnership/
(accessed on 8 March 2023).
[25]
Statistics Canada (2021), Data quality, concepts and methodology: Explanatory notes on direct
program payments to agriculture producers, https://www.statcan.gc.ca/eng/statistical-
programs/document/5229_D1_V4 (accessed on 15 January 2021).
[6]



Note

1 Market price support to grains and oilseeds, which existed until the mid-1990s, resulted from the
assistance provided to grain transportation which lower shipping costs for producers and consequently
raised farm-gate grain prices. In 1989-90, the transportation subsidies covered about 70% of total freight
costs with producers paying the remaining 30% (Doan, Paddock and Dyer, 2003[45]).


210 

Support to agriculture
Chile’s support to farmers is among the lowest of OECD countries with a Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
of 2.7% of gross farm incomes in 2020-22, down from 7.3% in 2000-02. Since Chile reduced its tariff-based
border protection in the 1990s, agricultural policies create very limited distortions to agricultural markets,
with almost no Market Price Support (MPS) to the sector. Domestic producer prices fully align with world
prices, as the ratio of average producer to border prices (National Nominal Coefficient, NPC) equalled 1 in
2020-22. Single Commodity Transfers (SCT) are small and limited to sugar and beef, for which they
amount to 3.4% and 1.8% of respective gross farm receipts.
As MPS is almost non-existent, agricultural policies are based on budgetary transfers, and total support
essentially goes through direct payments to farmers and to general services. Budgetary support to
producers represented 42.4% of total support in 2020-22 and is mostly targeted to small-scale farmers.
This support mainly includes payments for on-farm fixed capital formation, and on-farm services and
variable input use.
Support for general services (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) accounted for 55% of the total in
2020-22, and focused on off-farm irrigation infrastructure, inspection and control, land access, and
agricultural knowledge and innovation systems. Expenditures for general services represented an average
3.4% of the agricultural value of production in 2020-22, slightly below the OECD average. Total agricultural
support represented 0.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2020-22 – half the level in 2000-02.
Recent policy changes
A new administration took office in March 2022. The main priorities of the government are: (1) rural
development and well-being; (2) strengthening of small-scale family farming; (3) water and climate
emergency; (4) sustainability; (5) food security and sovereignty; and (6) international co-operation and
trade.
The National Commission on Food Security and Sovereignty (CNSSA) was established in July 2022 to
create the National Food Emergency Plan, and develop and implement measures for food security and
sovereignty in the country.
The Sow for Chile (Siembra por Chile) programme implemented since mid-2022 provides direct payments
for the purchase of agricultural variable inputs, such as agrochemicals, seeds, and fertilisers to small-scale
and indigenous farmers. Payments are made by the agency responsible for small-scale agriculture
(INDAP). The initiative also provides loans for medium-sized farms through a public bank (Banco Estado).
In January 2023, INDAP established the programme called Promotion and Strengthening of the
Sustainable Production of Traditional Crops to increase sustainable grain and vegetable production. It
provides payments to support the adoption of sustainable agricultural practices through acquisition of
improved or certified seeds, and credit for the acquisition of these inputs at preferential rates.
8 Chile


 211

The Inter-ministerial Committee for Just Water Transition was created at the beginning of 2023 to address
ongoing severe drought, with 16 basin councils (one in each region of the country), marking the beginning
of water-governance reform at the basin level, guided by principles of water security, inclusion, and
decentralisation.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Chile’s National Adaptation Plan for agriculture includes measures to foster resilience in the
agricultural sector. However, the country should take specific actions to facilitate the necessary
transformation to more climate-resilient farming structures and production methods, in addition to
shorter-term absorption of climate-related shocks. Chile should carefully monitor implementation
of such policies and assess their effects on the sector. Moreover, the country must develop more
sustainability actions and mainstream them into existing policy instruments for agriculture.
•
Chile’s commitment to achieving carbon neutrality by 2050 under the national strategy contains
nine objectives and 63 goals for mitigation policies and practices linked to agriculture and forestry.
However, the country does not have agriculture-specific mitigation targets, which can be helpful for
measuring progress on reducing agricultural emissions.
•
Expenditures for general services – focused on investments including irrigation infrastructure,
inspection and control, and agricultural knowledge and innovation systems – remain low relative to
the sector’s size. Chile should consider scaling up public investments that help the sector become
more sustainable, productive, and resilient. Additional and targeted investments in extension
services, innovations favouring sustainable productivity growth, and climate-smart agriculture
should be considered – particularly those favouring methane reduction to fulfil its commitment
under the Methane Pledge. Investments in irrigation systems must account for the changing climate
and use water management to ensure that they do not lead to increased water consumption.
•
Payments to farmers are rightly tailored and targeted to small-scale farmers and vulnerable
populations, such as indigenous and women farmers. Their effectiveness for improving
productivity, competitiveness, and the recovery of degraded soils should be carefully assessed to
allow for adjustments where current payments prove ineffective.
•
Improved co-ordination across ministries and agencies that support the agricultural sector or rural
populations will help ensure efficient use of public resources. Strong evaluation systems can help
in this regard. Horizontal frameworks that bring together multiple ministries can also help.
•
Moreover, given the increasing number of support programmes by regional governments targeting
rural populations, improved co-ordination, communication, and accountability are needed between
regional and national governments to avoid overlapping efforts and supports.




212 

Figure 8.1. Chile: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Chile - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
Chile - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Chile - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
1.06
Chile - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
Chile - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%


 213

Figure 8.2. Chile: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Figure 8.3. Chile: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts,
2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
%
Chile - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Border price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
Border price change decomposition
Change in producer price
PSE change decomposition
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Chile - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Sugar
Beef and veal
0%
0.25%
0.5%
0.75%
1%
1.25%
1.5%
1.75%
2%
2.25%
2.5%
2.75%
3%
3.25%
3.5%
3.…


214 

Table 8.1. Chile: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
4 806
12 915
12 477
13 990
12 278
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
72.86
77.67
74.05
78.32
80.63
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
4 118
11 111
9 835
12 424
11 074
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
369
356
312
394
362
Support based on commodity output
227
20
6
48
4
Market Price Support1
227
20
6
48
4
Positive Market Price Support
228
20
6
48
4
Negative Market Price Support
-1
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
140
301
294
318
289
Based on variable input use
21
60
57
60
63
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
85
164
161
179
153
with input constraints
66
81
77
91
77
Based on on-farm services
35
76
76
79
73
with input constraints
7
36
36
37
34
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
1
36
11
27
69
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
1
36
11
27
69
with input constraints
1
36
11
27
69
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
7.31
2.69
2.44
2.75
2.87
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.05
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.08
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.03
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
103
441
412
497
415
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
22
65
61
72
63
Inspection and control
3
107
109
109
101
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
67
261
234
306
242
Marketing and promotion
10
9
7
10
9
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
1
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
22.00
55.29
56.93
55.79
53.40
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-317
-61
-22
-135
-25
Transfers to producers from consumers
-226
-20
-6
-48
-4
Other transfers from consumers
-92
-41
-16
-87
-21
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
1
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-7.51
-0.53
-0.22
-1.09
-0.23
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.08
1.01
1.00
1.01
1.00
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.08
1.01
1.00
1.01
1.00
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
472
797
724
891
777
Transfers from consumers
318
61
22
135
25
Transfers from taxpayers
245
778
717
843
773
Budget revenues
-92
-41
-16
-87
-21
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.63
0.27
0.29
0.28
0.26
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
244
778
717
843
773
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.33
0.27
0.28
0.27
0.26
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
262
243
262
281
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
621.08
808.26
791.72
759.82
873.25
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Chile are: wheat, maize, apples, grapes, sugar,
tomatoes, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry, eggs, blueberries, cherries and peaches.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




 215

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Prior to 1973, agricultural policies in Chile followed an import substitution industrialisation model, with
measures such as price and production controls for staples (e.g. wheat), import tariffs, and export
restrictions. Longstanding institutions were created in this period, including the Institute for Agricultural
Development (INDAP - the smallholders’ agency), the Agriculture and Livestock Service (SAG -animal and
plant health institute), INIA (agricultural innovation agency), and others. This period also saw land reforms
that provided land to small-scale farmers and landless people (Anderson and Valdés, 2008[1]).
Economic and agricultural policies shifted in 1973 with the military coup. Chile was the first country in the
developing world to adopt market oriented open-economy reforms and structural macroeconomic reforms.
These reduced the role of government in the economy and liberalised trade (OECD, 2008[2]).
From 1973-83, general reforms such as macroeconomic stabilisation were advancing more rapidly than
agricultural sector-specific reforms. However, marketing boards and price control agencies for agricultural
products were dismantled, import tariffs were reduced and export restrictions were lifted. From the mid-
1980s, the government took measures to improve competitiveness and stimulate production and exports,
with general services to the sector playing a central role. Several agricultural institutions related to
innovation and irrigation were created, but smallholder development, the environment and resource use
received little attention (Anderson and Valdés, 2008[1]).
Since the restoration of democracy in 1990, agricultural policy focuses on three objectives: (1) increasing
competitiveness, (2) achieving more balanced agricultural development by better integrating poorer, less-
competitive, farmers into commercial supply chains, and (3) preserving the environment through
sustainable use of resources. Tariffs were further reduced and numerous Regional Trade Agreements
(RTAs) were signed, granting trade preferences to partners for agricultural products (OECD, 2008[2]). In
2022 the new government emphasised policies to address inequality issues in the sector, as well as on
sustainability and water management (Table 8.2).
Table 8.2. Chile: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1973
Import substitution industrialisation
model
Closed economy
High import tariffs
Price controls (e.g. minimum prices of main agricultural products such as wheat, fixed
consumer prices, fixed marketing margins)
Export quotas, licenses and export bans on main staple foods
Subsidies to some producers (e.g. milk)
Interventions in input markets
Investments in agricultural infrastructure (e.g. slaughterhouses, storage and processing
facilities, roads)
Establishment of key agricultural institutions (e.g. INDAP, SAG, INIA, COTRISA)
Land reform
1973-1990
Reforms for trade liberalisation
Removal of agricultural price controls
Dismantling of marketing boards and price control agencies, except for wheat, milk and
oilseeds
Rapid tariff reduction on most imports
Introduction of a uniform, non-discriminatory tariff system
Elimination of export restrictions
Establishment of price stabilisation mechanisms (price band systems) for imported
products (wheat, sugar and oilseeds)
Creation of further agricultural institutions (e.g. FIA, CNR)


216 

Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1990-2022
Return to democracy continues with
open markets model
Most Favoured Nation tariff reduction up to 1% by 2020 for all agricultural products
Many free trade agreements signed
Dismantling of the price band systems for sugar and oilseed
Increase in budgetary allocation to support smallholders and for investments in general
services
2022- present
More emphasis on inequality issues
addressing small-scale agriculture,
women, indigenous people and
youth.
Greater emphasis on sustainability
and water management.
While the country continued with open markets, more emphasis on small-scale
agriculture has taken place, by providing greater resources to INDAP.
Law modifications on water management.
Law modifications on soil programs.
Development of National Strategy of Sovereignty for Food Security
Agriculture sustainability programmes.
Following the near-elimination of market price support (MPS), producer support declined from close to
10% of gross farm receipts at the end of the 1990s to below 4% throughout the 2010s, and averaged 2.7%
in the past three years. Support payments related to agricultural input use have partly replaced MPS, and
these are targeted to small-scale agriculture. More funding is also provided for the provision of general
services, which today account for half of Chile’s total support estimate to agriculture.
Figure 8.4. Chile: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1990 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
For Chile, developing small-scale agriculture, the improvement of sustainable productivity,
competitiveness and the conservation of natural resources are the main policy focus. As MPS is inexistent,
agricultural policies are only based on budgetary allocations. Half of these budgetary expenditures are
Chile - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-5
0
5
10
15


 217

direct payments to small-scale farmers, which are provided for purchasing inputs, capital formation, credit
at preferential interest rates, the Improving degraded soils and on-farm irrigation investments. The other
half of the budget is spent in general services to the agricultural sector and is mainly for expanding and
improving irrigation systems, access to land, agricultural research and development, sanitary and
phytosanitary services and inspection services.
INDAP is the agency in charge of designing and implementing agricultural policies for small-scale farmers.
Key programmes administered by INDAP are: 1) services for the development of poor areas, which gives
subsidies for variable inputs such as seeds, fertilisers; subsidies for the creation of on-farm fixed capital
formation such as equipment and machinery; and subsidies for on-fam services such as like technical
assistance in 2022 this programme reach CLP 46.2 billion (USD 53 million); 2) territorial development
programme for indigenous communities, that only provides subsidies for fixed capital formation in poor
marginalised areas, budget for this programme was in 2022 CLP 35.9 billion (USD 41 million);
3) incentives for the development of agricultural investment which grants subsidies for variable inputs as
well as for fixed capital formation on the farm, INDAP spent on this programme in 2022 CPL 26.3 billion
(USD 30 million); 4) services for the development of productive and entrepreneurial capacities, that only
provides different types of on-farm services, such as technical assistance, expenditures allocated to this
programme in 2022 were CLP 16.8 billion (USD 19.2 million).
INDAP also provides credit to smallholders at preferential interest rates, the subsidy equivalent of this
credit was CLP 12.6 billion (USD 14.5 million). INDAP has a crop insurance programme, which covers up
to 50% of the premium.
Another important category of payments to farmers goes to the soil recovery programme. Around 70% of
these resources were administered by INDAP and addressed to smallholders; the remaining 40% was
administered by SAG (the animal and plant health agency) and given to medium and large-scale farmers.
The programme aims to recover degraded soils and make them apt for agricultural practices, as well as
soil conservation practices.
Subsides for irrigation is another important category that is managed by the national irrigation commission
(CNR). This irrigation subsidy has both on-farm and off-farm components. On-farm support provides
subsidies to farmers to improve or install a new irrigation system. On-farm subsidies represent 40% of
spending, whereas 60% is used for community, regional or national investments.
GSSE is dominated (58%) by investments on infrastructure basically for irrigation and land and water rights
for indigenous communities. Inspection services is another category with 24%, and lastly R&D and
agricultural schools contributed with 15% of total budget to GSSE.
Chile’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) committed to carbon neutrality by 2050 and takes a
carbon budgeting approach, although no specific target has been defined for agriculture. The LTCS
strategy contains nine objectives and 63 goals linked to the agricultural and forestry sector. These goals
are related to capacity building, agricultural R&D, agricultural extension services, reduction of greenhouse-
gas (GHG) emissions, increasing carbon sequestration, and strengthening climate change governance.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
In 2022, the Office of Agricultural Policies and Studies (ODEPA) developed an action plan to implement
the Sustainability Strategy for the Chilean Agri-food Sector (launched in 2021), creating a system of
indicators for monitoring and following-up targets and actions. Chile updated its National Adaptation Plan
for agriculture over the course of 2022. Some key measures better integrating forestry, agricultural, and
livestock management practices into techniques for adaptation to climate change; preserving and restoring
natural ecosystems; implementing technologies that increase irrigation efficiency; and improving off-farm
infrastructure and water management practices.


218 

Since early 1990s, Chile has been implementing the soil recovery programme, which promotes soil health,
recovery and conservation, and has been a key programme to increase the sector’s adaptation. The
operational rules and legislation for this programme are being updated and will be submitted for legislative
debate during 2023. The new operational rules aim to reorient incentive payments to sustainable practices,
including elements of agroecology, regenerative agriculture, organic agriculture, and purchase and
development of agricultural bio-inputs.
The Chile Conscious Origin (Chile Origen Consciente) programme promotes the implementation of best
agricultural practices in the Chilean agri-food sector. Established in 2022, it provides a framework for
farmers to incorporate sustainability standards in their operations to help them verify their compliance
through self-assessments and independent audits.
In 2022, INDAP developed the transition to sustainable agriculture programme, which promotes
conservation of productive resources, resilience to climate change, and availability of and access to healthy
food. This programme provides on-farm advisory services to help farmers adopt sustainable and
agroecological management practices.
The Framework Law on Climate Change was published in June 2022. It is the first national legislation to
address climate change as a state policy and introduces the legally binding target of economy-wide carbon
neutrality by 2050. The legislation lays down new rules at the central, regional, and local levels. One of
these is the first National Mitigation Plan for the Agri-food Sector, which contains measures and actions
necessary to reduce GHG emissions in the sector. The first stages of inter-ministerial co-ordination of the
plan began in the second half of 2022.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
In March 2022, a new administration took office. Its agenda is to accelerate the transformation of food
systems, moving towards fairer, healthier, and more sustainable production. Key new priorities are: 1) rural
development and well-being; 2) strengthening of small-scale family farming; 3) water and climate
emergency; 4) sustainability; 5) food security and sovereignty; and 6) international co-operation and trade.
The Ministry of Agriculture implemented the “Sow for Chile” (Siembra por Chile) programme that provides
direct payment for the purchase of agricultural variable inputs such as biochemicals, agrochemicals, seeds,
and fertilisers, to small-scale and indigenous farmers through the agency responsible for small-scale
agriculture (INDAP). The initiative also provides loans for medium-sized farmers through a public bank
(Banco Estado). The Sow for Chile initiative provides direct payment for the purchase of inputs for farming
traditional agricultural products such as grains and potatoes. The payments amount to CLP 219 thousand
(USD 251) per hectare for a maximum of 5 hectares per farmer per year. Another element of Sow for Chile
is the physical provision of fertiliser and grants for the purchase of fertilisers (mineral or organic). Crops
eligible for this subsidy are fruits, legumes, vegetables, and potatoes.
In 2023, INDAP established the programme “Promotion and Strengthening of the Sustainable Production
of Traditional Crops” that aims to increase sustainable grain and vegetable production. The programme
provides payments to adopt sustainable agricultural practices through the acquisition of improved or
certified seeds and also provides credit for the acquisition of these inputs at preferential rates. The
programme has two pillars:
•
competitiveness to address costs, productivity, and commercialisation
•
sustainability to address soil protection and other practices that reduce greenhouse gas
emissions and encourage carbon sequestration.
The National Commission on Food Security and Sovereignty (CNSSA) was established in 2022 to create
the National Food Emergency Plan and develop and implement a set of measures for food security and
sovereignty in the country. The plan will be implemented in 2023 and has ten main measures:


 219

•
Create a fund for the provision of loans to smallholders.
•
Mitigate the lack of access to fertilisers through direct delivery of fertilisers.
•
Create a security plan for strategic food zones to ensure food supply across the country.
•
A new Irrigation Law that provides access to water to small-scale farmers and ensures
environmental sustainability.
•
Enhance inspections (food safety) in operations of the main port terminals.
•
Promote the planting of traditional crops through credit.
•
Create 70 micro-foodbanks nationwide to deliver fruits and vegetables to vulnerable populations.
•
Implement a more efficient agricultural emergency responses for those production systems
affected by climatic hazards, through the physical provision of inputs, such as material for on-farm
irrigation systems, fertilisers, seeds, etc.
•
Expand preferential credit with state loan guarantee by Banco Estado.
•
Develop a price information system for seasonal food, to inform consumers of the cost of
inexpensive and healthy food choices.
To address ongoing severe drought, the Inter-ministerial Committee for Just Water Transition was created
at the beginning of 2023 with 16 basin councils, one in each region of the country, marking the beginning
of a reform of water governance at the basin level, guided by principles of water security, inclusion, and
decentralisation. The CNR represents the Ministry of Agriculture at this committee. The CNR is reforming
its main legal instrument for water efficiency in the country, Act No. 18.450 for the promotion of private
investment in irrigation works, directing public investment in small and medium agriculture, women, and
indigenous peoples, while granting greater environmental sustainability through the application of this
policy.
Moreover, the CNR will allocate more resources to diagnostic studies to improve basic information for
better irrigation management and water security initiatives, project future irrigation works, and programmes
to strengthen the technical and organisational capacities of users and other relevant stakeholders for water
management in the basins. Finally, the institution is formulating a plan of small and medium-sized
infrastructure projects to significantly increase public and private investment in irrigation works, including
green infrastructure and nature-based solutions, to address the expected growing water scarcity. The plan
will take into consideration regional particularities and the needs of those sectors most vulnerable to climate
change. It will be framed within the principles of sustainable rural development.
The animal and plant health agency Agricultural and Livestock Service (SAG) the continues to work on
strengthening sanitary and phytosanitary system of the country to support the sustainable and competitive
development of the forestry and livestock sector. This work is carried out by promoting the use of new
technologies and an ongoing review of technical and administrative regulations and procedures, following
the recommendations of the international reference bodies. In 2022, the Digital Affidavit (DA) was put in
place in 22 entry points, reaching 29% coverage at border controls nationwide. At the same time, the new
organisational structure “Laboratory Network” was established. Priorities were defined for the period, with
emphasis on budget management, aimed at improving efficiency, focusing on improving infrastructure,
optimising expenses associated with processes on diagnostics or analyses.
The Foundation for Agrarian Innovation (FIA) promotes innovation through the promotion, articulation,
development of capacities and technological diffusion of initiatives. During 2022, new strategic guidelines
were defined that will be incorporated in the different project funding initiatives: (1) sustainable
management of water resources, (2) adaptation and mitigation to climate change, and (3) sustainable food
systems. These guidelines contribute to the sustainable development and competitiveness of Chile and its
regions, with special emphasis on sustainable agro-food co-operatives (AgroCoopInnova Programme),
youth (Innovative Rural Youth Programme), and women through the creation of the first Network of
Innovative Rural Women in 2023.


220 

Trade policy developments in 2022-23
In 2022, an agreement signed with the South Korean Health Authority was implemented and the
transmission of electronic certificates began. With the United States, progress was made on a technical
level with a view to an upcoming exchange of electronic certificates. With the Pacific Alliance countries,
the electronic certificate exchange standard was defined and the work plan for its implementation was
established in 2023. Technical tests were completed with the People’s Republic of China (hereafter
“China”).
New countries adopted the modality of the paperless exchange process with Chile: Panama, Paraguay,
Spain, and France, as well as the conduction of trials for the implementation of ePhyto with Bolivia,
Ecuador, Guatemala, Thailand, Indonesia, Australia, and Korea. Regarding integration with SICEX (online
platform for international market), in 2022 adjustments were made for integrating with the Postal System.
Negotiations to broaden the Partial Scope Agreement (PSA) with India and modernise the FTA with Korea
finished in 2022. Negotiations with the European Union and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA)
also concluded in 2022. The negotiations for an FTA with Paraguay were concluded in 2021 and were
ratified by the Chilean Congress. During 2022, negotiations with Trinidad and Tobago continued for a
Partial Scope Agreement (PSA). In 2022, Chile signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on
agricultural co-operation with the Philippines and Thailand. Lastly, in February 2023 Chile ratified its
membership to the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP).
Contextual information
Real GDP growth in Chile has averaged around 4% since 2000 and made it become an upper middle-
income country. Agriculture’s weight in the economy is similar to the average of countries covered in this
report, accounting for 3.7% of GDP and 6.4% of total employment in 2021. The sector has a dual structure,
in which small-scale farms co-exist alongside a large-scale commercial farm sector. Chile is an open trade
country, which has helped it to become an important producer and exporter of agricultural and food
products such as fruits, vegetables, dairy products, poultry, pig meat and wine. Chile is a net exporter of
agro-food products with a surplus of around USD 2.8 billion (excluding fish and forestry) in 2021. Agro-
food products accounted for 14% of Chile’s total exports, and for 11.4% of its imports.




 221

Table 8.3. Chile: Contextual indicators

Chile
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
145
553
0.4%
0.5%
Population (million)
15
20
0.4%
0.4%
Land area (thousand km2)
744
744
0.9%
0.9%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
15 110
15 710
0.5%
0.5%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
21
26
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
9 440
28 105
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
22.3
29.5
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
5.7
3.7
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
14.1
6.4
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
17.0
14.0
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.7
11.4
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
68
61
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
32
39
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
12
8
32
34
Note: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
After a strong recovery in 2021 following the contraction due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Chile’s economy
grew by just 1.9% in 2022, similar to pre-pandemic rates. The country’s unemployment rate decreased
from 8.8% in 2021 to 7.7% in 2022. Inflation reached 11.6% in 2022, the highest in two decades.


222 

Figure 8.5. Chile: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Chile’s agricultural and agro-food sector has been successful in adding value to the production of primary
commodities, by producing more differentiated products such as temperate fruits, and processed products
such as wine. In 2021, 86% of agro-food exports were products for final consumption, both primary and
processed, and only 14% were products for further industrial processing. Agro-food imports were mostly
processed products for consumption with a 55%.


 223

Figure 8.6. Chile: Agro-food trade


Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Productivity growth has been the dominant driver for Chile’s growing agricultural production. Output growth
averaged 1.8% over the period 2011-20, slightly below the global average, and has been mainly achieved
by improvements in total factor productivity (1.6%), supported by some additional use of primary and
intermediate inputs. Agriculture accounts for around 11% of Chile’s GHG emissions, similar to the OECD
average. Around 7% of the total agricultural land is irrigated.
Chile - Figure 6A. Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Chile - Figure 6B. Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
10
10
25
25
4
15
15
37
37
55
55
49
49
6
6
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


224 

Figure 8.7. Chile: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 8.4. Chile: Productivity and environmental indicators

Chile
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
3.5%
1.6%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
..
..
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
..
..
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
..
1.5
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
18.8
10.5
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
7.0
7.0
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
..
..
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
..
..
8.3
7.4
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


Chile - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
1.62%
1.62%
1.12%
1.12%
-0.04%
-0.04%
0.35%
0.35%
0.19%
0.19%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Chile
World
-0.5%
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%
2.5%


 225

References

Anderson, K. and A. Valdés (2008), Distortions to Agricultural Incentives in Latin America, World
Bank, Washington DC, https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/6604.
[1]
OECD (2008), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Chile 2008, OECD Review of Agricultural
Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264042247-en.
[2]



226 

Support to agriculture
The share of support to agricultural producers in the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”)
averaged 14.4% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22. This is three times higher than in 2000-02 but remains
on par with average support (14.2%) between 2016 and 2019, when market interventions were reformed
for soybeans, rapeseed, cotton and maize, and minimum purchase prices for wheat and rice were reduced.
These reforms helped stabilise support levels after two decades of steady growth.
Between 2021 and 2022, reference prices rose faster than domestic prices in a context of increasing world
prices, particularly for wheat, maize, milk, pig meat, and other meat products. Against this backdrop,
producer support fell to 13.4% in 2022, the same level as in 2019.
Area payments to maize and soybeans increased since 2020 to boost production in these sectors and
meet higher demand for feed. Area payments in the Agricultural Production Development programme
increased, to offset rising inputs and production costs in 2022, and contributed to the overall increase in
budgetary support.
Payments based on area planted have consistently increased since 2014 because of the recent reforms.
However, Market Price Support (MPS) remains the main form of support, generated through both domestic
price support policies and various border measures on imports. Overall, more than two-thirds of support to
producers is in the form of potentially most-distorting transfers, a consistent pattern since 2000-02.
Producers of imported commodities (such as pig meat, milk, wheat, rice, cotton, soybeans, and sugar)
benefited from transfers equal to between 9% and 53% of commodity receipts in 2020-22. Prices received
by farmers were 15% higher than world prices on average in 2020-22. Higher domestic producer prices on
average indicate an implicit tax on consumers, with a percentage consumer support estimate of –12.7% in
2020-22.
General services support amounted to 11% of total support to agriculture in 2020-22. It covered three main
categories of services: public stockholding; development and maintenance of infrastructure; and the
agricultural knowledge and innovation system. The General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
represented 2% of the value of agricultural production. The Total Support Estimate (TSE) for agriculture
as a share of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) remained stable and relatively high at 1.8% in 2020-22.
Recent policy changes
The 2023 No. 1 Central Document reiterates the objective of annual grain production of at least 650 million
tonnes. It also prioritises increasing maize yields, expanding the soybean cultivated area, and reducing
soybean meal usage. It highlights the need for regulation and supervision of state grain reserves,
international trade-partner diversification, technological innovation to improve seeds and agricultural
machinery, and promoting “green agricultural development”.
9 China


 227

As prices for grain and oilseeds increased following Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, two key
soybean-producing provinces in northeast China announced their objectives to increase soybean area
compared to 2021. To meet these goals, provincial governments provided soybeans farmers with
additional area payments while the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) released guidelines
for alternating crops of maize and soybeans.
China provided subsidies in three rounds throughout 2022 to stabilise farm incomes and compensate grain
producers for the increasing costs of agricultural inputs: CNY 20 billion (USD 3 billion) in March 2022;
CNY 10 billion (USD 1.5 billion) in May 2022; and CNY 10 billion (USD 1.5 billion) in August 2022.
In June 2022, China issued the National Strategy on Climate Change Adaptation 2035. It focuses on four
areas: (1) greater emphasis on early-warning systems and risk management; (2) sectoral adaptation tasks
for agriculture and food security; (3) greater integration of national and regional adaptation strategies; and
(4) strengthening financial support, scientific and technological support, and international co-operation for
climate change adaptation.
China issued a national drought emergency plan in August 2022 as record temperatures and low water
levels affected much of the Yangtze River region, especially Sichuan, Chongqing, Hubei, and Jiangxi
provinces. MARA allocated CNY 300 million (USD 44 million) to 13 provinces as agricultural production
disaster-relief funds to facilitate flood control and drought relief.
Several measures were introduced in response to international market changes. China introduced a quota
for phosphate fertilisers exports in August 2022. It limits exports of phosphate fertilisers to 3.16 million
tonnes for the second half of 2022 to stabilise domestic prices. In September 2022, the National
Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) implemented a programme releasing 0.2 million tonnes of
pig meat from national, provincial, and municipal reserves to stabilise pig meat prices.
The General Administration of Customs of China (GACC) ended required PCR testing and disinfection
measures for COVID-19 in December 2022 (effective January 2023), which had applied to imported cold-
chain foods and non-cold-chain goods. At the same time, China removed the requirement for foreign trade
operators to register at local commercial authorities. Entities applying for import and export permits and
quotas, and state trading enterprises will no longer be required to provide a registration record.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Since early 2000s, several strategies, plans and programmes were put forward across institutions,
including MARA and the Ministry of Ecology and Environment, to strengthen the sector’s climate-
change adaptation and mitigation actions. In this context, implementation of the National
Agriculture Green Development Plan 2021-25 – a joint effort of various ministries and institutions –
is a positive step towards mainstreaming and co-ordinating adaptation policy objectives across
current and planned programmes, including better targeting of extension services for farmers.
•
Overall, long-term adaptation efforts, such as collaborative planning and multi-disciplinary
research, could be better integrated with efforts to help farmers accommodate climate risks in the
short term, and those backing incremental changes in the medium term. China could consider
additional efforts to measure adaptation outcomes, such as assessing adjustments in production
practices done in demonstration areas.
•
China’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) recognises agriculture’s importance to its
economy-wide emissions-reduction target (peak CO2 emissions by 2030) and its objective to
achieve carbon neutrality by 2060, but no targets have been set for agriculture. Nevertheless,
several sector-specific policy efforts aim to mitigate greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions, and the
monitoring of their impacts on GHG emissions should be improved against programme-specific


228 

targets. The National Agriculture Green Development Plan 2021-25 can play a role by providing
the tools to monitor GHG mitigation practices at farm level and along the value chain.
•
Reforms introduced until 2016 to replace intervention prices for key crops with direct payments
based on planted area are a step towards rebalancing the policy portfolio. This reflects China’s
increasing policy orientation towards long-term productivity growth and sustainability. Replacing
the maize purchasing and storage system with direct payments eased the burden of public
stockholding costs, although these remain the largest expenditure in general services support.
Such reforms could be gradually extended to include wheat and rice. If direct payments to farmers
are maintained over a longer-term, the link between these payments and production decisions
should be loosened, for instance by providing payments on a historical area basis, and ‘greened’
by making them conditional on environmentally friendly production practices.
•
To establish a solid framework for agri-environmental policies, China should define environmental
targets adapted to local ecological conditions and strengthen monitoring mechanisms for the
enforcement of environmental regulations. To this end, regular soil testing under the Soil
Environmental Information Platform and Monitoring System (part of the 2019 Soil Pollution
Prevention and Control Law) needs to be implemented and can set the stage for similar efforts
relating to water use in agriculture. As water resource scarcity is projected to remain a major
constraint to productivity growth in Chinese agriculture, further efforts are necessary to improve
water management. More specifically, in implementing the 2021 regulation on groundwater
conservation and protection, a comprehensive review of water governance could better define
responsibilities, remove conflicts, and ensure effective policy implementation.
•
Public expenditures on general services increased but at a slower pace than support to individual
producers and these have not kept pace with sectoral growth. Restructuring public expenditure
towards general services can be achieved by scaling down input subsidies such as those to
purchase farm machinery, and by ensuring that support through direct payments has only a
transitory role in supporting farmers’ adjustment to a new market environment. Enhanced public
investment in R&D can support more efficient use of variable inputs and reduce environmental
harm. Further investments in sanitary inspection and control services will be necessary to
implement the revised provisions of the Food Safety Law, the envisaged nationwide surveillance
system for pests and diseases.
•
Reforms to land-transfer rules have contributed to the emergence over the past decade of large
family farms, co-operative farms, and farms run by agro-business companies. To continue
improving agricultural productivity, increased investments in education and training, and enhanced
access to financial services should complement these reforms.




 229

Figure 9.1. China: Development of support to agriculture


‘





Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
China (People's Republic of) - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
China (People's Republic of) - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
China (People's Republic of) - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
China (People's Republic of) - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
China (People's Republic of) - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%


230 

Figure 9.2. China: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency. The producer price change and the border price change
are not calculated when both negative and positive market price support (MPS) occur at the commodity level for the previous year.  Note that
negative MPS estimates for livestock products may arise in cases of aligned product prices if there is positive MPS for feed commodities.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Figure 9.3. China: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
%
China (People's Republic of) - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE change decomposition
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
China (People's Republic of) - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Maize
Rapeseed
Rice
Soybeans
Sugar
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Sheep meat
Eggs
Cotton
Imported fruit and vegetables
Groundnuts
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%


 231

Table 9.1. China: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
270 118
1 809 299
1 622 587
1 832 931
1 972 378
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
75.76
81.00
76.96
83.53
82.50
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
281 331
1 993 923
1 778 446
2 042 579
2 160 743
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
14 354
271 068
250 277
289 292
273 634
Support based on commodity output
7 329
201 852
181 496
219 163
204 897
Market Price Support1
7 329
198 421
177 960
215 751
201 551
Positive Market Price Support
11 162
203 783
182 519
222 072
206 757
Negative Market Price Support
-3 833
-5 362
-4 559
-6 321
-5 206
Payments based on output
0
3 431
3 536
3 413
3 346
Payments based on input use
5 684
18 643
19 087
18 609
18 232
Based on variable input use
1 414
4 302
3 960
4 524
4 422
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
3 026
12 528
13 100
12 363
12 121
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
1 244
1 813
2 027
1 722
1 689
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
533
33 771
32 249
34 875
34 190
Based on Receipts / Income
533
1 464
1 681
1 370
1 342
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
32 307
30 568
33 505
32 849
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
370
15 501
15 896
15 456
15 153
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
370
15 501
15 896
15 456
15 153
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
438
1 300
1 550
1 189
1 162
Based on long-term resource retirement
438
1 300
1 550
1 189
1 162
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
5.18
14.40
14.77
15.17
13.38
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.03
1.15
1.15
1.16
1.14
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.05
1.17
1.17
1.18
1.15
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
11 861
33 136
35 360
32 335
31 713
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
1 347
5 044
6 102
4 538
4 492
Inspection and control
349
2 378
2 970
2 102
2 061
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
3 424
13 546
12 032
14 445
14 161
Marketing and promotion
0
466
548
429
421
Cost of public stockholding
6 741
11 703
13 708
10 822
10 579
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
45.03
10.92
12.38
10.05
10.39
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-8 512
-254 226
-240 634
-282 820
-239 224
Transfers to producers from consumers
-8 688
-228 755
-202 594
-252 327
-231 344
Other transfers from consumers
-1 119
-49 566
-56 501
-59 849
-32 349
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
128
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
1 167
24 096
18 461
29 356
24 469
Percentage CSE (%)
-3.03
-12.74
-13.53
-13.85
-11.07
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.04
1.16
1.17
1.18
1.14
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.03
1.15
1.16
1.16
1.12
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
26 343
304 204
285 636
321 627
305 348
Transfers from consumers
9 807
278 321
259 095
312 176
263 693
Transfers from taxpayers
17 655
75 449
83 042
69 300
74 003
Budget revenues
-1 119
-49 566
-56 501
-59 849
-32 349
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.97
1.81
1.95
1.81
1.69
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
19 014
105 783
107 676
105 877
103 797
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.42
0.63
0.73
0.60
0.58
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
196
189
197
203
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
8.28
6.70
6.90
6.45
6.73
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for China are: wheat, maize, rice, rapeseed, soybean,
sugar, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, pig meat, poultry, eggs, cotton, apples, groundnuts, peanuts, exported fruit and vegetables, and imported fruit and
vegetables.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




232 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
The evolution of China’s agricultural policy objectives reflects the changing role of agriculture at different
stages of economic development. In the 1950s and 1960s, the agricultural sector was taxed to support the
industrial sector’s development. In the late 1970s, China initiated an important economic transformation
process, implementing reforms towards a market-oriented economy including for the agricultural sector
(OECD, 2005[1]; OECD, 2018[2]). More specifically, China implemented its first rural reform, the household
responsibility system (HRS), during 1978-84. This dismantled the people’s communes and contracted
cultivated land to individual households, mostly based on the number of people or labourers in the
household.1
Until the late 1990s, agricultural policies focused on increasing food production, particularly grains, through
the provision of fertiliser and other input subsidies to farmers. At the same time, policy actions targeted
deregulation and diversification of marketing channels. Central and local governments increased support
for irrigation.
Liberalisation of international trade started in the early 1990s with the relaxation of trade restrictions and
allowing private traders to play a role in agricultural commodity markets. In the context of China’s WTO
accession in 2001, the average import tariff for agricultural products fell from 42% in the early 1990s to
12% in the early 2000s.
In the 2000s, the growing income gap between urban and rural populations, and between developed and
underdeveloped rural areas became an important policy issue. Increasing farmers’ income was made a
key policy objective together with food self-sufficiency in several of the No. 1 Central Documents during
the 2000s.2 Several new policies were introduced in this period to meet these objectives. These included
minimum purchase prices for grains, and a system for temporary purchase and storage of production, as
well as subsidies for agricultural materials, superior crop varieties, and agricultural insurance premiums.
Many of the No. 1 Central Documents also emphasised other policy goals, such as ensuring the quality of
agricultural products and food safety, enhancing agricultural competitiveness, and protecting the
agricultural ecosystem. In the early 2000s, China introduced agri-environmental payments under
programmes such as “Grain for Green” (officially called the Returning Farmland to Forests Programme),
converting grazing land to grassland, or Grassland Ecological Protection.
In 2014, land reforms clarified village collective landowner rights, individual household land contract rights,
and land operation rights through the “three rights separation system”. These reforms consolidated farm
operations and spurred productivity growth. To control the conversion of farmland for non-agricultural use,
a “red line” on arable land was set at no less than 124.3 million hectares in the 2016 Adjusted Scenario of
the Outline of the National Overall Planning on Land Use.
The government-led temporary purchase and storage policy for cotton, soybeans and rapeseed at pre-
determined prices was reformed in 2014-15, and in 2016 for maize. For cotton, this was replaced by
deficiency payments covering the difference between pre-determined target prices and actual market
prices. For soybeans and maize, it was replaced by direct payments based on area planted. In 2016 all
subsidies on grain, seed and aggregate inputs were merged into a single general income support payment.
While wheat and rice remained subject to the minimum price procurement programme, support prices were
gradually reduced between 2015 and 2019. Since the COVID-19 pandemic, the minimum support price
was increased again for indica rice and wheat.
A rural revitalisation strategy was introduced in 2017 to close the urban-rural development gap. This
strategy relies on support to general services as a means to develop agri-food supply chains.


 233

In March 2021, the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CCCPC) released the 14th Five-
Year Plan 2021-25 for National Economic and Social Development. The plan outlines specific key priorities
for agriculture modernisation:
•
enhancing food security, including by safeguarding a minimum arable land area of 120 million
hectares
•
maintaining subsidies for grain producers and increasing minimum purchase prices for wheat and
rice as appropriate
•
implementing high-standard infrastructure and conservation projects, which could also advance
the development of green agriculture
•
investing in innovative farm technologies and smart agriculture systems, including with respect to
seeds and animal breeding
•
and improving pest and disease control systems.
In November 2021, the State Council issued the 14th Five-Year Plan for Promoting Agricultural and Rural
Modernization 2021-25 setting the mid-term food security objective of maintaining annual production of
grains at a minimum of 650 million tonnes and of meat at 89 million tonnes. The Plan also emphasises
consolidating the achievements of poverty reduction in rural areas, supporting agricultural innovation and
seed development, and conducting new surveys on agricultural production costs to adjust agricultural
insurance programmes and subsidies.
Table 9.2. China: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1978
Centrally planned economy
Centralised control of agricultural activities
Collective and commune-farmer land systems
Production, marketing and price controls, implicitly taxing agriculture
Investments in irrigation systems and extension services
State agricultural trading firms and high tariffs
1978-1999
Initial reforms to the centrally planned
economy
Collective and commune land system dismantled, household responsibility
system set up for land use
Some deregulation of agricultural marketing
State Grain Authority ensuring food availability and affordability to the
population
Public stockholding, food price subsidies to urban consumers
Fertiliser and input subsidies
2000-2009
Improving farmers’ incomes and food self-
sufficiency key policy objectives
Further trade liberalisation
Increase in spending on agricultural research and development
Technical assistance services
Input subsidies, implicit credit subsidies
Increasing allocations to the “Grain for Green” conservation programme
Input and output markets increasingly allowing participation of private
traders
WTO accession in 2001, free trade agreements signed, reduction of tariffs
Minimum purchase price system for grains
Temporary purchase and storage policy established for selected
commodities
2010-2014
Increasing support to agriculture
Increasing minimum purchase prices, and larger set of commodities
covered by the temporary purchase and storage system
Agricultural insurance premium subsidies
Since 2014
Policy efforts to adjust the price support
system and respond to agricultural productivity
and sustainability challenges
Continued reforms in land transfer rules
National Agricultural Sustainable Development Plan 2015-2030
Agricultural support and protection subsidy payments per area since 2015
(currently “Agricultural Production Development” programme)
2017 National strategy on “rural revitalisation”
Dismantling of price support systems for cotton, soybeans, rapeseed,


234 

Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
maize; introduction of direct payments based on area
Gradual decrease in support prices for wheat and rice during 2015-19;
increases since the COVID-19 pandemic in support prices for indica rice
and wheat
Enhanced focus on food security through the No. 1 Central Document since
2022
At the end of the 1990s, China’s support to the agricultural sector mostly comprised budgetary allocations
while market price support (MPS) was negative. Budgetary allocations went to input subsidies and general
services to the sector. However, since 2002, MPS increased and became the main instrument to support
agricultural producers. After 2009, China continued to increase its minimum support prices, leading to
significant price gaps between domestic and international markets. Support to farmers increased until
2015, when reforms to commodities such as rapeseed, soybeans, cotton and maize contributed to lowering
MPS. Fluctuations in producer support levels since 2019, particularly market price support (MPS), are
linked to the evolution of international versus domestic prices. The increase in producer support from 2018
to 2021 was largely driven by a significant increase in MPS for grains and oilseeds against a backdrop of
domestic prices rising faster than border prices. Minimum purchase prices for wheat and rice have
gradually increased since the COVID-19 pandemic. Constraints in the supply of maize and soybeans for
animal feed and groundnuts led to large increases in domestic prices and imports for these commodities
in 2020 and 2021. In addition, domestic prices for livestock commodities such as beef or poultry meat have
been increasing due to more demand for these products in response to tighter supplies of pig meat in these
years. As reference prices increased faster than domestic prices in 2021-22, particularly for wheat, maize,
milk, pig meat and other meat products, producer support decreased once again. MPS accounts for more
than two-thirds of PSE, followed by budgetary support for payments based on current area and input
subsidies (Figure 9.4).
Figure 9.4. China: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1993 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
China (People's Republic of) - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20


 235

Main policy instruments
Market price support is the main form of support to Chinese farmers. It is provided through both domestic
price policies, such as the minimum purchase prices for wheat and rice, and trade policies including tariffs,
tariff rate quotas (TRQs) and state trading.
The minimum purchase prices for wheat and rice are set every year by the National Development and
Reform Commission (NDRC) in consultation with the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA), and
other government institutions. Their application is limited to major wheat and rice producing provinces. The
minimum purchase prices for wheat and rice are announced before sowing seasons, and only apply for
several months after the harvest. The central government mandates that state-owned China Grain
Reserves Corporation (Sinograin) and other state-owned companies undertake intervention purchases in
case market prices fall below specified minimums. Since 2018, only grain of national grade 3 or higher can
be purchased at minimum prices.3 However, in exceptional situations where there are large volumes of
grain below grade 3, such as in cases of extreme weather events, provincial authorities can also purchase
these under temporary reserves. Government procurement can begin only when the market price has
fallen below the minimum price for three consecutive days and must be suspended when the market price
rises above the minimum for three consecutive days. Ceilings on the volumes of grains procured at
minimum purchase prices during a marketing year have been set at 37 million tonnes for wheat (since
2019) and at 50 million tonnes for rice (since 2020).
Budgetary transfers to specific commodities include compensatory and direct payments. Compensation
payments cover the difference between pre-determined target prices and actual market prices for cotton
producers and are a combination of output payments and area payments. Direct payments based on area
planted are provided for soybeans and maize producers.
The “Agricultural Production Development” programme combines a subsidy paid per hectare with direct
payments for grain producers, subsidies for agricultural inputs, and subsidies for improved seed varieties.4
Subsidies are also available for purchases of agricultural machinery, land consolidation; irrigation,
agricultural insurance, returning farmland to forests and excluding degraded grassland from grazing.
General services to the sector focus on public stockholding of grains and developing agricultural
infrastructure (including irrigation and drainage facilities). Support to agricultural knowledge and innovation
is also significant.
China ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change on 3 September 2016 and submitted its first NDC
in 2016 and updated it in 2021. While there are no specific targets for the agriculture sector, the role of
agriculture, land-use change, and forestry is recognised in it. The commitments covered by the updated
NDC are to have CO2 emissions peak by 2030 and carbon neutrality by 2060; to lower the carbon intensity
of GDP to 65% below 2005 levels by 2030; to increase the share of non-fossil fuels to around 25% of
primary energy consumption; to increase forest stock volume by 6 billion m3 from the 2005 level; and to
bring total installed capacity of wind and solar power to over 1.2 billion kW by 2030 (State Council, 2021[3]).
The 2016 NDC calls for achieving zero growth in fertiliser and pesticide use by 2020, which MARA reported
as achieved in 2018. The NDC also sets broad objectives for controlling methane emissions from rice fields
and nitrous oxide emissions from farmland, promoting efficient use of straw and agricultural waste
(UNFCC, 2021[4]; Climate Action Tracker, 2021[5]).
The Soil Pollution Prevention and Control Law entered into force in 2019. The Law establishes systems
for agricultural land classification management according to pollution levels and identified risks. The
Ministry of Ecology and Environment together with the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs and the
Ministry of Natural Resources are establishing a soil environmental monitoring system with regular soil
examinations.


236 

The 14th Five-Year National Agriculture Green Development Plan 2021-25, issued jointly by MARA, the
NDRC, the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), the Ministry of Natural Resources (MONR), the
Ministry of Ecology and Environment (MEE), and the State Forestry and Grassland Administration (SFGA)
(State Council, 2021[6]), includes the following policy objectives and areas for action in the area of
mitigation:
•
Reduce usage of fertilisers and pesticides and increase application efficiencies.
•
Build a green and low-carbon agricultural industry supply chain to improve agricultural production
quality, efficiency and competitiveness by: setting up 800 green standardised agricultural product
production bases, 500 standardised demonstration farms for livestock and poultry, and creating
more than 1 800 agricultural brands; formulating and revising 1 000 industrial standards related to
agricultural green production; supporting green, organic, and geographical indication certification
of agricultural products (certified products should reach over 60 000 and the number of production
enterprises should reach 27 000).
•
Carry out research and apply agricultural green production technologies such as soil
improvements, waste recycling, and green processing; and research and develop green inputs
such as efficient and biological fertilisers, soil conditioners, high-efficiency, low-toxicity and low-
residue agricultural and veterinary drugs, feed additives, and degradable mulching films.
•
Improve compensation mechanisms for ecological protection and establish a price mechanism for
green products.
Other policies and programmes targeting climate change mitigation in the agricultural sector include
demonstrations of fertiliser reduction and efficiency enhancement, and research initiatives supporting GHG
mitigation. Several forestry programmes, primarily involving increased afforestation and improved forest
management, also support NDC objectives of increasing the forest stock volume and GHG emission
reductions in the LULUCF sector. The Grain for Green programme, implemented since 2000, uses direct
payments to incentivise farmers to re-establish forest and shrub vegetation on sloped cultivated land at
risk of erosion.
A new regulation on groundwater use entered into force in December 2021. The regulation sets out specific
rules for the use, conservation and protection of groundwater with the objective to enhance groundwater
supervision and management. The regulation designates areas where the exploitation of groundwater is
prohibited and entitles provincial-level authorities to address over-exploitation and pollution.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
China’s agricultural sector faces growing risks due to extreme weather and shifting planting conditions
brought about by climate change. China’s farming belts were hit by record temperatures and rainfall in
2022, with drought in the northern area of the country.
China implemented several climate change adaptation programmes starting in the mid-2000s. These
programmes included support to implement water-saving techniques in arid areas; agricultural
environment, water and soil conservation; water infrastructure for small agricultural plots; improved soil
organic matter levels; animal genetic variety conservation; and conservation planting.
The 2014-20 National Strategy on Climate Change Adaptation introduced additional programmes and
approaches for adaptation in agriculture. In the agro-food sector, the Strategy has focused on:
•
National research and development plans to define climate zones, adjust sowing dates and select
appropriate crop varieties. A total 3 564 agricultural climate zones at provincial city and county
levels and 5 303 extreme-weather risk zones were delineated.
•
Expanding irrigated area through the construction of irrigation systems, and small and medium-
sized reservoirs.


 237

•
Capacity building for disaster prevention and mitigation, including early-warning systems for
drought, floods, and zoonotic disease outbreaks.
•
Water-conservation projects, including infrastructure to connect feeder canal systems and key
irrigation projects, management of groundwater over-exploitation, promoting water conservation
and control in agriculture in the Yellow River Basin, developing high-efficiency dry farming in arid
and semi-arid areas, and improved flood storage and reservoirs.
•
Better weather monitoring and alerts via a new agricultural climate-resources survey and defining
regional climatic maps for agricultural production zones. The network layout of agricultural
meteorological observation facilities was improved and provides disaster information by region and
disaster type. The drought and flood disaster prevention system was improved, along with grass-
roots-level monitoring and the early-warning network for animal and plant epidemics and pests.
•
Technology transfer to promote “green development” of agriculture. This includes disseminating
technologies that reduce agricultural inputs and improve efficiency, promoting water and fertiliser
integration, and establishing a system for the collection and use of agricultural waste such as straw,
agricultural film, pesticide packaging waste, and livestock and poultry manure.
A subsidy for insurance fees covers selected crops and livestock commodities. Under the programme, the
cost of insurance is shared by the central government, local governments, and farmers. The programme
covers rice, wheat, maize, oilseeds (rapeseed, groundnuts), cotton, potato, highland barley, sugar, hogs,
cows, yak, and Tibetan sheep.
The National Agricultural Sustainable Development Plan 2015-2030 sets goals and approaches to protect
natural resources and encourage sustainable farming practices. It targets improved production quality and
efficiency by setting priorities for different zones according to their capacity for agricultural production,
resource endowments, and ecological characteristics (Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 2015[7]).
Moreover, 220 high-standard dry-farming and water-saving agricultural demonstration areas were
established in dry farming areas in north and northwest China to demonstrate and promote technologies
such as: water storage and soil moisture conservation; rainwater harvesting and supplementary irrigation;
ridge tillage and furrow irrigation; soil-moisture based on on-demand irrigation; water-saving irrigation;
water and fertiliser integration; drought and stress resistance; and water-resource efficiency.
The Cotton Sustainable Development Programme was introduced in 2021. The programme provides
online training to farmers and other stakeholders in the value chain on sustainable production standards.
The Ministry of Ecology and Environment, the NDRC, and MARA jointly issued the National Strategy on
Climate Change Adaptation 2035 in June 2022. The strategy builds upon the 2014-20 adaptation strategy
in four areas: (1) greater emphasis on early-warning systems and risk management; (2) sectoral
adaptation tasks for agriculture and food security; (3) greater integration of national and regional adaptation
strategies; and (4) strengthening financial support, science and technological support, and international
co-operation on climate adaptation (State Council, 2022[8]). The national adaptation strategy considers
geographic characteristics and spatial planning to ensure implementation is tailored to a variety of contexts.
In this sense, the Strategy’s implementation focuses on economic and ecological zones, including Beijing-
Tianjin-Hebei; Guangdong-Hong Kong, China-Macao Greater Bay Area; the Yangtze River Delta; the
Yangtze River Economic Belt; and the Yellow River Basin. The Strategy foresees the following areas for
action:
•
Optimise the pattern of agricultural resource use by adjusting and optimising the planting structure
and crop variety distribution, and selecting and breeding high-yield, high-quality and stress-
resistant crops.
•
Strengthen the climate-change-adaptation and disaster-mitigation work system for agriculture by
improving disaster monitoring and early-warning and response mechanisms, and disaster-
diagnosis technologies and standards; preparing disaster-mitigation plans for different regions and


238 

extreme events; and strengthening the training of agricultural producers in disaster prevention,
mitigation, and adaptation techniques.
•
Enhance the climate resilience of agricultural ecosystems through soil and water conservation, and
ecological protection; conservation tillage in suitable areas; agro-forestry activities in mountainous
areas, and intercropping systems; chemical fertilisers and pesticide reduction and efficiency; and
construction of climate-change-adapted germplasm conservation bases and seed banks to protect
endangered species of agricultural plants and animals.
•
Establish a climate-change framework adapted to food security objectives by improving monitoring
and forecasting of supply and demand, and risk-estimation systems for food production and
production-potential in major areas; strengthening arable-land protection and quality; and
improving the agricultural weather-service system and risk-sharing mechanisms, gradually
promoting weather-index-based insurance, and exploring agricultural-insurance mechanisms.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
China released its No.1 Central Document for 2023 in mid-February 2023, focusing on continued rural
revitalisation. The No.1 Central Document calls for more effort to stabilise production and ensure the supply
of grain and key agricultural products, boost the construction of agricultural infrastructure, strengthen
support for agricultural science, technology and equipment, reduce rural poverty, and to promote the
development of rural industries.
Food security remains a top priority. The 2023 No.1 Central Document reiterates the objective for an
annual production of grains of at least 650 million tonnes. It also prioritises increasing maize yields,
expanding the soybean cultivated area, and reducing soybean meal usage. The document highlights the
need for:
•
regulation and supervision of state grain reserves
•
international trade partner diversification
•
infrastructure development related to soil and water conservation and disaster and animal disease
prevention
•
technological innovation, including biotechnology, to improve seeds and agricultural machinery
•
promoting “green agricultural development”. In this sense, it notes for the first time in a key policy
document the need to “establish a monitoring system for agri-environmental protection” and to
“issue regulations on compensation for ecological protection”.
Early March 2022, China allocated CNY 1.6 billion (USD 253 million) to promote winter wheat cultivation
in the five main producing regions as well as other regions that were most recently affected by delayed
planting caused by heavy rainfall. At the end of March 2022, the Ministry of Finance allocated another
CNY 2 billion (USD 315 million) to support the cultivation of its winter wheat crop in 11 main production
provinces.
In April 2022, China suspended wheat auctions one month earlier than in 2021 due to tighter supplies. In
2022, it released overall 0.5 million tonnes of wheat per week from reserves in weekly auctions, compared
with 4 million tonnes per week in 2021. In March 2023, China restarted auctions of old rice crop stocks for
feed use to rotate out older stocks, to provide alternatives to maize as feed grain supplies remain tight,
and to temper rising feed grain prices. The estimated volume of old stock rice to be auctioned is of
18 million tonnes, less than half the amount on offer in 2021 and 2022. The grain state-owned enterprise
Sinograin announced it plans to increase its grain storage capacity by 30 million tonnes from 2021 to 2023,
boosting the company’s capacity by one-third. Moreover, in September 2022, China instructed farmers to
reduce the soybean use in animal feed by 30 million tonnes, or opt for other feeding alternatives, to reduce
pressure on soybean import costs and curb inflation.


 239

The State Council approved for 2022 an increase in the minimum support price (MSP) for wheat by CNY 40
(USD 6.3). This is consistent with increases in MSPs for wheat since the COVID-19 pandemic, in support
of domestic grain production.
In July 2022, to assist ginners holding high-priced inventories, China initiated a purchase plan of cotton
produced in Xinjiang for state reserves. As of August 2022, the government purchased 45% of the quantity
available.
In September 2022, the NDRC implemented a programme releasing 200 000 tonnes of pig meat from
national, provincial, and municipal level reserves with the objective to stabilise pig meat prices. Since
8 September 2022, the NDRC auctioned more than 127 000 tonnes of frozen pig meat reserves at the
national level.
In June 2022, the provincial government of Yunnan issued a three-year plan (covering 2022-24) to
modernise its agri-food industry. For sugar, the plan foresees maintaining Yunnan’s sugar cane acreage
at around 3.5 million mu (233 333 hectares), achieving sugar cane production of 17 million tonnes, and
achieving a sugar production of 2.5 million tonnes by 2024. Various support programmes are provided for
inputs such as seeds and mechanical equipment, as well as for sugar cane millers to increase profitability
by enhancing the use of by-products. In September 2022, the provincial government of Guangxi
announced continuing the three-year programme introduced in 2020 providing subsidies to sugar cane
planting and harvesting, seed development, field management, pest and disease control. The programme
will also provide support to crop insurance, sugar futures trading, as well as sugar cane transportation and
sugar processing.
In August 2022, China issued a national drought emergency plan as record temperatures and low water
levels affected the region spanning much of the Yangtze River, with Sichuan, Chongqing, Hubei and
Jiangxi provinces reporting severe impacts. Although none of the affected regions are major soybean
producing areas, the extreme heat and drought are expected to lower soybean yields. On 16 August 2022,
MARA allocated CNY 300 million (USD 44 million) to 13 provinces as agricultural production disaster relief
funds to facilitate flood control and drought relief.
The Agricultural Development Bank of China issued CNY 2.14 trillion (USD 297 billion) of loans in the first
three quarters of 2022. This includes loans for the purchase of summer and autumn grains seeds, seed
developments and upgrade of farmlands.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
As prices for grain and oilseeds increased following Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, two
leading soybean-producing provinces in north-east China, Heilongjiang and Inner Mongolia, announced
plans to increase soybean area by 10 million mu (0.7 million hectares) and 4.3 million mu
(0.3 million hectares), respectively, compared to 2021. To meet these objectives, provincial governments
provided soybeans farmers additional subsidies of CNY 2 000 per mu (USD 19 per hectare). MARA also
released guidelines for alternating crops of maize and soybeans, targeting different regions, and set an
objective of reaching 1 million hectares covered by 2023. Henan and Shandong provinces are providing
subsidies of CNY 3 000 per mu (USD 29 per hectare) to incentivise intercropping.
China provided subsidies in three rounds throughout 2022 to stabilise farm incomes and compensate grain
producers for the increasing costs of agricultural inputs: CNY 20 billion (USD 3 billion) in March 2022;
CNY 10 billion (USD 1.5 billion) in May 2022; and CNY 10 billion (USD 1.5 billion) in August 2022. Similar
to initiatives addressing impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020-21, these programmes would be
implemented as part of the “Agricultural Production Development” subsidy, paid per hectare.


240 

Trade policy developments in 2022-23
In 2022, the General Administration of Customs of China (GACC) announced that under the China-New
Zealand free trade agreement (FTA), China would remove special safeguard measures on imports of New
Zealand milk, butter, and cheese starting in 2022.
In February 2022, MARA signed a phytosanitary protocol with Myanmar for expanding maize exports to
China. In March 2022, GACC granted market access to Mongolian dairy products, including milk, cheese,
and whey powder. In the summer of 2022, the GACC also lifted a ban on cattle imports from Lao PDR that
had been in place due to lumpy skin disease.
In June 2022, GACC published the announcement regarding the “Implementation of Conditional Retrieval
Facilitation Measures for Imported Seed”. This allows qualified importers to retrieve seeds at customs for
storing in approved facilities prior to the official release of quarantine laboratory test results.
In September 2022, China published an updated Agricultural Product Quality and Safety Law, which
entered into force on 1 January 2023. This covers a range of issues relating to risk management and
standard development, places of origin, production, sales, supervision and administration, and legal
liabilities. It removes references to geographic indications. Producers and operators engaged in the cold
chain logistics of agricultural products must follow regulations and relevant agricultural product quality and
safety standards, strengthen the innovation and application of cold chain technology, and quality and safety
control, and implement regulations on cold chain logistics, agricultural products and their packaging,
means of transportation, and operating environments.
On 30 December 2022, China removed the requirement for foreign trade operators to register at local
commercial authorities. Entities applying for import and export permits, quotas, and state trading
enterprises will therefore no longer be required to provide a registration record.
Building on the results of pilot programmes, GACC, NDRC, and the Ministry of Commerce (MOFCOM)
implemented from 1 January 2023 the electronic data online verification of three quota certificates: the
“Agricultural Products Import Tariff Quotas Certificate of the People’s Republic of China”, “Fertiliser Import
Tariff Quota Certificate” and “Non-tariff Quota Preferential Tariff Rate Quota for Imported Cotton”. The
NDRC and MOFCOM will no longer issue paper quota certificates, but instead issue electronic quota
certificates, and transmit the electronic data to customs. The applicant goes through the import customs
procedures with the electronic quota certificate, and customs verifies this by comparing the electronic data
of the quota certificate and the electronic data of the customs declaration form.
On 29 December 2022, the State Council Tariff Commission (SCTC) announced its annual tariff
adjustment plan for 2023. As of 1 January 2023, China will calculate MFN tariffs on certain frozen poultry
products by applying a tariff on the import value (i.e. ad valorem) rather than by volume. China will also
temporarily lower import tariff rates for various cheese products (from 12% to 8%), various types of nuts
(new tariffs ranging between 5% and 12%), and sunflower seed (from 15% to 9%). The temporary applied
MFN import tariff rate for cashew nuts will be further lowered to 5% in 2023. The temporary import tariff
rates for orange juice, which had been previously raised to 18% in 2022, increased again in 2023 to 20%.
On 3 October 2022, China restricted the export of maize starch owing to concerns about local supplies. In
this context, the government required companies to suspend shipments with the objective to stabilise
prices and contain inflationary pressures.
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
On 25 May 2022, the GACC and the Ministry of Agriculture in Brazil signed a Protocol on Phytosanitary
Requirements to allow maize imports from Brazil. This follows China’s strategy in diversifying its import
sources for key commodities.


 241

In August 2022, China introduced a quota limiting total phosphate exports to 3.16 million tonnes for the
second half of 2022. In October 2021, state-owned enterprises producing phosphate were required to stop
exports until at least June 2022. In addition, China implemented a quota limiting total phosphate exports
to 5.5 million tonnes for the second half of 2021.
In October 2021, China also restricted exports of all
fertilisers by introducing a new requirement for inspection certificates to ship fertilisers.
Trade policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Between September and December 2022, in order to promote epidemic prevention and control for non-
cold chain goods at the port, the GACC adjusted the completion requirements for relevant items of the
“Customs Declaration Form for Imported Goods of the People's Republic of China” and the “Recording List
of Imported Goods at Customs of the People's Republic of China”: a newly added declaration item of
“preventive disinfection” was included (i.e. disinfection of places and items that may be contaminated by
pathogenic microorganisms when there is no clear source of infection).
On 28 December 2022, GACC removed PCR testing requirements and disinfection measures for COVID-
19 that had been applied to imported cold-chain foods and non-cold chain goods. This change took effect
on 8 January 2023.
Contextual information
China has the world’s largest population and the second largest land area. It is an upper-middle income
economy, with a GDP per capita – adjusted by PPP – close to 83% of the average of countries covered
by this report (Table 9.3). However, while counting almost 20% of the world’s population, it has only 7% of
the world’s potable water and 10% of the world’s agricultural land. China is thus a resource scarce country,
which results in severe competition between agriculture and other users of land and water resources.
Agriculture remains an important part of China’s economy. It accounts for 24.4% of employment, but its
7.6% share of GDP indicates that labour productivity is significantly lower than in the rest of the economy.
Even if rural incomes are growing at high rates, they remain at around one-third of those in urban areas.
Crop production represents 66% of total agricultural output and its composition has changed significantly
over the last decades, driven by the shift towards higher value-added agricultural products such as fruit
and vegetables. While the average farm size remains less than one-hectare, large-scale production has
been developing rapidly, including among co-operative and corporate farms. North and northeast
provinces have seen more rapid farm consolidation than other regions, as increased labour mobility and
the transfer of land among farmers over the past three decades have led to adjustments in the farm
structure. Livestock production originates mostly from larger-scale commercial units (OECD, 2018[2]).




242 

Table 9.3. China: Contextual indicators

China
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
3 683
27 313
9.2%
22.2%
Population (million)
1 264
1 426
29.5%
27.2%
Land area (thousand km2)
9 425
9 425
11.5%
11.4%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
523 731
528 508
17.4%
18.0%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
132
149
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
2 917
19 338
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
19.3
16.6
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
14.9
7.6
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
50.0
24.4
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
4.8
1.9
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
4.7
8.2
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
64
66
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
36
34
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
23
23
32
34
Note: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Real GDP growth averaged 4.6% in 2020-22 (Figure 9.5). After the COVID-19 crisis and following a period
of gradual slowdown in economic growth since 2012, China experienced one of the strongest economic
growth rates among G20 economies, supported by strong industrial activity and a boost in exports against
a backdrop of increasing demand in other major economies. Despite those signs of improvement,
economic growth decelerated to around 3% in 2022, as activity in China was held back by continued
lockdowns and a wave of COVID-19 infections. Unemployment only slightly increased since 2020, as the
economy was supported by the COVID-19 fiscal support policies. Following inflation above 2% in 2019
and 2020, when food inflation was driven by higher pig meat prices due to the African swine fever outbreak
and related supply constraints, inflation rose again in 2022 against a background of increasing international
commodities price and increasing input costs.


 243

Figure 9.5. China: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
China has consistently and increasingly been a net agro-food importer since 2003, but agro-food exports
have been growing over the last two decades. While agro-food exports stabilised since 2018, agro-food
imports have been increasing at a higher rate during this period. The significant increase in agro-food
imports since 2020 has been driven by higher imports of grains and oilseeds, particularly maize and
soybeans, as well as higher pig meat imports. Primary products used as inputs in the domestic food
industry dominate China’s agro-food imports, representing 44% of the total in 2021. In turn, primary and
processed products for final consumption are key export categories, accounting for 70% of total agro-food
exports (Figure 9.6). Over the last two decades, China has developed into the largest importer of
agricultural products in the world. With rising consumption and limited capacity to increase its domestic
production due to arable land and water scarcity, China increasingly meets its demand through imports. In
this context, its agricultural policy setting – including price and storage measures for some commodities –
can have important impacts on world prices.


244 

Figure 9.6. China: Agro-food trade


Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural output growth in China averaged 1.7% in 2011-20, on par with the world average (Figure 9.7).
This has been driven by growth in total factor productivity (TFP) of 1.6% per year, higher than the global
average and largely attributed to farm consolidation and increased mechanisation of production. The
contribution of primary factor growth to agricultural output growth (0.2%) is slightly lower than the world
average (0.4%).
China (People's Republic of) - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
50
100
150
200
250
China (People's Republic of) - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
16
16
17
17
14
14
44
44
40
40
30
30
30
30
9
9
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 245

The sustained growth in agricultural output is exerting pressures on natural resources such as land and
water. While nutrient surplus intensities for nitrogen and phosphorus have been declining over the past
two decades, these remain at high levels, particularly for phosphorus relative to the OECD average
(Table 9.4). Agriculture remains the main user of water, accounting for 61.6% of total water abstraction,
well above the OECD average. Water stress is more than twice as high as the OECD average.
Figure 9.7. China: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 9.4. China: Productivity and environmental indicators

China
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
4.4%
1.6%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
41.4
30.4
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
9.8
9.5
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.4
2.0
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
9.8
6.7
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
10.3
13.1
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
68.8
61.6
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
19.3
20.7
8.3
7.4
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.
China (People's Republic of) - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
1.59%
1.59%
1.12%
1.12%
0.15%
0.15%
0.35%
0.35%
-0.10%
-0.10%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
China (People's Republic of)
World
-0.5%
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%
2.5%


246 

References

Climate Action Tracker (2021), “Countries: China”,
http://climateactiontracker.org/countries/china.html (accessed on  15 January 2019).
[5]
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (2015), National Agricultural Sustainable Development
Plan 2015-2030, http://www.moa.gov.cn/zwllm/zwdt/201505/t20150527_4619961.htm
(accessed on  10 January 2019, in Chinese).
[7]
OECD (2018), Innovation, Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability in China, OECD Food and
Agricultural Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264085299-en.
[2]
OECD (2005), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: China 2005, OECD Review of Agricultural
Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264012615-en.
[1]
State Council (2022), National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 2035.
[8]
State Council (2021), Fourteenth Five-Year Plan for National Agricultural Green Development,
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhengceku/2021-09/07/content_5635867.htm (accessed on
15 December 2021).
[6]
State Council (2021), Responding to Climate Change: China’s Policies and Actions,
http://www.scio.gov.cn/zfbps/32832/Document/1715506/1715506.htm.
[3]
UNFCC (2021), China First NDC - Updated October 2021,
http://www4.unfccc.int/submissions/indc/Submission%20Pages/submissions.aspx.
[4]


Notes

1 Although ownership of land remained collective, control and income rights belonged to individuals under
the HRS, with a land contract term of 15 years. When this ended in the late 1990s, the second term was
extended to 30 years.
2 Self-sufficiency was interpreted to mean that China should produce 95% of its own grain requirements.
The Chinese self-sufficiency rate for grains is defined as the total production of wheat, coarse grains and
rice divided by total domestic consumption of these crops (OECD, 2005[1]). The No. 1 Central Document
is the most important policy document in China, issued jointly by the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China (CCCPC) and the State Council. This document determines the most important policy issues
and focus of the year. Issues related to agriculture, farmers and rural areas have consistently been selected
as the topic of this document since 2004.
3 The quality grade standard is divided into five grades plus a ‘sub-standard’ category.
4 This programme was previously called the “agricultural support and protection subsidy”.


 247

Support to agriculture
Agricultural producer support in Colombia averaged 6.1% of gross farm receipts during 2020-22, well
below the OECD average, and 25% lower than in the early 2000s. Producer support experienced a sharp
decrease over the past two years due to the temporary suspension of the Andean Price Band System
(SAFP) for some agricultural commodities and the reduction on import tariffs of key agricultural products.
Despite this reduction, Market Price Support (MPS) continues to be the dominant type of support,
accounting for 83.5% of the Producer Support Estimate (PSE) in 2020-22. MPS for a range of agricultural
products is driven by border measures, such as tariffs, and represents the only form of Single Commodity
Transfers (SCT). SCT are particularly high for rice, but still sizable for eggs, maize, sugar, and pig meat.
Prices received by farmers were an average 5% higher in 2020-22 than those observed in world markets.
Budgetary transfers to farmers accounted for the remaining 16.5% of PSE in 2020-22. This type of support
is mostly based on input use. It includes measures such as preferential interest rates for credit, subsidised
agricultural insurance premiums, and subsidies for the acquisition of inputs like fertiliser and seeds.
Subsidies are also provided for on-farm services and for on-farm fixed capital formation such as machinery
and equipment.
Budgetary allocations to general services for the sector (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) were
relatively small. Their average share in the value of agricultural production was 1.1%, a decrease from
1.5% in 2000-02 and less than one-third of the OECD average. Support for general services focuses on
agricultural research and knowledge transfer; infrastructure, particularly for irrigation; and farm
restructuring (e.g. land formalisation, rights, and access). Overall, total support to the sector (Total Support
Estimate, TSE) corresponded to 0.6% of GDP.
Recent policy changes
The administration that took office in August 2022 introduced an agricultural development plan for 2022-26,
called “Towards Agriculture for Life” (“Hacia Una Agricultura Para La Vida”). The plan focuses on five
strategies: (1) comprehensive land reform; (2) addressing inequalities facing indigenous, black, women,
and young people in the sector; (3) environmental protection and sustainability; (4) market inclusion in
agricultural value chains; and (5) a territorial approach considering the social, economic, and
environmental characteristics of rural areas. Adjustments to policies will be reflected during 2023.
To mitigate domestic price increases caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and exacerbated by the war in
Ukraine, Colombia set the tariffs on agricultural inputs at 0%, and prolonged the suspension of the SAFP
for some products and the decrease of import tariffs such as the established fixed tariffs for rice (80%),
milk powder (98%), white corn (40%), whey (94%), and wheat (0%) until December 2023. The March 2022
reduction to 0% of import tariffs on 163 products that are part of the basic household basket was also
extended until December 2023. A new programme within the Fund for Access to Agricultural Inputs (FAIA)
approved in 2022 provides a partial refund of producers’ agricultural input expenditures.
10 Colombia


248 

Assessment and recommendations
•
Colombia’s efforts in climate-change adaptation concentrate on emergency relief, planning, and
strategies. However, these are insufficient for the sector to become more climate resilient. The
government must define more specific actions for climate-change adaptation as part of existing
policy frameworks and guidelines, with the objective of fostering long-term sector resilience.
•
Colombia’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) commits to reducing total greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions by 51% with respect to the baseline scenario by 2030, and black-carbon
emissions by 40% compared to 2014 levels in 2030, with the long-term objective of carbon
neutrality by 2050. Given agriculture’s role as a major contributor to the country’s GHG emissions,
it will need to reduce its emissions significantly. Setting specific emission-reduction targets and a
mitigation plan for the sector would help progress. Furthermore, the government should promote
the adoption of low-emission production systems.
•
More broadly, the environmental-sustainability performance of the sector, including biodiversity,
water use, and deforestation, are challenges to consider more systematically in policy design. This
includes the environmental effects of agricultural policy instruments and the provision of public
goods and services. Agriculture sustainability is particularly important because Colombia is one of
the most biodiverse countries in the world. Additionally, even though efforts of focalisation and
territorial targeting have taken place, the government could consider using land-management
instruments like zoning to define which products can be grown, depending on the soil, water, and
agroclimatic conditions, which is crucial for ongoing efforts at land reform.
•
Colombia’s agricultural sector faces structural challenges and could increase support to key
general services to overcome these challenges. Public investment should focus on strategic areas
that improve productivity and competitiveness, and ensure the sector’s sustainable development.
They include land-tenure rights, improved hydrological infrastructure for irrigation; transport
infrastructure; digital infrastructure, research, development, and innovation capacity; animal and
plant health protection and control services; promotion of the sustainable use of natural resources;
and national and functional extension, training, and technical assistance systems that foster
technology adoption and promote farmer co-operatives.
•
Under the framework of the Peace Agreement, Colombia made progress in the provision of rural
public goods. However, short-term responses to problems faced by agricultural producers (mainly
in the form of input subsidies) divert scarce resources from developing an enabling environment to
facilitate the sector’s sustainable growth. Further re-orientation of support from input subsidies to
general services is needed to foster more inclusive and sustainable agricultural growth.
•
Efforts in land reform must be accompanied by broader provision of public goods. As more than
50% of land ownership is informal, an inclusive land-access policy framework would promote rural
and sectoral development. Implementation of the multi-purpose cadastre policy should accelerate.
Upgrading the cadastre system and speeding the registration and allocation of land rights are
crucial for the sector. Land rights contribute to long-term growth in the agricultural sector by
stimulating private investment, and help promote the development of rural areas.
•
The government should assess the impact of policy instruments and agricultural-support
programmes. Current programmes have broad scope and are implemented through a bundle of
policy instruments with unclear combined impact. A review could redefine and re-organise policy
instruments based on evidence of the costs and benefits of individual measures and policy
packages. Such a revision could consider equity, social and environmental outcomes.


 249

Figure 10.1. Colombia: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Colombia - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Colombia - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Colombia - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Colombia - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%
Colombia - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%


250 

Figure 10.2. Colombia: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency. The producer price change and the border price change
are not calculated when both negative and positive market price support (MPS) occur at the commodity level for the previous year. Note that
negative MPS estimates for livestock products may arise in cases of aligned product prices if there is positive MPS for feed commodities.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Figure 10.3. Colombia: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.

%
Colombia - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE change decomposition
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Colombia - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Maize
Rice
Sugar
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Eggs
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%


 251

Table 10.1. Colombia: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
10 565
27 356
27 434
27 149
27 487
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
80.75
79.61
66.47
80.90
91.45
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
7 938
22 388
22 047
21 956
23 159
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
2 630
1 719
2 666
1 253
1 239
Support based on commodity output
2 544
1 432
2 420
911
967
Market Price Support1
2 544
1 432
2 420
911
967
Positive Market Price Support
2 550
1 438
2 422
914
977
Negative Market Price Support
-6
-5
-2
-3
-11
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
86
287
246
342
273
Based on variable input use
53
175
151
199
177
with input constraints
36
152
132
163
161
Based on fixed capital formation
16
50
46
68
36
with input constraints
3
24
24
30
19
Based on on-farm services
17
62
50
75
60
with input constraints
5
40
31
45
44
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
24.96
6.13
9.63
4.56
4.47
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.32
1.05
1.10
1.04
1.04
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.33
1.07
1.11
1.05
1.05
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
154
320
307
512
141
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
49
133
105
270
24
Inspection and control
9
28
33
33
19
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
95
141
151
187
86
Marketing and promotion
0
17
18
21
11
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
1
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
5.51
15.55
10.33
29.01
10.19
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-2 318
-1 871
-3 322
-1 155
-1 137
Transfers to producers from consumers
-2 087
-1 422
-2 437
-918
-910
Other transfers from consumers
-248
-461
-902
-244
-236
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
16
11
18
7
9
Percentage CSE (%)
-29.49
-8.17
-15.07
-5.26
-4.91
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.42
1.09
1.18
1.06
1.05
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.42
1.09
1.18
1.06
1.05
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
2 784
2 039
2 973
1 765
1 380
Transfers from consumers
2 335
1 883
3 339
1 162
1 146
Transfers from taxpayers
697
618
536
847
470
Budget revenues
-248
-461
-902
-244
-236
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
2.85
0.65
1.10
0.56
0.41
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
240
607
553
854
414
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.25
0.19
0.20
0.27
0.12
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
274
251
267
304
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
2 297.17
3 899.51
3 695.61
3 744.32
4 258.61
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Colombia are: maize, rice, sugar, milk, beef and veal,
pig meat, poultry, eggs, bananas, plantains, coffee, palm oil and flowers.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




252 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
The agricultural sector has played an important role in Colombia’s economic growth. Commercial
agriculture began a phase of rapid expansion in the 1960s. Growth, especially in the 1960s and 1970s,
was partly a response to policy incentives to mechanise and intensify the use of modern inputs, and partly
a consequence of the sector’s protection from imports. The coffee booms of the 1970s and the 1980s
coincided with strong growth in agricultural and total GDP. Until the beginning of the 1990s, agriculture
was the largest productive sector of Colombia. Over this period, import substitution policies were used,
including tariffs, quantitative restrictions, state marketing enterprise, subsided credit and minimum prices
(Anderson and Valdés, 2008[1]).
At the beginning of the 1990s, Colombia experimented with more open trade. The government monopoly
on agricultural marketing was eliminated and private banks were encouraged to lend to farmers and
agricultural exporters. To diversify the markets for Colombian agro-food products, the government
negotiated trade agreements with Mercosur, the United States, Central America, Chile, Canada, and the
European Union (OECD, 2015[2]).
This economy-wide programme of trade liberalisation was combined with deregulated foreign exchange
rates and labour markets. Quantitative trade restrictions were abolished, and import tariffs reduced and
replaced by ad valorem tariffs. The role of IDEMA (Instituto de Mercadeo Agropecuario), the agricultural
marketing institute that had a monopoly over grain imports, was reduced and its operation limited to poor
areas with less access to markets. Minimum guaranteed prices were established for some staple
commodities, with international prices used as a benchmark (Anderson and Valdés, 2008[1]).
However, this liberalisation was too rapid for farmers to adjust, putting the sector in crisis. Then, towards
the end 1990s, and under pressure from farmers, the government implemented policies to protect the
sector and stabilise producer incomes in the face of price fluctuations in world markets. A price band
system for six agricultural commodities, along with their substitutes and derivatives was introduced,
covering 112 products in total. This eventually evolved into the Andean Price Band System (Sistema
Andino de Franjas de Precios - SAFP) and incorporated more products. The construction of the price
bands, which fixed the floor and ceiling prices, raised the protection of domestic goods against imports.
Moreover, the Price Stabilisation Funds (Fondos de Estabilización de precios, FEPs) originally created for
cocoa and cotton, were expanded to also cover palm oil, sugar cane, beef, and milk. The FEPs make
payments to producers when the selling price of a product falls below a minimum (floor) price. When the
sales price of a product is higher than an established maximum (ceiling) price, producers contribute to the
FEPs. While these funds currently do not represent government outlays, the government provided the
initial capital for their set-up.
After 56 years of conflict between the government, paramilitary groups and guerrilla groups, a peace
agreement was signed in 2016 by the government and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
(FARC). The peace negotiations resulted in an agreement with a common vision for rural development. It
sets out a long-term plan for the sector focusing on the use of land and water resources, increased
productivity and competitiveness, improved infrastructure and other public goods for the agricultural sector,
and a redefined institutional architecture to design and implement policy (OECD, 2015[2])
Colombia’s support to agricultural producers relative to gross farm receipts changed little during
1992-2013, but trended downwards since 2014. Market price support is the predominant category. Since
2007, there was a clear trend towards increasing budgetary support to the sector, particularly in 2013 when
outlays more than doubled. This trend reversed since 2016, and budgetary allocations have fallen
considerably in both absolute and relative terms (Figure 10.4).


 253

Table 10.2. Colombia: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1990s
Import substitution policies
Tariffs on agricultural inputs and outputs
Other border measures establish tariff rate quotas (TRQs)
Minimum prices
Export promotion and subsidies for traditional crops (coffee, sugar)
State marketing agency (government purchases of agricultural products)
Subsided agricultural credit
Export taxes
1990-2013
Back and forth changes to trade
liberalisation and measures to offset
economic crisis
Changes to trade liberalisation and some
protection measures
Role of the state marketing company reduced and later increased for marketing
cereals and oilseeds
Reduction of tariffs for both agricultural outputs and inputs
Export subsidies
Several FTAs signed
The price band system extends and becomes the Andean Price Band System
covering in total 154 products and by-products
Quantitative import restrictions created
Direct payments introduced
Expansion of price stabilisation funds to other crops
2013-2022
Peace negotiations and agreement
Focus on agricultural innovation and public goods
Focus on productivity, competitiveness, and rural development
Efforts to improve the land tenure system
2022-present
Agrarian reform
Agricultural inequalities
Emphasis on land rights, land restitution, land access
Emphasis on small-scale farmers
Colombia’s support to agricultural producers relative to gross farm receipts changed little during 1992-2013
but trended downwards since 2014. Support is predominantly provided through market price support;
however this support has sharply been reduced in 2021 and 2022 due to reduction of key import tariffs and
the suspension of the Andean Price Band System for agricultural products as consequence of COVID-19
and the war. In terms of budget, since 2016 budgetary allocations have fallen considerably in both absolute
and relative terms (Figure 10.4).




254 

Figure 10.4. Colombia: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1992 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Agricultural policy in Colombia is shaped by both the National Development Plan (PND) and the agricultural
plan, where each new administration defines the emphasis. However, two key agricultural policy
instruments have been used over the past two decades and focus on import cost and income stabilisation,
contributing to market price support. One is the Andean Price Band System (SAFP) stabilises import costs
for 13 commodities: rice, barley, yellow maize, white maize, soybeans, wheat, unrefined soybean oil,
unrefined palm oil, unrefined sugar, refined sugar, milk, chicken cuts, and pig meat. The system also
applies to first stage processed products derived from these commodities. However, over the past two
years, due to COVID-19 Colombia has suspended the use the Andean Price Band System for rice, milk,
white maize, and wheat.
The other instrument is the Price Stabilisation Funds (FEPs) which are designed for income stabilisation.
Seven products use the FEPs, which are financed and administered by producer associations: cotton,
cocoa, palm oil, sugar, beef, milk, and coffee. FEPs make payments to producers when the selling price
of a product falls below a minimum (floor price). When the sales price of a product is higher than an
established maximum (ceiling price), producers contribute to the FEPs. The ceiling and floor prices are
established by a Council formed by stakeholders and government, this price use based on selected
international prices for each product. FEPs are funded through producer levies and function as price-
setting mechanisms that make domestic producer prices higher than international prices. The ceiling and
floor prices are established based on selected international prices for each product, while the transfers and
compensations take into account a reference price indicator at which the products reach the market.
In addition to these two measures, the country also provides preferential interest rates for agricultural
credit, through the Financing Fund for the Agricultural Sector (FINAGRO), a second-tier bank, and provides
credit for working capital, marketing, and investment. Agricultural risk management instruments include
Colombia - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35


 255

agricultural insurance, where the government subsidises up to 80% of the cost of insurance premiums;
farmers pay the remaining 20% and the VAT.
Many agricultural programmes provide input subsidies. For example, subsidies for farm improvements are
provided through the programme Competitive Improvements, these subsidies are given mostly for fixed
capital formation such as investments related to drainage and on-farm irrigation infrastructure, among
others. The Fund for Agricultural Promotion (Fondo de Fomento Agropecuario-FFA) gives subsidies for
the purchase different inputs including variable (e.g. seeds and fertilisers), as well as services and farm
equipment and fixed capital formation. Productive Alliances programme also provides all kinds of input
subsidies but are only directed to small-scale farmers. Lastly, subsidies for the services of animal and plant
control health are given to farmers.
Public expenditures for investments on general services are mostly destined to farm restructuring and
agricultural research and extension services, as well as inspection and control. Moreover, efforts under
the framework of the Peace Agreement on the provision of rural public goods and services have increased
the amount of land with formal tenure, improved irrigation-drainage, and provided technical assistance.
In terms of climate change on Colombia’s NDC aims to reduce GHG emissions by 51% in 2030, as well
as to reduce black carbon by 40% compared to 2014 levels. Colombia’s long-term objective is to achieve
carbon neutrality by 2050. The country also is a participant in the Global Methane Pledge, which reaffirms
its commitments to mitigation measures. Furthermore, the country created a National Appropriate
Mitigation Action (NAMA) for coffee 2016, for livestock in 2017 and for panela (raw sugar) in 2018.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
Policy efforts in Colombia aim to simultaneously address adaptation, mitigation, environmental protection,
and conservation. Climate Action Law 2169 passed in December 2021 establishes goals to achieve carbon
neutrality, climate resilience, and low-carbon development in the country in the short, medium, and long
terms within the framework of Colombia’s international commitments on climate issues. In agriculture, the
law calls for considering climate change adaptation and mitigation in planning instruments for the
agricultural sector (PIGCCS) by 2030, and for implementing adaptation actions under the National Plan for
Adaptation to Climate Change.
Colombia’s NDCs commit to actions on adaptation related to agriculture, such as improving technical
capacities or production methods related to main crops (e.g. rice, maize, potato, livestock, dairy, sugar
cane, cocoa, bananas, and coffee) to adapt to climate change. Improved availability of agroclimatic
information is meant to aid farmers’ decision making. These actions rely on international co-operation
funds.
The Green Climate Fund was created in November 2022 with the Development Bank of Latin America
(CAF). The Fund implements the project “Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and
sustainability in prioritised agricultural production systems” (CSICAP), with the objectives to:
•
implement digital agriculture systems and climate services to modernise agricultural extension
services and provide adaptation and mitigation recommendations that support the reduction of
agroclimatic risks and crop loss while stimulating a low-emission sector
•
develop, validate, and scale technologies such as genetic improvements or crop management to
increase resilience and low-carbon agriculture
•
strengthen the capacity of producers, technicians, and institutions to adopt new technology and
business models that take into account environmental, social, and gender considerations.
The Law “Immediate climate crisis on floods” signed in 2022 aims to provide better and more efficient relief
assistance during flooding in rural areas. Colombia also introduced GANABOSQUES, a digital platform
that monitors GHG emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. This platform measures risk


256 

associated with deforestation in specific regions such as natural national parks, and verifies cattle
movements in deforested areas and strategic ecosystems.
The Integral Program for the Productive Reconversion of Livestock (PIRPAG) was created in 2022. This
programme aims to improve the efficiency and sustainability of livestock production in regions associated
with deforestation, based on agricultural zoning that defines appropriate areas for beef and milk cattle
ranching. Moreover, the sustainable cattle policy guidelines published in 2022 propose short-, medium-,
and long-term actions to ensure the growth and competitiveness of cattle ranching. The cattle guidelines
have three areas: (1) sustainability, productivity, and markets; (2) governance and institutions; and
(3) finance and incentives. The guidelines encourage farmers to adopt sustainable practices to shift
extensive cattle production systems to semi-intensive and sustainable models that are economically viable
and do not involve deforestation.
The Comprehensive Agricultural Sector Climate Change Management Plan (PIGCCS) passed in 2021
includes adaptation activities organised along three axes: (1) strengthening the country's capacity to
manage agro-climatic information; (2) adapting the productive systems of the agricultural, fishing, and
forestry sectors to climate change; and (3) strengthening the institutions of the agricultural sector in their
actions related to adaptation to climate change.
Lastly, guidelines were developed and passed in 2021 for low-impact agricultural activities and the
conservation of natural resources in paramos land. The guidelines have conservation measures such as
protecting underground and superficial water sources, promoting the use of green and living fences, and
protecting wild plant species located on paramos, as well as sustainable measures such as the use of bio-
inputs or bio-fertilisers, and no-till or minimum-till practices.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
The new administration, which took office in August 2022, introduced a new agricultural development plan
for 2022-26 called Towards Agriculture for Life (Hacia Una Agricultura Para La Vida). This plan focuses on
five key strategies:
1. a comprehensive land reform
2. addressing inequalities facing indigenous, black, women, and young people in the sector
3. environmental protection and sustainability
4. market inclusion on agricultural value chains
5. territorial approach considering the social, economic, and environmental characteristics of rural
areas
Adjustments to current policies, as well as new policies and their implementation, will be reflected during
2023. However, as part of the new development plan, the agrarian reform started to be implemented with
the identification of 20 million hectares of fertile land that can be acquired by the government at market
prices, with the plan for the next four years is to distribute 3 million hectares to farmers.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
A new programme within the framework of the Fund for Access to Agricultural Inputs (FAIA), approved in
2022, provides a partial refund of producers’ agricultural input expenditures. The programme benefits
small-scale farmers producing poultry, livestock, banana, potato, rice, pig, corn, sheep, cassava, sugar
cane for panela production, mango, orange, onion, lemon, banana, tomato, pineapple, carrot, beans,
strawberry, and blackberry. Twenty percent of expenditures for variable inputs such as fertilisers, seeds
are refunded to mitigate the impacts of higher input prices due to the war and the COVID-19 pandemic.


 257

Trade policy developments in 2022-23
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
Several measures have been applied to mitigate the impact of high food prices due to COVID-19 and
exacerbated by the war. In 2023, the Andean Price Band System continues to be suspended and is
replaced by fixed tariffs for rice (80%), milk powder (98%), white corn (40%), and whey (94%). In addition,
import tariffs of wheat and peanut were reduced to zero for two years, until July 2024.
Tariffs for other agricultural commodities are applied at reduced levels, for example for crude soybean oil,
soybean and crude palm oil up to a maximum level of 40%, wheat up to a maximum level of 35%, white
and raw sugar up to a maximum level of 70%, roosters and chickens fresh or refrigerated, frozen without
cutting up to a maximum level of 92%. Seasoned and frozen pieces of turkey, preparations and preserves
of meat, offal or blood, of rooster or hen, in seasoned and frozen pieces, and other seasoned and frozen
pieces of poultry up to a maximum level of 70 %.
In March 2022, Colombia set to zero import tariffs for 163 products1 that are part of the basic household
basket, this measure is in force until December 2023. Lastly, import tariffs on all agricultural inputs,
including fertilisers were reduced to zero to mitigate domestic price increases, this measure remains in
force until May 2024.
Contextual information
Colombia has a surface of 1.1 million km2; it is the only South American country that borders both the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Colombia has abundant agricultural land and fresh water, is very biodiverse
and is rich in natural minerals and fossil fuels. Agriculture continues to be an important sector for the
economy – accounting for 7.4% of employment and 15.3% of GDP in 2021. Colombia has a dualistic
distribution of land ownership where traditional subsistence smallholders co-exist with large-scale
commercial farms. Even if the relative weight of agro-food exports in total exports has declined over the
years, the sector continues to make a significant contribution to the country’s exports, with agro-food
exports accounting for a quarter of all exports in 2021 (Table 10.3).




258 

Table 10.3. Colombia: Contextual indicators

Colombia
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
265
866
0.7%
0.7%
Population (million)
38
50
0.9%
1.0%
Land area (thousand km2)
1 110
1 110
1.4%
1.3%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
44 859
48 243
1.5%
1.6%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
35
46
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
6 753
16 819
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
12.5
16.3
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
8.3
7.4
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
22.3
15.3
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
22.3
22.4
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
12.8
13.6
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
59
62
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
41
38
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)

10
32
34
Note: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
In 2022, Colombia saw its real GDP growth decrease to 8% after its significant recovery from the recession
in 2020, caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Still, growth in 2022 remained well above the rates seen in
the first two decades of the 21st century. Employment, which had suffered from the pandemic, experienced
a small recovery with unemployment falling to 13.8% from the 15.4% rate observed in 2020. However,
inflation rose to 10% in 2022, up from 3.5% in 2021, which is related to the COVID-19 pandemic and the
economic impacts of the war in Ukraine (Figure 10.5).


 259

Figure 10.5. Colombia: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
The country has been a net exporter of agricultural and food products with a net surplus of USD 1 billion
in 2021. Colombia’s agro-food exports are almost equally split between those destined for final
consumption (52%) and those that are sold as intermediate inputs (48%) for use in manufacturing sectors
in foreign markets. In contrast, the majority of agro-food imports (68%) are in the form of intermediates for
further processing in the country (Figure 10.6).
Figure 10.6. Colombia: Agro-food trade

Colombia - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
2
4
6
8
10


260 


Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Colombia has witnessed an output growth of 2.24% p.a. for the period 2011-2020. This growth is mostly
due to Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth, which was 1.49% over the same period, far above the world
average. Primary production factors use growth (0.63%) and, to a lesser extent rising use of intermediary
inputs (0.13%), contributed to output growth. Agriculture is the main water user with a share of 59.4% total
water use, above the OECD average. Furthermore, agriculture contributed with 31.4% of GHG emissions.
In contrast, nitrogen balance (10.8) is much lower than the OECD average (30.4). (Figure 10.7 and
Table 10.4).
Colombia - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
11
11
29
29
37
37
39
39
18
18
25
25
34
34
7
7
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 261

Figure 10.7. Colombia: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 10.4. Colombia: Productivity and environmental indicators

Colombia
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.8%
1.5%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
9.9
10.8
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
5.8
6.9
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)¹
5.9
1.5
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
35.7
31.4
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
..
2.2
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
60.2
59.4
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
..
..
8.3
7.4
Note: * or closest available year.
1. Data are not directly comparable between time periods due to change in methodology in 2013.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


Colombia - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
1.49%
1.49%
1.12%
1.12%
0.63%
0.63%
0.35%
0.35%
0.13%
0.13%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Colombia
World
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%
2.5%


262 

References

Anderson, K. and A. Valdés (2008), Distortions to Agricultural Incentives in Latin America, World
Bank, Washington DC, https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/6604.
[1]
OECD (2015), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Colombia 2015, OECD Review of
Agricultural Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264227644-en.
[2]


Note

1
https://dapre.presidencia.gov.co/normativa/normativa/DECRETO%20307%20DEL%203%20DE%20MAR
ZO%20DE%202022.pdf (in Spanish).


 263

Support to agriculture
Agricultural support for producers (Producer Support Estimate, PSE) in Costa Rica amounted to 4% of
gross farm receipts in 2020-22, well below the OECD average and down from 8% in 2000-02. Agricultural
support comes almost entirely (89%) from market price support (MPS), one of the most trade- and
production-distorting forms of support, generated through border measures (tariffs) and domestic
measures (minimum reference prices). Products with price support notably include rice, pig meat, poultry
meat, and sugar. On average, border protection and price interventions inflated producer prices by 4%
relative to international prices in 2020-22. The remaining producer support (worth 0.4% of gross farm
receipts) comes through credit at preferential rates for the agricultural sector, input subsidies for agricultural
equipment and machinery, payments for environmental services, and support to organic production,
among others.
Spending on general services (General Services Support Estimate, GSSE) was equivalent to 1.3% of the
value of agricultural production in 2020-22, a small increase from 2000-02. Nevertheless, this share
remains well below the OECD average. In 2020-22, GSSE expenditures were mainly allocated to three
areas: (1) the agricultural knowledge and innovation system, particularly extension services; (2) inspection
and control; and (3) development and maintenance of irrigation and rural roads infrastructure. Total support
to the sector (Total Support Estimate, TSE) corresponded to 0.4% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in
2020-22, a significant decline from 1.2% in 2000-02.
Recent policy changes
Costa Rica undertook reforms to the price system and import tariffs for rice in 2022. These are part of the
Rice Path: a new strategy to promote greater competition in the rice market and improve the quality of
local production. As the first actions under this plan, the reference price scheme was dismantled, and the
most-favoured-nation (MFN) import tariffs for paddy and milled rice were reduced from 35% to 4.5% and
5%, respectively. The Rice Path includes actions to promote research and technology transfer, and provide
training on topics such as proper crop management, sustainable use of natural resources, and
improvement and reduction in the use of agrochemicals. Technical assistance and training will also be
available for producers who need to change activities.
A public policy for the agricultural sector for 2023-32 was launched in January 2023. It aims to improve the
sector’s competitiveness; foster the creation of value-added; generate employment; and improve the
population’s living conditions through actions to increase productivity, sustainability and resilience, and
adaptation to climate change. The policy foresees measures to modernise the numerous institutions
governing the sector, strengthen their co-ordination, and improve the quality of their services.
Costa Rica signed a Trade Association Agreement with Ecuador in March 2023, expected to enter into
force in 2024. It aims to consolidate and improve market access for Costa Rican exports and create a legal
framework to continue promoting and developing investments and strategic alliances between the
11 Costa Rica


264 

countries. Once in force, it will add to the network of agreements under which Costa Rica conducts most
of its agro-food trade.
Assessment and recommendations
•
The National Climate Change Adaptation Plan 2022-26 is a step towards adopting a longer-term
perspective to align with climate change goals and improving institutional co-ordination, as
recommended by the OECD (2017[1]). While the plan includes numerous measures to improve the
adaptation of agriculture, many are contingent on external funding. This uncertainty might impede
implementation of new initiatives or affect the continuity of existing programmes. The government
should prepare a contingency plan in case external funds are not forthcoming in a timely manner.
•
The new public policy for the agricultural sector for 2023-32 sets a general framework for the
sector’s climate adaptation. A more detailed outlining of concrete actions foreseen under this policy
will be key to assessing its potential impact. This is an opportunity for Costa Rica to better align
agricultural and climate policies, and to implement OECD recommendations such as linking
existing voluntary programmes and direct payment schemes with adaptation, integrating
adaptation into existing technical assistance programmes and extension services, and
systematically monitoring and evaluating adaptation efforts.
•
Despite the relatively large contribution of agriculture to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, Costa
Rica has not established a sector-specific mitigation target. The agricultural Nationally Appropriate
Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) have achieved GHG emission reductions in the coffee and livestock
sectors. There are plans to develop NAMAs for other sectors, such as rice and bananas, but their
progress depends on the availability of external funding. Implementing additional agricultural
NAMAs could mitigate GHG emissions and promote the adoption of good practices in important
agricultural activities.
•
Recent reforms of the reference price and import tariffs for rice – following OECD recommendations
– are important steps towards improving the affordability of a basic staple food. To promote a
transition to more sustainable and resilient production, and protect farmers’ livelihoods, the
government must ensure that all measures included in the Rice Path are adequately implemented.
This includes providing technical assistance to small and medium-sized rice producers, helping
small-scale farmers who wish to cease rice production, and actions to use water more efficiently
and reduce the use of agrochemicals.
•
Beyond rice, price transfers (measured by market price support) continue to account for the largest
share of producer support. For example, several agro-food products are subject to higher-than-
average import tariffs. Costa Rica should continue its efforts to reduce transfers that distort
domestic markets and trade, constrain competition, productivity and competitiveness, and risk
harming the environment.
•
Support to general services has increased in the last two decades, including investments in the
agricultural innovation system. However, relative to the value of agricultural production it continues
to be below the OECD average. The low expenditure, a fragmented research agenda, and limited
information sharing with extension services constrain innovation. Strengthening investment in
innovation and knowledge transfer could create an enabling environment to improve productivity
and unlock untapped potential in Costa Rican agriculture.
•
The estimated agricultural Total Factor Productivity (TFP) decreased on average 2% per year in
2011-20. Streamlining the institutional structure governing the sector could improve the delivery of
public policies and contribute to improving productivity (OECD, 2023[2]). The new sector policy for
2023-32 represents an opportunity in this regard. Investments are also required to reduce the
infrastructure gaps that limit the sector’s competitiveness, such as the poor quality of rural roads.


 265

Figure 11.1. Costa Rica: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Costa Rica - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
Costa Rica - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Costa Rica - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.025
1.05
1.075
1.1
Costa Rica - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
Costa Rica - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.25%
0.5%
0.75%
1%
1.25%
1.5%


266 

Figure 11.2. Costa Rica: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 11.3. Costa Rica: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
Costa Rica - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Border price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
Border price change decomposition
Change in producer price
PSE change decomposition
-40
-20
0
20
40
Costa Rica - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Rice
Sugar
Pig meat
Poultry meat
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%


 267

Table 11.1. Costa Rica: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
2 209
5 217
5 086
5 259
5 305
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
79.20
89.28
85.37
89.93
92.54
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
1 114
2 329
2 210
2 257
2 520
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
175
212
301
207
127
Support based on commodity output
164
189
278
183
106
Market Price Support1
164
189
278
183
106
Positive Market Price Support
164
189
278
183
106
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
10
22
23
23
20
Based on variable input use
4
10
11
10
9
with input constraints
1
10
11
10
9
Based on fixed capital formation
1
7
7
7
6
with input constraints
0
1
1
1
1
Based on on-farm services
5
5
6
5
5
with input constraints
3
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
1
1
1
2
1
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
1
1
2
1
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
1
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
7.90
3.98
5.90
3.92
2.38
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.08
1.04
1.06
1.04
1.02
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.09
1.04
1.06
1.04
1.02
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
20
68
65
74
66
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
10
28
31
27
25
Inspection and control
3
19
12
23
22
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
7
20
20
23
18
Marketing and promotion
0
1
1
1
1
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
10.47
24.65
17.67
26.34
34.30
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-189
-239
-334
-233
-149
Transfers to producers from consumers
-156
-172
-252
-171
-93
Other transfers from consumers
-34
-67
-83
-62
-57
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-16.93
-10.10
-15.12
-10.30
-5.93
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.20
1.11
1.18
1.11
1.06
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.20
1.11
1.18
1.11
1.06
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
195
280
366
281
193
Transfers from consumers
189
239
334
233
149
Transfers from taxpayers
40
108
114
110
100
Budget revenues
-34
-67
-83
-62
-57
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.23
0.42
0.59
0.44
0.28
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
32
91
88
98
87
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.20
0.14
0.14
0.15
0.12
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
368
354
361
389
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
331.77
616.93
584.68
621.35
644.77
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Costa Rica are: rice, sugar, milk, beef and veal, pig
meat, poultry, bananas, coffee, palm oil and pineapple.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




268 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Costa Rica’s agricultural policy has developed in three phases (Table 11.2). Up to the 1980s, the country
pursued import substitution, supported by government market interventions and capitalising on its natural
comparative advantages through the export of traditional products such as coffee, bananas, sugar and
bovine meat.
Between the mid-1980s and the mid-2000s, Costa Rica followed an outward-oriented growth strategy,
which influenced the development of agricultural support policies. Market intervention decreased
significantly, combined with continued domestic reforms and trade liberalisation, marked by Costa Rica’s
accession to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1990 and, subsequently, to the World
Trade Organization (WTO) in 1995. Price controls were eliminated (except in the case of rice), export taxes
removed and import tariffs lowered. Costa Rica entered into free trade agreements that granted duty-free
treatment for imports from many trading partners, although tariffs still apply to some agricultural products
(OECD, 2017[1]).
The food price crisis of 2007-08 fuelled food security concerns, leading to the establishment of programmes
seeking to increase productivity of staple foods, particularly through extension services targeting small-
scale farmers. The administered price for rice that had been maintained for decades was reformed in 2015
and converted to a minimum reference price, which was eliminated in 2022 together with tariff reductions
on rice imports. Costa Rica’s policies continue to emphasise export-oriented agriculture, which has
resulted in some asymmetries between exporters and producers for the local market. In addition, greater
policy focus is now directed at promoting sustainable productivity with an emphasis on small-scale farmers
(OECD, 2017[1]).
Table 11.2. Costa Rica: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1980s
Closed economy
Import substitution approach; price interventions on agricultural products, particular
emphasis on guaranteed price for rice; high tariffs on agricultural imports
Creation of the National Production Council (CNP) in the 1940s to promote
agricultural and industrial production, control agricultural prices and own public
infrastructure for the collection, storage, transport and distribution of grains
1980s-2007/08
Gradual shifts to open the
economy
Dismantling price interventions (but minimum price for rice continued)
Reduction of trade barriers (import and export tariffs)
Reforms to CNP end most functions, keeping only the Institutional Supply
Programme (PAI), which purchases food from small and medium farms for
consumption in public institutions
Strengthening agricultural exports via product diversification and development of
destination markets; several FTAs signed; incentives (including in agriculture) to
domestic and foreign companies to attract FDI, such as the Free Trade Zone Regime
(FTZ) providing tax benefits and preferential port rates
Creation of agricultural institutions for animal health (SENASA), plant health (SFE),
agricultural innovation (INTA)
Creation of the Rural Development Institute (IDA/INDER)
Since 2008
Open economy with a focus on
sustainability and small-scale
farmers
Emphasis on extension services for small-scale farms; promotion of good agricultural
practices
Small and limited payments to farmers for environmental services
Import tariffs persist for some agricultural products
Major rice policy reforms in 2022: elimination of the reference price and lower tariffs
Producer support has fluctuated between 2% and 11% of gross farm receipts over the last decades. This
volatility can be partly explained by fluctuations in export and import unit values or in the international
reference prices for some MPS commodities. Costa Rica’s PSE consists mainly of market price support


 269

(MPS), which accounts for around 90% and concentrates on rice and livestock products. In contrast,
budgetary support to producers is limited and has changed little over time (Figure 11.4). Around 75% of
total budgetary allocations are in the form of general services to the sector. Agricultural research and
development (R&D), extension services, inspection and control, and rural infrastructure account for most
of these expenditures. Costa Rica does not provide budgetary transfers to consumers.
Figure 11.4. Costa Rica: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Until the end of 2022, the agricultural policy framework of Costa Rica was guided by the 2019-22 Policy
Guidelines for the Agricultural, Fishing and Rural Sector, which sought to improve the well-being of people
employed in agriculture, achieve a competitive and sustainable agriculture, and strengthen the sector’s
resilience, with a cross-cutting axis of climate action and risk management. A new public policy for the
agricultural sector (Política pública para el sector agropecuario costarricense 2023-2032) was unveiled in
January 2023 (see below).
Market Price Support (MPS) is the most important component of overall agricultural support. Costa Rica
maintains a wide range of border measures, including tariffs and sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS)
measures. The average applied most-favoured-nation (MFN) tariff on agricultural imports in 2021 was
11.6%, above the 4.6% faced by non-agricultural products. Certain sectors face significantly higher MFN
average rates, such as dairy (50.9%), animal products (20.8%) and sugars (18.9%) (World Trade
Organization, 2022[3]).
Costa Rica - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-5
0
5
10
15


270 

Budgetary policy instruments predominantly focus on providing general services to agriculture, including
extension services, research and development (R&D), and plant and animal health services, with a
significant emphasis on environmental protection. The National Institute for Innovation and Transfer of
Agricultural Technology (INTA) manages agricultural research, development and innovation. Together with
the MAG’s National Directorate of Agricultural Extension, INTA also operates technology transfer and
extension services to farmers. The National Animal and Health Service (SENASA) and the National
Phytosanitary Service (SFE) are in charge of animal and plant health services.
Farmers also receive a number of specific payments and subsidies, including implicit subsidies through
credit at preferential interest rates, and some subsidies for fixed capital formation mostly directed to small-
scale farmers.
The National Seed Policy for 2017-30 is implemented by the National Seed Office with the participation of
stakeholders from the seed production sector. The strategic actions of this policy include the development
of varieties, the production of seeds and the assurance of their quality, the extension of seeds’ use, the
development of seed-producing companies, and ensuring security in the supply of seeds.
The National Groundwater, Irrigation and Drainage Service (SENARA) constructs and manages irrigation
infrastructure, and maintains and upgrades existing infrastructure. It carries out actions such as:
•
Providing training and assistance to producers for the proper use of water resources.
•
Construction works for drainage and flood control in the regions with the highest levels of rainfall.
This regulates soil moisture, which favours production and prevents losses from flooding.
•
A programme for research and management of groundwater resources, generating information on
the availability of water for its sustainable use.
Costa Rica has committed to a completely decarbonised economy by 2050 and established annual goals
for reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The overall goal is composed of two objectives:
(1) maximum 9.11 MtCO2eq net emissions, with emissions per capita of 1.73 net tonnes by 2030; and
(2) absolute maximum net emissions of 106.53 MtCO2eq for 2021-30 (OECD, 2022[4]). While agriculture
contributes 21% to the country’s GHG emissions, almost twice the OECD average, the country does not
have an agriculture-specific target.
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) for agriculture were developed in collaboration with
public institutions, producer organisations, the private sector and academia, supported by international
co-operation funds. Currently, two agricultural NAMAs are active for coffee and livestock. Low-emission
production of coffee is done on an estimated 24 770 hectares, which has led to a reduction of
71 763 tonnes of CO2eq between 2014 and 2022. The livestock sector reduced emissions by
175 000 tonnes of CO2eq in the same period, and overall captured more GHGs than it generates. While
the planning and development of additional NAMAs for other sectors such as bananas and rice has started,
their implementation is highly dependent on the availability of international co-operation funding.
Costa Rica’s agri-environmental policy also includes the Payment for Environmental Services Programme.
Its projects on agroforestry services provide financial compensation to small and medium-sized agricultural
or livestock producers who plant trees interspersed with crops or pastures. This programme seeks to
maintain, recover, and develop forest ecosystems, increase carbon sequestration, improve the rural
landscape and the environmental conditions of cattle farms, and generate additional economic resources
through the sale of wood from the trees planted.
The Recognition of Organic Environmental Benefits programme, managed by the Department of Organic
Production of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, consists of a direct payment for producers that are
certified organic or in the transition period. The incentive is provided in a base amount per year for a
maximum of three years.


 271

Costa Rica has entered into 16 free trade agreements (FTAs) with trading partners across the world. Most
trade is conducted under these agreements: as of 2017, FTAs covered almost 93% of the country’s total
exports and 83% of imports (Ministerio de Comercio Exterior, 2017[5]). An important policy to promote
agricultural exports is the DESCUBRE programme, operated through a public-private partnership led by
the Ministries of Agriculture and Foreign Trade and the export promotion agency PROCOMER.
DESCUBRE links farmers to export markets and value chains and promotes investments in rural and
coastal areas. Its activities include providing seed funding and technical assistance to help small producers
become providers of larger exporting companies in selected agro-food value chains.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
The National Climate Change Adaptation Plan 2022-26 was presented in April 2022. This plan defines the
actions required to implement the National Climate Adaptation Policy (launched in 2018). It is closely linked
to Costa Rica’s updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), submitted at the end of 2020, which
includes a National Communication on Adaptation that sets concrete guidelines and goals. The adaptation
plan covers six areas: (1) knowledge management; (2) territorial planning; (3) ecosystem management;
(4) public services; (5) productive systems; and (6) investment and financial security. It includes
232 concrete adaptation actions to be undertaken by 49 institutions.
Most actions that concern the agricultural sector in the national adaptation plan are grouped under its
Axis 5, “Adapted and eco-competitive production systems”. Some examples include: developing a strategy
for rainwater-harvesting and irrigation technologies in productive agricultural systems; developing a
programme for training and technology transfer in practices that strengthen resilience and promote
ecosystem-based adaptation at different scales (small, commercial, and agro-industrial); and establishing
a seed bank with crop varieties from different Costa Rican regions. Many of the proposed actions are
contingent on external funds.
In 2021-22, the National Seed Office implemented the Project for Strengthening Capacities in Seed
Production for Adaptive and Resilient Agriculture, supported by international co-operation funds. This
project seeks to improve the capacities of family farms producing seed, promote the use of superior-quality
seeds, and increase the productivity of these systems while taking climatic variables into consideration. It
also contributes to the National Biodiversity Strategy (2016-25) by promoting the management and
conservation of seeds of native species for food and reforestation by indigenous people and local
communities.
The NAMAs for the coffee and livestock sectors also include adaptation actions. The NAMA-coffee aims
to improve resource-use efficiency in production and processing. Work is being done to implement the
National Coffee Strategy for Low Emissions and Resilience to Climate Change. Other actions include
training model farms, producers, and public and private extension professionals in sustainable production,
and planting trees in agroforestry systems in coffee farms. Coffee processors also receive financial
incentives to reduce their emissions and their electricity and water use.
In the case of the NAMA-livestock, the National Institute for Innovation and Transfer of Agricultural
Technology (INTA) provides research support covering topics such as: Voisin Rational Grazing1 and its
potential to improve productivity and re-carbonise soil in pastures; developing bovine genetics adapted to
the country's climate and production scales; the rational use of nitrogen in the fertilisation of pastures and
the use of fertigation techniques with slurry in pastures; and fodder conservation systems.
During 2022, the National Directorate of Agricultural Extension provided incentives for climate change
adaptation and mitigation in farms. The Recognition of Benefits for Good Agricultural and Livestock
Practices programme grants a monetary incentive to agricultural producers, covering 20% to 30% of
investments with a positive environmental effect, such as live fences, fodder banks, biodigesters, or
organic waste-treatment systems. In addition, the Ecological Blue Flag (Bandera Azul) for the agricultural


272 

sector is a voluntary programme recognising farmers that implement practices in areas such as water
management, soil conservation, consumption of agricultural inputs, fossil fuels and electricity, and actions
to improve climate adaptation and resilience.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
A new public policy for the agricultural sector for the period 2023-32 was launched in January 2023. It aims
to improve the competitiveness of the sector (including crops, livestock, fisheries, and agro-industry)
through actions oriented to increase productivity, sustainability and resilience, and adaptation to climate
change, to improve the international competitiveness of Costa Rican products, create employment and
improve living conditions in rural areas (Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería, 2023[6]). The policy identifies
four major action areas:
•
Modernising and strengthening the sector institutions and improving co-ordination, using
technology to simplify procedures and improve regulations.
•
Improving competitiveness through the availability of information for producers and decision-
makers, better infrastructure and plant and animal health services, and improved access to
financing and insurance.
•
Improving productivity and sustainability through the promotion of good agricultural practices and
technologies that optimise resource use, the development of economic incentives for producers
who implement actions that contribute to the decarbonisation goals, the implementation of the
National Adaptation Plan for agriculture, and the promotion of research and knowledge transfer.
•
Improving value added and marketing channels through the promotion of value addition and
production linkages, identifying new market niches, and developing physical and virtual marketing
channels. This action area also includes a food and nutritional security component that seeks to
promote the access and availability of balanced foods for the population, and actions for the
management and use of waste.
A new strategy for the rice sector was presented in the second half of 2022. The strategy, known as the
“Rice Path”, was developed by an inter-institutional team that included the vice-president and the ministers
of agriculture, economy, and foreign trade. The strategy proposes actions to improve the quality of
production and promote greater market competition. The first actions under this strategy were to eliminate
the reference price scheme and reduce the MFN import tariffs on paddy rice from 35% to 4.5% and on
milled rice from 35% to 5%.2 This reform follows past OECD recommendations to Costa Rica about the
reduction of market price support for rice, which highlighted the need to address the perverse incentives
created for rice production and the policy’s negative impact on poor households (OECD, 2017[1]). It is
expected that this reform will help reduce the cost of the basic goods basket (OECD, 2023[2]).
The Rice Path strategy also includes research and technology transfer, promoting the use of seeds and
supplies suitable for the country's conditions, and training farmers on topics such as proper crop
management, sustainable natural resource use, and rationalising agrochemical use. Technical assistance
and training will also be provided to producers who need to change activities. These actions will be
developed by the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) and the National Institute for Innovation and
Transfer of Agricultural Technology (INTA) starting in 2023. They are expected to benefit about 490 small
and medium-size rice producers.
In 2022, Costa Rica established the legal framework for the cultivation, production, industrialisation, and
trade of cannabis for medical and therapeutic purposes and of hemp for food and industrial uses. It
regulates and allows the production and use of psychoactive cannabis and its derivatives (exclusively for
medical and therapeutic uses), as well as the production, industrialisation, and commercialisation of hemp
for industrial and food uses. The framework gives the MAG the authority to issue licences and
authorisations for cultivation, production, and related activities, and to provide technical assistance to small


 273

and medium producers for the development of crops. Both activities are expected to promote economic
and social development in rural areas.
A reform to the registration process of new agrochemicals entered into force in February 2023. The new
regulation allows to homologate the registration of Technical Grade Active Ingredients (TGAI) with OECD
members and other adherents to the OECD System for Mutual Acceptance of Chemical Safety Data. This
reform eliminates a bottleneck that had delayed the registration of new molecules for decades. It is
expected to significantly reduce the time needed for registration and modernise the agrochemicals
authorised in the country, making available newer molecules that are more friendly to the environment and
human health (Servicio Fitosanitario del Estado, 2023[7]).
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
In March 2023, Costa Rica and Ecuador signed a Trade Association Agreement. It aims to consolidate
and improve market access for Costa Rican exports and create a bilateral legal framework to continue
promoting and developing investments and strategic alliances between both countries. The agreement is
expected to enter into force in 2024.
In May 2022, Costa Rica lifted the restrictions on imports of fresh avocados from Mexico that had been the
subject of a WTO dispute initiated in 2017. The panel found that Costa Rica’s restrictions were inconsistent
with the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures. To bring the measures into conformity with
its legal obligations, Costa Rica repealed the resolutions that had been found incompatible with WTO
provisions (Servicio Fitosanitario del Estado, 2022[8]).
Several developments related to agricultural import tariffs took place in 2022. They include lower tariffs on
paddy and milled rice approved in August, and the expiration in March of an antidumping measure
consisting of additional import duties on unrefined crystal white sugar imports from Brazil (World Trade
Organization, 2022[9]).
A safeguard measure increasing the import tariff on refined white sugar, which was in force since
August 2020 (OECD, 2021[10]), expired in August 2023. Following concerns raised by Brazil and its
decision to suspend concessions by raising tariffs on certain agricultural products from Costa Rica (World
Trade Organization, 2020[11]), in October 2022 Costa Rica opened a tariff rate quota of 4 437 metric tonnes
of refined sugar from Brazil not subject to the safeguard duty, in exchange for Brazil ending the tariff
increase on Costa Rican products.
Contextual information
Costa Rica is a small country with a population of 5.2 million. Its long democratic tradition and political
stability have underpinned its economic progress and the development of its agricultural sector. Agriculture
still plays a relatively important role in the economy, contributing 12% to employment. While the share of
agriculture in GDP is above the average of covered countries, it has halved in the last two decades,
reflecting the diversification of the economy. Costa Rica’s GDP per capita almost tripled between 2000
and 2021 and is now close to the average across all countries covered by this report (Table 11.3).




274 

Table 11.3. Costa Rica: Contextual indicators

Costa Rica
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
32
117
0.08%
0.10%
Population (million)
4
5
0.09%
0.10%
Land area (thousand km2)
51
51
0.06%
0.06%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
1 840
1 762
0.06%
0.06%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
78
101
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
7 796
23 320
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
38.2
25.3
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
10.2
4.7
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
16.3
11.7
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
31.0
37.2
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.6
13.3
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
76
73
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
24
27
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
11
14
32
34
Note: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
After a marked recovery from the economic contraction associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, real GDP
growth in 2022 declined to 4.3%, closer to typical pre-pandemic growth rates. Despite this lower growth,
unemployment declined between 2021 and 2022, although it remains above its pre-COVID-19 levels. After
years of fluctuating between zero and 2%, inflation had an important increase in 2022, reaching 8%
(Figure 11.5).


 275

Figure 11.5. Costa Rica: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Costa Rica is a net exporter of agro-food products, which accounted for 37% of the 2021 value of goods
exports. Around 45% of Costa Rica’s agricultural exports are primary crops for final consumption, such as
bananas and pineapples, while a third of exports are processed products for final consumption. Agro-food
imports are almost equally distributed between products for final consumption and products for industry
(Figure 11.6).


276 

Figure 11.6. Costa Rica: Agro-food trade


Note: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Costa Rica’s estimated Total Factor Productivity (TFP) decreased by 2% per year during 2011-20. The
output growth of 1% p.a. between 2011 and 2020 resulted from the increasing use of primary factors and,
to a lesser extent, variable inputs (Figure 11.7). Area expansion into less productive land, ongoing farm
fragmentation and limited financial and physical infrastructure were among the key contributing factors to
the TFP decline.
Costa Rica - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Costa Rica - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
11
11
16
16
11
11
32
32
33
33
44
44
45
45
9
9
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 277

Figure 11.7. Costa Rica: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Agriculture is the main user of water resources. It accounts for almost two-thirds of total freshwater
abstractions, a share that has doubled in the last two decades. The overall water stress indicator (intensity
of freshwater resource use) increased3 between 2000 and 2021, although it remains well below the OECD
average. In the last two decades, there have been improvements in some agri-environmental indicators
such as the nutrient balances and the sector’s share in total energy use and GHG emissions (Table 11.4).
However, the share of agricultural GHG emissions and the phosphorus balance are above the OECD
average. Environmental regulations have led to an important increase in the country’s forest cover, which
is approaching 60% (World Bank, 2022[12]). As of 2022, 26% of the country’s land area is protected (OECD,
2023[13]).


Costa Rica - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
-1.97%
-1.97%
1.12%
1.12%
2.69%
2.69%
0.35%
0.35%
0.20%
0.20%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Costa Rica
World
-3%
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%


278 

Table 11.4. Costa Rica: Productivity and environmental indicators

Costa Rica
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.8%
-2.0%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
36.0
33.7
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
12.1
9.9
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
6.6
2.0
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
29.2
20.5
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
5.6
9.0
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
32.5
66.2
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
0.1
2.8
8.3
7.4
Note: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


References

Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería (2023), Política pública para el sector agropecuario
costarricense, http://www.mag.go.cr/bibliotecavirtual/E14-11132.pdf.
[6]
Ministerio de Comercio Exterior (2017), Informe de evaluación global de resultados de los
acuerdos comerciales vigentes en Costa Rica, https://www.comex.go.cr/media/6621/informe-
de-evaluaci%C3%B3n-global-de-resultados-de-los-acuerdos-comerciales-vigentes-en-costa-
rica-2017.pdf.
[5]
OECD (2023), OECD Economic Surveys: Costa Rica 2023, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/8e8171b0-en.
[2]
OECD (2023), Protected areas (dataset),
https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=PROTECTED_AREAS (accessed on
31 March 2023).
[13]
OECD (2022), Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2022: Reforming Agricultural
Policies for Climate Change Mitigation, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/7f4542bf-en.
[4]
OECD (2021), Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2021: Addressing the Challenges
Facing Food Systems, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/2d810e01-en.
[10]
OECD (2017), Agricultural Policies in Costa Rica, OECD Food and Agricultural Reviews, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264269125-en.
[1]


 279

Servicio Fitosanitario del Estado (2023), Rigen reformas a proceso de registro de agroquímicos
(press release),
https://www.sfe.go.cr/Prensa_2023/02%20Rigen%20reformas%20a%20proceso%20de%20r
egistro%20de%20agroqu%C3%ADmicos.pdf (accessed on 2 March 2023).
[7]
Servicio Fitosanitario del Estado (2022), Resolución DSFE-004-2022. Establece los requisitos
fitosanitarios para la importación de frutos frescos de aguacate (Persea americana Mill) para
consumo, https://members.wto.org/crnattachments/2022/SPS/CRI/22_3490_00_s.pdf.
[8]
World Bank (2022), Costa Rica’s Forest Conservation Pays Off,
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2022/11/16/costa-rica-s-forest-conservation-pays-
off (accessed on 31 March 2023).
[12]
World Trade Organization (2022), Committee on Anti-Dumping Practices - Semi-annual report
under article 16.4 of the Agreement - 1 January to 30 June 2022 - Costa Rica
(G/ADP/N/370/CRI).
[9]
World Trade Organization (2022), World Tariff Profiles 2022: Costa Rica,
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/daily_update_e/tariff_profiles/CR_e.pdf.
[3]
World Trade Organization (2020), Notification of Brazil to the Council for Trade in Goods and the
Committee on Safeguards (G/L/1364/Suppl.1; G/SG/N/12/BRA/4/Suppl.1).
[11]





Notes

1 This grazing-management approach was proposed by French biochemist André Voisin in the 1950s. It
comprises four principles: (1) allowing grass to recover between grazing intervals; (2) setting occupation
periods short enough to keep cattle from grazing the same grass a second time; (3) allowing animals with
the highest nutritional requirements to harvest large quantities of the best-possible quality grass; and
(4) maximising milk yields by moving cows to a different paddock after a maximum of three days.
2 MFN tariffs for imports into Costa Rica reflect the sum of an ad valorem duty (Derecho Arancelario a la
Importación - DAI) and a 1% import tax (Law 6946). The reduction for paddy and milled rice applies to the
DAI, which decreased to 3.5% and 4% respectively.
3 The large variation between 2000 and 2020 is partly explained by the use of a more accurate data source
(public water supply operators) starting in 2016. Nevertheless, total freshwater abstraction in Costa Rica
grew at an average yearly rate of 3.5% between 2016 and 2021.


280 

Support to agriculture
Policy reforms undertaken in the European Union (EU)1 in the 1990s and early 2000s substantially reduced
support to agriculture and shifted its composition to less production- and trade-distorting measures. EU
support to producers as a share of gross farm receipts stabilised since 2010 and stood at 16% in 2020-22,
close to the OECD average.
While trade-protection measures remain in effect for several sectors – including import and export
licensing, Tariff Rate Quotas (TRQs), and special safeguards – market-distorting price transfers declined
substantially over the last two decades. In 2020-22, Market Price Support (MPS) accounted for 16% of
support to producers, down from 46% in 2000-02.
Most support to producers is budgetary, largely in the form of decoupled direct payments. On average,
nearly half of budgetary support in 2020-22 was based on historical entitlements, while around 29% was
based on current area or animal numbers requiring production, and 20% on input use. Moreover, 61% of
payments to producers were contingent on mandatory environmental constraints, and an additional 12%
came from voluntary agri-environmental schemes with conditions beyond mandatory requirements.
Expenditures for general services to the sector (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) in 2020-22
averaged 12.9% of total support, or 2.8% of the value of agricultural production – a decrease compared to
2000-02 and below the OECD average. Expenditures on agricultural knowledge and innovation systems
have increased over the past two decades and their share of GSSE rose from 42% in 2000-02 to 52% in
2020-22. Relative to the value of production, these expenditures remained at 1.5%, above the OECD
average. The contribution of expenditures on marketing and promotion also rose, while the share of support
for development and maintenance of infrastructure and public stockholding decreased over the same
period.
Total support to the sector declined in relative terms over the past 20 years. In 2020-22, total support was
estimated at 0.6% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), compared to 1.0% in 2000-02.
Recent policy changes
The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) 2023-27 entered into force in January 2023. The new CAP defines
a new delivery model, with more flexible implementation by Member States compared to previous CAP
reforms. The CAP 2023-27 is built around ten specific objectives, which form the basis for EU Member
States to design their CAP Strategic Plans (CSPs). The CSP approval process was the focus of much
agricultural policy activity in 2022. After bilateral consultations between the European Commission and
each Member State, the 28 CSPs2 were revised and formally approved between August and December
2022. CSPs include interventions under the two CAP pillars and are expected to devote 32% (close to
EUR 98 billion or USD 103 billion) of total public CAP funding to deliver specific environmental benefits for
climate, water, soil, air, biodiversity, and animal welfare.
12 European Union


 281

EU policies in 2022 also focused on mitigating the impacts of rising food prices and input costs for farmers
and consumers, accelerated by Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine. A raft of measures was
implemented at the EU-level, including flexibilities under the CAP, exceptional market measures, direct
support, and two successive temporary state-aid frameworks. In addition, EU Member States introduced
their own measures, such as tax concessions, investment assistance, and allowances to consumers and
farm households, to help farmers and agro-food businesses cope with the financial impacts. Finally, the
European Commission and national governments, drawing on recent experiences with COVID-19 and the
war in Ukraine, have undertaken a number of actions to strengthen the overall resilience of the agriculture
and food sector against potential future crises. In addition, as a part of the solidarity response to Ukraine,
the European Union implemented trade-facilitating measures, accounting for a significant share of
Ukraine’s cereal exports, with some implementation problems in some neighbouring Member States due
to the increased trade volumes.
In 2022, the European Union concluded negotiations for a comprehensive and ambitious trade agreement
with New Zealand and a modernised Association Agreement with Chile. They are the first two agreements
to include a dedicated chapter on sustainable food systems.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Adoption of the EU Strategy on Adaptation in 2021 was a step towards improving knowledge of
the impacts of climate change and adaptation solutions in the European Union. Unlike the policy
framework for mitigation, there are no adaptation targets or requirements for Member States, which
makes it difficult to monitor efforts. Synergies should be sought between the broader range of EU
policies (i.e. flood-risk management policies) and agricultural policies. Adaptation measures in the
European Union tend to focus on actions that directly benefit farm businesses (e.g. support for
more efficient irrigation systems) and would benefit from actions towards wider preparedness and
public benefits (e.g. land management practices that reduce flood risks).
•
While CAP measures rarely make explicit reference to climate adaptation, several can contribute
to agriculture’s adaptation to climate change. CAP support’s effectiveness in responding to
adaptation challenges could be improved by prioritising measures that target knowledge transfer
and preventive ecosystem restoration actions, responding to the challenges identified in the EU
Strategy on Adaptation.
•
Efforts have been made to improve fairness and to better distribute direct payments to farmers.
However, they do not target low-income farm households and are not always the most efficient tool
to achieve productivity and socio-economic objectives. Income support objectives should be met
with more targeted payments to low-income farm households, not only to be more effective, but
also to free up more funds for voluntary payments for environmental services, and for investment
in innovation and resilience.
•
Several environmental conditions are attached to direct payments with the objective of ensuring
that EU farmers adopt sustainable agricultural practices. However, certain aspects of their design
and implementation, such as weaknesses in monitoring and the use of many exemptions, limit the
effectiveness of these mechanisms in promoting public goods or reducing environmental
externalities. Efforts should be made to improve the targeting of measures aimed at environmental
sustainability. Voluntary schemes should be transformed into multi-annual, results-based
payments for environmental services, to increase policy performance and offer farmers additional
sources of revenue.
•
Despite substantial progress on policy reforms, potentially most-distorting forms of support still
represent nearly a quarter of support to producers. While the CAP 2023-27 includes promising new
approaches and priorities, meeting the ambitious objectives of the European Green Deal will


282 

require further reforms, including phasing out remaining market price support and payments with
strong potential to harm the environment and to distort markets and trade.
•
Agriculture productivity growth remains moderate, and innovation represents a low share of CAP
expenditure, though some developments point to growing emphasis on innovation and knowledge
exchange. The creation of new European Partnerships relevant to farming and food systems under
Horizon Europe, and the inclusion of specific sections on Agricultural Knowledge and Innovation
Systems (AKIS) in all the CSPs under the CAP 2023-27 are positive steps. Nevertheless, the sector
could benefit from increasing the share of support to innovation in the agricultural policy mix, and
from steering agricultural innovation efforts towards environmental sustainability.
•
The European Union and its Member States acted quickly to reduce the economic impact of the
war in Ukraine on the EU agro-food sector. Most support was provided in the form of direct
payments to farmers to absorb the shock, but there are also examples of actions adopted to
strengthen the long-term resilience of EU food supply chains. These include ongoing mapping of
risks and vulnerabilities, undertaken by the European Food Security Crisis Preparedness and
Response Mechanism (EFSCM), and on-farm investment support provided by EU Member States
to reduce the dependence of agricultural businesses on inputs such as energy and fertilisers. While
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine has elevated food-security issues to the top of the
political agenda, the European Union should ensure that derogations from environmental rules do
not become a permanent solution and do not hamper environmental objectives.
•
Recent crises highlight the need to monitor Member States’ supply chains and markets, and
co-ordinate long-term actions. Policy packages should be balanced, considering the EU’s broader
food-system objectives, and far-sighted, beyond relief measures, creating incentives for agro-food
business to adapt and transform, and consequently improve resilience against future shocks.




 283

Figure 12.1. European Union: Development of support to agriculture







Note: European Economic Community (EEC) with 12 members for 1986-88, EU15 for 2000-02, EU28 for 2018-19, EU27 and the United Kingdom
for 2020 and EU27 from 2021.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
European Union - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
European Union - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
European Union - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
European Union - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
European Union - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%


284 

Figure 12.2. European Union: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: EU27. % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in Euro.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Figure 12.3. European Union: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross
farm receipts, 2020-22

Note: EU27.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
%
European Union - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Border price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
Border price change decomposition
Change in producer price
PSE change decomposition
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
European Union - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Maize
Rice
Sugar
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Sheep meat
Wine
Potatoes
Plants and flowers
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
22%
24%
26%
28%
30%
3…


 285

Table 12.1. European Union: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
233 558
225 093
482 391
452 748
481 338
513 086
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
74.95
73.34
73.85
72.98
72.98
75.58
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
212 900
226 789
477 225
445 464
464 490
521 721
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
95 385
79 781
92 669
97 971
91 467
88 567
Support based on commodity output
86 308
40 997
14 671
16 738
11 815
15 458
Market Price Support1
80 672
37 067
14 405
16 434
11 552
15 230
Positive Market Price Support
81 784
37 067
14 405
16 434
11 552
15 230
Negative Market Price Support
-1 112
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
5 637
3 930
265
305
263
228
Payments based on input use
5 056
6 833
15 264
15 318
15 581
14 894
Based on variable input use
960
3 047
6 353
6 767
6 392
5 901
with input constraints
0
0
45
38
53
43
Based on fixed capital formation
2 986
2 259
6 146
5 833
6 285
6 321
with input constraints
0
94
121
68
162
135
Based on on-farm services
1 109
1 527
2 765
2 718
2 904
2 671
with input constraints
90
274
8
10
14
1
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
3 587
31 196
22 963
23 490
23 384
22 013
Based on Receipts / Income
147
99
1 599
1 403
1 977
1 418
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
3 440
31 097
21 363
22 087
21 407
20 595
with input constraints
940
13 953
19 165
19 900
19 696
17 900
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
9
7
12
8
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
10
38 312
41 108
39 022
34 807
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
10
38 312
41 108
39 022
34 807
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
478
1 078
1 200
1 040
1 367
1 193
Based on long-term resource retirement
476
846
303
145
440
324
Based on a specific non-commodity output
2
176
804
798
827
786
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
57
93
97
99
83
Miscellaneous payments
-43
-334
250
271
286
194
Percentage PSE (%)
38.43
29.77
16.49
18.34
16.30
15.10
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.66
1.22
1.03
1.04
1.03
1.03
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.62
1.42
1.20
1.22
1.19
1.18
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
9 144
8 355
13 814
14 603
14 559
12 281
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
1 814
3 492
7 176
6 791
7 802
6 935
Inspection and control
194
281
1 251
1 303
1 246
1 202
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
1 331
2 222
2 075
2 082
2 317
1 825
Marketing and promotion
1 210
996
3 261
4 368
3 149
2 265
Cost of public stockholding
4 571
1 294
32
42
22
33
Miscellaneous
24
69
20
16
22
21
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
8.31
9.12
12.89
12.91
13.68
12.14
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-69 408
-33 000
-13 633
-14 519
-11 271
-15 109
Transfers to producers from consumers
-80 268
-36 084
-13 624
-14 886
-11 112
-14 876
Other transfers from consumers
-1 699
-717
-435
-128
-598
-581
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
4 992
3 537
427
495
438
348
Excess feed cost
7 567
264
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-33.38
-14.75
-2.87
-3.26
-2.43
-2.90
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.63
1.19
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.03
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.50
1.17
1.03
1.03
1.02
1.03
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
109 521
91 672
106 910
113 069
106 465
101 196
Transfers from consumers
81 967
36 801
14 060
15 014
11 709
15 457
Transfers from taxpayers
29 253
55 589
93 285
98 183
95 353
86 320
Budget revenues
-1 699
-717
-435
-128
-598
-581
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
2.51
1.04
0.62
0.63
0.62
0.62
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
28 849
54 606
92 504
96 635
94 912
85 966
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.66
0.62
0.54
0.54
0.55
0.52
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
152
204
201
207
..
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
0.91
1.09
0.89
0.88
0.85
0.95
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
European Economic Community (EEC) with 12 members for 1986-88; EU15 for 2000-02; EU27 and the United Kingdom for 2020; and EU27 from 2021.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for the European Union are: wheat, maize, barley, oats,
rice, rapeseed, sunflower, soybean, sugar, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, pig meat, poultry, eggs, potatoes, tomatoes, plants and flowers, and wine.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




286 

Description of policy developments
In the European Union the policy setting affecting the agricultural sector is mainly driven by an overarching
framework established at EU level, which allows for policy space at Member State level. Whereas the first
two sections on Overview of policy trends and Main policy instruments focus solely on policies at EU level,
the following sections on Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture and Domestic policy
developments discuss both EU and Member State level.
Overview of policy trends
The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) has been the European Union’s agricultural policy framework since
its institution in 1962, although the mix of policy instruments has evolved substantially over time
(Table 12.2). The Treaty of Rome that established in 1957 the European Economic Community defined
common policies on agriculture and trade (OECD, 2011[1]; European Parliament, 2021[2]). Agriculture made
up a much larger share of Europe’s economy at the time, and the income gap between urban and rural
households was increasing. Moreover, the region was a net food importer with concerns about securing
adequate food supplies during the Cold War (Grant, 2020[3]). In this context, the Treaty of Rome laid down
five main objectives for the CAP:
1. To increase agricultural productivity by promoting technical progress and ensuring the optimum
use of the factors of production, in particular labour
2. To ensure a fair standard of living for farmers
3. To stabilise markets
4. To assure the availability of supplies
5. To ensure reasonable prices for consumers
CAP measures targeting these objectives were financed from the European Agricultural Guidance and
Guarantee Fund (EAGGF), split into separate Guidance and Guarantee sections. Different rules governed
the two: the Guidance section financed operations related to structural policy and development of rural
areas, while the Guarantee section funded expenditures on market and price policies (European
Parliament, 2021[4]).
For more than three decades until the 1990s, support prices under the CAP were high compared to world
market prices, with an unlimited buying guarantee. As a result, European farmers produced increasing
surpluses and the cost of managing stocks and subsidising exports grew accordingly. In response, by the
1980s the European Union introduced quantitative production restrictions in the form of quotas on milk
production.
The CAP’s first major reform occurred in 1992, in conjunction with negotiations on the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and following the result from the US-EU soya GATT panel. The MacSharry
Reform brought a major shift in the delivery of the CAP. Instead of supporting production (through market
intervention and export subsidies), the regime shifted the bulk of support to supporting producer incomes
directly through area and headage payments, aiming to close the gap between supply and demand and
reduce overall expenditures (European Parliament, 2021[5]). This wide-ranging reform reduced cereal
intervention prices, introduced compensatory payments per hectare for cereals or per head for livestock,
and introduced a mandatory set-aside scheme to take land out of production. In conjunction with the reform
of budgetary support measures through the MacSharry package, market price support (MPS) also declined
thanks to EU commitments under the 1995 Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture. Namely, bound
tariffs were gradually reduced, and variable import levies were replaced with ad valorem or specific tariffs
and tariff rate quotas (OECD, 2011[1]).


 287

Subsequent reforms built on the foundation of the MacSharry Reform, reducing distortive support to the
agricultural sector or changing how support is delivered. The Agenda 2000 reform focused on aligning EU
and world prices, offsetting the reduction of price support with increased direct aid to producers under the
now called Pillar 1 (European Parliament, 2021[5]). In addition, the Rural Development Regulation was
introduced as Pillar 2 of the CAP. Finally, this package instituted two types of environmental cross-
compliance conditions: an optional measure linked to the direct payment in Pillar 1, and the so-called
“Good Farming Practice” requirements for the agri-environmental schemes in Pillar 2.
The 2003 Fischler Reform3 further developed and consolidated these measures, decoupling most support
from production through the introduction of the single payment scheme (SPS) (European Parliament,
2021[5]). Furthermore, in this reform cross-compliance became obligatory and was extended to include not
only environmental issues but also public, animal and plant health and animal welfare issues. Cross-
compliance rules were enforced through a set of Statutory Management Requirements (SMR) and
“Minimum Requirements for Good Agricultural and Environmental Condition” (GAEC). This package also
introduced modulation, allowing Member States to transfer funds between the two pillars to reinforce rural
development objectives. The reform also prioritised financial discipline, freezing the budget of Pillar 1
(covering the SPS and market measures) and imposing annual compulsory ceilings. This coincided with
the splitting of the CAP budget into the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF) to finance Pillar 1
and the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) to finance Pillar 2 from 2007.
Additionally, this round of reform introduced the single common market organisation (CMO) in 2007, which
codified the regulation mechanisms of the existing CMOs. Reform programmes for specific commodities
(cotton, hops, olive oil, tobacco, sugar, fruits and vegetables, and wine) were introduced from 2003 to
2008, with the aim of reducing distortive payments, restoring market-based incentives and aligning them
with the SPS (OECD, 2011[1]). Through the different rounds of CAP reform, as result of budgetary
payments replacing MPS, but also as result of the additional Member States joining the European Union,
the absolute budget figure for the CAP more than doubled from 1990 to 2010.
Measures taken under the 2009 Health Check sought to continue the direction of the 2003 reform. Namely,
decoupling of aid continued and nearly all payments (with the exception of suckler cow, sheep and goat
premia) were included into the decoupled direct payments scheme - SPS. It also further reduced market
intervention for a number of products, abolished set-aside and introduced phase-out of milk quotas.
Additional flexibility for direct payments was introduced as well (OECD, 2011[1]). The Health Check also
resulted in changes to both SMR and GAEC of cross-compliance, with the addition of two water
management standards.
The 2013 Reform set out a more global, integrated approach to agricultural support for the programming
period 2014-20, undertaken through four lines of action (European Parliament, 2021[5]):
1. Converting decoupled aid into a multifunctional support system with aid directed toward specific
objectives. Accordingly, the SPS was replaced by a system of multi-purpose payments with seven
components: (1) a basic payment; (2) a greening payment for environmental public goods; (3) an
additional payment for young farmers; (4) a “redistributive” payment for first hectares of farmland;
(5) support for areas with specific natural constraints; (6) aid coupled to production; and (7) a
simplified system for small farmers. Direct payments were still subject to cross-compliance rules,
which were confirmed and simplified.
2. Consolidating the two CAP pillars, with mostly decoupled direct aid and market measures funded
through Pillar 1, and rural development funded through Pillar 2, which continued to be co-financed
by the Member States.
3. Consolidating CMO tools into safety nets in case of market disruption or price crisis, and ending
other supply control measures, namely the sugar and milk quotas.
4. A more integrated, targeted and territorial approach to Pillar 2 through rural development plans,
simplifying the range of available instruments to focus on certain core objectives.


288 

During the negotiations of the new CAP post 2020, a political agreement between the European Parliament
and the EU Member States in the Council was reached on transitional rules for the CAP for 2021-22 on
27 November 2020. These transitional rules were based on the principle of continuity of the 2014-20 CAP
rules, while also including new elements to ensure a smooth transition.
In January 2023, the European Commission and the European Union Member countries began to
implement the new CAP 2023-27. Although with a similar annual budget as the transitional period, the new
CAP entails a new delivery model (NDM), in which Member States play a critical role in designing and
implementing their CAP Strategic Plans (CSPs), which include both Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 measures (the
NDM and CSPs are covered later in the chapter).
While CAP budget has remained relatively stable in nominal terms since 2010, CAP expenditures as a
share of the total EU budget declined sharply, from 65.5% in 1980 to 33.1% in 2021 (EP, 2022[6]).
Table 12.2. European Union: Agricultural policy trends
Years
Main Milestones
Key Policy Features
pre-1992
Coupled support phase:
CAP financed by the European
Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee
Fund (EAGGF), European Economic
Community with 12 members1
Support prices greater than world prices
Unlimited buying guarantee
Production quotas for certain products, including dairy and sugar
1992-1999
MacSharry Reform:
CAP, EU Expansion 1995 (Austria,
Finland, Sweden), Uruguay Round
Agreement on Agriculture
Shift from product support through prices to producer support
through income-supporting measures, with the reduction in
intervention prices compensated by increased direct aid per hectare
or livestock headage payments
Establishment of set-aside payments to encourage land retirement
Tariffication of border measures and gradual reductions in bound
tariffs
2000-2002
Agenda 2000 CAP Reform:
CAP divided into Pillar 1 and Pillar 2
(Rural Development)
Further reduction of EU market support prices in closer alignment
with world prices, partly offset by direct aid to producers in the form
of increased area or headage payments
First introduction of environmental cross-compliance
Introduction of Rural Development Regulation as a second pillar of
the CAP
2003-2008
Fischler Reform:
CAP Pillars 1 (financed by EAGF) and 2
(financed by the European Agricultural
Fund for Rural Development EAFRD),
EU Expansion 2004 (Malta, Cyprus,
Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic,
Slovenia, Hungary) and 2007 (Bulgaria
and Romania)
Decoupling much of CAP support from volume of production, with
fixed single farm payment (SPS) introduced based on historical
references
Cross-compliance for environmental and public health objectives
compulsory for receiving full payments. Introduction of Statutory
Management Requirements (SMR) and ‘Minimum Requirements for
Good Agricultural and Environmental Condition’ (GAEC)
Single common market organisation (CMO) introduced
Reform programmes initiated for cotton, hops, olive oil, tobacco,
sugar, fruit and vegetable and wine regimes
2009-2013
Health Check:
CAP Pillars 1 and 2
Further reduction of EU market intervention for certain products
Phasing out of milk quotas initiated
Abolition of set-aside
Integration of nearly all payments into SPS
New cross-compliance requirements introduced
2013-2020
2013 Reform:
CAP Pillars 1 and 2, EU Expansion
2013 (Croatia) and Contraction 2020
(United Kingdom)
Decoupled aid converted to multifunctional support (including basic
payment, greening payment, small farmer payment, etc.)
Consolidation of two pillars of CAP, with direct payments and
market measures under Pillar 1
Consolidation of CMO tools, abolition of supply control measures
(including ending milk and sugar quota schemes)
External and internal convergence, with payment envelopes
gradually adjusted to move toward a uniform minimum per hectare
payment


 289

Years
Main Milestones
Key Policy Features
2021-2022
Transitional rules

Continuity of the 2014-2020 CAP rules, while also including new
elements to ensure a smooth transition
2023-2027
CAP 2023-27
Introduction of new delivery model and
CAP Strategic Plans
The new delivery model requires Member States to programme both
CAP Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 expenditures within the context of their
CAP Strategic Plans.
New cross-compliance requirements (enhanced conditionality) and
eco-schemes were introduced.
1. When the Maastricht Treaty establishing the EU was signed in 1992: Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Greece,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and the United Kingdom were part of the Union.
Source: European Parliament (2021[5]) and OECD (2011[1]).
Total support to the agricultural sector as percentage of agricultural gross value-added in the European
Union largely comes from budgetary allocations. Market price support declined significantly from 1986
through the 2000s but has remained mostly unchanged since around 2010. The most substantial change
to PSE composition began in the mid-2000s after the Fischler reform decoupled most payments to farmers
from production (Figure 12.1, Figure 12.4).
Figure 12.4. European Union: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
European Union refers to EEC12 for 1986-94, EU15 for 1995-2003, EU25 for 2004-06, EU27 for 2007-13, EU28 for 2014-19, EU27 and the
United Kingdom for 2020, and EU27 from 2021.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
European Union - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45


290 

Main policy instruments
The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is the agricultural policy framework of the European Union. The
new CAP 2023-27 entered into force on 1 January 2023.4 In addition to the CAP, Member States may
implement measures funded from national or sub-national budgets that target specific agricultural sectors
or objectives. These measures must comply with the European Union’s state aid rules and not distort
competition within the common market (OECD, 2017[7]).
The CAP is currently organised in two pillars: the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund finances Pillar 1,
and the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and EU Member States jointly co-finance5 rural
development measures under Pillar 2. Member States deployed Rural Development Plans (RDPs) for
Pillar 2 over the seven-year CAP period 2014-20.
Usually, each CAP reform covers a seven-year period coinciding with the EU multi-annual financial
framework. Programming for CAP 2014-20 ended in 2020. However, as for the 2021-27 programming
period, the CAP 2014-20 structure remained in place also for 2021-22 under transitional rules while
negotiations for the new CAP were concluded. This period will be referred to here and the support
estimates reported as CAP 2014-22. CAP 2023-27 will refer to the support estimates from 2023.
The overall budget for the CAP during the years 2014-20 was EUR 408 billion (USD 465 billion), 76% of
which was initially allocated to Pillar 1 (covering market related expenditure and direct payments), and the
remaining 24% to Pillar 2 (rural development spending, including agri-environmental payments). The CAP
2014-20 allowed Member States to transfer up to 15% of each envelope6 between the two pillars and the
transitional rules made available this option also for the years 2021 and 2022. Over the whole 2014-22
period, fifteen countries transferred amounts between the two pillars and net transfers from the first pillar
to the second stood at some EUR 4 billion (USD 4.6 billion) (EP, 2022[8]).
Pillar 1 defines and funds market measures under the common market organisation, as well as direct
payments that may or may not be connected to specific commodities but whose recipients must be active
farmers. Rural development policy is supported by Pillar 2. Contrary to Pillar 1, which is entirely financed
by the European Union, Pillar 2 programmes are co-financed by the Member States.
Direct payments make up the bulk of CAP spending: in 2022, they accounted for two-thirds of the CAP
expenditures (Table 12.3). These payments are largely decoupled from production as they are based on
farm area, and do not depend on current production decisions. They represent an important part of farm
income (OECD, 2023[9]).
Table 12.3. EU expenditure on agriculture by source and use, 2022


Share in CAP expenditure
Pillar 1
Direct Payments
67.0%
Pillar 1
Interventions in agricultural markets CMO
5.7%
Pillar 2
Rural Development – EU funding
27.2%
Pillar 1 and 2
Administrative expenditure
0.01%
Note: Estimated funding. Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: OECD calculations based on European Commission, EUR-Lex budget 2023.
Direct payments under Pillar 1
The Basic Payment Scheme (BPS) and the Single Area Payment Scheme (SAPS) made up 50% of the
EU Pillar 1 direct payments envelope in 2022 (Table 12.4).7 The proportion spent by Member States on
these two schemes varies significantly and reflects their spending choices on optional measures under
Pillar 1.


 291

Table 12.4. Direct payments budget under Pillar 1, 2022

Budget
(EUR million)
Share in direct
payments
Share in decoupled direct
payments
Direct payments; of which:
37 126
100.0%

Decoupled direct payments; of which:
31 761
85.5%
100.0%
Basic Payment Scheme (BPS)
14 192
38.2%
44.7%
Single Area Payment Scheme (SAPS)
4 495
12.1%
14.2%
Greening
10 931
29.4%
34.4%
Redistributive payment
1 661
4.5%
5.2%
Young farmers
477
1.3%
1.5%
Areas with Natural Constraints
5
0.01%
0.02%
Voluntary Coupled Support
4 088
11.0%

Small Farmers Scheme
595
1.6%

POSEI
444
1.2%

Other
246
0.7%

Note: The 2023 EU fiscal year (November to October) is attributed to year 2022 in the PSE system. Numbers may not add up to 100 due to
rounding.
Source: OECD calculations based on European Commission, EUR-Lex budget 2023.
In the ten Member States that apply the SAPS, Transitional National Aid (TNA) may be granted from
national budgets up to 50% of the level of SAPS. TNA is mostly disbursed as decoupled payments even if
limited commodity specificity is allowed. In claim year 2020 (the most recent year for which these data are
available), the TNA was paid in all SAPS Member States except for Latvia, with 15% of this amount paid
as coupled support (EC, 2022[10]). It may apply on a per area basis to arable land, hops and starch
potatoes; a volume basis to milk; and a headage basis to livestock. Member States may review TNA
budgets and supported commodities on an annual basis.
Both the BPS and the SAPS required cross-compliance with environmental and other standards, though
exceptions apply. In the CAP 2014-22 cross-compliance requirement were set out in 13 SMRs and
7 GAEC standards.8 Non-compliance with these standards and requirements could lead to a reduction in
CAP payments to the farmer. Additional environmental conditions were attached to the per-hectare
greening payment, that accounted for 29% of the Pillar 1 direct payments budget. Both cross-compliance
and greening leave many details of design and implementation to the discretion of individual EU Member
States (OECD, 2023[9]).
Ten Member States or regions have chosen to grant higher payments to the first hectares9 under the so-
called redistributive payment, using 4.5% of the European Union’s direct payments envelope.
Under the so-called “degressivity”, Member States had to reduce by at least 5% BPS payments to
individual farms which exceeded EUR 150 000 (USD 170 932). These funds were transferred to Pillar 2
and used to fund the Member State’s RDPs. In 2021, twenty-one Member States10 applied the reduction
of payments: thirteen Member States11 applied the minimum reduction, and eight12 chose to cap the BPS
at levels varying from EUR 150 000 (USD 170 932) to EUR 300 000 (USD 341 864). Ten Member States13
also used the option to increase the amount exempt from the 5% reduction by the value of salaries paid.
Despite all these corrective measures, in some Member States a high share of direct payments still goes
to larger farms with higher than average levels of income per farm (OECD, 2023[9]).
A top-up payment to young farmers (under 40 years old) in addition to the BPS and SAPS applied in all
Member States. In 2022, this payment accounted for 1.3% of the European Union’s direct payments
envelope, as reported in the general budget. Member States chose to implement this measure in different
ways. Some offered recipients a flat payment rate on a limited number of hectares, while others applied a
payment proportional to the BPS or SAPS received. In addition to this compulsory young farmer scheme,


292 

25 Member States chose to attribute a portion of their rural development envelopes to support young
farmers, representing 4.5% of total planned rural development expenditures (ENRD, 2016[11]). The bulk of
this spending was directed toward business development and investments.
Denmark and Slovenia implemented the Pillar 1 direct payment to Areas with Natural Constraints (ANC).
Under this payment, ANC were defined based on eight biophysical criteria.14 Denmark used 0.3% and
Slovenia 1.6% of their national direct payments envelope for ANC payments (EC, 2021[12]). A payment
targeted to areas with natural or other specific constraints can also be budgeted under the RDP. It is
implemented in 25 Member States and accounts for 23% of Pillar 2 public expenditure funds (including
Member States’ contributions from national budgets) in 2022.
In the CAP 2014-22, Member States could choose to allocate part of their direct payments envelope to
commodity-specific payments within defined ceilings (up to 13%) and under defined conditions. This
voluntary coupled support (VCS) could be granted to create an incentive to maintain current levels of
production in the sectors or regions concerned, with the objective of safeguarding specific types of farming
or specific agricultural sectors that are particularly important for economic, social or environmental reasons.
Choices of Member States on take-up of the VCS varied greatly, both in terms of the level of support and
the commodities supported. All except Germany choose to offer some VCS, using 11% of the EU direct
payments budget in 2022.
Fifteen Member States chose to offer the Small Farmers Scheme that waived requirements attached to
the greening payment and cross-compliance.15 The payment could not exceed EUR 1 250 (USD 1 424)
per farm and depending on the method chosen by the Member State the overall envelope was limited to
10% of national direct payments.16
The POSEI scheme (Programmes dʼOptions Spécifiques à lʼEloignement et à lʼInsularité) supports farming
in the European Union’s outermost regions by using production-related payments. The scheme supports
access to food, feed and inputs for local communities as well as the development of local agricultural
production. It represented 1% of the direct payments envelope in 2022.
Market measures under Pillar 1
Pillar 1 also funds market support measures, representing 5.6% of the overall agriculture and rural
development budget in 2022 (Table 12.3). These cover mainly the fruit and vegetables and wine sectors,
while other market-related expenditures include the POSEI and Smaller Aegan Islands (excluding direct
payments), promotion of agricultural products, apiculture and school schemes.
Part of the Pillar 1 budget is held back each year as a crisis reserve in case of emergency. If unused, the
envelope reverts for distribution as Pillar 1 direct payments in the same year. This emergency fund was
activated for the first time in 2022 to fund EUR 350 million of the EUR 500 million (USD 368 million of the
USD 526 million) package to support agricultural producers in sectors affected by market disturbance due
to the war in Ukraine (see section on Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine).
Fruits and vegetables are supported through market intervention measures implemented through producer
organisations. There is also an entry price system (minimum import price) for some products and
ad valorem duties, but no export subsidies. Member States can provide co-financed support to the fruit
and vegetables sector, and the olive oil and table olives sectors. This funds a wide range of actions from
production planning, quality measures, market withdrawal and harvest insurance to training, promotion
and communication. Some of these measures apply at farm level while others are provided to producer
organisations or the sector at large. For olive oil and flax fibre private storage may be activated as an
optional scheme. In the CAP 2014-22, recognition of producer and inter-branch organisations expanded
beyond fruits and vegetables. Compensation may be greater when producers claim support via producer
groups, as was the case with compensation payments related to Russia’s embargo on imports.


 293

The “School Schemes” programme promotes consumption of fruits and vegetables by school children. It
covers consumption of fresh and processed fruits and vegetables and banana products. The budget for
this was EUR 175 million (USD 184 million) in 2022.
In the dairy sector, intervention prices are used for butter and skimmed milk powder (SMP), while import
tariffs are applicable to all milk and dairy products. Intervention purchases cannot exceed 50 000 tonnes
for butter, and 109 000 tonnes for SMP, respectively representing 2% and 7% of production in 2021. Above
those limits, purchase is made by tender. Intervention purchases were opened for both products as a
response to sector shocks due to COVID-19, prior to which no intervention purchases had been made for
butter since 2009, while the last intervention purchases for SMP prior to the pandemic had taken place in
2019.
Livestock production benefits from certain market supports. For the beef market, this is in the form of floor
prices, tariffs and TRQ support.17 Import protection is provided for pig meat. The market support regime
for sheep meat comprises tariffs and TRQs, with most country-specific TRQs subject to a zero customs
duty. TRQs also support the poultry and eggs markets.
During times of low market prices, the EU can provide support to private sector operators by paying for the
cost of storage of their products for a determined period of time. Private storage may be activated as an
optional scheme for butter, SMP, certain cheeses, beef, pig meat, sheep meat and goat meat. This
opportunity was opened for butter, SMP, cheese, beef and sheep meat in 2020-21 in response to the
COVID-19 emergency and for pig meat in 2022 in response to the war in Ukraine (see Domestic policy
responses Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine).
Since January 2016, new vine planting for wine is limited to 1% of the planted vine areas per year. The
wine sector is also supported through promotional measures in both the European Union and third
countries, restructuring and conversion of vineyards; compensation for green harvesting; setting up of
mutual funds; investment in tangible and intangible capital; income insurance; development of new
products, processes and technologies; and distillation of by-products.
Rural development programmes under Pillar 2
The Rural Development fund EAFRD is part of the EU-level Common Strategic Framework covering all
support from European Structural and Investment (ESI) funds in Member States through partnership
agreements.18 The EAFRD-financed Pillar 2 of the CAP 2014-22 covers six priority areas implemented
through national (or regional) rural development programmes (RDPs). RDPs also supported projects using
the LEADER approach (Liaison Entre Actions de Développement de l’Économie Rurale) based on a multi-
sectoral approach and local partnerships to address specific local problems.




294 

Table 12.5. Rural Development, total public expenditure by priority area (estimated 2022)

Share in total public expenditure
Rural Development EU funding
68.4%
Rural Development national funding
31.6%
Priority 1: Fostering knowledge transfer and innovation
Allocated through other priorities
Priority 2: Enhancing competitiveness of all types of agriculture and the sustainable management of forests
21.2%
Priority 3: Promoting food chain organisation, including processing and marketing, and risk management
9.6%
Priority 4: Restoring, preserving and enhancing ecosystems
49.2%
Priority 5: Promoting resource efficiency and the transition to a low-carbon economy
4.9%
Priority 6: Promoting social inclusion, poverty reduction and economic development in rural areas
12.4%
Note: Measures M20 (Technical assistance), M113 (Early retirement) and M131 (Meeting standards based on Community legislation), which
together accounted for 2.8% of total public expenditure on Rural Development in 2022, do not contribute directly to any of the six priorities
listed in the table.
Source: OECD calculations based on European Commission, EUR-Lex budget 2023 (for EU funding) and EAFRD financial execution (for Rural
Development and allocation to priorities). Total public expenditure comprises EU funding and Member States national funding of Rural
Development.
Member States develop RDPs covering the entire CAP cycle based on a menu of 19 measures to meet
the six priority areas of Pillar 2.19 At the aggregate, nearly 60% of the RDP budget for the period 2014-22
was allocated to just three of these measures: Areas with Natural Constraints; Investments; and Agri-
environment and Climate. Of these, "investments” was a top-three measure in terms of expenditure in most
Member States. At least 30% of rural development funding from the EU budget must be spent on measures
related to the environment and climate change adaptation (including forestry and investments in physical
assets) and another 5% must be spent on the LEADER approach.
Knowledge and innovation
The Pillar 2 of the CAP and the Horizon Europe programme are the two main EU funding streams
supporting knowledge and innovation in EU agriculture. However, the vast majority of allocated resources
(over 90%) is earmarked by individual Member States from national budgets, including non-agricultural
budget lines (OECD, 2023[9]).
There were three main measures in RDPs for 2014-22 that target agricultural innovation: knowledge
transfer, advice, and co-operation. Uptake of these measures was slower and more limited than other rural
development measures (OECD, 2023[9]). The share of knowledge- and innovation-related spending in total
public expenditure on agricultural support measures under Pillar 2 was around 2% in recent years.
The agriculture-relevant aspects of Horizon Europe fall under Cluster 6 on “Food, Bioeconomy, Natural
Resources, Agriculture and Environment”. This cluster is important for the European Green Deal, with
regard to the “Farm to Fork” Strategy, as well as for climate, circular economy and zero-pollution objectives.
With an estimated budget of EUR 9 billion (USD 10 billion) over the seven-year programming period, it
offers funding to stimulate public and private investment in research and innovation and fosters multi-actor
projects and partnerships across EU countries.
“EU Missions” are a new element of Horizon Europe. These are a portfolio of collective actions like
research projects, policy measures or legislative initiatives. There are five Missions in different thematic
areas, of which “A Soil Deal for Europe” will help the agricultural sector by developing concrete solutions
for restoring soil functions.
The European Innovation Partnership for Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability (EIP-AGRI) is the
main EC policy tool bringing together CAP and Horizon funding for bottom-up multi-actor agricultural
innovation projects. These projects tackle practical problems through a co-creation process involving
farmers, researchers and other relevant actors.


 295

Climate change mitigation policies
The European Climate Law codifies the goal set out in the European Green Deal for Europe’s economy
and society to become climate-neutral by 2050.20 It also sets the intermediate target of reducing net
greenhouse gas emissions by at least 55% by 2030, compared to 1990 levels. This package is part of the
EU’s revised nationally determined contributions (NDCs).21 Although agriculture was not specifically
mentioned in the European Climate Law, proposals on legislative tools to deliver on the targets include
both agriculture and the land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) sectors.
Mitigation efforts for non-CO2 GHGs emitted by all sectors outside the Emission Trading System (ETS),
including transport, buildings, small industry outside the ETS, waste and agriculture sectors are covered
under the 2018 EU’s Effort Sharing Regulation, which was amended in April 2023. The new regulation22
lays down obligations on Member States with respect to their minimum contributions for the period from
2021 to 2030 to fulfilling the Union’s target of reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 40% below 2005
levels. EU Member States now have emission reduction targets ranging from 10% to 50% compared to
2005 levels.
CO2 emissions relating to forestry, wetlands, cropland and grassland management are addressed primarily
under the European Union’s LULUCF Regulation,23 which establishes a legislative framework for
accounting emissions and removals from the land-use sectors between 2021 and 2030. Under the current
framework, Member States must ensure that accounted CO2-eq emissions from the LULUCF sector are
entirely compensated by an equivalent removal of CO2-eq from the atmosphere through action in the
LULUCF sector.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
The policies in place to support climate-change adaptation in the EU agricultural sector is complex and
involves interaction of the general EU policy framework with more specific programmes and adaptation
measures implemented at various geographical scales (EEA, 2019[13]):
•
The EU Policy Framework on adaptation sets objectives for action based on a range of strategies
and policies, including the EU Strategy on Adaptation to Climate Change, the CAP, and EU laws,
regulations, and directives (e.g. Climate Law, Water Framework Directive, Floods Directive).
•
Programmes supporting adaptation include EU programmes such as LIFE+, Copernicus,
INTERREG, and Horizon Europe; and national or regional programmes such as rural development
programmes, River Basin Management Plans, and Natura 2000 plans. Such programmes provide
a framework for action at farm level and can provide knowledge and/or financial support.
•
The programmes supporting adaptation offer opportunities to introduce specific adaptation
measures that can be implemented at national or regional level (e.g. farm advisory systems,
irrigation infrastructure, flood prevention), and at farm level (e.g. risk management, early-warning
systems, education, and awareness raising).
The sections below provide an overview of the EU’s and Member States’ main policies and programmes
on climate-change adaptation in agriculture, including a selection of measures put in place by Member
States since 2021 to adapt the agricultural sector to various climate pressures.
The EU policy framework and programmes
In the context of the European Green Deal, the European Climate Law (Article 5) states that the European
Commission needs to adopt a Union strategy on adaptation to climate change in line with the Paris
Agreement. In February 2021, the Commission adopted the Communication “Forging a climate-resilient
Europe – the new EU Strategy on Adaptation to Climate Change” (EC, 2021[14]).


296 

The new Strategy aims to improve knowledge of climate impacts and adaptation solutions, stepping up
adaptation planning and climate risk assessments, accelerating adaptation action, and helping strengthen
climate resilience globally. This strategy builds on the 2013 Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (EC,
2013[15]). Unlike the policy framework for mitigation, the European Union’s adaptation strategy does not
set binding targets or requirements for Member States.
The European Climate Adaptation Platform (Climate-ADAPT) is part of the EU adaptation strategy. It is a
partnership between the European Commission and the European Environment Agency to gather more
and better data on climate-related risks and losses, and help users access and share data and information
on the impacts of climate change and on EU, national, and transnational adaptation strategies and actions
(EC and EEA, 2023[16]).
The CAP is the main policy instrument to stimulate adaptation solutions and improve the resilience of EU
agriculture to climate risks. Climate action (including adaptation) was a cross-cutting objective of the
CAP 2014-22, and the European Commission deemed a quarter of CAP spending as contributing to
climate mitigation and adaptation (European Commission, 2019[17]). However, the CAP contains no legally
binding or concrete, quantified objectives for adaptation and few CAP measures make explicit reference
to climate adaptation.
CAP 2014-22 aimed to encourage climate adaptation of agriculture through both Pillar 1 and Pillar 2
measures. In Pillar 1, this was through the implementation of green payments and cross-compliance,
especially those that helped maintain diverse farming systems (e.g. crop diversification, introduction of
Ecological Focus Areas, protection of permanent grassland and landscape features). For Pillar 2, support
for knowledge transfer, preventive or restoration actions, agro-forestry, co-operation, and risk management
could all aid adaptation.
The new CAP 2023-27 can contribute to climate-change adaptation through enhanced conditionality, eco-
schemes and agri-environment-climate commitments (AECCs). New conditionality rules related to climate
have been introduced, notably GAEC 2 requiring protection of wetland and peatland, while GAEC 7
requires more-ambitious crop rotations and GAEC 8 requires larger areas beneficial for biodiversity.
The CAP 2023-27 requires stronger efforts for environmental and climate-change mitigation and
adaptation within the new Common Market Organisation aid schemes for the fruit and vegetables sector.
This attributes 15% of expenditure on operational programmes to such actions, and 5% of expenditure to
strengthen research, development, and innovation (EC, 2023[18]). Overall, the European Commission
estimates that 40% of CAP spending between 2021 and 2027 will contribute to climate mitigation and
adaptation.
Other EU environmental policies that stimulate adaptation action and contribute to disaster-risk reduction
include the EU biodiversity strategy, the Water Framework Directive, and the Floods Directive (EEA,
2019[13]). These set EU-wide objectives for outcomes that can improve the resilience of agricultural
landscapes. The LIFE Climate Action Sub-programme supports projects for renewable energy, energy
efficiency, farming, land-use planning, and peatland management. The INTERREG Europe Programme
helps local, regional, and national governments across Europe develop and deliver better policy. Moreover,
one of Horizon Europe’s missions for 2021-2027 focuses on supporting EU regions, cities, and local
authorities in their efforts to build resilience against the impacts of climate change (EC, 2023[19]).
Adaptation measures in EU Member States
By the end of 2021, all EU Member States had issued a national adaptation strategy or plan, and all of
them explicitly include agriculture as a priority sector. In addition, various Member States (e.g. Malta and
Romania) mainstreamed climate change adaptation into national agricultural policies, and several Member
States (e.g. Slovenia) developed specific adaptation strategies for the agricultural sector (EEA, 2019[13]).


 297

In Finland, the cross-sectorial climate-change adaptation strategy was revised in 2022 and the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry is responsible for co-ordinating the overall national adaption policy.
Most short-term measures help manage extreme climate events (drought and floods), and most countries
adopted programmes to tackle drought events. Croatia established a EUR 13.3 million (USD 14 million)
programme in December 2022 to mitigate drought damage for agricultural producers, which aimed to reach
20 000 farmers. Similarly, Slovenia’s Ministry of Agriculture activated several national measures for
farmers affected by drought. In 2022, Austria finalised the National Water Management and Flood Risk
Management Plans to be published every six years. As response to the flood events of 2021, Germany
provided damage compensation, liquidity programmes and tax-relief measures, and suspended loan
repayments by up to two years. In 2021, Hungary put in place an Agricultural Crisis Insurance Scheme to
stabilise farm revenues and partially compensate farmers for the loss of revenue caused by extreme
weather events affecting crop production. In the Netherlands farmers can be reimbursed for a maximum
of 64% of weather-based insurance premiums, aiming to cover 4 400 participants by 2027.
Measures and programmes to support incremental changes in the medium- and long-term include
measures for the green transition of agriculture, monitoring and decision-support tools, investments in
infrastructure, and dedicated R&D investments, as described below.
Programmes in Bulgaria encourage crop rotation, especially with nitrogen-fixing crops to prevent soil
erosion and support carbon sequestration. In France, several actions to facilitate the transition towards
sustainable and climate-resilient agriculture were undertaken as part of the recovery plan after COVID-19.
The plan will add 7 000 km of hedgerows to limit soil erosion, store carbon, and increase resilience against
wind. In 2021, EUR 24.5 million (USD 29 million) was invested to plant 2 800 km of hedgerows. The Good
Carbon Diagnostic measure is also used to support a portfolio of adaptation actions for farmers, including
improved management of organic matter. Portugal’s National Plan for Recovery and Resilience provides
resources for adaptation to climate change to increase water-efficiency management in agriculture.
Several Member States adopted early-warning systems and decision-support tools to reduce risks for
farmers. Estonia launched the Big Data Project in 2022 to connect public and private datasets to digital
decision-making tools that help agricultural producers adopt climate- and environmentally friendly
measures and technologies. Portugal’s Climate Portal platform disseminates climate data, and the National
Adaptation Roadmap Project 2100 analyses the impacts of climate change and assess investments for
adaptation and the costs of inaction. Romania’s updated 2021-30 climate-change adaptation strategy
includes a dedicated knowledge platform (RO-ADAPT) following the model of the EU Climate-ADAPT
platform. A frost warning app introduced in Greece alerts farmers to upcoming frost events, while
Slovenia’s online tool Sušomer monitors drought. In the Czech Republic an online anti-erosion calculator
was launched to support decision-making regarding soil erosion.
Infrastructure investments include modernising existing irrigation networks in Greece and a fund in
Lithuania for investment in no-till farming. In Latvia, the implementation of projects on the restoration of
109 km of drainage systems in agricultural land was completed in 2022. Sweden’s Local Nature
Conservation Initiative grants support to different kinds of nature-based solutions for climate adaptation,
including the construction of wetlands and the restoration of watercourses. Spain is investing in the
modernisation of irrigation infrastructure using a combination of European and national funds to further
implement its irrigation policy, with the objective of improving the efficiency and sustainability of water use
and ensuring the good quantitative and qualitative status of water resources.
Targeted R&D can improve the resilience of the farming sector to climate change. Ongoing collaborative
research projects in Finland support and monitor adaptation measures on farms. Ireland recently funded
five research projects relevant to climate change adaptation in agriculture, focusing on wheat and barley
genetic diversity, soil biodiversity, soil health and climate-smart soil management. Slovenia financed
programmes for new plant varieties that are better-adapted to new climate conditions.


298 

RDP measures supporting climate change adaptation
Implementation of adaptation measures is supported by national (or regional) rural-development
programmes (RDPs). As of October 2022, Croatia’s RDP had financed 19 irrigation system projects
covering an around 8 200 hectares, at a total value of around EUR 104.8 million (USD 110.2 million). RDP
funding has been used in Greece for “active systems” investments to protect against frost, hail, and rain in
vineyards and orchards (e.g. hail protection nets). In Poland, Pillar 2 is financing the management of
rainwater in river catchments on agricultural land through the modernisation of existing water and hydro-
technical facilities. Portugal’s RDP provided EUR 1.75 billion (USD 1.84 billion) for the adaptation of
agriculture and forestry to climate change (54.5% of total funding to agriculture and forests). In the Slovak
Republic, 13 RDP calls totalling EUR 363 million (USD 382 million) were launched during 2014-22 to
support investment, resilience, and preventive actions against fires, natural disasters, and catastrophic
events.
In the CAP 2023-27, Pillar 2 and sectoral interventions include measures to support investments that target
environmental and climate-related objectives – both, “productive” investments (which also bring economic
gain) and “non-productive” investments (which bring primarily environmental and climate-related benefits).
Half of the investment interventions proposed in Member States’ CSPs target environmental and climate-
related objectives  (EC, 2022[20]). Examples of “productive” green investment interventions include those
in manure management, production of renewable energy (explicitly including biogas in the case of Austria,
Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Poland, Romania, Slovenia, and Spain), and more-
efficient irrigation. In several plans, the latter is the only intervention planned specifically for adaptation
purposes. The 28 proposed CSPs included investments worth around EUR 3.4 billion (USD 3.6 billion),
which will mostly support renewable energy for 2023-27. “Non-productive” examples include investments
in establishing landscape features, restoring dry stone walls, restoring wetlands and peatlands, restoring
habitats and landscapes, and establishing protection against large predators.
Overall, the 28 CSPs include 59 agri-environment management commitments from 21 Member States
linked to climate-change adaptation (EC, 2023[18]). Almost 180 000 farms (around 2% of all EU farms) will
receive support for investments contributing to climate-change mitigation and adaptation and to the
production of renewable energy or biomaterials. CSPs will finance afforestation or agroforestry restoration
on almost 623 000 hectares, and 25% of Natura 2000 areas will be covered by specific, additional, focused
actions to protect habits and species. The share of EU-utilised agricultural area under additional action for
climate adaptation (result indicator 12 of the CSP EU Regulation 2021/2115) totals 25% (EC, 2022[21]).
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
Overall spending
The EU budget for agriculture and rural development in 2022 was EUR 55.4 billion (USD 58.3 billion), an
increase of EUR 0.4 billion (USD 0.4 billion) compared to 2021. Total expenditure under Pillar 1 was
EUR 40.3 billion (USD 42.4 billion) (76.8%), with EUR 15.1 billion (USD 15.9 billion) (23.2%) allocated
under Pillar 2.
The 2023-2027 CAP Reform
The European Commission presented its proposal for the post 2020 CAP reform in 2018, aiming to
modernise and simplify the European Union’s policy on agriculture. Following extensive negotiations
between the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission,
agreement was reached, and the new CAP was formally adopted on 2 December 2021 (EC, 2021[22]).
The CAP 2023-27 entered into force in January 2023 and is built around ten specific objectives: to ensure
a fair income for farmers; to increase competitiveness; to improve the position of farmers in the food chain;


 299

climate change action; environmental care; to preserve landscapes and biodiversity; to support
generational renewal; vibrant rural areas; to protect food and health quality; fostering knowledge and
innovation.
Member States implemented the CAP 2023-27 with new CAP Strategic Plans24 designed at national level
(see Box 12.1). CSPs are expected to devote 32% (close to EUR 98 billion or USD 103 billion) of public
CAP funding to specific environmental benefits for climate, water, soil, air, biodiversity, and animal welfare
and to encourage practices that go beyond the conditionality. Twenty-four per cent of direct payments are
dedicated to eco-schemes designed by each Member State and 48% of rural development spending from
EU funds is earmarked for environment and climate.
CSP development started in 2020 with European Commission recommendations on specific issues to be
addressed, including European Green Deal-related climate and environmental objectives and specific
national values25 for Farm to Fork (F2F) and Biodiversity strategy targets at national level (EC, 2020[23]).
The European Commission provided observation letters commenting on each Member State’s draft CSP.
After bilateral consultations, CSPs were revised and formally approved in August 2022.
In September 2022, a Commission Implementing Regulation set out rules for the evaluation of the CSPs
and their monitoring and evaluation (EP, 2022[24]). This regulation provides technical support for Member
States and the relevant stakeholders and some common rules to ensure data availability for monitoring
and evaluation. It includes standards of good agricultural and environmental conditions of land (GAEC),
rules on Local Action Groups (LAGs) and data on European Innovation Partnership for Agricultural
Productivity and Sustainability (EIP-AGRI) operational groups.
The new CAP introduces the concept of social conditionality (i.e. farmer payments are linked to compliance
with certain labour laws), while environmental sustainability is addressed through a new “green
architecture”. Greening payments were replaced by stricter environmental requirements in cross-
compliance (enhanced conditionality), while eco-schemes were introduced to incentivise the adoption of
specific farming practices with additional environmental benefits. Eco-schemes, as part of Pillar 1, are fully
financed by the EU budget and the related payments are granted per hectare in two forms: either as
compensation for additional costs incurred or income foregone, similar to the agri-environmental support
schemes of Pillar 2, or as fixed top-up payments in addition to decoupled direct payments.
Member States can use eco-schemes to make their area-based rural development support more targeted
in terms of area or issue addressed (EC, 2022[20]) and customise them to specific national environmental
and climate needs. CSPs differ greatly in their level of environmental ambition and 158 eco-schemes have
been developed across the 27 Member States (EC, 2023[18]). Among the 158 eco-schemes, 18% provide
payments that go beyond the annual area-based decoupled payment,26 while the remaining 82% provide
payments intended to compensate the additional costs and income loss (and possible transaction costs)
incurred by farmers due to these commitments. While most Member States designed several eco-
schemes, each of which is relatively specific to a given objective, six countries (the Czech Republic,
France, Hungary, Ireland, the Netherlands and the Slovak Republic) adopted only one multi-dimensional
eco-scheme that includes a package of options. Two CSPs (the Netherlands and Hungary) put forward
points-based eco-schemes, with a scoring or weighting of the different practices according to their
expected positive environmental impact, and some countries (e.g. Lithuania, Ireland and Portugal) request
farmers to adopt more than one eco-scheme or a minimum number of practices.




300 

Box 12.1. The 28 CAP Strategic Plans
The new CAP entails a new delivery model in which Member States play a critical role in designing and
implementing their CAP Strategic Plans (CSPs). Each CSP combines a wide range of targeted
interventions, with the view of delivering tangible results in relation to EU-level objectives, while
contributing to the ambitions of the European Green Deal (EC, 2019[25]). The Commission asked EU
countries to determine specific national values for these European Green Deal targets and align their
CSPs with them.
This programming approach applies to interventions under both pillars of the CAP and not only to rural
development interventions as in the Rural Development Plans (RDPs) of the CAP 2014-22. There is
one CSP for each Member State (except for Wallonia and Flanders in Belgium, which each has their
own one), a total of 28 plans compared to 118 RDPs that included regional plans in several countries
(e.g. France, Germany, Italy, and Spain). The European Commission published a preliminary overview
of the 28 CSPs in December 2022 (EC, 2022[21]), and a more detailed analysis of the approved Plans
in April 2023, including the key elements and choices set out by the Member States (EC, 2023[18]).
Member States were required to carry out a thorough assessment of their territory and agro-food sector,
based on a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats (SWOT) analysis. Each CSP must include
the following sections:
•
the assessment of needs, based on a SWOT analysis
•
the intervention strategy, including targets and related milestones for each of the 10 specific
CAP objectives
•
the elements common to several interventions, such as relevant definitions (e.g. status of “active
farmer”, “eligible area”, etc.)
•
interventions: direct payments (including eco-schemes), sectoral interventions and rural
development measures
•
target and financial plans, with Member States’ allocations for each type of intervention
•
the governance and co-ordination system and integrated administration and control system
(IACS)
•
the elements that ensure modernisation of the CAP, and in particular how the CSP will
contribute to foster and share knowledge, innovation and digitalisation in agriculture and rural
areas
•
a description about the Member State’s national and regional set-up, and in particular which
elements are established at national and at regional level
•
annexes (ex-ante evaluation, SWOT analysis, consultation process with partners, etc.).
Under the CAP 2023-27, EU Member States were required to include one or more eco-schemes in their
CSPs and to integrate their regional Agricultural Knowledge and Innovation Systems (AKIS). The
decision on the selection of actions and dedicated budget for knowledge and innovation lies with the
Member States.
Agri-environmental sustainability
The European Green Deal aims to “boost the efficient use of resources by moving to a clean, circular EU
economy and stop climate change, revert biodiversity loss and cut pollution, through a just and inclusive
transition” (EC, 2019[26]). Key actions in 2022 relating to the roll-out of the European Green Deal, included
proposals to modernise EU industrial emissions rules (EC, 2022[27]) to steer large industry in long-term


 301

green transition, including more large-scale intensive livestock farms; a Nature protection package (EC,
2022[28]), including a proposal for Nature Restoration Law, with quantified targets, indicators and
milestones that the 27 Member States will be required to meet; an EU-wide voluntary framework to reliably
certify high-quality carbon removals (EC, 2022[29]), focusing on innovative carbon removal technologies
and sustainable carbon farming solutions, including those affecting agriculture and forestry sectors.  As of
30 April 2023, all these proposals were under negotiations and not yet approved.
The Farm-to-Fork and Biodiversity Strategies, both adopted in May 2020, are part of the European Green
Deal aim at transforming the EU food system into a global standard for sustainability and halting
biodiversity loss (EC, 2020[30]). Key initiatives in 2022 included:
•
An Integrated Nutrient Management Action Plan (EC, 2022[31]) to help achieve the European
Green Deal’s 2030 target of reducing nutrient losses by 50%, while ensuring no deterioration in
soil fertility.
•
Proposals for a new Regulation on the Sustainable Use of Plant Protection Products (EC,
2022[32]), including legally binding targets at EU level to reduce by 50% the use and the risk of
chemical pesticides as well as the use of the most hazardous pesticides by 2030.27
•
A proposal for a new regulation on Geographical Indications (GIs) and other quality schemes for
agricultural products, to increase the uptake and the level of protection, especially online (EC,
2022[33]).
In the EU Biodiversity Strategy, the EU and its Member States committed to implement more than
100 actions to halt and reverse biodiversity loss by 2030. As of 30 April 2023, a total of 47 actions were
completed.28 In addition, Ireland launched a EUR 5 million (USD 5.3 million) pilot Farm Environmental
Study to provide an opportunity for farmers to learn more about farmland habitats and to have habitats and
biodiversity on their land surveyed. These surveys are intended to establish baseline habitat and
biodiversity data, as well as a baseline for future targeting of agri-environmental schemes. Croatia adopted
a support programme for farmers using agricultural land protected as cultural heritage, which provides
compensation for their loss of income due to the obligation to comply with the regulations on cultural
heritage protection. Hungary launched an RDP initiative devoted to the “ex situ or in vitro” conservation of
genetic resources of protected indigenous and endangered agricultural animal breeds and advisory
activities to prevent genetic erosion.
Several Member States adopted new regulatory measures to reduce the environmental impacts of
agricultural inputs. In Austria, the Ammonia Reduction Directive entered into force, setting requirements
for the timely incorporation of fertilisers and the addition of urease inhibitors on nitrous fertilisers, as well
as the coverage of storage facilities for liquid manure and digestate. Austria also launched a new Nitrate
Action Programme focusing on improved fertiliser measurement, optimisation of the storage and spreading
of farm manure.29 Spain updated its regulation on nitrates, which established action programmes in nitrate
vulnerable zones, as well as codes of agricultural good practices related to fertiliser use and manure
management. Spain also established standards for sustainable nutrients management in agricultural soils
accompanied by a Digital Farm Notebook, which will register fertilisation practices in the farm. Poland
revised its Nitrate Action Programme, allowing the use of a flexible spring fertilisation date and updated
the production coefficients for natural fertilisers and the related nitrogen contents. The Czech Republic
introduced an obligation for agricultural entrepreneurs farming more than 20 hectares of agricultural land
to keep electronic records of fertilisers to help create a tool to calculate nutrient balances. Regarding plant
protection products, Croatia adopted a new act on the sustainable use of pesticides. France temporarily
permitted neonicotinoid use as seed coating in sugar beet fields in 2022, while launching a EUR 7 million
(USD 7.4 million) research programme to identify alternatives. Romania released its first Code of Good
Agricultural Practices regarding water protection against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural
sources.


302 

With the aim to promote the development of renewable energy on farmland, Greece enacted two new
regulations on renewable energy source licensing and on photovoltaic power stations in highly productive
agricultural lands, Ireland included the aid for installation of Solar PV technology along with battery storage
in its Targeted Agricultural Modernisation Schemes, and Estonia launched a EUR 28.8 million
(USD 30.3 million) fund to support investment in biogas and biomethane production plants in addition to
the EUR 20 million (USD 21 million) available under the framework of REPowerEU.30 Poland adopted the
Energy for Rural Areas scheme with a budget of EUR 214 million (USD 225 million) from the Modernisation
Fund to provide rural communities, including farmers, with grants and loans for the use of renewable
sources.
Through the Farm to Fork and the Biodiversity strategies, the European Commission has committed to
reach the target of 25% of the EU’s agricultural land being under organic farming by 2030. Building upon
the EU Organic Action Plan launched in 2021 (OECD, 2022[34]), Austria included in its Organic Farming
Action Plan 2023 the EU targets and measures, as well as the new ambition to expand its organic area up
to 30% of its agricultural area by 2027. Poland updated its Framework Action Plan for Organic Food and
Farming 2021-2030, committing to have at least 7% of agricultural area under the organic production
scheme by 2030, i.e. doubling compared to 2019. Croatia’s National Action Plan for the Development of
Organic Agriculture 2023-2030 covering a wide range of areas was sent out for public consultation. In 2022
Estonia developed an action plan containing various targets to promote organic farming for the period
2023-2030. Under this plan, it started to support organic food supply in educational institutions to
compensate additional costs and raise children’s awareness through a budget of EUR 0.8 million
(USD 0.8 million) in 2022 that increased to EUR 10.2 million (USD 10.7 million) in 2023. France
accelerated support to the organic food supply chain through more funding for the Agence Bio in charge
of studying the reasons behind the reducing demand, a new promotion campaign for organic products,
and revised eligibility criteria of the Avenir BIO Fund to finance more projects. France also reinforced the
requirements for granting the “high environmental value” (HVE) level of its national environmental farm
certification scheme, including more rigorous biodiversity protection, lower use of phytosanitary products
and better management practices for fertiliser use. Finally, most Member States have indicated a national
value for organic area in their national CAP Strategic Plan for 2023-27, as a contribution to the
corresponding Green Deal target.
Member States’ CSPs include several measures related to climate mitigation, including support for
investments in biogas production, manure management and genetic improvement and optimised feeding
to reducing methane and ammonia emissions (EC, 2022[21]). Among the most recent initiatives outside the
CAP, Ireland published its Climate Action Plan 2023 including core agriculture measures to achieve its
sectoral GHG emission reduction goal, such as the reduction of chemical nitrogen use to a maximum of
300 000 tonnes, reducing the first calving age of suckler beef cows, and the upscale on carbon farming in
line with the EU’s proposal to develop a new regulatory framework for the certification of carbon removals.
Germany provided additional support to implement the ten measures in its Immediate Climate Action
Programme for 2022. On the production side measures focus on increased fertiliser efficiency, conversion
of animal husbandry and the promotion of natural carbon sinks through appropriate management practices.
On the consumption side measures focus on promoting plant-based diets and the reduction of food waste.
Spain set out a legal basis for a computer tool that verifies the implementation of best available techniques
(BATs) and support the calculation, monitoring and reporting of emissions at the farm level by establishing
a general registry for BATs. Austria launched its Moor Strategy Austria 2030+, which guides actions to
protect peatlands and peat soils throughout Austria until 2030.
In the period 2022-23, the European Commission has adopted various measures and proposals under the
framework of its 2020 Circular Economy Action Plan. Among those most directly affecting the agro-food
sector are the proposals to empower consumers in the green transition and for a Directive on green claims,
adopted in March 2023.  Both initiatives aim to combat misleading claims and greenwashing, as well as to
increase consumer confidence in environmental labelling. Meanwhile, in 2022, Greece adopted its National


 303

Road Map for Circular Economy 2021-2025, which shows alignment with the goals and commitments of
the 2020 EU Circular Economy Action Plan and covers various issues including reducing food waste
actions and pesticide packaging management, among others.
Animal health and welfare
In the context of the Farm to Fork Strategy, the European Union is expected to review and evaluate the
existing animal welfare legislation, including on animal transport and slaughter, by the last quarter of
2023. Without waiting for the next EU framework to be developed, Austria and France enacted animal
welfare legislation to end the culling of male chicks in egg-laying hen production units as of January 2023,
becoming the second countries after Germany to do so. Germany introduced new rules on the transport
of calves, which must be at least 28 days old to be transported within the country. Spain also established
new regulations on animal health and protection standards during transport in November 2022, as well as
for the management of bovine farms in December 2022. These basic rules determine the minimum
conditions for infrastructure, equipment and handling, biosecurity, hygiene and sanitation, and
environmental requirements, among others.
Regarding support to farmers, Austria increased subsidy rates for animal welfare investments from 25%
to 35% for pigs and to 30% for turkeys. In February 2023, Romania introduced a compensatory payment
for income losses and additional costs incurred by farmers implementing pig and poultry welfare, which
takes the form of a fixed annual payment per livestock unit. In the frame of its RDP, in 2022 Croatia
implemented payments for animal welfare in cattle breeding, pig breeding, poultry farming, goat and sheep
breeding, while Hungary announced several new calls for applications in 2022 with animal welfare
components in the sheep and goat, poultry and dairy sectors. In Hungary, a new RDP call was also opened
aiming to improve the ecosystem serving capacity of bee colonies by providing support to ensure hygienic
and animal protection conditions for the welfare of bees.
Animal and plant disease
The Avian Influenza epidemic, which started in October 2021, continued during 2022 and affected wild
birds, poultry or captive birds in 25 EU Member States. Overall, the 2021-22 epidemic has been the largest
observed in the European Union so far as it has been difficult to rapidly contain the spread of the virus
once it entered areas with high concentration of poultry establishments. Several large clusters have
developed in certain parts of France, Italy and Hungary. However, the epidemiological situation started to
improve during the second quarter of 2022.
Affected Member States introduced specific measures in response to the outbreak of pathogenic avian
influenza. The Czech authorities stated a ban on outdoor poultry farming as of 12 December 2022 and
launched an information campaign for farmers, veterinarians and hunters on disease detection, prevention
and reporting. In addition, the Czech Republic launched an avian influenza vaccination campaign targeting
genetically valuable geese. In July 2022, France established a new avian influenza plan that complements
its action plan approved in 2021: two sets of compensatory payments were made available with an overall
budget of EUR 1.5 billion (USD 1.6 billion), vaccination against avian influenza was launched on a pilot
basis on 10 May 2022 and integrated into an action plan on 22 December 2022. In December 2022, Poland
implemented a EUR 34 million (USD 35.8 million) exceptional compensation scheme targeting poultry and
egg producers whose holdings were located in protection zones established due to outbreaks of avian
influenza between December 2019 and July 2021. More broadly, Hungary amended its national legislation
regarding the support for the prevention and control of animal diseases, enabling a more targeted use of
resources while introducing stricter conditions for aid.
With regard to Plant Health, several initiatives have been put in place. Since 2023 in Austria, forecasting
models for the rape pests in spring have been available free of charge for more than 40 sites throughout
the country. Regarding the Xylella emergency, in September 2022 Italy established the criteria and


304 

methods for granting contributions for the replacement of olive trees damaged by the bacterium. Under its
Development Sectoral Programme (2021-25), Greece has provided funding for the improvement of
laboratory infrastructure in the field of sanitary and phytosanitary standards. In Hungary, from 1 January
2023, farmers with agricultural land of more than 10 hectares will have to keep up-to-date records of
insecticide treatments for arable crops on the electronic spray register interface provided by the authority.
Finally, Croatia adopted the Act on Amendments to the Plant Health Law, which aims to protect the territory
from harmful organisms and consequently reducing the use of plant protection products.
Food safety, health and traceability
As of March 2022 in France, country-of-origin labelling became mandatory for all meats served in
restaurants. Similarly, by mid-2023 in Austria country-of-origin labelling is compulsory for meat, eggs and
milk in collective catering such as hospitals, retirement homes, schools and companies.
Institutional arrangements were also developed. In December 2022, Croatia inaugurated its Food Safety
and Quality Centre. In March 2022, the Czech Government approved the Action plan for the
implementation of the Food Safety and Nutrition Strategy 2030. Since 2021 Belgium, France, Germany,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Switzerland and Spain form part of a transnational co-ordination
mechanism to facilitate the use of the front-of-pack nutrition label Nutri-Score. In July 2022 and
March 2023, these countries adopted the modifications of the Nutri-Score algorithm proposed by the
scientific committee to strengthen the effectiveness of this label in classifying products in accordance with
the dietary guidelines of the various countries, with the aim of guiding consumers towards healthier food
choices.
Addressing antimicrobial resistance (AMR) was also part of the agenda. Following up on the EU
legislative package on veterinary medicinal products and medicated feed,31 which came into force on
28 January 2022, Hungary began implementing mandatory collection and reporting of data on antimicrobial
use in food-producing animals via a verified online platform, while France banned all imports of meat and
meat products from animals that received antibiotic growth hormones as of 22 April 2022. Meanwhile,
Malta has been implementing its Strategy and Action Plan for the Prevention and Containment of
Antimicrobial Resistance and Portugal has set up an eco-scheme under its CAP Strategic Plan 2023-27
focused on promoting a more rational use of antimicrobials. Finally, four Member States, the Czech
Republic, France, Malta and Poland, have indicated a national value for the use of antibiotics in their CAP
Strategic Plan for 2023-27 as a contribution to the corresponding Green Deal target.
In March 2022, the French Presidency of the Council of the European Union organised a High-Level One
Health Ministerial Conference on Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) during which the Trio Presidency of the
Council of the EU, constituted by France, the Czech Republic and Sweden, presented a Declaration on
antimicrobial resistance,32 underlining that AMR will be a priority of the three presidencies from
January 2022 to June 2023, suggesting possible work options on the topic at the EU Level.
Market infrastructure and institutions
Several Member States have implemented measures to strengthen their market infrastructure. Croatia is
investing EUR 81.8 million (USD 86.0 million) in the construction of logistics distribution centres for fruits
and vegetables under its National Recovery and Resilience Plan 2021-2027. Malta has undertaken a
reform of its Ta’ Qali’ Fruit and Vegetables Market, to improve its governance, legislative framework and
overall infrastructure. In early 2023, Ireland adopted the Agriculture and Food Supply Bill establishing a
new independent statutory body, An Rialálaí Agraibhia, to promote fairness and transparency in the agro-
food supply chain. The agro-food regulator will have powers to levy fines of up to EUR 10 million
(USD 10.5 million) on buyers, including retailers, food producers and processors, who engage in unfair
trading practices with farmers and other suppliers.


 305

Land tenure policies
Hungary introduced new legislation in 2022 prohibiting the creation of more undivided common property
and strengthens the right of farmers in the case of purchases and usufructuary leases following property
inheritance. Meanwhile, Malta has undertaken the reform of its legal framework for the protection of
Maltese agricultural land, which aims to strike a balance between the public interest and the landowner’s
interest.
Risk management
In 2022, various Member States’ risk management policies focused on supporting producers in coping with
disaster related impacts. In Poland, two disaster schemes were introduced to assist agricultural
producers who suffered damage from adverse weather events, including drought. The first disaster aid
scheme of EUR 100 million (USD 105 million) targeted crop producers affected in 2021. The level of aid
granted to each farmer depends on the area of arable land affected and the extent of yield losses. The
second disaster aid scheme with a budget of EUR 130 million (USD 137 million) provided a lump-sum to
families at risk of losing their financial liquidity due to damage to farms caused by natural disasters in 2022.
The payment depends on the extent of damage to the farm’s agricultural production and the number of
applicants. The Slovak Republic has implemented exceptional disaster aid for specific sub-sectors;
EUR 5.7 million (USD 6.0 million) was paid to 1 800 fruit and winegrowers to compensate for the
consequences of frost damage and EUR 4.4 million (USD 4.6 million) was granted to 9 500 livestock
farmers who suffered from fodder shortages due to drought and high feed prices in 2022. Croatia provided
EUR 13.3 million (USD 14.0 million) to 20 000 producers to mitigate the effects of drought on corn,
soybeans, sunflowers, fruits, vegetables, sugar beets and tobacco, EUR 3.3 million (USD 3.5 million) to
alleviate the effects of hail from June 2022 and EUR 160 000 (USD 168 265) for beekeepers who suffered
damage from Colony Collapse Disorder in 2022. Additional funds were dedicated to longer-term
investments in the restoration of agricultural land affected by natural disasters, adverse weather conditions
and catastrophic events. France announced EUR 76 million (USD 80.0 million) to support farmers affected
by the April 2022 frost, mainly in the arboriculture sector, with payments starting in November 2022, and
EUR 1.8 million (USD 1.9 million) to compensate for damage caused by the May 2022 hailstorms. Feeding
of grazing animals in the Czech Republic was exceptionally allowed on species-rich pastures, based on a
notification of force majeure – drought in 2022.
In parallel, several Member States continued to grant insurance premium subsidies, including Croatia,
Romania, and the Slovak Republic, among others. In 2022, Spain increased the budget for insurance
subsidies by 30% with respect to 2016-20, which allows to finance new subsidies for farms in shared
ownership by couples and for newcomers. Reforms to strengthen the reinsurance scheme and stabilisation
reserves were also introduced. In February 2022, France adopted the reform of the harvest insurance,
which establishes a universal coverage against climatic risks, accessible to all farmers. Entering into force
on 1 January 2023, this reform doubles the budget envelope to EUR 600 million (USD 631 million) per
year.
Support to specific groups of farmers
To advance gender equality, a National Dialogue on Women in Irish Agriculture was convened on
1 February 2023, providing an opportunity for stakeholders to provide input on how to increase the visibility
and status of women in agriculture. In their CSP for the 2023-27 CAP, the majority of Member States
recognised the importance of gender issues and the need to increase the participation of women in farming
and to improve the socio-economic situation of rural women. The Czech Republic, Italy, Portugal, and
Spain introduced conditions for selection or access to support that target the involvement of women in
farming. Spain also increased the complementary direct payment for young farmers if the beneficiary is
female and owns or co-owns the farm (EC, 2023[18]).


306 

Most Member States plan additional income support and installation aid for young farmers in their CSP.
Several countries, including Cyprus, the Czech Republic, France, the Netherlands, Portugal and the Slovak
Republic, propose to provide investment support at higher rates as part of an intervention exclusively for
young farmers, while more Member States provide for higher support rates for young farmers as part of a
general investment intervention.
Innovation and knowledge
In 2022, the European Commission presented its final proposals of four new European Partnerships with
particular relevance to farming and food systems: the “Accelerating Farming Systems Transition:
Agroecology living labs and research infrastructures” partnership (EC, 2022[35]), the “Agriculture of Data”
partnership (EC, 2022[36]), the “Animal Health and Welfare” partnership (EC, 2022[37]) and the “Sustainable
Food Systems for People, Planet and Climate” (EC, 2022[38]) partnership. EU partnerships are key
implementation tools of Horizon Europe, the Research and Innovation Framework Programme for 2021-27.
At the country level, France amended its roadmap for innovation, digitalisation and investment in the agro-
food supply chain. Four actions are foreseen: (1) digitalisation of product information for quality and
consumer confidence, (2) development of proteins of the future, including from leguminous plants, by
providing start-up support and additional help, (3) R&D to support the supply chain and enhancement of
the value of ferment banks, and (4) the “Pass Industry” approach to develop solutions to skills needs in
companies.
The Flemish Government (Belgium) dedicated EUR 2 million (USD 2.1 million) to research and
innovation on drought-resistant crops and innovation-driven water efficiency in agriculture and
horticulture. It also made available EUR 2.8 million (USD 2.9 million) for agriculture and horticulture
projects that bring together companies and research centres to tackle water and drought problems, climate
change, sustainable energy and more efficient management of natural resources. France awarded the
National Research Institute for Agriculture, Food and Environment (INRAE) the first public contract since
the establishment of INRAE in 202033 to support research, innovation, expertise in agriculture, food and
environment and improving INRAE’s impacts. Greece decided to support crop restructuring and animal
genetic improvement projects under the National Recovery and Resilience Plan “Greece 2.0”. Ireland,
together with New Zealand, launched a new research initiative for 2022-24. The Joint Research
Mechanism (JRM) will fund collaborate on projects in the areas such as reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions and enhanced carbon sequestration in ruminant, and pasture-based production systems.
In the Netherlands, the educational subsidy vouchers programme Subsidieregeling Agarische
Bedrijfsadvisering en Educatie (SABE) has been extended to allow farmers to apply for knowledge
transfer courses about nature-inclusive farming and precision farming from 2022 onward. For 2021-22,
SABE also subsidised demonstration farms and business plans for sustainable fundamental business
transition of farmer’s operations.
Data and digitalisation
The European Commission has taken further steps in the process of converting the Farm Accountancy
Data Network (FADN) to become a Farm Sustainability Data Network (FSDN). In June 2022, a regulation
amendment  (EC, 2022[39]) was proposed with the aim to reinforce the relevance of the network for policy-
making, research, evaluation and policy analysis. The basic legislative act for the establishment of the
FSDN is projected to enter into force in 2023, with the secondary legislation foreseen to be finalised in
2023 or 2024. The FSDN aims to introduce new environmental and social variables to their data collection.
The first FSDN data set will reflect 2025 data and will be publicly available in 2026 or 2027 (EC, 2022[40]).
In 2022, the European Commission presented two major data-related initiatives in the context of the
European strategy for data: the Data Governance Act (DGA), in force from September 2023, and the Data


 307

Act (EC, 2022[41]) still to be adopted. The DGA promotes sharing of non-open access data in a variety of
sectors, including agriculture, by establishing safeguards and reducing technical barriers to use the data
(European Parliament and European Council, 2022[42]). The Data Act proposes a set of rules to determine
who can use and access data generated via connected devices. For the EU agricultural sector this helps
to address the transfer of data generated by farm machinery to the manufacturer, who could use the
information about the farm’s performance to their advantage (EC, 2022[43]).
Several Member States have introduced new digital tools to support the development and implementation
of their agri-food policies. Belgium has developed an application with the use of geotagged photos to
monitor compliance with CAP direct payments requirements. On 22 September 2022, France launched
the digital platform “Ma cantine” to help collective catering services, such as canteens, achieve the Egalim
law target of 50% sustainable and quality food, including 20% from organic farming.34 Croatia has
implemented two projects aiming at digitising the food donation process and the food waste prevention
system. Poland has created the Agrophage Signalling Platform to provide access to up-to-date plant
protection programmes. In Spain, Digital Farm Notebooks that record on farm practices such as
fertilisation, are expected to come into use in mid-2023 for larger irrigated farms. Finally, Romania and
Poland set up the issuance of electronic phytosanitary certificates to facilitate trade in agricultural products
in July 2022.
To promote the digitalisation of the agricultural sector, Croatia has invested EUR 9.6 million
(USD 10.1 million) for the acquisition of equipment for precision agriculture, software solutions for data
collection, GIS technologies and automatic equipment, and plans further investment in digital public
services under its National Recovery and Resilience Plan 2021-26. Likewise, Greece has included funding
for precision agriculture projects under its 2021-25 Development Sectoral Programme. In Italy, producers
of organic wines and wines with a protected designation of origin or geographical indication (PDO/PGI)
benefited from a contribution to invest in digital systems. Meanwhile, France has presented a roadmap on
“Agriculture and Digitalisation” around seven priorities for French AgriTech and has planned to invest
EUR 3 million (USD 3.1 million) in public support to the digitisation of product information for quality and
consumer confidence through the Numalim platform. In Bulgaria, more than 8% of farms are expected to
receive financial support for introducing digital farming technologies under the new CAP 2023-27.
Tools to monitor the digitisation of the sector have also been developed. In 2022, Spain made progress in
implementing its Digitalisation Observatory, which aims to assess the degree of penetration and adoption
of new technologies in the agro-food sector and the situation of the sector’s digitisation. Six Member States,
the Czech Republic, Finland, Ireland, Latvia, Poland, and Spain, have indicated a national value – or non-
binding target under F2F – for fast broadband in rural areas in their CAP Strategic Plan for 2023-27, as a
contribution to the corresponding Green Deal target. Malta has indicated a target already attained.
Rural Development Policy
In June 2021, the European Commission published its communication, “A long-term vision for the
European Union’s rural areas – Towards stronger, connected, resilient and prosperous rural areas” (EC,
2021[44]) to create a debate on the future of rural areas and the role they have to play in our society. In
January 2022, the European Committee of the Regions (2022[45]) adopted its opinion on the long-term
vision for the European Union’s rural areas, recognising it as a crucial step towards the sustainable
development of rural areas and territorial cohesion but regretted that its publication came after the
conclusion of negotiations on the CAP 2023-27. In March 2022, the European Economic and Social
Committee adopted its opinion (EESC, 2022[46]) on the rural vision: it broadly welcomed the long-term
vision but found it unclear what the implications of the design and content of the Commission’s new CAP
and CSPs for each Member State will be for the long-term vision, and how the Commission should ensure
consistency and added value between the CAP and other policies. On 13 December 2022, the European
Parliament adopted a resolution on the rural vision (EP, 2022[47]), which welcomed the Commission’s


308 

communication on a long-term vision for the European Union’s rural areas and agreed with its general
aims and emphasised that the development of rural areas must remain high on the EU agenda.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Under the Temporary Framework for State aid measures to support the economy in the current COVID-19
outbreak (2020/C 91 I/01) of 19 March 2020, the European Commission allowed Member States to provide
time-bound aid from their own budget to sectors confronting economic difficulties due to the coronavirus
outbreak. The Temporary Framework came into force in March 2020 and its duration was extended until
30 June 2022. Under this umbrella, most EU Member States continued with the implementation of their
COVID-19 pandemic measures expiring in 2022, although some new regimes were established in 2022.
In March 2022, Greece implemented two new state aid measures targeting the vulnerable sectors of
potatoes, mandarins, lavender cultivation, dried figs and table olives, the fur and pig sectors, and
agricultural co-operatives. Also in March 2022, Hungary introduced an aid scheme granting income support
for the rearing of breeding sows. Poland also established new schemes to assist producers of pig sows
and hops producers. In April 2022, Romania adopted an Emergency Ordinance to support the activity of
breeders in the cattle, pig and poultry sectors and in May 2022 it announced support for agri-food entities
in the form of micro-grants and working capital grants. In April 2022, Lithuania provided aid to chicken
broiler producers, while Malta introduced support to recognised swine co-operatives and Luxembourg
notified the third part of an aid scheme directed to the pig sector. In May 2022, Cyprus announced aid to
cheesemakers, after supporting pig, poultry, cow and rabbit farmers. In February 2022, France notified a
new aid scheme to support more than 10 000 pig farmers. Moreover, under its Recovery plan to the
COVID-19 pandemic “France 2030”, France launched in 2022 new calls for applications and measures to
encourage innovation in natural fermentation techniques, protein source diversification, food packaging,
digital technologies and territorial food projects.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
The war in Ukraine accelerated rising food prices and input costs in 2022, such as energy, fertilisers and
animal feed. As stated in the Commission Communication entitled “Safeguarding food security and
reinforcing the resilience of the food systems” (EC, 2022[48]), there was no immediate threat to food security
in the European Union. However, the European Union remains a considerable net-importer of specific
products, such as feed protein, sunflower oil and fertilisers. Hence, the main impact of the war lies in the
increase of costs throughout the food supply chain.
At the European Union level, the main areas of interventions included: CAP flexibilities, exceptional market
measures, direct support to farmers and rural areas, and actions to foster the overall resilience of the
sector. Within this framework, Member States chose which measures to implement, based on their own
specific circumstances. Member States also put in place their own regulatory flexibilities, tax concessions,
investment assistance, and allowances to consumers and farm households to help farmers and agro-food
enterprises cope with the financial impacts. Moreover, as discussed in Chapter 2, the European Union
provided assistance to Ukraine’s agriculture and food security, as well as employment for its citizens.
On CAP flexibilities, in March 2022, the Commission adopted an exceptional and temporary derogation
to allow the production of any crops for food and feed purposes on fallow land, while maintaining the full
level of the greening payment for farmers in 2022 (EC, 2022[49]). This derogation, aimed at enlarging the
European Union’s production capacity, was taken up by several Member States, including Austria, Belgium
(Wallonia), the Czech Republic, France, Germany (partly), Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, and Poland.
Subsequently, in July 2022, the Commission authorised the derogation of the application of Good
Agricultural and Environmental Conditions (GAEC) Standards 7 and 8 required under the CAP 2023-27
(EC, 2022[50]). In practice, farmers could keep producing the same crop on a specific plot of land in 2023


 309

– except for maize and soybeans – and not take the compulsory 3% or 4% of their land35 out of production
for biodiversity purposes until 2024. Almost all Member States used derogations for both GAECs.
To increase the cash flow of farmers, Member States were allowed to increase the advances for direct
payments from 50% to 70% and for certain rural development measures from 75% to 85%. Countries
taking advantage of the direct payment advance include the Czech Republic, Spain and Poland, while
advanced RDP payments were applied in Poland. Farmers started receiving these advances from mid-
October.
On exceptional market measures, in April 2022, the European Commission granted private storage aid
for pig meat (EC, 2022[51]). The scheme provides financial support to cover part of the cost of storing
pig meat withdrawn from the market for a period of between two and five months. This flexibility was
intended to alleviate the prolonged economic difficulties of the European pork sector by limiting the
available pig meat supply and thus rebalancing the market.36 The EC regulation argues that Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine has created additional market disturbance and caused a sharp drop of export demand
for certain pig meat products.
Member States also introduced regulatory flexibilities at the national level to allow certain products to
remain on the market. Belgium introduced temporary packaging and labelling exception measures to make
it easier for food producers to replace ingredients affected by supply shortages. Italy put in place
derogations in the wine production regarding the percentage of grapes harvested outside the Protected
Denomination of Origin (PDO) or the Protected Geographical Indication (PGI) areas.
In March 2022, a support package of up to EUR 500 million (USD 526 million) was made available to
Member States to provide direct support to agricultural producers most affected by the war in Ukraine (EC,
2022[52]). This funding included EUR 350 million (USD 368 million) from the crisis reserve under the CAP,
which had never been used before. Member States could supplement this funding with national aid up to
a maximum of 200% of the amount set out for each country (Table 12.6). This prioritised farmers who
engage in environmentally sustainable practices. Member States distributed these direct payments either
among all farmers, as in the case of Denmark, or more often to producers of targeted crops or animal
products (or both), including but not limited to, poultry, dairy, pig meat, greenhouse crops and horticulture.
Table 12.6. Exceptional adjustment aid to agricultural producers available to EU Member States
Member State
EU envelope
(EUR)
Sectors
All agricultural
sectors
Livestock
Beef
Dairy
Eggs
Pig meat
Poultry
Rabbit meat
Sheep and/or goat
(milk and/or meat)
Fruits and
vegetables
Hops
Live flowers and
ornamental foliage
Wine
Austria
8 998 887









x



Belgium
6 268 410




x
x
x

x
x

x

Bulgaria
10 611 143





x
x


x


x
Croatia
5 354 710



x
x
x
x






Cyprus
632 153





x







Czech Republic
11 249 937



x

x
x


x



Denmark
10 389 359
x












Estonia
2 571 111



x

x


x




Finland
6 872 674





x
x


x



France
89 330 157

x











Germany
60 059 869





x
x


x
x

x
Greece
26 298 105









x





310 

Member State
EU envelope
(EUR)
Sectors
All agricultural
sectors
Livestock
Beef
Dairy
Eggs
Pig meat
Poultry
Rabbit meat
Sheep and/or goat
(milk and/or meat)
Fruits and
vegetables
Hops
Live flowers and
ornamental foliage
Wine
Hungary
16 939 316





x
x






Ireland
15 754 693





x



x



Italy
48 116 688


x
x









Latvia
4 235 161





x
x


x



Lithuania
7 682 787




x
x
x






Luxembourg
443 570
x












Malta
69 059









x



Netherlands
8 097 139





x
x






Poland
44 844 365





x



x



Portugal
9 105 131


x
x
x
x
x






Romania
25 490 649





x
x


x


x
Slovak Republic
5 239 169



x

x


x




Slovenia
1 746 390



x









Spain
64 490 253


x



x
x
x
x



Sweden
9 109 115



x


x






Total
500 000 000













Source: Authors’ representation based on EC (2022[52]; 2022[53]).
A new rural development measure (Measure 22) was introduced in June 2022 to ensure the continuity of
business activities in response to the impact of the war in Ukraine (European Parliament and European
Council, 2022[54]). A one-off lump sum is provided to farmers and for small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs) active in processing, marketing or development of agricultural products. Member States providing
this support had to include the measure in the rural development programmes via a programme
modification. The payment is financed by EAFRD appropriations under the 2023 budget, offset by a
corresponding reduction in payments in subsequent years (EU Monitor, 2022[55]). For instance, Croatia
decided to provide EUR 31.7 million (USD 33.3 million) to agricultural holdings with an economic size of
more than EUR 3 000 (USD 3 155) that implement agri-environmental climate measures or are
beneficiaries of support for organic production. These farms are awarded payment between EUR 1 000 to
EUR 15 000 (USD 1 052 to USD 15 775). Processors of organic products can receive support of
EUR 3 000 to EUR 25 000 (USD 3 155 to USD 26 291) depending on the reduction in their incomes in
2022 compared to 2021. Greece, Bulgaria and Poland have also made use of this measure to support
Greek livestock farmers, such as goat, sheep, cattle, poultry and pig breeders, Bulgarian small and
medium-sized enterprises in the cereals, oilseeds, medicinal and essential oil crops, potatoes, dairy
products, honey, fruit and vegetables sectors, and Polish pig farmers, respectively.
The third direct support measure was a new self-standing Temporary Crisis Framework (TCF) allowing
Member States to use state aid flexibilities to cushion the economic impact of the war in Ukraine, adopted
in March 2022 and originally due to expire in December (EC, 2022[56]). In the face of the continued war,
the Commission prolonged and amended the Temporary Crisis Framework three times, with the latest
changes and the creation of the new Temporary Crisis and Transition Framework (TCTF) adopted in
March 2023. Successive frameworks allow financial assistance from national budgets to farmers affected
by significant increases in input costs and for energy-intensive undertakings such as fertiliser production.
Member States can grant liquidity support, including State guarantees and subsidised loans, and aid for
increased gas and electricity prices. The temporary support can be also provided to facilitate the rollout of


 311

renewable energy and decarbonisation of the industrial processes. While measures to mitigate impacts of
the war in Ukraine should be phased out by the end of 2023, the aid for fostering transition towards a net-
zero economy is planned to be available for an additional two years.
Under the TCF (and TCTF), most Member States granted subsidies or direct payments to mitigate the
impact of increased input prices. For instance, Austria introduced the electricity cost subsidy, which is
provided to all farms as a lump-sum payment per area or number of animals. Particularly energy-intensive
businesses can apply in a second stage for a subsidy based on their actual electricity consumption, taking
into account the deduction of the flat-rate grant awarded in the first stage. France proposed a subsidy for
agricultural and agro-food businesses for which electricity or gas exceeded 3% of turnover in 2021 and
which faced a doubling of gas or electricity prices compared to 2021. It also allocated EUR 400 million
(USD 421 million) to support breeders heavily dependent on animal feed. In December 2022, Croatia
adopted energy support measures, worth over EUR 26.5 million (USD 27.9 million), for processors of
agricultural commodities. Further measures for alleviating input price rises were taken by Greece, Poland,
and Spain, which provided support for the purchase of fertilisers. While in the case of Greece the level of
support was around 11% of fertiliser purchases, in the latter countries it was granted in the form of
payments per hectare. Ireland provided a EUR 56 million (USD 59 million) Fodder Support Scheme to
grow sufficient grass and conserve fodder for the winter in the form of a direct payment for up to a maximum
of 10 hectares. Latvia provided assistance to producers of selected agricultural products to partially (70%)
offset the increase in expenses on feed (pig and poultry sector), fertilisers (selected vegetables sector),
diesel, electricity and heating in the period from July to October 2022 (compared to the same period of
2021). To cope with rising input and electricity costs, Sweden introduced a EUR 154 million
(USD 162 million) state-aid scheme, providing direct payments per farmed animal and per heated square
metre of greenhouse used for the production of fruits, berries, vegetables, mushrooms, sprouts, spices or
ornamental plants.
Within the TCF and TCTF, a number of Member States have also introduced specific financial measures
for the agro-food sector. The Czech Republic provided EUR 10 million (USD 10.5 million) in direct
payments to reduce the outstanding principal of operating loans to SMEs active in food production.
Hungary, Italy, the Netherlands and Estonia opted to provide aid in the form of guarantees on loans.
EUR 226 million (USD 238 million) was available to support Hungarian SMEs active in agriculture, food
production and the bioeconomy, EUR 180 million (USD 189 million) to support Italian SMEs in the
agriculture, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture sectors, EUR 70 million (USD 74 million) to support Dutch
SMEs in the field of greenhouse production and horticulture, and EUR 15 million (USD 15.8 million) to
support Estonian primary producers of agricultural products, fisheries and aquaculture operators.
Several EU Member States complemented their intervention by implementing tax measures to mitigate the
rise in agricultural input prices. Some of these measures had been introduced earlier to cope with high
inflation and were extended in the wake of the crisis caused by Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine.
Austria, the Czech Republic, Estonia and Luxembourg granted a flat-rate tax allowance of EUR 0.06 to
EUR 0.08 per litre (USD 0.06 to USD 0.08) for diesel used for agricultural purposes. Poland increased the
limits for the reimbursement of excise duty on the consumption of diesel used for farm work from 100 litres
to 110 litres per hectare of utilised agricultural area and from 30 litres to 40 litres per annual average
livestock unit (cattle). Italy put in place a tax credit for the purchase of fuel for agricultural activities.
Temporary reductions in VAT rates were also implemented for other affected agricultural inputs, such as
fertilisers, animal feed and plant protection products, as for instance in Greece, Portugal, and Poland.
Other tax flexibilities were also reported: Spain established exceptional income tax reductions for the
purchase of fertilisers, France granted social contribution rebates for farms facing significant higher costs
and Italy postponed the deadline for payment of tax and administrative duties for young farmers.
On consumer policies, some Member States, such as Croatia, intervened in the retail prices of certain
basic foodstuffs, and others, such as Poland and Spain, temporarily reduced VAT on selected food


312 

products. The Czech Republic increased the budget to support the operation of food banks. Portugal
provided an additional EUR 60 (USD 63) for the most vulnerable households.
On resilience of the sector, starting in March, the expert group on the European Food Security Crisis
preparedness and response Mechanism (EFSCM)37 met eleven times in 2022 with the aim to ensure a
better flow of information throughout the food supply chain, co-ordinate responses at all levels and identify
priorities. The work of the EFSCM continues in 2023, with the mapping of risks and vulnerabilities expected
to be completed in the last quarter of the year.
Under the EFSCM, in December 2022, the Commission launched a dashboard on food security in the
European Union. The dashboard presents a wide range of indicators affecting food supply and food
security in the European Union, such as weather and drought events, freight and energy costs,
development of animal diseases and possible trade restrictions, as well data on self-sufficiency rates of
the most significant agricultural commodities, import dependency for these commodities and for fertilisers;
and monthly rates of food inflation (EC, 2022[57]). Additionally, a dashboard on the “Impact of Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine on selected agricultural sectors” was developed and is constantly updated.
In addition to initiatives at EU level, national governments continued to strengthen their preparedness in
various ways. France elaborated its resilience plan for agriculture. Denmark revised its contingency plans.
Member States have been also monitoring market mechanisms and security of food supply. Finland
committed additional resources to reinforce the information systems of the Finnish Food Authority. Portugal
created the Price Observatory “National is Sustainable” to monitor the impact of market disruptions on
consumer prices.
EU Member States have also been promoting investments contributing to the green transition of the sector,
including by making farms more energy self-sufficient. For instance, Finland provided aid for on farm
investment in renewable energy and biofuels. It also introduced investment support, e.g. in advanced
processing techniques for biogas digestates; in nutrient recycling and carbon sequestration; as well as in
the start-up of the production of fertilising products when the starting material for production is manure or
waste from biogas plants. Italy approved further measures for agricultural and agro-food companies to
increase the production capacity of electricity from renewable sources. Portugal introduced subsidies for
the installation of photovoltaic panels.
In its Communication on “Ensuring availability and affordability of fertilisers” of 9 November 2022, the
Commission outlined the various actions available to help farmers to optimise their fertiliser use and reduce
their dependency while safeguarding yields (EC, 2022[58]). In the area of research and innovation, Horizon
Europe continues to invest, among others, in projects aiming to substitute the use of synthetic fertilisers.
Also, the European Innovation Partnership for Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability (EIP-AGRI)
supports operational projects across Europe, e.g. on improving nitrogen efficiency (Germany), developing
the production process of bio-fertilisers (Italy), integrating cover crops into the field crop rotation (Slovenia)
(EC, 2022[59]).
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
The European Union’s trade policy plays an important role in supporting the European agricultural sector,
through the use of a number of measures. On 22 June 2022, the Commission presented a communication
on “The power of trade partnerships: together for green and just economic growth” (EC, 2022[60]), to further
strengthen the implementation and enforcement of Trade and Sustainable Development chapters of the
EU’s trade agreements.
In June 2022, the Commission also published a report entitled “Application of EU health and environmental
standards to imported agricultural and agri-food products”  (EC, 2022[61]). The conclusion was that: there
is some scope to extend EU production standards to imported products provided this is done in full respect
of the relevant WTO rules; and it is essential to make a case-by-case assessment before applying


 313

production standards to imports. This report assessed the legal and technical feasibility of doing this via
multilateral, bilateral or autonomous instruments the constraints that apply, and the wide range of areas
where the European Union has already extended to imported products its domestic production standards.
The prohibition on the import of beef produced with growth hormones is an early example of the application
of reciprocity measures to imported agricultural products and, more recently, the European Union has
stated that it will not permit the import of meat where antibiotics have been used for growth promotion.
Trade agreements
On 30 June 2022, the European Union and New Zealand concluded negotiations for a trade
agreement (EC, 2022[62]). For the first time ever in an EU trade agreement, the deal has a dedicated
sustainable food systems chapter38 covering: closer co-operation on animal welfare standards; initiatives
to phase out the use of antimicrobial agents as growth promoters and to reduce the use of antimicrobial
agents in animal production; and co-operation on food loss and waste, pesticides and fertilisers, and on
the security and resilience of food supply chains.
On 9 December 2022, the European Union and Chile announced the finalisation of their modernised
Association Agreement (EC, 2022[63]), which, regarding agro-food trade, includes a chapter on Sustainable
Food Systems, with the goal of building more sustainable and resilient food supply chains, and a dedicated
Trade and Gender chapter.
On 11 October 2022, the Commission published its annual Report on Implementation and Enforcement
of EU Trade Agreements (EC, 2022[64]). According to this report, EU agro-food trade with the
74 preferential partners grew by 4.7% in 2021, thus more modestly than agro-food trade between the
European Union and all trading partners (which grew by 7.2%). On the other hand, the inclusion of the
United Kingdom among the European Union’s preferential partners also led to an increase in the European
Union’s trade surplus with preferential partners in goods, which grew from EUR 124 billion
(USD 141 billion) in 2020 to EUR 208 billion (USD 246 billion) in 2021, albeit on a much-reduced level of
trade because of COVID-19. Around 20% of the surplus with preferential partners can be attributed to
agro-food.
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
In May 2022, the European Parliament and the Council (2022[65]) suspended for one year import duties on
all Ukrainian exports to the European Union and granted Ukraine zero tariff, zero quota access to the EU
market. This step was designed to help boost Ukraine’s exports to the European Union and to help to
alleviate the difficult situation of Ukrainian producers and exporters in the face of Russia’s military invasion.
Also in May 2022, as part of the European Union’s solidarity response with Ukraine, the Commission
presented a set of actions to help Ukraine export its agricultural produce (EC, 2022[66]). Following Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine and its blockade of Ukrainian ports, Ukrainian grain and other agricultural goods could
no longer reach their destinations. The situation was threatening global food security and there was an
urgent need to establish alternative logistics routes using all relevant transport modes. Based on an action
plan set out by the Commission, the European Union established “EU-Ukraine Solidarity Lanes” to ensure
Ukraine can export grain, but also import needed goods such as animal feed and fertilisers. The export of
Ukrainian commodities was resumed first via road, rail and inland water ways through neighbouring
countries thanks to the Solidarity Lines, and then from August 2022 via maritime routes thanks to the Black
Sea Grain Initiative. 39
The implementation of measures facilitating the imports of Ukrainian agricultural produces into the
European Union resulted in part of the cereals intended for transit being marketed in neighbouring
countries. The price of cereals and farmers’ incomes in these Member States were affected. In this context,
in March 2023, the European Commission approved further schemes supporting the wheat and maize


314 

producers (EC, 2023[67]) under the State aid Temporary Crisis and Transition Framework (discussed in the
section above). On 15 April 2023, Poland unilaterally introduced a temporary complete import ban on a
range of agricultural products from Ukraine (Minister of Development and Technology, 2023[68]). The transit
ban was lifted six days later (Minister of Development and Technology, 2023[69]; Minister of Finance,
2023[70]). Similar import restrictions on imports from Ukraine were announced by Hungary (15 April), the
Slovak Republic (17 April) and Bulgaria (19 April), two of which also border Ukraine. As of 30 April 2023,
negotiations are ongoing between these Member States, Romania, and the European Commission on
additional support measures for affected agricultural producers.
On 9 November 2022, the European Commission presented the Communication on “Ensuring availability
and affordability of fertilisers” (EC, 2022[59]) highlighting the need to diversify the supply sources of
fertilisers and intermediate products. The European Commission has reached out to alternative suppliers
of fertilisers to compensate for shortfalls from Russia and Belarus.40 On 12 December 2022, an
amendment to the regulation was announced suspending until 17 June 2023 tariffs on inputs used for the
production of nitrogen fertilisers for all countries except Russia and Belarus (EC, 2022[71]; European
Council, 2023[72]). The objective of this amendment was to increase the stability and diversification of
supply, thereby alleviating costs for EU fertiliser producers and EU farmers.
Specific temporary flexibilities to existing import requirements on animal feed were adopted to contribute
to alleviating the pressure on the feed market. Regulatory flexibilities were also implemented to facilitate
the import of certain agricultural inputs. As an example, Spain relaxed the Maximum Residue Limits (MRLs)
for pesticides in maize destined exclusively for animal feed imported from Brazil or Argentina for the period
between March and September 2022.
Contextual information
The European Union is the largest economic region covered in this report, accounting for 18% of the
economic activity of all countries covered herein. Although the contribution of agriculture to both GDP and
employment has declined since 2000, the share of agriculture in the region’s exports has increased by
approximately 50% during this period (Table 12.7). More than 40% of the region’s landmass is dedicated
to agriculture, of which nearly 60% is dedicated to arable land use. Crops (including cereals, oilseeds,
fresh fruit and vegetables, and plants and flowers) predominate in agricultural output, accounting for 61%
of total production, although large differences exist across Member States. Livestock products – including
dairy, beef and veal, pig meat, sheep meat, poultry and eggs – account for the remainder.




 315

Table 12.7. European Union: Contextual indicators

European Union
International comparison

2000* (EU15)
2021* (EU27)
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
9 933
21 901
24.8%
17.8%
Population (million)
378
447
8.8%
8.5%
Land area (thousand km2)
3 124
3 996
3.8%
4.8%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
140 395
163 962
4.7%
5.6%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
114
106
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
26 302
48 900
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
10.9
15.5
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
2.2
1.6
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
4.3
3.8
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
6.0
8.9
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.8
5.9
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
54
61
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
46
39
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
52
58
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Real GDP in the region rebounded strongly in 2021 after the contraction of economic activity due to the
fallout of the COVID-19 emergency in the previous year. Prior to 2020, GDP growth had been positive
since 2013 (Figure 12.5). A sharp rise in inflation under the pressure of energy, food and other commodity
prices hit the European Union economy in 2021-22. Geographical proximity to war and dependence on
imports of fossil fuels make the European Union one of the most exposed economies in this respect. The
unemployment rate returned in 2022 to pre-covid level (6%).


316 

Figure 12.5. European Union: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Note: EU28 for 2000-19 and EU27 (excluding the United Kingdom) from 2020.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
The European Union has been the world’s largest agro-food exporter since 2013, and remains one of the
largest importers as well (Figure 12.6). The region is a net food exporter, with agro-food products
accounting for 8.9% of all EU exports and 5.9% of all EU imports. The region’s agro-food exports are
overwhelmingly composed of processed goods for final consumption (61%), while imports are more evenly
distributed among the four categories shown in Figure 12.6, with processed goods for final consumption
accounting for the largest share of imports (26%).


 317

Figure 12.6. European Union: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding. Extra-EU trade: EU15 for 2000-2003; EU25 for 2004-06; EU27 for 2007-13, EU28 for
2014-19 and EU27 (excluding the United Kingdom) from 2020. The exclusion of the United Kingdom contributed to the rise of EU export since
2020.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
At 0.66%, agricultural output growth in the European Union over the period 2011-20 was significantly below
the world average of 1.9% (Figure 12.7). Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth was also below the world
European Union - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
50
100
150
200
250
European Union - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
14
14
26
26
14
14
27
27
61
61
25
25
11
11
22
22
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


318 

average over the period at 1.04% on average, but it was still sufficient to more than offset the impact of
reduced primary factor input use, including labour, land, livestock and machinery, on agricultural output.
The moderate TFP growth has been achieved in the sector along with a reduction of certain environmental
pressures, as illustrated through various environmental indicators (Table 12.8). From 2000 to 2021, the
region’s nitrogen balance fell by more than 35%, the phosphorous balance declined by nearly 80%, while
the share of agriculture in water abstractions fell by 13 percentage points. At the same time, although the
European Union has achieved reductions in these indicators, some still remain high by comparison. For
example, the region’s nitrogen balance is nearly 50% higher than the OECD average, with some Member
States with nitrogen surpluses more than three times above the EU average. While the region achieved
improvements in most environmental indicators, agriculture’s GHG emissions as a proportion of total
European Union GHG emissions increased over the period, from 8.8% in 2000 to 11.6% in 2021.
Figure 12.7. European Union: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: EU27. Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and
fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.


European Union - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
1.04%
1.04%
1.12%
1.12%
-0.61%
-0.61%
0.35%
0.35%
0.23%
0.23%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
European Union
World
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%


 319

Table 12.8. European Union: Productivity and environmental indicators

European Union
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.1%
1.0%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000* (EU15)
2021* (EU27)
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
68.4
44.0
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
7.3
1.5
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.0
2.9
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
8.8
11.6
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
..
..
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)1
41.7
28.4
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
..
..
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year. EU27 for TFP annual growth rate. 1. Due to the data availability, the EU15 aggregate does not include
Austria, Germany, Ireland, Italy and the United Kingdom; while the EU27 aggregate does not include Austria, Croatia, Finland, Hungary, Ireland
and Italy.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.

References

EC (2023), Approved 28 CAP Strategic Plans (2023-2027). Summary overview for 27 Member
States Facts and figures, European Commission, Brussels,
https://agriculture.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2023-06/approved-28-cap-strategic-plans-2023-
27.pdf (accessed on 13 July 2023).
[18]
EC (2023), Daily News 27 / 03 / 2023,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/MEX_23_1924 (accessed on
19 April 2023).
[67]
EC (2023), EU Mission: Adaptation to Climate Change, https://research-and-
innovation.ec.europa.eu/funding/funding-opportunities/funding-programmes-and-open-
calls/horizon-europe/eu-missions-horizon-europe/adaptation-climate-change_en#what-are-
the-eu-missions (accessed on 10 March 2023).
[19]
EC (2022), A European Strategy for data, https://digital-
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/strategy-data.
[41]
EC (2022), Application of EU Health and Environmental Standards to Imported Agricultural and
Agri-Food Products, European Commission, Bruxelles.
[61]
EC (2022), Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/467 of 23 March 2022 providing for
exceptional adjustment aid to producers in the agricultural sectors.
[52]
EC (2022), Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2022/484 of 23 March 2022 providing for
derogations as regards the implementation of certain conditions relating to the greening
payment for claim year 2022.
[49]


320 

EC (2022), Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1317 of 27 July 2022 providing for
derogations as regards the application of the standards for good agricultural and
environmental conditions of land (GAEC standards) 7 and 8 for claim year 2023.
[50]
EC (2022), Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/470 of 23 March 2022 granting aid
for private storage for pigmeat and fixing the amount of aid in advance.
[51]
EC (2022), Commission to establish Solidarity Lanes to help Ukraine export agricultural goods,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_3002 (accessed on
23 March 2023).
[66]
EC (2022), Common agricultural policy for 2023-2027. 28 CAP strategic plans at a glance,
European Commission, Brussels, https://agriculture.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022-12/csp-
at-a-glance-eu-countries_en.pdf (accessed on 21 March 2023).
[21]
EC (2022), Draft proposal for a European Partnership under Horizon Europe Sustainable Food
Systems for People, Planet & Climate; 11th April 2022, https://research-and-
innovation.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022-04/ec_rtd_he-partnership-sustainable-food-
systems-april_2022.pdf.
[38]
EC (2022), Draft proposal for a European Partnership under Horizon Europe: Accelerating
farming systems transition: agroecology living labs and research infrastructures; Version
30.03.2022, https://research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022-
04/european_partnership_for_accelerating_farming_systems_transition_march_2022.pdf.
[35]
EC (2022), Ensuring availability and affordability of fertilisers,
https://agriculture.ec.europa.eu/common-agricultural-policy/agri-food-supply-chain/ensuring-
availability-and-affordability-fertilisers_en (accessed on 17 April 2023).
[59]
EC (2022), Ensuring availability and affordability of fertilisers, COM/2022/590 final of 09
November 2022.
[58]
EC (2022), EU Biodiversity Strategy Actions Tracker, https://dopa.jrc.ec.europa.eu/kcbd/actions-
tracker/.
[74]
EC (2022), EU-Chile Joint Communiqué on the Advanced Framework Agreement,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/statement_22_7603 (accessed on
23 March 2023).
[63]
EC (2022), EU-New Zealand Trade Agreement: Unlocking sustainable economic growth,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_4158 (accessed on
23 March 2023).
[62]
EC (2022), European Green Deal: Commission proposes certification of carbon removals to help
reach net zero emissions, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_7156
(accessed on 23 March 2023).
[29]
EC (2022), European Partnerships under Horizon Europe Partnership on Animal Health and
Welfare (PAHW) Version v6.4 Save date 27 April 2022, https://research-and-
innovation.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022-04/ec_rtd_he-partnership-pahw.pdf.
[37]
EC (2022), Exceptional adjustment aid to producers in the agricultural sectors (Commission
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/467), (accessed on 3 March 2023).
[53]


 321

EC (2022), Farm Sustainability Data Network state of play. FSDN Stakeholder workshop.
[40]
EC (2022), Geographical indications and quality schemes explained,
https://agriculture.ec.europa.eu/farming/geographical-indications-and-quality-
schemes/geographical-indications-and-quality-schemes-explained_en#documents (accessed
on 23 March 2023).
[33]
EC (2022), Green Deal: Modernising EU industrial emissions rules to steer large industry in long-
term green transition, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_2238
(accessed on 22 March 2023).
[27]
EC (2022), Green Deal: pioneering proposals to restore Europe’s nature by 2050 and halve
pesticide use by 2030.
[28]
EC (2022), Horizon Europe Partnership “Agriculture of Data” – Updated partnership proposal,
March 2022, https://research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022-04/ec_rtd_he-
partnership-agriculture-data.pdf.
[36]
EC (2022), Implementation and enforcement of EU trade agreements, European Commission,
Brussels, https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/documents-
register/detail?ref=COM(2022)730&lang=en (accessed on 23 March 2023).
[64]
EC (2022), Joint Declaration - 1 billion euro mobilised for Solidarity Lanes,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/statement_22_6825 (accessed on
19 April 2023).
[78]
EC (2022), Nutrients: Commission seeks views on better management,
https://environment.ec.europa.eu/news/nutrients-commission-seeks-views-better-
management-2022-06-03_en (accessed on 23 March 2023).
[31]
EC (2022), Proposal for a Council Regulation amending Annex I to Regulation (EEC) No
2658/87 on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff.
COM(2022)359, European Commission, Brussels,
https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/documents-register/detail?ref=COM(2022)359&lang=en
(accessed on 18 April 2023).
[71]
EC (2022), Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council Amending
Council Regulation (EC) No 1217/2009 as Regards Conversion of the Farm Accountancy
Data Network into a Farm Sustainability Data Network. COM(2022) 296, European
Commission, Brussels.
[39]
EC (2022), Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on
harmonised rules on fair access to and use of data (Data Act), No. COM(2022) 68 final.
[43]
EC (2022), Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the
sustainable use of plant protection products and amending Regulation (EU) 2021/2115,
European Commission, Brussels, https://food.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022-
06/pesticides_sud_eval_2022_reg_2022-305_en.pdf (accessed on 23 March 2023).
[32]
EC (2022), Proposed CAP Strategic Plans and Commission observations, European
Commission, Brussels, https://agriculture.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022-07/csp-overview-
28-plans-overview-june-2022_en.pdf (accessed on 21 March 2023).
[20]


322 

EC (2022), Safeguarding food security and reinforcing the resilience of food systems,
COM/2022/133 final of 23 March 2022.
[48]
EC (2022), Summary report on the implementation of direct payments [except greening] Claim
year 2020, https://agriculture.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2023-01/summary-report-
implementation-direct-payements-claim-2020.pdf (accessed on 1 February 2023).
[10]
EC (2022), Temporary Crisis Framework for State Aid measures to support the economy
following the aggression against Ukraine by Russia, 2022/C 131 I/01 of 24 March 2022..
[56]
EC (2022), The European Commission launches dashboard on food security in the EU,
https://agriculture.ec.europa.eu/news/european-commission-launches-dashboard-food-
security-eu-2022-12-08_en (accessed on 17 April 2023).
[57]
EC (2022), The power of trade partnerships: together for green and just economic growth.
COM(2022) 409 final, European Commission, Brussels, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52022DC0409&from=EN (accessed on 4 April 2023).
[60]
EC (2021), Contingency plan for ensuring food supply and food security in times of crisis,
COM/2021/689 final of 12 November 2021.
[75]
EC (2021), Direct payments 2015-2020 decisions taken by Member States: State of play as from
June 2021, https://agriculture.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2021-07/simplementation-decisions-
ms-2021_en_0.pdf (accessed on 1 February 2023).
[12]
EC (2021), Forging a climate-resilient Europe - the new EU Strategy on Adaptation to Climate
Change. COM(2021) 82 final, European Commission, Brussels.
[14]
EC (2021), Long-term vision for rural areas: for stronger, connected, resilient, prosperous EU
rural areas, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_21_3162 (accessed on
5 May 2023).
[44]
EC (2021), The new common agricultural policy: 2023-27 | European Commission,
https://ec.europa.eu/info/food-farming-fisheries/key-policies/common-agricultural-policy/new-
cap-2023-27_en#legalbases (accessed on 17 March 2022).
[22]
EC (2021), Trade Policy Review. An Open, Sustainable and Assertive Trade Policy,
https://doi.org/10.2781/862105.
[82]
EC (2020), Recommendations to the Member States as Regards Their Strategic Plan for the
Common Agricultural Policy. COM(2020) 846, European Commission, Brussels.
[23]
EC (2020), Reinforcing Europe’s resilience: halting biodiversity loss and building a healthy and
sustainable food system, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_884
(accessed on 23 March 2023).
[30]
EC (2019), A European Green Deal | European Commission,
https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en (accessed on
6 February 2022).
[25]
EC (2019), The European Green Deal. COM(2019) 640, European Commission, Bruxelles,
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/resource.html?uri=cellar:b828d165-1c22-11ea-8c1f-
01aa75ed71a1.0002.02/DOC_1&format=PDF (accessed on 16 May 2022).
[26]


 323

EC (2017), “The Small Farmers Scheme, European Commission Directorate-General for
Agriculture and Rural Development, Brussels”,
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/food-farming-
fisheries/key_policies/documents/small-farmers-scheme_en.pdf (accessed on 26 April 2022).
[80]
EC (2015), Good Agricultural and Environmental Conditions (GAEC),
https://marswiki.jrc.ec.europa.eu/wikicap/index.php/Good_Agricultural_and_Environmental_C
onditions_%28GAEC%29 (accessed on 16 May 2023).
[81]
EC (2013), An EU Strategy on adaptation to climate change. COM(2013) 216 final, European
Commission, Brussels.
[15]
EC (n.d.), Beef: Information on the role of market measures, market monitoring, and the legal
bases for the beef sector, European Commission, Brussels, https://ec.europa.eu/info/food-
farming-fisheries/animals-and-animal-products/animal-products/beef_en (accessed on
26 April 2022).
[79]
EC and EEA (2023), Climate-ADAPT. Sharing adaptation knowledge for a climate-resilient
Europe, https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/ (accessed on 10 March 2023).
[16]
EEA (2019), Climate change adaptation in the agriculture sector in Europe, European
Environment Agency, Copenhagen, https://doi.org/10.2800/537176.
[13]
EESC (2022), EESC opinion: EU Long-term vision for rural areas,
https://www.eesc.europa.eu/en/our-work/opinions-information-reports/opinions/eu-long-term-
vision-rural-areas (accessed on 23 March 2023).
[46]
ENRD (2016), “Focus Area 2B: Entry of skilled farmers into the agricultural sector”,
https://enrd.ec.europa.eu/sites/enrd/files/focusarea- summary_2b.pdf (accessed on
5 February 2022).
[11]
EP (2022), Commission implementing regulation (EU) 2022/1475 of 6 September 2022 laying
down detailed rules for implementation of Regulation (EU) 2021/2115, European
Commission, Brussels, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32022R1475&from=EN (accessed on 22 March 2023).
[24]
EP (2022), European Parliament resolution of 13 December 2022 on a long-term vision for the
EU’s rural areas – Towards stronger, connected, resilient and prosperous rural areas by
2040, European Parliament, Brussels, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/TA-9-
2022-0436_EN.html (accessed on 23 March 2023).
[47]
EP (2022), Financing of the CAP. Fact Sheets on the European Union, Fact Sheets on the
European Union, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/106/financing-of-the-
cap (accessed on 18 October 2022).
[6]
EP (2022), First pillar of the common agricultural policy (CAP): II – Direct payments to farmers,
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/109/first-pillar-of-the-common-
agricultural-policy-cap-ii-direct-payments-to-farmers (accessed on 24 March 2023).
[8]
EP (2021), Regulation (EU) 2021/2115 of the European Parliament and of the Council,
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32021R2115&from=EN
(accessed on 24 March 2022).
[73]


324 

EU Monitor (2022), Explanatory Memorandum to COM(2022)242 as regards a measure to
provide temporary support under the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development
(EAFRD),
https://www.eumonitor.eu/9353000/1/j4nvhdfdk3hydzq_j9vvik7m1c3gyxp/vlt3gmej6rfi
(accessed on 17 April 2023).
[55]
European Commission (2019), Statement of estimates of the European Commission for the
financial year 2020, European Commission, Brussels,
https://commission.europa.eu/system/files/2019-06/draft-budget-2020-wd-13-web-
1.4_soe.pdf (accessed on 4 January 2023).
[17]
European Committee of the Regions (2022), Opinion Factsheet. A Long-term vision for the EU’s
rural areas.
[45]
European Council (2023), Council Regulation (EU) 2022/2465 of 12 December 2022, https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32022R2465.
[72]
European Parliament (2021), Financing of the CAP, European Parliament,
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/106/financing-of-the-cap.
[4]
European Parliament (2021), The Common Agricultural Policy - Instruments and Reforms,
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/107/the-common-agricultural-policy-
instruments-and-reforms.
[5]
European Parliament (2021), The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) and the Treaty, European
Parliament, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/103/the-common-
agricultural-policy-cap-and-the-treaty.
[2]
European Parliament and European Council (2022), Regulation (EU) 2022/1033 of 29 June 2022
on a specific measure to provide exceptional temporary support under the European
Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) in response to the impact of Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine.
[54]
European Parliament and European Council (2022), Regulation (EU) 2022/868 of 30 May 2022
on European data governance and amending Regulation (EU) 2018/1724 (Data Governance
Act), OJ L152/1.
[42]
European Parliament and European Council (2022), Regulation (EU) 2022/870 of 30 May 2022
on temporary trade-liberalisation measures supplementing trade concessions applicable to
Ukrainian products under the Association Agreement.
[65]
European Parliament and European Council (2020), Regulation (EU) 2020/872 on a specific
measure to provide exceptional temporary support under the European Agricultural Fund for
Rural Development (EAFRD) in response to the COVID-19 outbreak.
[76]
Grant, W. (2020), “The Common Agricultural Policy: An Overview”, EuropeNow 37,
https://www.europenowjournal.org/2020/11/09/the-common-agricultural-policy-an-overview/.
[3]
Minister of Development and Technology (2023), Regulation on the ban on the import of
agricultural products from Ukraine of 15 April 2023 (Dz.U. 2023 poz. 717; in Polish),
https://isap.sejm.gov.pl/isap.nsf/DocDetails.xsp?id=WDU20230000717.
[68]


 325

Minister of Development and Technology (2023), Regulation on the ban on the import of
agricultural products from Ukraine of 21 April 2023 (Dz.U. 2023 poz. 751; in Polish),
https://isap.sejm.gov.pl/isap.nsf/DocDetails.xsp?id=WDU20230000751.
[69]
Minister of Finance (2023), Regulation amending the Regulation on goods, the carriage of which
is covered by (Dz.U. 2023 poz. 750; in Polish),
https://isap.sejm.gov.pl/isap.nsf/DocDetails.xsp?id=WDU20230000750.
[70]
Ministère de l’Agriculture et de la Souveraineté Aimentaire (2022), A proposes de la loi EGalim,
https://ma-cantine.agriculture.gouv.fr/mesures-phares/qualite-des-produits/.
[77]
OECD (2023), Policies for the Future of Farming and Food in the European Union, OECD
Agriculture and Food Policy Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/32810cf6-en.
[9]
OECD (2022), Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2022: Reforming Agricultural
Policies for Climate Change Mitigation, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/7f4542bf-en.
[34]
OECD (2017), Evaluation of Agricultural Policy Reforms in the European Union: The Common
Agricultural Policy 2014-20, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264278783-
en.
[7]
OECD (2011), Evaluation of Agricultural Policy Reforms in the European Union, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264112124-en.
[1]


Notes

1 For 2020, estimates include the United Kingdom. Although the United Kingdom withdrew from the
European Union on 31 January 2020, the UK budget for agricultural expenditures in 2020 continued to be
sourced largely from the European Commission, and the United Kingdom remained part of the Common
Market in 2020.
2 There is one CSP for each of the 27 EU Member States, except for Wallonia and Flanders in Belgium,
which each has their own one, for a total of 28 plans.
3 Also referred to as the June 2003 reform or the 2003 “Luxembourg” reform.
4 This section provides an overview of the main policy tools in place; the new elements of the CAP 2023-27
framework and its implementation are described later in the domestic policy developments section.
5 Co-financing rates vary by measure and by Member State.
6 Member States with average direct payment per hectare below 90% of the EU average can transfer up
to 25% of rural development funds to direct payments.



326 


7 The SAPS was an alternative to the BPS in place in most Member States that joined the European Union
after 2000. It offered a uniform decoupled per hectare payment rate. The SAPS applies to all Member
States joining since 2004 except Slovenia, Malta, and Croatia, which implement the BPS with the EU15.
8 These standards were designed to: establish buffer strips along water courses (GAEC 1); comply with
authorisation on water for irrigation (GAEC 2); protect ground water from pollution (GAEC 3); ensure
minimum soil cover (GAEC 4) and minimum land management practices (GAEC 5); maintain soil organic
matter level (GAEC 6); ensure the retention of landscape features (GAEC 7) (EC, 2015[81]).
9 Payments are granted on a maximum number of hectares, which varies by country or region: Belgium
(Wallonia), 30 ha; Bulgaria, 30 ha; Croatia, 20 ha; France, 52 ha; Germany, 46 ha with a higher per hectare
payment rate for the first 30 ha; Lithuania, 30 ha; Poland, from 3 to 30 ha (with no payment below 3 ha);
Portugal, 5 ha as from claim year 2017; Romania, 30 ha with a smaller per hectare payment rate for the
first 5 ha; and the Slovak Republic, 28 ha with different hectare payments for 3 size ranges (below 4.99 ha,
from 5 to 14.99 ha, above 15 ha).
10 Member States that implemented the redistributive payment with more than 5% of the national ceiling
allocated to the scheme could opt-out of this mechanism and the following six Member States and regions
used this option: Belgium (Wallonia), Croatia, France, Germany, Portugal, and Romania.
11 The Czech Republic, Denmark, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Luxemburg, Malta, the Netherlands,
Slovenia, the Slovak Republic, Spain, and Sweden.
12 Austria, Belgium (Flanders), Bulgaria, Ireland, Greece, Hungary, Poland and Portugal.
13 Austria, Bulgaria, Estonia, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, Portugal, Slovenia and Spain.
14 The criteria are low temperature, dryness, excess soil moisture, limited soil drainage, unfavourable
texture and stoniness, shallow rooting depth, poor chemical properties, and slope.
15 The fifteen Member States that opted for the SFS were: Austria, Bulgaria, Germany, Estonia, Greece,
Spain, Croatia, Italy, Latvia, Hungary, Malta, Poland, Portugal, Romania, and Slovenia. No strict definition
of “small farmer” was provided for under the scheme, which was available to the farmers eligible under the
basic payment scheme (BPS) or the single area payment scheme (SAPS) and wishing to participate in the
scheme.
16 Member States could choose their preferred method to calculate their SFS payments: lump-sum
payment (an equal amount to all farmers in the scheme); payment due each year (individual farmers
receive a single payment equivalent to what would have been due under other payment schemes); and
payment due in 2015 (individual farmers received a single payment that depends on the amount that would
have been due in 2015). Member States that opted for the “payment due each year” method were not
subject to the 10% maximum, provided they did not round up lower payment amounts to EUR 500
(USD 570). For more information, see (EC, 2017[80]).
17 If the average market price in an EU country or in a region of an EU country drops below EUR 2 224
(USD 2 339) per tonne over a representative period, the European Commission may use public
intervention to support beef prices (EC, n.d.[79]).
18 In addition to the EAFRD, these include the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), Cohesion
Fund, European Social Fund (ESF), and the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund (EMFF).



 327


19 Exceptional temporary support was added to the list in response to the COVID-19 outbreak (2020[76])
and the impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine (2022[54]).
20 Regulation (EU) 2021/1119.
21 The European Unions’ National Determined Contribution covers all 27 of its Member States.
22 Regulation (EU) 2023/857.
23 Regulation (EU) 2018/841.
24 Rules on support for CSPs are established by EU Regulation 2021/2115 (EP, 2021[73]), which also sets
the rules on the Performance Monitoring and Evaluation Framework (PMEF), which applies for the CAP
from 2023 until 2027.
25 EU Member States have been encouraged to set non-binding national targets – referred to as “national
values” – in relation to the EU-level targets from the Farm to Fork (F2F) and Biodiversity strategies.
26 In the CAP 2023-27 the Basic payment scheme has been renamed as Basic income support for
sustainability (BISS).
27 In both cases, the trend would be compared to a three-year baseline, comprising the average of 2015
to 2017.
28 Progress can be monitored online via the “EU Biodiversity Strategy Actions Tracker” (EC, 2022[74])
providing regular updates on the implementation of the strategy.
29 All EU Member States are required to produce and periodically update Nitrate Action Programmes as
part of the Nitrates Directive.
30 REPowerEU is the European Commission’s plan to make Europe independent from Russian fossil fuels
well before 2030, in light of Russia's invasion of Ukraine (https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-
policy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal/repowereu-affordable-secure-and-sustainable-energy-
europe_en).
31 Regulations (EU) 2019/6 and (EU) 2019/4.
32 Trio Presidency of the Council of the European Union France, the Czech Republic and Sweden:
Declaration on antimicrobial resistance (March 2022).
33 The National Research Institute for Agriculture, Food and Environment (INRAE) was established in 2020
from the merger of the National Institute of Agricultural Research (INRA) and the National Research
Institute of Science and Technology for Agriculture and Environment (IRSTEA).
34 The EGalim law, is actually called “law for the balance of commercial relations in the agricultural and
food sector and a healthy, sustainable and accessible food for all”. As of 1 January 2022, it requires public
catering to offer at least 50% sustainable and quality products, including at least 20% organic products
(Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Souveraineté Aimentaire, 2022[77]).



328 


35 GAEC 8 requires a minimum share of 4% of arable land to non-productive areas but the share to be
attributed to compliance with this GAEC is 3 % when at least 7% of arable land is devoted to non-productive
areas under an eco-scheme.
36 The pig meat industry has been experiencing difficulties due to the slowdown in exports to the People’s
Republic of China, the spread of African swine fever among EU Member States, the impact of COVID-19
restrictions and Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine.
37 The European Food Security Crisis preparedness and response Mechanism (EFSCM) was established
following the adoption of the “Contingency plan for food supply and food security in times of crisis” under
the Farm to Fork Strategy (EC, 2021[75]). Its aim is to improve co-operation between the public and private
sectors and evaluate risks when crises arise. It relies on a dedicated group of experts, and stakeholders
from the food supply chain.
38 From 2021, all future trade agreements with the European Union are expected to include a chapter on
sustainable food systems as stated in the European Commission’s Communication “Trade Policy Review:
An Open, Sustainable and Assertive Trade Policy” (EC, 2021[82]).
39 The “Solidarity Lanes” and the Black Sea Grain Initiative allowed the export of about 25 million tonnes
of Ukrainian grain, oilseeds and related products between May 2022 and the end of October 2022 (EC,
2022[78]).
40 Oman, Turkmenistan and Qatar were identified as alternative sources of nitrogen fertilisers, while
imports from Egypt and Algeria have already increased.


 329

Support to agriculture
Iceland has seen limited reform to agricultural policies and support remains among the highest in the
OECD. The Producer Support Estimate (PSE) was more than three times the OECD average in 2020-22,
at 50% of gross farm receipts. Market price support measures account for 47% of producer support,
principally tariffs that maintain high domestic prices relative to world prices and cause a large transfer from
consumers to agricultural producers. Payments coupled with production factors complement market price
support. Output payments for milk producers and largely decoupled payments to sheep meat producers
represent most of the remaining support to farmers. About 70% of farm support is potentially most-
distorting to production and trade.
Effective prices received by farmers have declined over time on average as the Producer Nominal
Protection Coefficient (NPC) declined but remain almost double those in world markets. Market price
support is especially high for poultry and egg products, where it accounts for 100% of Single Commodity
Transfers (SCT). SCT represent 95% of total PSE.
Expenditures for general services (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) represent 4% of total support
to agriculture (Total Support Estimate, TSE), much lower than the 14% OECD average. These
expenditures decreased from 8% of the value of agricultural production in 1986-88 to 3% in 2020-22
because the value of production increased 18% while expenditures decreased around 56%. Inspection
and control represent 63% of GSSE and much of the rest is devoted to public stockholding. TSE as a share
of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) declined significantly, from 5% in 1986-88 to 0.8% in 2020-22.
Recent policy changes
A Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries was established at the beginning of 2022, placing food in the
foreground to emphasise the food context as one comprehensive chain of value-creation and resource-
utilisation. The policy goals are to promote high-quality food production along with responsible and
sustainable use of land and oceanic resources, and support innovation and product development.
Discussions towards a comprehensive policy for agriculture and other industries responsible for food
production continued in 2022, leading to a draft to be presented in Parliament in 2023 for expected adoption
before the end of the year. A dedicated agricultural policy will also be presented to Parliament for the first
time in 2023; the policy was previously included only in the regulatory framework and agricultural
agreements between the government and farmers’ association. The major components of the agricultural
policy include food security, climate-change mitigation and adaptation, biodiversity, land use, sustainable
circular economy, research, and development. These policies are expected to be adopted by Parliament
in 2023 and in force until 2040.
13 Iceland


330 

Assessment and recommendations
•
Climate change has had positive impacts on crop and grass yields. However, warmer climatic
conditions also bring new pests and insects that might reduce future yields. The agriculture sector
is assumed to play a significant role in the national action plan for social adaptation to climate
change being finalised by mid-2023, but a comprehensive climate-change adaptation policy and
measures for agriculture have not been implemented. It will be important to move from adaptation
strategies to policy implementation, supported by monitoring and measurement of progress. It will
also be important that adaptation policy supports the shift from coping and incremental adaptation
strategies towards transformative adaptation of production systems.
•
Agriculture plays a central role in Iceland’s climate-mitigation policy and efforts to reach carbon-
neutrality, mainly due to the size of the livestock sector. Measures to reduce greenhouse-gas
(GHG) emissions from agriculture will be important to reach the challenging goal of carbon-neutral
agriculture by 2040. However, current agricultural support measures – especially market price
support and output payments for ruminant products such as milk and wool – counteract and reduce
the effectiveness of GHG-mitigation measures in agriculture.
•
Progress in agricultural policy reforms has been limited, and Iceland’s support to farmers remains
well above that of most OECD countries. Given that agricultural support policies remain dominated
by market price support and output payments, Iceland’s support to agriculture continues to be
production- and trade-distorting, contributing to inflated agricultural and food prices, and risks
adding to environmental pressures.
•
Producer support should be decoupled from agricultural production and favour less production-
and trade-distorting and less environmentally harmful forms of support. Re-instrumentation of
producer support from production-coupled support measures towards decoupled support
payments with environmental cross-compliance requirements and towards specific agri-
environmental measures (including GHG-mitigation) would contribute to reaching agriculture’s
carbon-neutrality target by 2040.
•
The re-instrumentation and reform of agricultural support policies could contribute to adaptation
too. Reducing market price support and payments targeted at specific commodities would
contribute to climate-change adaptation, as farmers would not be locked into producing subsidised
commodities under changing climatic conditions.
•
In addition, shifting budget expenditure from producer support towards Iceland’s agricultural
innovation systems and other general services could increase innovations to enhance
environmentally sustainable productivity growth and contribute to climate-change mitigation and
adaptation.




 331

Figure 13.1. Iceland: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Iceland - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Iceland - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Iceland - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
1
2
3
4
5
Iceland - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
Iceland - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%


332 

Figure 13.2. Iceland: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 13.3. Iceland: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
Iceland - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Border price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
Border price change decomposition
Change in producer price
PSE change decomposition
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
Iceland - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Sheep meat
Eggs
Wool
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%


 333

Table 13.1. Iceland: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
236
150
278
256
283
296
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
80.32
82.11
85.03
84.12
84.69
86.27
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
205
136
249
224
252
270
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
193
139
191
198
201
175
Support based on commodity output
180
113
129
132
141
115
Market Price Support1
179
72
89
95
98
73
Positive Market Price Support
179
72
89
95
98
73
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
2
40
41
37
43
42
Payments based on input use
13
4
18
26
14
14
Based on variable input use
3
0
3
3
3
3
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
6
2
11
19
7
7
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
4
2
4
4
4
3
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
-1
-3
12
10
12
12
Based on Receipts / Income
-1
-3
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
12
10
12
12
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
20
33
29
34
34
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
1
5
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
1
5
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
1
5
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
77.19
63.98
50.16
55.12
52.04
43.98
Producer NPC (coeff.)
4.16
2.44
1.68
1.82
1.76
1.52
Producer NAC (coeff.)
4.38
2.78
2.01
2.23
2.09
1.78
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
18
11
8
9
8
8
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
5
5
1
1
1
1
Inspection and control
1
2
5
5
5
6
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
2
1
0
0
1
0
Marketing and promotion
1
1
0
0
1
1
Cost of public stockholding
9
2
2
3
1
1
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
6.94
7.39
4.25
4.54
3.75
4.46
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-112
-65
-82
-87
-90
-69
Transfers to producers from consumers
-157
-66
-83
-88
-91
-70
Other transfers from consumers
-1
-2
0
0
0
0
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
46
3
0
0
1
1
Excess feed cost
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-70.44
-48.30
-33.14
-39.09
-35.93
-25.76
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
4.38
1.98
1.50
1.64
1.56
1.35
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
3.38
1.93
1.50
1.64
1.56
1.35
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
257
153
200
207
209
184
Transfers from consumers
158
68
83
88
91
70
Transfers from taxpayers
100
87
117
120
119
114
Budget revenues
-1
-2
0
0
0
0
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
4.94
1.72
0.81
0.96
0.82
0.68
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
78
81
112
113
111
110
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.52
0.91
0.45
0.52
0.44
0.41
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
264
656
618
655
695
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
40.94
89.37
132.54
135.38
126.95
135.27
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Iceland are: milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, wool,
pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




334 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Iceland’s agricultural policy focuses on food security, safety and quality; strengthening rural activity;
environmental sustainability; and maintaining farm income.
Iceland supports agriculture heavily and reforms over time have been limited. Support consists mainly of
price support sustained with border measures and quotas. Dairy producers receive payments based on
output. In 1996, support to sheep meat producers changed from price support to direct payments based
on historic entitlements. A regional scheme for sheep farmers implemented in 2008 provides additional
direct payments based on historic entitlements. Individual non-transferrable quotas for milk producers were
introduced in 1980 and went through a number of reforms. In 1992, the current system of freely transferable
quotas was introduced, and production-based payments were linked to the quota, paid directly to the
farmer.
Since the mid-1990s, tariffs on agricultural products were reduced. However, tariffs on several agriculture
product groups, particularly meat, dairy and flowers, remain high and complicated. Many compound duties
with both ad valorem and specific duties apply. Export subsidies for agricultural products have not been
provided since the early 1990s.
Table 13.2. Iceland: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to mid-1990s
Closed economy
Minimum prices
Agricultural tariffs and non-tariff measures
Consumer subsidies
Mid-1990s-2016
Gradual reforms to open market
EFTA, EEA
Phase out of administered prices (except milk)
Decoupled payments introduced to substitute price support measures
Act Production, Pricing and Sale of Agricultural Products No. 99/1993
Act on Agriculture No. 70/1998
2017-present
Continuation of gradual reforms
Revisions of agreements for sheep and cattle farmers
Several FTAs signed
EEA agreement enhanced
Reduction of agricultural tariffs
The policy mix remains dominated by production- and trade-distorting measures. Iceland continues to
provide agricultural support through market price support maintained by border measures, and through
direct payments based on entitlements directly or indirectly coupled with production.
Support to producers declined since the mid-1980s. An important reduction in market price support took
place at the beginning of the 1990s, but market price support still accounts for 42% of total support to
agriculture. Two-thirds of producer support is provided based on prices (Figure 13.4). TSE has declined
over time, averaging 0.8% of the country’s GDP in recent years, with PSE being the dominant component
at 95%. The remaining TSE is financing for GSSE of which 70% comprises expenditures for inspection,
with public stockholding expenditures responsible for much of the remainder.


 335

Figure 13.4. Iceland: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The objective of Iceland’s agricultural policy is to maintain and strengthen a diverse agricultural sector to
the extent that physical and marketing conditions allow. The key goals are to: meet domestic demand
where realistically possible; maintain sustainable production of high-quality, healthy products; improve
efficiency and competitiveness; improve farmers’ incomes; foster innovation and create job opportunities;
and sustain livelihoods in rural areas.
Agricultural policies in Iceland are based on two legal instruments. First, the policy concerning production
and marketing of agricultural products (laid out in the Act on the Production, Pricing and Sale of Agricultural
Products No. 99/1993) establishes objectives for Iceland’s agricultural policy and provides the framework
for Icelandic agriculture and its regulation. The second legal instrument concerns policies for the provision
of support to farm construction projects, livestock improvement and extension (advisory) services (laid out
in Act on Agriculture No. 70/1998).
The government negotiates with the Farmers’ Association concerning the general framework for support
and production control in the cattle, sheep, and horticultural sectors. There is also an agreement on so-
called horizontal support, such as advisory services, breeding, animal welfare, environmental protection,
sustainable land management, organic farming, and land cultivation. The current agreements cover
2017-26, with extensive reviews in 2019 and again in 2023. These agreements have traditionally set the
foundation of the support system for agriculture. These agreements are normally revised twice during their
term of validity and the latest revision will take place in 2023 and is expected to focus on issues related to
food security, environment, and climate change.
Iceland - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90


336 

Iceland’s agricultural support comes through price support (maintained by border measures), and direct
payments based on payment entitlements coupled with production factors. Price support is provided for all
livestock products and some horticultural products. Direct payments are provided to cattle (mainly dairy)
and sheep producers, and on a smaller scale, to certain greenhouse producers.
For dairy, direct payments depend on the size of a producer’s quota and the current number of animals.
Headage payments are provided for up to 180 dairy cows and 260 beef cows per farm, with full payment
for each of the first 50 dairy cows and 200 beef cows, then at a declining rate for each additional cow. The
Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture sets a national dairy production quota divided among producers based
on their annual quotas for the preceding year. Annual dairy quotas also determine entitlements for direct
payments. Production in excess of quotas is permitted, provided all such production is for export.
Wholesale prices are regulated for approximately half of all dairy products based on the volume of raw milk
required. A government-chaired committee representing both the Farmers’ Association and the labour
union (acting on behalf of consumers) determines the guaranteed minimum prices for milk delivered within
production quotas on an annual basis. Trade in support entitlements (basic payments to all active dairy
and cattle farmers) between entitlement holders is allowed with quantity limitations and takes place in a
market operated by the government. Dairy producers also benefit from support for breeding, land
cultivation and development programmes.
For sheep, direct payments link to entitlements based on historical production. However, eligibility to
receive full payments requires keeping a minimum number of winter-fed sheep on the farm. Additional
payments to sheep farmers relate to a quality-control scheme for lamb meat based on animal welfare,
product quality, traceability and sustainability criteria. Premium payments are provided at the wholesale
level for purchasers of wool, and to farmers to co-operate in increasing added value for sheep products.
Imports of meat, dairy products, and some vegetables that compete with domestic production are subject
to tariffs, often compound duties with an ad valorem component of 30% and a specific duty that varies from
ISK 5/kg (USD 0.04/kg) to ISK 1 462/kg (USD 2/kg). However, products originating in partner countries of
the European Economic Area (EEA) or in one of the 41 countries with which Iceland has free trade
agreements may carry lower tariffs. The agreement for the cattle sector includes a provision to change the
specific duties for certain cheese and milk powder products based on changes in the Special drawing rights
to Krona (SDR/ISK) exchange rate from 1995 to 2016, effective 1 March. Since then, the specific
component was adjusted annually to the 12-month evolution of SDR/ISK.
Iceland is a member of the European Economic Area (EEA) and of the European Free Trade Association
(EFTA). While the EEA Agreement does not apply to most trade in agricultural goods, it opens trade in
several processed agricultural products and encourages bilateral agreements on primary commodities.
As a member of EFTA, Iceland is also party to several Free Trade Agreements (FTAs), including with
countries in Southeast Europe, North Africa and the Middle East, Latin America, and Asia, as well as with
the South African Customs Union. In addition, Iceland has bilateral FTAs with the Faroe Islands,
Greenland, and the People’s Republic of China.
Efforts are being made to strengthen environmental consultation within the agricultural sector, to implement
green accounting for farmers and increase the number of participating farmers in programmes related to
environmentally friendly agriculture. The agricultural sector has set a goal of carbon neutrality by 2040.
Iceland’s 2020 Climate Action Plan contains several actions for agriculture. These include, for example,
improved utilisation and handling of fertilisers by reducing the use of mineral fertilisers; improved livestock
feeding to reduce enteric fermentation; increased domestic vegetable production; and carbon neutrality in
cattle breeding. Another main action is an ongoing programme around climate friendly agriculture which is
based on the co-operation of several ministries and institutions in the field of environment, food and
agriculture. The main goal is to reduce GHG emissions from agriculture, improve feed and resource use,
optimise land use and to preserve and increase carbon in soils and vegetation.


 337

The climate action plan further aims at improved treatment of livestock manure and utilisation of synthetic
fertilisers, aquaculture waste and other nutritious by-products that can be used for land cultivation or land
reclamation. Emphasis is on improving farmers’ access to practical information and consultation regarding
how they can best reduce GHG emissions from their operations. Efforts that reduce emissions intensity of
production, that is GHG emissions per kg of product, are considered of importance since Icelandic
agriculture primarily serves the domestic market. Furthermore, efforts are being made to increase domestic
production of vegetables, cereals and organic farming.
The agricultural agreements between government and farmers will be revised in 2023 and the common
goal between the contracting parties is that all changes will be climate friendly. There is also a
comprehensive strategy and implementation plan for land reclamation and forestry, where the focus is on
diverse ecosystems, nature-based solutions in climate issues, sustainable land use, knowledge,
co-operation and public health.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
A national action plan for social adaptation to climate change is being prepared, expected to be finalised
in mid-2023. It will be based on existing policies and goals set by the government. The agricultural system
will play a significant role in the plan, such as addressing how the agricultural system needs to respond to
changing conditions and how land cultivation should adapt to changing climate conditions.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
In the beginning of 2022, a new Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries was established following
elections. The Ministry is based on its predecessor, but focal points and goals have been adjusted and
some portfolios transferred to other ministries. Food is now in the foreground of the title as it is emphasised
to view food in a broad context as one comprehensive chain of value creation and resource utilisation. The
main policy goals are to promote high quality food production along with responsible and sustainable use
of land and oceanic resources, and to support innovation and product development.
An ongoing effort has been made to formulate a comprehensive policy in the field of agriculture and other
industries responsible for food production. A draft of a comprehensive food policy will be presented to the
parliament in the spring of 2023 and is expected to be adopted before the end of the year. A dedicated
agricultural policy will also be presented for the first time to the parliament in the spring of 2023. The policy
has previously only been expressed as part of the regulatory framework and in agricultural agreements
between the government and the farmers’ association.
The policy was developed after widespread consultations throughout the country. Its major components
include food security, climate change mitigation and adaptation, biodiversity, land use, sustainable circular
economy, research, and development. These policies are expected to be adopted by Parliament in 2023
and to be in force until 2040. Factors of food security will be monitored more closely in near future and
there the government have been preparing implementation of monitoring food security and other strategic
reserves. The Agricultural University of Iceland has prepared comprehensive proposals for increased food
security in Iceland. One of the main concerns is the lack of cereal production which has been limited in
Icelandic agriculture in modern times but was once widespread. In 2023 the government started an action
plan which aims to increase cereal production significantly by investing in infrastructure and plant breeding.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
In early February 2022, prior to Russia’s invasion to Ukraine, the government decided to grant a one-time
support to address the effects of rising costs (almost doubled) of fertiliser imports due to rising natural gas
prices and other inputs. The support was meant to compensate farmers, at least partly, for the cost
increase of around ISK 650 million (USD 4.8 million), and to strengthen domestic food security and


338 

farmers’ willingness to maintain production. Additionally, ISK 50 million (USD 0.37 million) was granted for
long-term projects related to better nutrient use efficiency and environmental issues.
As with the war the impacts on markets for agro-food products and inputs became more significant, a
working group established by the government identified significant additional challenges for farmers due
to rising costs of fertiliser, feed, oil and other inputs, with implications differing between sectors. During the
spring 2022, the financial basis of farmers and the willingness to maintain production were found to be
significantly weakened. In response, the government designed and implemented a special support
programme of ISK 2.5 billion (USD 18.5 million) to accommodate increased production costs. The support
measures are divided into four parts and most of them are in the form of added funding to ongoing direct
support payments, while also aiming to increase agricultural resilience and ensure domestic food security.
The four support measures are: 1) 65% increase of support payments on land cultivation and farmland
payments (ISK 517 million; USD 3.8 million); 2) around ISK 1.3 billion (USD 9.6 million) additional
payments on existing support for sheep, dairy, cattle, and goat farming; 3) ISK 140 million
(USD 1.03 million) contribution to horticulture farmers; and 4) ISK 450 million (USD 3.3 million) to poultry,
swine, and egg farmers to accommodate increased feed prices. Additionally, it was proposed to continue
monitoring the development of food security issues and necessary supplies of various inputs.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
A new provisional law was passed by parliament and took effect on 15 June 2022, which temporarily
abolished all tariff duties on imports of products, including all agricultural goods, originated in Ukraine. The
law will be valid through May 2023, unless further extended by parliament.
Contextual information
Iceland is a small, sparsely populated country with a GDP per capita above the OECD average. Agriculture
contributes about 5% of GDP and 4% of employment. Conditions for agriculture in Iceland are limited by
the country’s geographical conditions. The growing season is short – around four months – yields are low,
and production and transport costs are high. Approximately one-fifth of the total land area of Iceland is
agricultural land, mostly suitable for fodder production and livestock raising. Only around 6% of agricultural
land area is arable land.
Livestock-rearing is the main farm activity, with milk and sheep meat being the most important products.
Livestock production is mostly grassland-based and most farm animals are native breeds. The main crops
are hay, cereals for animal feed and vegetables – the latter are cultivated primarily in greenhouses heated
with geothermal energy. The main agricultural exports are pure-bred horses for breeding, sheep meat
products and fur skins. The range of Iceland’s agricultural products is limited and meets approximately
50% of total domestic food requirements. Consequently, Iceland is a net importer of agricultural products
(excluding fishery goods), mainly for final consumption. Imports are more diversified than exports and have
increased steadily in recent years.




 339

Table 13.3. Iceland: Contextual indicators

Iceland
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
8
22
0.02%
0.02%
Population (million)
0.3
0.4
0.01%
0.01%
Land area (thousand km2)
100
101
0.12%
0.12%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
1 889
1 872
0.06%
0.06%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
3
4
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
29 784
58 297
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
24.9
27.0
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
8.1
5.1
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
8.3
4.1
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
7.9
4.9
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.3
10.1
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
15
13
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
85
87
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
7
6
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Iceland’s economy is recovering from a deep recession caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The economy
is projected to grow by 4.2% in 2022 and 2.8% in 2023, driven by buoyant goods and services exports,
and the unemployment rate is expected to be around 4.5% in 2022 (OECD, 2022[1]). Iceland’s prosperity
has been built on the sustainable management of its abundant natural resources, including the
comprehensive fisheries management system based on individual transferable quotas, renewable energy
(geothermal and hydro) and carbon sequestration opportunities (afforestation, revegetation).


340 

Figure 13.5. Iceland: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 13.6. Iceland: Agro-food trade

Iceland - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1


 341


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Output growth in agriculture (8%) has clearly outpaced the global average (2%) over the 2011-20 period,
which has been driven by commensurately robust growth in total factor productivity (TFP) of over 8% per
year – which was also much higher than the global average rate of 1.1%. This is mostly related to a
significant output growth in aquaculture and much less so in crop and animal output. At the same time
input growth has decreased.
A harsh climate, lack of suitable land, small average farm size, and the narrow genetic base for traditional
livestock present significant constraints to the sector. Due to its relatively low livestock densities, Iceland’s
nutrient balances show a comparatively small surplus of both nitrogen and phosphorus. Iceland has the
lowest pesticide sales per hectare in the OECD area and the sector’s share of energy use has fallen over
time. Agriculture continues to represent a significant share in the country’s total GHG emissions – well
above the OECD average – mainly due to the importance of the ruminant livestock sector. Emissions of
CH4 emissions from enteric fermentation and manure management, and N2O emissions from manure
management and fertilisers have historically accounted for over 99% of the total emissions from
agriculture, with less than 1% arising from CO2. With abundant water and a small population, total water
abstraction in Iceland is less than 1% of total available freshwater resources. This is one of the lowest
intensities of water resource use in the OECD, although the freshwater abstractions per capita are the
highest in the OECD area (OECD, 2019[2]). The share of agriculture in total water abstractions has
decreased over the past two decades.
Iceland - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
52
52
23
23
14
14
6
32
32
54
54
1
1
17
17
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


342 

Figure 13.7. Iceland: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 13.4. Iceland: Productivity and environmental indicators

Iceland
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.1%
8.3%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
8.0
7.6
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
1.8
1.0
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
1.9
1.3
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
15.2
13.7
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
..
..
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
42.9
22.3
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
0.1
1.8
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


Iceland - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
8.27%
8.27%
1.12%
1.12%
0.00%
0.00%
0.35%
0.35%
-0.31%
-0.31%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Iceland
World
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%


 343

References

OECD (2022), OECD Economic Outlook, OECD Publishing, https://doi.org/10.1787/62d0ca31-
en.
[1]
OECD (2019), “Water: Freshwater abstractions (Edition 2018)”, OECD Environment Statistics
(database), https://doi.org/10.1787/09a848f4-en (accessed on 7 April 2022).
[2]




344 

Support to agriculture
Net support to producers in India has been negative throughout the last two decades, but fluctuates
markedly. Domestic producers have been implicitly taxed on average, as budgetary payments to farmers
did not offset the price-depressing effect of complex domestic marketing regulations and trade policy
measures. Virtually all gross producer transfers (whether positive or negative) come in potentially most
production – and trade-distorting forms – a consistent pattern since the early 2000s, the period for which
support data are available.
Support to producers in 2020-22 includes budgetary transfers corresponding to 11% of gross farm receipts,
positive Market Price Support (MPS) of +1.8% of gross farm receipts for commodities that are supported
and negative MPS of as much as -27.5% for those that are taxed. Overall, this led to negative net support
of -15% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22, against a backdrop of increasing prices at the border for many
of the exported commodities covered, particularly wheat, maize, and milk. Export restrictions apply since
2022 to various types of rice, wheat, sugar, and related products (e.g. wheat flour).
Single Commodity Transfers (SCT) are mainly composed of MPS but vary by commodity. Most
commodities were implicitly taxed in 2020-22, effectively reducing receipts by half for products such as
banana or mango. Commodities with positive SCTs – ranging between 8% and 30% of commodity receipts
in the same period – include sugar, chickpeas, other pulses, and poultry meat.
Budgetary transfers to producers are dominated by large subsidies for variable input use, such as
fertilisers, electricity, and irrigation water. However, budgetary allocations to the direct income transfer
programme, PM-KISAN, have been increasing since its implementation in 2018 and now represent 7.2%
of budgetary spending.
Public expenditures financing general services to the sector (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE),
mainly related to investments in off-farm irrigation systems, are around half the level of subsidies for
variable input use. Expenditures for GSSE increased to 4% of the value of agricultural production in
2020-22, from 3% in 2000-02.
Policies that affect farm prices provide implicit support to consumers. Food subsidies provided through the
Targeted Public Distribution System, whose allocations increased substantially during the COVID-19
pandemic, also reduce costs for consumers. The consumer support estimate is 44% of expenditure on
average across all commodities in 2020-22.
Recent policy changes
Following annual increases in Minimum Support Prices (MSP) in June 2022, the government of India (GoI)
increased MSPs for several summer-planted crops, including rice and maize. Similarly, it raised MSPs for
several winter-planted crops in October 2022, including rapeseed, wheat, and lentils.
14 India


 345

The Department of Fertilizers of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare (MAFW) increased
fertiliser subsidies in April 2022 and November 2022 for summer- and winter-planted crops in response to
rising international fertiliser prices. This includes support for domestically produced fertilisers through
freight subsidies to cover transport from producer states to other parts of the country.
Several programmes introduced in 2022 focus on digitalisation and agri-environmental measures. The
Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority signed a Memorandum of
Understanding with the National Research Development Corporation in April to implement the Agri-Export
Policy and strengthen commodities’ export value chains by disseminating technologies to promote climate-
resilient agriculture. In May, the GoI introduced new support for the use of drones in agricultural activities,
particularly to assess the state of crops and spray fertilisers and pesticides, and for digitising land records.
India introduced export restrictions for several commodities in 2022 with an open-ended timeframe and
the objective of stabilising fluctuations in domestic prices following Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine. Commodities affected by export bans, duties, or permits include various types of rice, wheat,
sugar, and related products (e.g. wheat flour).
In November 2022, the Ministry of Consumer Affairs removed the oilseeds and oil stock limits previously
imposed on wholesalers and traders. The measure had been introduced in 2021 to address rising domestic
prices for edible oils by discouraging stockholding and monitoring consumption.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Environmental sustainability and resilience measures in agriculture – particularly for climate-
change adaptation – have been gaining prominence in India, mainly through programmes focused
on conserving water, altering crop-management practices, investing in technologies for crop
production and developing new cultivars. This is a commendable response to increased
environmental pressures and rising threats from climate change.
•
However, agricultural support could further align with climate-change mitigation and adaptation
efforts. In particular, scaling back variable input subsidies (fertiliser, irrigation water and electricity)
can directly lower greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and increase flexibility to adjust production
systems in response to a changing climate. These funds could be used to train farmers in more
efficient and sustainable input use by ensuring that extension systems focus on climate change,
sustainability, digital skills, and resilience.
•
India’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) includes an economy-wide emission-intensity-
reduction target, but no sector-specific targets. Nonetheless, several sector-specific programmes
aim to mitigate GHG emissions by promoting energy conservation, alternative fuels from renewable
technologies, water conservation, afforestation, land and waste management, increased fertiliser
efficiency, crop diversification, lower-methane-emission rice production, and by avoiding crop
residue burning. These efforts should be enhanced and monitoring their impacts on GHG
emissions improved through well-defined targets.
•
As general services continue to focus on irrigation expansion, any new investments in irrigation
should be better co-ordinated with water management objectives and help reduce water
consumption in dry or groundwater depleting regions. Overall, long-term transitional efforts could
focus on enhanced collaborative planning and multi-disciplinary research that accounts for India’s
regional diversity.
•
Greater emphasis on general services can boost needed investment in agricultural research and
development and innovation. In particular, increased investments in the agricultural knowledge
system and knowledge transfer through Farmer Producer Organisations could ensure sustained
and sustainable productivity growth. Promoting new technologies and production practices is


346 

important for GHG emission reduction in the livestock sector – the primary contributor to GHG
emissions in India.
•
Restrictive domestic marketing policies and border measures reduce prices below those on
international markets over most of the period reviewed. Developing the electronic National
Agricultural Market (e-NAM) set up in 2016 should remain a priority to foster efficient markets and
competitive agro-food supply chains across states. In addition, the 2017 model Agricultural
Produce and Livestock Marketing (Promotion and Facilitation) Act should be implemented in a
more harmonised and consistent way across states, and synchronised with reforms to the MSP
system through coherent plans. Complementing these programmes with investments in transport
infrastructure, marketing, training, and other general services to agriculture will help farmers reap
the benefits in productivity and income. Budgetary allocations for rural infrastructure and
digitalisation in agriculture in the 2021 and 2022 Union Budgets are positive steps in this direction.
•
The large share of employment in agriculture compared to its GDP contribution reflects the
persistent labour-productivity gap relative to other sectors and translates into low farm incomes. In
the short-to-medium term, direct cash transfers (such as through PM-KISAN) can support the
poorest farmers’ livelihoods and adjustment to new market conditions. In the longer term, policies
focused on education and financial services are needed to facilitate significant structural
adjustments, including the transition of farm labour to other activities and consolidation towards
farm operations sufficiently large to exploit economies of scale.
•
India is an important agro-food exporter. The Agricultural Export Policy (AEP) framework adopted
in 2018 helped reduce uncertainty and transaction costs throughout supply chains by easing export
restrictions on organic and processed agricultural products. However, recent export restrictions on
products such as rice, wheat, sugar, onions, and related products directly affect India’s reliability
as a supplier, and exacerbate the persistent challenge of low farm incomes. An extension of the
AEP to all agri-food products should be considered to create a stable and predictable market.
•
Recent reductions in tariffs and relaxation of quantitative restrictions on selected pulses, albeit
temporary, are additional positive steps towards improving food security and diversifying diets.
Together with domestic marketing reforms, easing export and import restrictions would make the
market more predictable and increase incentives for producers and traders to invest in supply
chains.
•
India made significant progress eliminating inefficiencies in the food-distribution system in the
period before the COVID-19 pandemic, and these efforts should continue. The experimental
replacement of physical grain distribution with direct cash transfers could be gradually expanded,
including by drawing on recommendations made by the High-Level Commission on Restructuring
the Food Corporation of India, which suggested focusing initially on cities with populations over
1 million, followed by grain surplus states.




 347

Figure 14.1. India: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
India - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
-20%
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
India - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
India - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
India - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
India - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
-1%
-0.5%
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%


348 

Figure 14.2. India: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.


India - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Maize
Rapeseed
Rice
Sugar
Milk
Bovine meat
Poultry meat
Sheep meat
Eggs
Bananas
Cotton
Tomatoes
Potatoes
Groundnuts
Mangoes
Other pulses
Chick peas
Onions
-110%
-100%
-90%
-80%
-70%
-60%
-50%
-40%
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%


 349

Table 14.1. India: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
112 282
445 545
439 502
457 177
439 957
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
64.75
76.38
75.79
75.59
77.75
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
109 060
391 773
372 704
404 752
397 862
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
-2 709
-73 926
-40 665
-80 792
-100 323
Support based on commodity output
-11 243
-126 253
-87 818
-133 431
-157 511
Market Price Support1
-11 243
-126 570
-88 466
-133 731
-157 513
Positive Market Price Support
3 583
9 787
7 749
9 274
12 339
Negative Market Price Support
-14 827
-136 357
-96 215
-143 005
-169 852
Payments based on output
0
317
648
301
2
Payments based on input use
8 519
43 839
38 698
43 304
49 514
Based on variable input use
8 519
43 372
38 245
42 828
49 041
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
0
394
399
386
398
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
0
73
54
89
75
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
8 231
8 232
8 975
7 488
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
8 231
8 232
8 975
7 488
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
15
257
223
361
187
Percentage PSE (%)
-2.31
-14.98
-8.34
-15.84
-20.18
Producer NPC (coeff.)
0.91
0.78
0.83
0.77
0.73
Producer NAC (coeff.)
0.98
0.87
0.92
0.86
0.83
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
3 526
17 278
16 623
17 662
17 550
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
402
1 217
1 096
1 274
1 281
Inspection and control
25
415
379
334
531
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
2 021
14 687
14 189
15 085
14 788
Marketing and promotion
14
19
6
12
39
Cost of public stockholding
1 044
931
947
953
894
Miscellaneous
21
9
6
4
17
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
..
..
..
..
..
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
14 692
152 834
150 272
144 600
163 629
Transfers to producers from consumers
10 856
110 386
76 711
116 574
137 873
Other transfers from consumers
-224
-89
-19
-80
-167
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
4 222
44 105
74 446
29 855
28 013
Excess feed cost
-163
-1 568
-866
-1 749
-2 090
Percentage CSE (%)
14.12
43.96
50.38
38.57
44.24
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
0.91
0.78
0.83
0.78
0.74
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
0.88
0.69
0.67
0.72
0.69
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
5 040
-12 543
50 404
-33 274
-54 760
Transfers from consumers
-10 632
-110 297
-76 692
-116 494
-137 706
Transfers from taxpayers
15 896
97 842
127 115
83 299
83 113
Budget revenues
-224
-89
-19
-80
-167
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.02
-0.44
1.89
-1.05
-1.57
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
16 283
114 027
138 870
100 457
102 753
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
3.33
3.65
5.21
3.16
2.95
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
191
174
185
215
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
47.26
76.31
74.23
74.50
80.20
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for India are: wheat, maize, rice, soybean, rapeseed,
groundnuts, chick pea, other pulses, potatoes, onion, tomatoes, mango, bananas, sugar, cotton, milk, bovine meat, sheep meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




350 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Food security has been an important objective of agricultural and trade policy since India’s independence
in 1947. Food shortages in the early 1960s made crop productivity and farm output a key policy ambition.
While scope to further expand the area under cultivation was limited, the advent of the “green revolution”
in the mid-1960s raised crop productivity through improved technologies and seed varieties. This was
accompanied by expanded extension services and increased use of fertilisers, pesticides, and irrigation.
The government of India (GoI) introduced several marketing regulations affecting the sale, stocking and
trading of agricultural commodities. The Essential Commodities Act (ECA) introduced in 1955 provided for
the control of production, supply, distribution, and pricing of essential commodities. During the 1960s and
1970s, most states also enacted and enforced Agricultural Produce Markets Regulation (APMR) Acts, with
the first point of sale of agricultural products occurring at regulated market yards (mandis) under the
responsibility of Agricultural Produce Market Committees (APMC). Two institutions were set up in 1965 to
manage prices and distribution of wheat and rice, namely the Food Corporation of India (FCI) and the
Agricultural Prices Commission, later renamed the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP).
These institutions introduced complex domestic marketing regulations and border measures that
increasingly penalised Indian farmers who often received less than international prices for their products.
In the 1970s, several government programmes were set up to increase production, covering industrial
organisation, research, finance, and trade. In the case of milk production and processing, this took place
at three different levels:
•
At the farm-level, dairy farmers were organised into co-operatives and provided with advanced
technologies, such as animal breeds that produced more milk.
•
At the district level, co-operative unions were formed, who owned and operated milk processing
plants as well as storage and transport equipment and provided animal health services.
•
At the state level, state federations conducted and co-ordinated the nation-wide marketing of milk.
Government funding for agricultural research and extension increased, and many State Agricultural
Universities (SAU) were set up. Institutional lending to farmers expanded by directing commercial banks
(nationalised from 1969) to provide credit to agriculture. New financial institutions were established, such
as the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) in 1982 and regional rural banks.
Import competition was highly restricted to allow domestic agricultural production to increase.
In the 1980s and 1990s, yield-enhancing “green revolution” techniques were increasingly used, reaching
new regions and crops such as pulses, oilseeds, and coarse grains. Broader economic deregulation at
that time largely bypassed agriculture, in part because of the prevalence of state regulations in agriculture.
From 1980 to 1999, budgetary support to agriculture increased more than tenfold.
In the 2000s, agricultural policies focused increasingly on enhancing productivity and farmers’ incomes.
The National Agricultural Policy (NAP), formulated in 2000, prioritised increasing cropping intensity on
existing agricultural land, developing rural infrastructure, and developing and disseminating agricultural
technologies. The National Policy for Farmers (NPF), approved in 2007, identified a need to focus more
on the economic well-being of farmers rather than just on production.
The Eleventh Five-Year Plan 2007-12 focused on bringing technology to farmers, improving the efficiency
of investments, improving access for the poor to land, credit and skills and addressing water management
concerns. The Twelfth Five-Year Plan 2012-17 was articulated around more budgetary support to
agriculture and to infrastructure along with an aim to improve the functioning of markets, more efficient use
of natural resources, and improved delivery of government services such as credit and animal health.


 351

The 2012-17 plan established the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) to replace the previous
Public Distribution System (PDS, established in 1997). The new system aimed to reduce the amount of
grain released from government stocks for distribution that did not reach intended beneficiaries.1 In
addition, the plan redirected some food subsidies to other welfare schemes to better target the poor,
introduced policies specific to individual states or areas, and redefined the definition of “poor” for the
purpose of the TPDS. The 2013 National Food Security Act (NFSA) further addressed these concerns.
In 2016, the GoI set the target of doubling farmers’ income by 2022-23 and by 2018 five-year plans were
replaced by a framework of three-year action agendas. These agendas were prepared by the National
Institution for Transforming India (NITI Aayog, the erstwhile Planning Commission of India), a policy think-
tank of the government of India. The Agriculture Export Policy framework was established at the end of
2018, aiming to double agricultural exports by 2022-23 and boost the value-added of agricultural exports.
To address farm indebtedness, several states implemented support packages for farm loan waivers
between 2017 and 2020.
The only output support payments were introduced between 2018 and 2021 for clearing of arrears for
sugar cane deliveries. The subsidies were provided directly to sugar cane farmers. These were replaced
in 2022 by a support scheme for first-stage buyers of sugar cane (the scheme for providing assistance to
sugar mills for expenses on marketing costs and other processing costs).
Marketing regulations under the Agricultural Produce Market Committees (APMC) Acts were progressively
amended in 2003, 2007 and 2017. This was to address concerns around highly fragmented markets,
inadequate physical marketing infrastructure, large numbers of intermediaries in supply chains and
insufficient remuneration to farmers. Even though state governments were encouraged to adopt similar
reforms, implementation of agricultural marketing reforms remained highly differentiated across India’s
states.
In June 2020, the GoI initiated reforms to domestic agricultural marketing regulations as part of a COVID-
19 support package. The proposed reforms included a set of ordinances to deregulate major food crops
from the 1955 ECA, allow farmers to sell their agricultural products outside of government-regulated
markets and allow barrier-free inter- and intra-state trade of agricultural commodities. The central
government had also proposed providing a legal framework for farmers to facilitate contract farming
schemes with processors and other market actors in supply chains to reduce price risk. However, on
29 November 2021, the Parliament approved a bill withdrawing the three laws. Moreover, in
December 2021, the GoI set up a committee to review the legal framework for the MSP system.
Table 14.2. India: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1950-1965
Expansion of agricultural area was
the main source of output growth
Agrarian reforms (abolition of intermediary landlordship, imposition of land ceiling)
Strengthening of co-operative credit institutions
Essential Commodities Act 1955
1965-1980
Increase in productivity main was the
source of growth “green revolution”

Promoting the adoption of technological breakthroughs in rice and wheat production
Policy support for marketing, research and credit
Introduction and formalisation of lending to priority sectors, including agriculture
New institutions, e.g. State Agricultural Universities, Food Corporation of India,
Agricultural Prices Commission
Programmes to increase production and processing of milk (support to breeds producing
more milk, producer organisations, and processing and transport equipment)
Minimum support prices
1980s
Widespread use of technology in
major crop areas

Some delicensing and deregulation
Increase in subsidies to agriculture


352 

Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1990s
Economic and trade liberalisation in
agriculture lags behind general
economic reforms

Cautious relaxation of trade protection in some products, e.g. sugar, cotton, edible oils,
wheat, rice
Increases in input subsidies
Targeting of beneficiaries of public distribution system of food grains
2000s
Demand-driven shift towards
producing more fruit, vegetables and
livestock products
Increasing price gaps between
international and domestic prices for
producers

Alternate tightening and loosening of market and trade regulations (including export
restrictions)
Agricultural marketing regulations influencing pricing, procuring, stocking, and trading of
commodities
Large increases in input subsidies, including credit
Support to high productivity seeds particularly cotton
Since 2010
Major participant in world markets for
some commodities
Continued price gaps between
international and domestic prices
taxing producers
Increasing direct payments to
producers
Increasing support to consumers

More structured interaction between central and state level authorities
Expansion of food subsidies and 2013 National Food Security Act
Pilots to replace physical distribution of grains with cash transfers in selected states and
Union Territories
Agriculture Export Policy framework aimed at ensuring processed and organic products
are not subject to export restrictions
Doubling Farmers’ Income by 2022-23 action plan
State-level support packages for farm loan waivers
Direct income transfer programme PM-KISAN
Changes to domestic agricultural marketing regulations initiated in 2020 as part of the
COVID-19 economic support package; withdrawal of reforms at the end 2021
Export restrictions applied to several commodities in 2022 (rice, wheat, sugar, and related
products)
Over the past two decades, producer support was composed of negative market price support (MPS), and
budgetary allocations, including almost exclusively input subsidies. India’s percentage PSE fluctuated
markedly, registering a high of zero in 2000, a low of -31% in 2007, followed by large swings before
increasing negative support in 2021-22 (Figure 14.4). These variations were driven primarily by changes
in the relative levels of domestic and international prices underlying MPS, while input subsidies followed a
more steadily increasing trend. The particularly large absolute size of negative MPS in 2011-13 (and to
some extent in 2007 and 2008) coincides with periods of high international commodity prices not or only
partially transmitted to the domestic market, due at least in part to India’s use of export-impeding measures
(for example, export restrictions or export bans applied in several of those years to wheat, non-basmati
rice, chickpea, sugar and milk). The negative value of the PSE reflects that, on average, domestic
producers were implicitly taxed, as the increasing budgetary payments to farmers did not offset the price-
depressing effect of complex domestic regulations and trade policy measures. Payments not requiring
production have been increasing since 2018, driven by higher budgetary allocations to the direct income
transfer programme Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN). Against a backdrop of increasing
reference prices for the exported commodities covered since 2020, MPS has been higher than during
2015-19.


 353

Figure 14.3. India: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 2000 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Agriculture and food is governed via six major policy channels: 1) managed prices and marketing channels
for many farm products; 2) subsidised farm inputs; 3)  general services for the agricultural sector as a
whole; 4) making certain food staples available to selected groups of the population at government-
subsidised prices; 5) regulated border transactions through trade policy; and more recently, 6) the income
support scheme PM-KISAN (OECD/ICRIER, 2018[1]; ICRIER, 2022[2]; Gulati, Kapur and Bouton, 2020[3]).
States have constitutional responsibility for many aspects of agriculture, but the central government sets
national approaches to policy and provides the necessary funds to implement programmes at state level.
The central government (Union Cabinet) is responsible for some key policy areas, notably international
trade policies, and for implementation of the National Food Security Act (NFSA) of 2013.
Policies governing the marketing of agricultural commodities in India – for both producers and the food
chain – include the national Essential Commodities Act (ECA) and the state-level APMC Acts. These acts
regulate the pricing, procuring, stocking, and trading of commodities. Farmers bring their produce to sell in
regulated wholesale markets (or mandis). This infrastructure is also used for government procurement
under the minimum support price system. Differences exist among states in the status of their respective
APMC Acts and in how these acts are implemented.2 The electronic portal (electronic National Agricultural
Market, e-NAM) set up in 2016 and the 2017 model Agricultural Produce and Livestock Marketing
(Promotion and Facilitation) Act were shared with state governments as a recommendation for adoption.3
E-NAM currently integrates 1 000 APMC markets in 18 states and 3 Union Territories (UTs); almost
17 million farmers and 150 000 traders are registered on the e-NAM platform (Government of India,
2021[4]).
India - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20


354 

Based on the recommendations of the CACP, the central government establishes a set of minimum support
prices (MSP) for 23 commodities each year. The CACP bases its recommendations on the average cost
of production at both the actual covered cost of production and the imputed value of family labour. State
governments may also provide a bonus payable over and above the MSP for some crops. National and
state-level agencies operating on behalf of the Food Corporation of India (FCI) can buy wheat, rice and
coarse grains as well. Several other agencies can buy pulses, oilseeds and cotton at MSP – including
through the Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay Sanrakshan Yojna (PM-AASHA) programme introduced in
2018 – and some horticulture commodities without MSP are also procured. However, procurement under
the price support scheme effectively operates mainly for wheat, rice and cotton, and only in a few states.
Input support policies enable agricultural producers to obtain farm inputs at subsidised prices. Policies
governing the supply of fertilisers, electricity and water are the largest of these. Other supported inputs are
seeds, machinery, credit, and crop insurance. State-level loan debt waivers where local governments
compensate lending institutions for forgiving debt to farmers are increasingly used. About 30% of
agricultural loans continue to come from non-institutional sources (e.g. moneylenders), as opposed to
financial institutions such as commercial banks (Reserve Bank of India, 2019[5]).
General services policies focus on programmes for the development and maintenance of infrastructure,
particularly related to irrigation. Budgetary support is also significant for public stockholding and for
agricultural knowledge and innovation.
Public distribution of food grains is done under the joint responsibility of the central and state governments.
The TPDS operates under the NFSA in all states and UTs. Other Welfare Schemes (OWS) also operate
under the NFSA. The central government allocates food grains to state governments and the FCI
transports food grains from surplus states to deficit states. State governments distribute the food grain
entitlements by allocating supplies within the state, identifying eligible families, issuing ration cards, and
distributing food grains mainly through Fair Price Shops.
India’s Foreign Trade Policy is formulated and implemented by the Directorate General of Foreign Trade
(DGFT) and announced every five years. It is reviewed and adjusted annually in consultation with relevant
public agencies. The Basic Customs Duty (BCD), also known as the statutory rate, is agreed at the same
time as the approval of the annual budget. In contrast to previous five-year Foreign Trade Policy
frameworks, the latest Foreign Trade Policy 2023 – effective as of 1 April 2023 – does not include an end
date.
Agricultural exports have been managed for several decades through a combination of export restrictions,
including export prohibitions, licensing requirements, quotas, taxes, minimum export prices,4 and state
trading requirements. Whether these restrictions are enforced or not may change several times per year,
according to domestic supplies and prices. The 2018 Agriculture Export Policy framework includes three
main areas for action. First, ensuring that processed agricultural products and organic products are not
subject to export restrictions. Second, undertaking consultations among stakeholders and Ministries to
identify those essential food security commodities to which export restrictions may be applied under
specific market conditions. Third, reducing import barriers applied to agricultural products for processing
and re-exporting.
The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) is under the
responsibility of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MoCI). It provides financial assistance to exporters
in the form of transport support.5
The PM-KISAN scheme provides an annual direct income transfer of INR 6 000 (USD 84) per farmer to all
farmers with land titles. The payment does not require farmers to produce, is irrespective of the farm size,
and may be used for any need.
India ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change on 2 October 2016. India updated its Nationally
Determined Contribution (NDC) in August 2022. The 2022 NDC comprises eight goals, three of which are


 355

quantitative targets to be achieved up to 2030: to reduce the emissions intensity of the GDP by 45% from
the 2005 level; to achieve about 50% cumulative electric power installed capacity from non-fossil fuel-
based energy resources; and to create an additional carbon sink of 2.5 billion to 3 billion tCO2eq through
additional forest and tree cover.
Mitigation efforts to reduce GHG emissions from agriculture are largely through production techniques that
improve emissions intensity (e.g. initiatives such as horticulture land extension, increased rice
intensification systems, direct-seed rice cultivation, solar pumps, micro-irrigation, neem coated urea
scheme, bio-fertilisers, balanced feedstock, and bypass protein for livestock).  The Union Budget 2022-23
promotes “chemical-free natural farming” throughout the country. Initially, the focus is on farmers’ land in
5 km wide corridors along the Ganga river.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
India’s agricultural sector is highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change and extreme weather events.
Since the mid-1950s, India has experienced a rise in average temperatures, a decrease in monsoon
precipitation, increased frequencies of extreme temperature, rainfall and drought events, an increase in
the intensity of severe cyclones, and other changes in the monsoon system (Ministry of Earth Sciences,
2020[6]).
Environmental sustainability and resilience measures in agriculture – and climate-change adaptation
measures in particular – have been gaining prominence, notably through programmes called “missions”.
India’s 2008 National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) included four missions focused on
adaptation efforts: (1) sustainable habitats; (2) optimising water-use efficiency; (3) creating ecologically-
sustainable climate-resilient agricultural production systems; and (4) safeguarding the Himalayan glaciers
and mountain ecosystems. These missions include initiatives related to water usage, disaster
management, biodiversity conservation, and ecosystem protection. In addition, India implements specific
schemes that promote organic farming, efficient irrigation systems, watershed management, and improved
soil health and climate-resilient agro-ecological systems.
The National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) within the NAPCC became operational in
2014-15, promoting soil and moisture conservation measures; comprehensive soil health management;
efficient water management practices, and mainstreaming rain-fed technologies. “Farm Water
Management” was implemented as one of the components of NMSA with the objective of enhancing water
use efficiency by promoting technological interventions such as drip and sprinkler technologies, efficient
water application and distribution systems, and secondary storage. Thereafter, these activities have been
subsumed under the “Per Drop More Crop (PDMC)” component of the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee
Yojana (PMKSY) scheme in 2015-16. This scheme prioritises water conservation and its management in
agriculture with the objective to extend the area under irrigation while preserving water resources.
Also under the NMSA, “Rainfed Area Development” focuses on Integrated Farming Systems to enhance
productivity and minimise risks associated with climatic variability. Under this system, crops and cropping
systems are integrated with other activities such as horticulture, livestock, fisheries, agro-forestry, and
beekeeping to support farmers by providing additional income opportunities and mitigate the impacts of
droughts, floods, or other extreme weather events. The Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture
(MIDH) includes a sub-component focused on “Creation of water resources”, while the National Food
Security Mission (NFSM) includes components such as “Water Carrying Pipes” and “Mobile Rain Gun”
focused on hydrological infrastructure and water-use efficiency.
“Soil Health Management” is another component under the NMSA. It promotes integrated nutrient
management through targeted use of mineral fertilisers, including secondary and micro-nutrients, in
conjunction with organic manures and bio-fertilisers to improve soil health and productivity. It also improves
soil and fertiliser testing facilities, providing soil test-based recommendations to farmers for improving


356 

fertility. The Soil Health Card implemented in 2015 provides information to farmers about the nutrient status
of their soil and recommends the appropriate dosage of nutrients to improve its health and fertility.
India is implementing specific schemes to promote organic farming, including the Organic Value Chain
Development for North-East Region and the MIDH component “Adoption of Organic Farming” (in addition
to the above-noted Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana Mission). Missions such as the National Mission on
Agricultural Extension and Technology aim to improve soil health and climate-resilient agro-ecological
systems through technical assistance.
The GoI has been covering part of the premium for crop insurance through crop insurance schemes since
2000. These include the National Agricultural Insurance Scheme, the Modified National Agricultural
Insurance Scheme, the Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme, the Coconut Palm Insurance Scheme,
the National Crop Insurance Program, the Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme, and
most recently, the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojna (PMFBY) scheme. PMFBY, introduced in 2016,
provides insurance to farmers for crop losses due to monsoon fluctuations or other extreme weather
events.
Public-sector research focuses on developing new crop varieties and management practices to improve
yields and tackle pests/diseases for various agro-climatic conditions. The Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR) launched the National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) project in
2011 to enhance the resilience of Indian agriculture to climatic variability and climate change through
strategic research and technology demonstration in crops, livestock, and fisheries. The project focuses on
selected commodities, such as wheat, rice, maize, pigeon pea, groundnut, tomato, mango, banana, cattle,
buffalo, and small ruminants. Major research themes include assessing the vulnerability of major
production zones; assessing the impacts of and developing varieties tolerant to climatic stresses
(e.g. drought, heat, flooding) in grain and horticulture crops; evolving adaptation and mitigation strategies
through enhanced water- and nutrient-use efficiency and conservation agriculture; studying changes in
pest dynamics, pest- and pathogen-crop relationships, and emergence of new pests and pathogens under
climate change. The emphasis on new varieties and new technologies translates into programmes such
as Crop Science, Horticulture Science, and Plant Science. The MIDH also includes the “Promotion of
Integrated Pest Management” programme. The Livestock Health and Disease Control Programme focuses
on disease control in the livestock sector and was launched in 2021.
Ongoing agro-climatic research includes the development of drought- and heat-tolerant genotypes in
chickpea, pigeon pea, and mung bean and the development of drought-tolerant onions and other
horticultural crops. India’s research institutions have also developed flood- and drought-tolerant rice
varieties and early-maturing wheat varieties for late-sowing areas to avoid terminal heat stress at the time
of maturity. The National Agricultural Research System (NARS) is developing location-specific wheat
varieties with traits addressing crop duration, varied soil conditions, and improved grain qualities while
increasing grain yield levels through traditional breeding.
ICAR and various state agricultural universities (SAU) are targeting research to develop response
mechanisms through early planting and short-duration varieties to mitigate potential climate-change risks.
The NFSM includes components focused on capacity building, namely “Cropping-system-based training”
and “Demonstrations on improved package for rice”, while the MIDH includes “Technology dissemination
through demonstration” and “Good Agriculture Practices”. Several programmes focus on improving
production practices, such as the “National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture” (NICRA), “Drought
and heat tolerant genotypes”, or “Agronomic management - Early planting”.
The GoI introduced new extension services for rice farmers in May 2022. These focus on disseminating
agricultural production practices that help producers use less water and chemical fertilisers. In July 2022,
the GoI also introduced extension and advisory services for farmers about mitigating extreme weather
conditions and adverse impacts on agricultural production, using climate-resilient seed varieties, including
rice and maize. This includes providing local weather information, including alerts and related agro-


 357

meteorological advisories using e-services launched by the Ministry of Earth Sciences. India first set up its
National Monsoon Mission to improve weather forecasts for farmers in 2012.
India’s 2022 updated NDC focuses on adapting to climate change by enhancing investments in
development programmes for sectors vulnerable to climate change, particularly agriculture, water
resources, the Himalayan region, coastal regions, and health and disaster management.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
In June 2022, the GoI increased the minimum support price (MSP) for several summer planted (kharif)
crops, including rice (5.2% increase) and maize (4.9%). In October 2022, the GoI raised the MSP for
several winter planted (rabi) crops, including rapeseed (7.9%), wheat (5.5%) and lentils (9%).
In July 2022, India added maize and rice to the list of products subject to the 5% Goods and Services Tax.
The two commodities were previously excluded from this list.
To address rising inflation, the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) extended in December 2022
by one year the suspension of futures trading of derivatives in several agricultural products, including
wheat, rice, and soybeans. The measure was initially introduced in January 2021.
In November 2022, the Ministry of Consumer Affairs removed the oilseeds and oil stock limits previously
imposed on wholesalers and traders. The measure had been introduced in 2021 to address rising prices
for edible oils by controlling stock quantities and monitoring consumption.
In January 2023, the GoI announced the release of 3 million tonnes of wheat into the domestic market
between January and March 2023, to help control rising wheat prices. The Food Corporation of India (FCI)
offered wheat through e-auctions to local millers and bulk buyers at a maximum volume of 3 000 tonnes
per buyer per action. In addition, wheat was offered to state governments for their food security
programmes, and public sector organisations and co-operative federations at a concessional rate of
INR 23 500 (USD 287) per tonne on the condition that the wheat be converted to flour and supplied to
consumers at INR 29 500 (USD 360) per tonne.
In May 2022, the GoI introduced new support for the use of drones in agricultural activities, particularly for
assessing the state of crops, spraying of fertilisers and pesticides, as well digitising land records. The
support provides a maximum of INR 533 000 (USD 6 454) in subsidies to small farmers, as well as women
in farming and farmers located in the north-eastern states, to buy drones. Other farmers would be eligible
for financial assistance up to a maximum of INR 426 000 (USD 5 164).
In April 2022, the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) in
India signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the National Research Development Corporation to
implement the Agri-Export Policy and strengthen commodities’ export value chains by disseminating
technologies to promote climate-resilient agriculture, zero carbon emission farming, and residue- and
carbon-free food for exports. The key areas of co-operation include developing farm machinery for low-
cost, user-friendly, and energy-efficient tools for small scale farmers, as well as promoting and supporting
agricultural start-ups.
In May 2022, the GoI amended the 2018 National Biofuels Policy that incorporated various advancements
in biofuels production and accelerated the E20 mandate to April 2025. The amendment i) allows more
feedstocks for production of biofuels, ii) introduces a set of measures which facilitate the blending target
of 20% ethanol in gasoline, iii) promotes the production of biofuels, and iv) grants permission for the export
of biofuels in specific cases, such as exports of biofuels from special economic zones and export-oriented
units for fuel purposes.
In December 2022, the GoI announced that under the NFSA it will continue to provide free food grains for
approximately 813.5 million beneficiaries in 2023,6 but it did not extend beyond 2022 the Pradhan Mantri
Garib Kalyan Ann Yojana (PMGKAY) programme, launched in April 2020 as a relief measure due to the


358 

COVID-19 pandemic. This follows a 60% reduction in the wheat allocation and a 50% increase in the rice
allocation within the PMGKAY programme for May-September 2022.
The Union Budget 2023-24, released in February 2023, increases the budget allocation to agriculture by
4.7% compared to the previous financial year. It emphasises credit to agricultural producers, digitalisation,
and improving production practices. Some specific elements are:
•
Investing INR 25.2 billion (USD 300 million) for the digitalisation of 63 000 agricultural credit
societies.
•
Further developing Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) for cotton producers, including
collaboration between farmers and private sector for input supplies, extension services, and
marketing promotion.
•
Launching the Aatmanirbhar Clean Plant programme of INR 22 billion (USD 300 million) to boost
availability of disease-free, quality planting material for high-value horticultural crops.
•
Promoting the Indian Institute of Millets Research to a centre for excellence, to support the
development of millet production.
•
Setting up an agricultural accelerator fund to fund start-ups by entrepreneurs in rural areas.
•
Setting up a National Cooperative database to extend coverage of co-operatives in villages where
these currently do not exist.
•
Encouraging 10 million farmers to adopt “natural farming”. Ten thousand bio-input resource
centres will be set up, creating a national level micro-fertiliser and pesticide manufacturing network.
Moreover, the PM-PRANAM scheme will be initiated to incentivise states to bring down the use of
mineral fertilisers. The Gobardhan scheme will also promote 200 compressed natural gas plants
using cow-dung and other agricultural and livestock waste.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
In April 2022 and November 2022, the Department of Fertilizers of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’
Welfare increased fertilisers subsidies for both the summer plants (kharif) and winter planted (rabi) crops
in response to rising international fertiliser prices. This includes support for domestically produced fertilisers
through freight subsidies to cover transport from producing states to other parts of the country.
In December 2022, India revised the 2015 gas procurement rules under which fertiliser companies were
required to buy 80% of their gas through long-term contracts. Fertiliser plants are now able to source more
gas through the domestic spot market (Indian Gas Exchange) or inter-company contracts.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
In March 2022, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MoCI) extended the unrestricted import policy for
pigeon peas and black gram lentils until 31 March 2023. These pulses can thus be imported without any
quantitative restrictions but remain subject to existing import duties. Moreover, in July 2022, the MoCI
issued a notification to increase imports of these pulses from Malawi, Mozambique, and Myanmar through
2026.
In May 2022, the MoCI introduced export restrictions for raw, refined, and white sugar. As of 1 June 2022,
exports of these products require a special permit from the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution/Department of Food and Public Distribution/Directorate of Sugar. The restriction is not
applicable to sugar exports destined to the United States and the European Union falling under tariff rate
quotas (TRQ). In October 2022, India extended the export restrictions for sugar until October 2023.
To address rising domestic prices of edible oils and food inflation, the MoCI introduced in May 2022 duty-
free TRQs of 2 million tonnes for crude soybean oil and 2 million tonnes for crude sunflower oil until 2024.


 359

Also in May 2022, the MoCI reintroduced a TRQ of 0.55 million tonnes for soybean meal, including meal
from genetically engineered (GE)-soybean varieties, to alleviate high livestock feed costs. India also
removed the 5% Agriculture Infrastructure and Development Cess (AIDC)7 on these edible oils. However,
in January 2023, the MOCI announced that the TRQ for crude soybean oil would only apply until the end
of 2023.
In October 2022, the Department of Food and Public Distribution extended until 31 March 2023 the
application of reduced tariff rates for crude palm oil; refined, bleached, and deodorised (RBD) palm olein;
RBD palm oil; and crude soybean oil.
In April 2022, the MoCI eliminated the 5% tariff rate and the 5% AIDC on cotton not carded or combed.
This applied between April and September 2022.
In October 2022, the MoCI authorised export-oriented units and firms set up in Special Economic Zones
to export flour made from imported wheat with the objective to facilitate exports of value-added products.
Food processors are thus allowed to import duty-free wheat against a commitment to export flour.
In January 2023, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) issued a notification that
introduces a list of 79 designated ports-of-entry for certain imports of food products considered to be of
high-risk. The products include milk and milk products; egg powder; meat and meat products, including
poultry, fish and fish products; infant foods; health supplements; foods for dietary uses, probiotic and
prebiotic foods; and foods for special medical purposes.
In January 2023, FSSAI introduced a notification setting new standards for basmati rice. The standards
foresee that imported basmati rice should “possess natural fragrance characteristic of basmati rice and be
free from artificial colouring and fragrance, and polishing agents.”
In April 2022, Australia and India signed an Economic Cooperation and Trade Agreement (ECTA)
encompassing various market access policy dimensions for goods and services. India will benefit from
preferential access to Australia's market for all its exports, including agri-food products. Around 96.4% of
India’s exports by value will enter Australia duty-free. Around 85% of Australia’s goods exports will benefit
from duty-free treatment in India and an additional 5% will see tariffs eliminated over a 10-year period.
However, products deemed sensitive by India, such as wheat, rice, sunflower seed oil, oil cake and maize,
remain excluded from any tariff concessions.
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
On 13 May 2022, the MoCI prohibited indefinitely exports of all types of wheat. The MoCI’s notification of
the export ban referenced the steep increase in global wheat prices and consequent risk to the food
security of India, neighbouring and other vulnerable countries. The notification also specified exemptions
to the ban for pending export shipments with an irrevocable letter of credit issued on or before the date of
notification. Exports were also allowed, with the GoI’s permission, to other countries to meet their food
security needs and based on requests from these governments. The MoCI issued on 14 May 2022 a trade
notice regarding the implementation of the export ban notification saying that exports of wheat on
humanitarian grounds as assistance between governments would be allowed on a case-by-case basis.
Subsequently, on 17 May 2022 the MoCI issued another trade notice allowing exports of wheat
consignments that had been handed over to customs for examination or registered into their systems on
or before 13 May 2022, whether or not they were tied to a specific letter of credit or other financial
instrument.
On 6 July 2022, India introduced export licensing requirements on wheat flour effective 12 July 2022. The
measure aimed to stabilise fluctuations in domestic prices and control the quality of exports as carried out
by the Export Inspection Council. Wheat flour had been excluded from the wheat export ban implemented
in May.


360 

On 9 September 2022, India imposed a 20% export duty on non-basmati rice (except for parboiled rice) to
boost domestic supplies amid a fall in area planted with paddy in the kharif (summer planted) season, also
within an open-ended timeframe. Furthermore, exports of broken rice have been banned to ensure
adequate availability for the domestic poultry industry, other animal feedstock, as well as ethanol
production. Due to loading in progress, exceptions to the rice export ban were allowed until 15 October
2022. In November 2022, the MoCI lifted however the ban on exports of organic non-basmati rice including
broken rice.
In August 2022, the Plant Quarantine Division of the MAFW published the Plant Quarantine Order. The
amended order grants expanded market access for cherries from the northwest United States.
Contextual information
India is the seventh largest country in the world by land area and became the most populous country
worldwide in 2023. While the share of urban population continued to increase over the past decade, about
two-thirds of the population still lives in rural areas. At just 0.15 hectare per capita, agricultural land is very
scarce.
Agriculture continues to be an important part of India’s economy. The sector accounts for 16.8% of GDP,
but the estimated 44% share of employment indicates that labour productivity remains significantly lower
than in the rest of the economy (Table 14.3). The productivity gap is also reflected in the evolution of farm
incomes, which have increased by less than one-third that of non-agricultural incomes in recent years.
Agriculture’s weight in the economy has gradually declined, mostly in favour of services, which have led
economic growth over the last two decades and played a more important role in India’s economic
development than in most other major emerging economies.
Indian agriculture is continuing to diversify towards livestock and away from grain crops. While grains and
milk remain dominant, there has been a gradual change in the composition of production to other crops –
such as sugar cane, cotton, fruit and vegetables – as well as certain meat sub-sectors. The livestock sector
has seen faster and less volatile growth than the crop sector. The agricultural sector continues to be
dominated by a large number of small-scale farmers, as the national average farm size has been in steady
decline.




 361

Table 14.3. India: Contextual indicators

India
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
2 212
10 194
5.5%
8.3%
Population (million)
1 060
1 408
24.7%
26.8%
Land area (thousand km2)
2 973
2 973
3.6%
3.6%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
180 975
179 045
6.0%
6.1%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
356
473
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
2 087
7 242
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
10.2
15.1
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
21.6
16.8
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
59.6
44.0
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
10.9
10.9
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.6
5.5
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
73
63
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
27
37
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
89
87
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Real GDP growth has been fluctuating between 4% and 8% over the last two decades, highlighting
remaining structural bottlenecks in areas such as labour markets or the business environment. The
COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions led to a 7% drop in GDP, but growth rebounded to an average
of 7.3% in 2021-22, placing India again among the fastest growing G20 economies. Growth moderated,
however, in 2022 against a backdrop of Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, supply chain
disruptions, and rising energy and food prices. Unemployment has increased since the COVID-19
pandemic, but the relatively low unemployment figure (averaging about 6.7% in 2019-21) hides significant
informal employment. Against a background of higher international prices and rising domestic wholesale
prices for selected food items, inflation reached 6% in 2022 (Figure 14.4).


362 

Figure 14.4. India: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
India is a consistent net agro-food exporter and the importance of agro-food products in total trade has
been increasing over the past two decades, with a share of 11% in 2021. However, agro-food imports have
until recently been growing faster than exports. Products for direct consumption – of low value, raw or
semi-processed, and marketed in bulk – dominate agro-food exports, representing 58% of the total in 2021.
Processed products for further processing by domestic industry are the main import category, accounting
for 68% of total agro-food imports (Figure 14.5).


 363

Figure 14.5. India: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural output growth in India averaged 3% in 2011-20, well above the world average (Figure 14.6).
This has been driven mainly by a significant increase in total factor productivity (TFP) which grew at 2.7%
per year, backed by technological progress in the form of improved seeds and better infrastructure
(including irrigation coverage, road density, and electricity supply).
India - Figure 6A. Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
10
20
30
40
50
India - Figure 6B. Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
19
19
68
68
23
23
7
7
43
43
4
4
15
15
21
21
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


364 

However, the sustained growth in agricultural output and fertiliser use have put mounting pressures on
natural resources, particularly land and water. This is reflected in the nutrient surplus intensities at the
national level, which have grown over time and are much higher than the average for OECD countries
(Table 14.4). About 80% of total water abstractions are by the agricultural sector. The share of agriculture
in total GHG emissions is also higher than the OECD average, partly due to the weight of the agricultural
sector in the Indian economy. Livestock rearing is the main source of GHGs.
Figure 14.6. India: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 14.4. India: Productivity and environmental indicators

India
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.7%
2.7%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
91.0
135.0
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
20.7
29.5
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
5.3
4.8
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
23.3
14.4
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
33.4
39.3
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
..
80.0
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
..
..
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.
India - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
2.69%
2.69%
1.12%
1.12%
0.07%
0.07%
0.35%
0.35%
0.29%
0.29%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
India
World
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%


 365

References

Government of India (2021), National Agriculture Market (e-NAM): One Nation One Market for
Agricultural produce,
https://static.pib.gov.in/WriteReadData/specificdocs/documents/2021/nov/doc2021112561.pdf
.
[4]
Gulati, A., D. Kapur and M. Bouton (2020), “Reforming Indian Agriculture”, Economic & Political
Weekly, Vol. 55/11, https://www.epw.in/journal/2020/11/special-articles/reforming-indian-
agriculture.html (accessed on 15 March 2020).
[3]
ICRIER (2022), Background Analysis for India chapter in Agricultural Policy Monitoring and
Evaluation Reports.
[2]
Ministry of Earth Sciences (2020), Assessment of Climate Change over the Indian Region,
http://www.indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/files/file/Assessment-of-Climate-Change-over-the-
Indian-Region.pdf.
[6]
OECD/ICRIER (2018), Agricultural Policies in India, OECD Food and Agricultural Reviews,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264302334-en.
[1]
Reserve Bank of India (2019), Report of the Internal Working Group to Review Agricultural
Credit, https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/PublicationReportDetails.aspx?UrlPage=&ID=942
(accessed on 10 January 2020).
[5]




Notes

1 The Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) plays the same role as the Public Distribution
System (PDS) before the TPDS but with a special focus on the poor.
2 In the seven states or UTs that do not have an APMC act, procurement can take place outside mandis.
3 Agriculture marketing also covers the futures market governed by the Securities and Exchange Board of
India (SEBI), with the largest value of agricultural commodity trade taking place through the National
Commodity Derivative Exchange (NCDEX). In addition, the Negotiable Warehouse Receipt System
(NWRS) – established under the Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA) – aims to
support farmers by storing products in warehouses. However, farmers, especially small and marginal, do
not directly trade in agri-futures market in India.
4 This represents the price below which exporters are not allowed to export a specific commodity. A
minimum export price is set taking into consideration concerns about domestic prices and supply of that
specific commodity.



366 


5 A Ministerial Decision on Export Competition at the WTO Ministerial Conference held in Nairobi in 2015
put an end to the subsidisation of agricultural exports, which for India would occur at the end of 2023
(https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/minist_e/mc10_e/l980_e.htm).
6 Under the NFSA, around two-thirds of the Indian population were beneficiaries, entitled to 5 kg food
grains per person every month for those people under the priority households (PHH) and 35 kg per
household under Antyodaya Ann Yojana (poorest of the poor). Prior to the announcement, food grains
were supplied at subsidised prices of INR 3 per kg for rice, INR 2 per kg for wheat, and INR 1 per kg for
coarse grains. Under the PMGKY scheme, the GoI provided an additional 5 kg of food grain free of cost to
about 800 million beneficiaries for the period April 2020 to December 2022.
7 The AIDC is a tax that the GoI levies on commercial agricultural production in the country.


 367

Support to agriculture
Support as a share of gross farm receipts in Indonesia declined to 8.0% in 2020-22 after peaking at 26.2%
in 2015. The largest component is Market Price Support (MPS) to producers, in line with the government’s
focus on food sovereignty and self-reliance. Prices received by farmers were 4% higher than world prices
on average. Staple products targeted by programmes aimed at self-sufficiency (e.g. sugar, maize, poultry,
rice, and eggs) had the highest single-commodity transfers relative to their gross farm receipts, all above
22%.
The share of potentially most-distorting producer transfers was 93% in 2020-22, reflecting the prominence
of MPS (including large negative price support due to increasing export taxes on palm oil) and payments
based on unconstrained variable input use (particularly fertilisers) in the Indonesian policy mix.
Indonesia’s food assistance programme (BPNT) supports poor consumers through electronic vouchers.
However, this budget transfer is smaller than the support transferred from consumers to producers via
price support measures. Therefore, consumers are penalised by agricultural policies with a Consumer
Support Estimate (CSE) of -14.2% of consumer expenditures measured at the farm-gate level.
Expenditures on general services to the sector (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) focus on
irrigation infrastructure and public stockholding, and are small compared to producer support, at 10% of
the Total Support Estimate (TSE). Expenditures for GSSE relative to the value of agricultural production
were 1.1%, lower than in other emerging economies such as the People’s Republic of China (hereafter
“China”) or India. TSE decreased from 1.5% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) to 1.1% in the last two
decades. However, this decline was due to increasingly negative MPS for some commodities (notably
palm oil), whereas positive support to the sector increased from 1.8% to 2.2% of GDP over the same
period.
Recent policy changes
The government adjusted the fertiliser subsidy scheme in response to high global prices. This policy has
the objectives of benefiting poor farmers and improving productivity, but an increasing price disparity
between subsidised and non-subsidised fertilisers began to challenge its implementation. Maximum prices
of subsidised fertilisers were increased, partially following world markets. Furthermore, the scheme was
restricted in 2022 to only three types of fertilisers and nine commodities, compared to all fertilisers and 70
commodities in 2021. Stricter supervision by law-enforcement agencies is in place to control the allocation
and distribution of subsidised fertilisers, and limit the sale of counterfeit fertilisers.
A letter from the Ministry of Agriculture on strengthening food security and uptake of domestic production
confirms self-sufficiency as a policy objective to achieve food security. The letter justifies and promotes
import-tariff protection for food-security objectives. Consistent with this, a new regulation from the recently
created National Food Agency (NFA) requires government food reserves to equal up to 5% of domestic
consumption needs for 11 staple commodities, doubling the previous 2.5% target.
15 Indonesia


368 

A foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) outbreak was declared in East Java in May 2022 after more than 30 years
of being FMD free. A new task force on FMD mitigation is leading control measures, including
decontamination, vaccination, and strengthened surveillance in areas that have not been infected.
Assessment and recommendations
•
To contribute to the resilience and adaptation of the agricultural sector, the recently established
National Research and Innovation Agency (BRIN) should prioritise climate-change adaptation
strategies in agriculture. There are already policies targeting the adoption of new technologies, but
they should focus on helping farmers develop capacity to adapt to the extent possible, rather than
on specific practices, to ensure incentives and capacities to find the best solutions for the specific
context of individual farmers. In particular, the knowledge and capacity building of agencies such
as the Indonesian Agency of Agricultural Research and Development could be strengthened to
ensure co-working between researchers, advisors, and farmers.
•
To improve the contribution of the agricultural sector to climate-change mitigation, the government
should assess whether the recent carbon tax bill and carbon-emission-rights mechanisms for coal
power plants could be extended to the sector. Indonesia could lower emissions from agriculture,
forestry and other land use (AFOLU) via measures to increase the adoption of climate-smart
agricultural practices, such as those identified in the Long-Term Strategy for Low Carbon and
Climate Resilience. Emissions could be reduced with improved management of agricultural land,
avoiding burning, and through active reforestation policies. Biofuel mandates and subsidies must
be evaluated from the perspective of potential negative spill-over onto land use and food access.
•
Indonesian agricultural policy focuses on self-sufficiency and trade measures to achieve food self-
reliance. This creates large price gaps between domestic and international markets for imported
products such as maize, poultry, and rice. The impact will likely work against objectives that
underpin the Food Law of 2012, including affordable prices for consumers who are penalised by
positive MPS, and diversification in production and diet, which is undermined by the concentration
of support to a few staple commodities.
•
Export restrictions on crude palm oil should be phased out as they reduce the prices for domestic
producers, including small holders, and require frequent adjustments. This policy change should
be accompanied by reinforced regulations against deforestation. The recurrent changes in export
taxes and domestic market obligations in 2022 have created market uncertainty, conflicting signals
to farmers, and bottlenecks in the chain.
•
The BPNT electronic food voucher system in place since 2019 represents an important
improvement in the effectiveness of the food assistance programme. Further steps could be taken
to improve food security, particularly combining the vouchers with a reduction in positive MPS to
staple commodities, which harms net food consumers.
•
Fertiliser subsidies are costly and can lead to inefficient use. Use must consider local soil and
production conditions to be effective and avoid negative environmental impacts. The fertiliser
subsidy scheme is unsustainable in the context of high global fertiliser prices, which increase
budgetary costs and generate potential for hoarding and counterfeiting. Converting subsidies into
payments per unit of land would make the support more efficient in transferring income to farmers.
•
Policies should stimulate investment in infrastructure and innovation. Savings from reduced input
subsidies could be re-allocated to Indonesia's Agricultural Innovation System. Investing in
knowledge transfer and advice to farmers would improve decisions on the allocation of inputs such
as fertilisers to local production needs. Advice could focus on improving farmers' skills to manage
production and natural resources on their farms, contributing to long-term agricultural productivity
growth and poverty reduction.


 369

•
Administrative requirements for agri-food imports related to food safety, quarantine, product
standards, and labelling have multiplied in Indonesia. Combined with uneven enforcement and
poor transparency due to changing rules, these requirements add to trade costs. Indonesia should
clarify and strengthen the scientific basis of these requirements, and improve consistency in their
implementation and co-ordination with other countries, such as in the ASEAN region.
Figure 15.1. Indonesia: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Indonesia - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
Indonesia - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Indonesia - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.025
1.05
1.075
1.1
Indonesia - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
Indonesia - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%


370 

Figure 15.2. Indonesia: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency. The producer price change and the border price change
are not calculated when both negative and positive market price support (MPS) occur at the commodity level for the previous year.  Note that
negative MPS estimates for livestock products may arise in cases of aligned product prices if there is positive MPS for feed commodities.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 15.3. Indonesia: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
Indonesia - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE change decomposition
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
Indonesia - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Maize
Rice
Soybeans
Sugar
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Eggs
Palm oil
Cocoa beans
-60%
-50%
-40%
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%


 371

Table 15.1. Indonesia: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
23 813
114 236
106 905
120 654
115 148
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
71.96
78.76
78.40
79.54
78.34
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
22 684
76 080
73 140
76 086
79 013
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
1 856
9 647
16 771
4 598
7 573
Support based on commodity output
1 763
3 120
13 983
-6 681
2 059
Market Price Support1
1 763
3 120
13 983
-6 681
2 059
Positive Market Price Support
2 360
15 833
17 384
13 789
16 327
Negative Market Price Support
-597
-12 713
-3 400
-20 471
-14 268
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
82
6 513
2 775
11 265
5 501
Based on variable input use
19
3 922
2 294
6 189
3 284
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
59
2 058
410
4 066
1 699
with input constraints
1
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
4
532
70
1 009
517
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
11
14
13
15
13
Based on Receipts / Income
11
14
13
15
13
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
7.68
8.01
15.29
3.49
6.28
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.08
1.04
1.16
0.96
1.04
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.08
1.09
1.18
1.04
1.07
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
623
1 284
1 840
565
1 446
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
45
61
84
35
65
Inspection and control
14
58
38
83
52
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
323
606
967
177
675
Marketing and promotion
0
5
3
7
5
Cost of public stockholding
240
554
749
264
649
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
22.96
9.83
9.19
6.79
13.20
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-2 001
-10 449
-12 718
-5 009
-13 620
Transfers to producers from consumers
-2 034
-12 610
-13 634
-8 356
-15 841
Other transfers from consumers
-318
-1 158
-1 309
-753
-1 413
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
328
2 167
1 415
3 154
1 932
Excess feed cost
22
1 152
809
946
1 702
Percentage CSE (%)
-8.90
-14.21
-17.73
-6.87
-17.67
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.12
1.22
1.26
1.14
1.28
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.10
1.17
1.22
1.07
1.21
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
2 807
13 098
20 026
8 317
10 951
Transfers from consumers
2 352
13 768
14 942
9 109
17 254
Transfers from taxpayers
773
488
6 393
-39
-4 890
Budget revenues
-318
-1 158
-1 309
-753
-1 413
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.47
1.10
1.89
0.70
0.82
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
1 044
9 978
6 043
14 998
8 892
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.56
0.83
0.57
1.26
0.67
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
376
348
369
409
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
9 322.08
14 582.21
14 593.09
14 307.82
14 845.71
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Indonesia are: maize, rice, soybean, sugar, milk,
beef and veal, pig meat, poultry, eggs, bananas, cassava, cocoa beans, coffee, palm oil and rubber.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




372 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Indonesia’s economy was relatively closed to trade for almost three decades from the 1960s to the 1980s.
Trade liberalisation started only in the 1990s with the signature of agreements that created the WTO and
the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA).
Over the past 30 years, the main priorities of Indonesia’s agricultural policy have been food self-sufficiency,
food diversification, value added, competitiveness, and farmers’ welfare. Agricultural producers benefit
from a wide range of input subsidies for fertilisers, seeds, and credits, among others. The number and cost
of these programmes grew rapidly starting in the mid-2000s. Since 1998, the government has increased
the minimum producer price of rice, while targeted food assistance for the poor (via subsidised rice under
the programme Raskin) was introduced, increasing expenditure on food assistance programmes.
Raskin went through a number of changes in the last decade and was eventually renamed as Rastra.
These programmes allowed the Food Logistics Agency BULOG to distribute about 10 kg of rice per poor
family per month. By 2019, this was replaced by the current BPNT programme that has grown to become
a large-scale programme to provide an electronic food voucher, replacing physical rice distribution.
Tariffs fell significantly, with the average for agriculture (excluding alcoholic beverages) dropping from 20%
in 1990 to 5% in 2010. Import monopolies, licensing requirements and export restrictions on agricultural
products were removed in 1997-98. However, quantitative import restrictions were introduced, notably for
rice, sugar and beef. Import requirements imposed for sanitary, phytosanitary and religious or cultural
reasons (i.e. halal certification) are significant and potentially stringent. Export taxes were introduced in
1994 on crude palm oil (CPO) and its derivatives, and on cocoa in 2010. These and other export restrictions
to CPO persist with adjustments over the years.
Indonesia’s current agricultural policies are framed in the 2012 Food Law, which establishes the objectives
of “food self-reliance and food sovereignty” (kemandirian pangan dan kedaulatan pangan). In practice, the
goal is achieving self-sufficiency on staple and strategic commodities (rice, maize, soybean, sugar, and
beef). The country provides subsidies for input use, particularly fertilisers and seeds.
Table 15.2. Indonesia: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1960s to 1980s
Closed economy
Production expansion to avoid social unrest, rise in oil
prices and green revolution
Food Logistics Agency (BULOG) established in 1967 and its marketing
role expanded
Subsidised inputs such as fertilisers, pesticides and credit
Significant spending on infrastructure
Increased import tariff rates
Quantitative control of exports and imports
Export taxes on palm oil and its derivatives
1980s – 1996
Trade liberalisation
Abolishment of tariffs, general tariffs reduction programme
Trade agreements (URAA, AFTA, APEC)
New legislation on export tax on palm oil and its derivatives in 1994
Phase out of input subsidies
1997-1999
Market reform
Asian financial crisis
Reduction of BULOG’s monopoly powers, particularly in rice markets
Reduction of fertiliser subsidy
Introduction of targeted rice distribution programme (OPK/Raskin)
Tariffs replace import licensing arrangements for sugar
Abolishment of local content requirements for dairy and soybeans
Temporary removal of export taxes on palm oil and its derivatives


 373

Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
2000-2012
Measures to revitalise the agricultural sector in
response to poor productivity
Reinstated fertiliser subsidy
Increased expenditures in extension services R&D and irrigation
Increased tariffs on rice and sugar
Quantitative controls on trade in rice, sugar and beef
More stringent non-tariff measures
Variable export tax on palm oil and its derivatives, and on cocoa
2012-present
2012 Food Law, policy focus on self-sufficiency of
staple food (rice, maize, soybeans, sugar and beef)

Increased role of BULOG in rice imports and domestic market
Distribution of rice at low prices, first through Raskin programme, then
Rastra and finally BPNT electronic vouchers organising rice
distribution
More input subsidies for fertilisers, seeds and credit.
Grant for machineries to targeted farmers’ groups
New initiative on food estate
Indonesia’s producer support estimate has been mostly positive over the past 30 years, mainly due to
market price interventions (tariffs and minimum prices). The only exception occurred during the financial
crisis in 1998 and the food crisis in 2008. Export taxes imposed on palm oil and cocoa result in negative
support for those commodities. The negative price support to palm oil quintupled in 2021 and 2022 due to
skyrocketing world prices not fully transmitted to local consumers for which palm oil is a staple commodity.
Budgetary transfers to producers (input subsidies) and consumers (food aid), are smaller than the support
to the price of other staple commodities such as sugar, maize, poultry, rice and eggs, and have been stable
over the past decade.
Figure 15.4. Indonesia: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1990 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Indonesia - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40


374 

Main policy instruments
The Food Law of 2012 shapes Indonesia's current agricultural policy and set of core objectives. It sets out
the principles of food self-reliance (kemandirian pangan) and food sovereignty (kedaulatan pangan) as the
applied approach to food security. The law stipulates that domestic food demand be fulfilled by imports if
local food sources are insufficient (USDA FAS, 2019[1]). The same principles are manifest in the Strategic
Plan of the Ministry of Agriculture 2020-24: achieving self-sufficiency in the production of selected staple-
food commodities (rice, maize, soybeans, sugar and beef) to assure food security; ensuring food prices
are affordable for consumers across the archipelago; diversifying production and consumption away from
carbohydrates (rice and wheat) towards animal-based products, and fruits and vegetables (particularly root
vegetables); raising the competitiveness of agricultural production and value-added processing; increasing
the availability of raw materials for bio-industry and bioenergy; and improving the welfare of farmers
through higher incomes as a way to reduce the level of rural poverty (OECD, 2012[2]).
Indonesia pursues its policy objectives through both domestic and trade measures. Domestic policy
measures include minimum purchase prices for rice and sugar; substantial budgetary allocations for input
support; and provision of services to the agricultural sector as a whole, especially for irrigation, research
and development, and marketing and promotion.
Indonesia transformed the former Food Security Agency (FSA/BKP) under the Ministry of Agriculture in
July 2021, establishing the National Food Agency (NFA/Bapanas). NFA manages government food
reserves and, through BULOG, manages public interventions in the domestic market and imports. It is also
responsible for market operations aimed at stabilising domestic prices. BULOG can only buy rice from
farmers when the market price is lower than or equal to the minimum price and must maintain a minimum
year-end stock of 2 million tonnes, about 2.5% of annual consumption (USDA FAS, 2019[1]). Only BULOG
can import medium-quality rice with a maximum of 25% broken grains. However, private companies can
import specialty rice such as jasmine and basmati (USDA FAS, 2018[3]). In 2017, Indonesia introduced
ceiling prices on medium- and premium-quality rice at the retail level, which vary across regions. When the
retail price exceeds the ceiling, BULOG releases rice from stocks to the market. The state-owned food
holding ID FOOD also plays a role in food-related policies, e.g. by facilitating the distribution of cooking oil.
In May 2019, the Rastra food assistance programme was replaced by the BPNT, co-ordinated by the
Ministry of Social Affairs (Ministry of Social Affairs (Kementerian Sosial), 2019[4]). Under the BPNT, eligible
households receive IDR 150 000 (USD 10.3) per month on a purchasing card that can be used to buy rice
at the market price from selected retailers.
A wide range of input subsidies – on fertilisers, seeds and credit – support agricultural producers. The
percentage of subsidy varies across fertiliser types, with urea receiving the highest, at 67.2% of the market
price (Sudaryanto, 2018[5]). Subsidies are paid to fertiliser manufacturers who are mandated to sell
fertilisers to farmers at a reduced price. Before the beginning of the planting season, the Ministry of
Agriculture (MoA) issues a decree on the estimated demand for different types of fertilisers by province,
along with the reference retail price of fertilisers. Based on this information, governors of the corresponding
provinces break down the demand for fertiliser by district. The decree also serves as a reference for
fertiliser companies to distribute fertilisers in the corresponding regions. In addition to the subsidy, the MoA
also directly distributes fertilisers to food crop farmers in selected regions.
The MoA encourages small and medium-scale farm businesses through partnerships between the private
sector and community investment that support Micro Business Credit. One large-scale programme focuses
on the development of regional food production centers: the programme, called the Food Estate (FE),
integrates upstream to downstream activities.
The government of Indonesia invests in irrigation infrastructure. According to the Ministry of Public Works,
approximately 84% of Indonesian harvested rice area is irrigated, while the remaining 16% is rain fed
(USDA FAS, 2019[1]). Facilitated by savings from reduced fuel subsidies since 2015, the government has


 375

pushed to improve irrigation infrastructure, mainly for rice production. Investments in infrastructure
complement exemptions in place for water transportation costs: farmers are not charged for the cost of
delivering water from the source to the tertiary system via primary and secondary canals.
Indonesia restricts imports of strategic commodities (those associated with self-sufficiency targets: rice,
maize, soybeans, sugar and beef). The Food Law sets out the principles that underpin food trade. It
contains provisions restricting staple food exports and imports, such as “state food export can only be
implemented after fulfilling National Food Reserve and staple food consumption necessity” and “food
imports can only be implemented if domestic food production is not sufficient” (Articles 34 and 36). Trade
policy includes both tariff and non-tariff measures. The trade weighted average of applied most favoured
nation (MFN) import tariff on agro-food products was 5.6% in 2020. Rice and sugar have higher specific
tariffs. Quantitative import restrictions and licensing are in place, notably for rice, sugar and beef. Those
import requirements imposed for food safety and religious reasons are becoming more stringent. The MFN
tariff schedule is updated every five years by the Ministry of Finance (Buku Tarif dan Kepabeanan).
Since 2008, importing companies must receive Ministry of Trade approval as registered importers for a
range of processed products manufactured from meat, cereal, sugar and cocoa. Similar restrictions were
placed on imports of animals in 2011. In line with the Ministry of Trade regulation, “On the Import and
Export of Animals and Animal Products” issued in September 2011, these imports can only be carried out
if the domestic production and supply are not sufficient to meet consumer demand at an affordable price.
A variable export tax on cocoa and palm oil was put in place in 2010 and 2015, respectively (OECD,
2012[2]). The tax rate on crude palm oil depends on reference prices and is zero for prices below USD 750
per tonne. When reference prices exceed this level, the tax is imposed on a sliding scale between USD 3
and USD 200 per tonne. Since 2015, the government collects an additional export levy for crude palm oil
on top of the variable export tax to finance subsidies to biodiesel, infrastructure, research and development
projects on palm oil, replanting in small farms, market promotion and human resource development.
To reduce dependency on fossil fuels, government policy focused in the last two decades on shifting from
fossil fuel consumption to the use of biofuels mainly from palm oil, with the first regulation on biofuel
development introduced in 2006. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MERM) led the research
and development process and started a mandate to use biofuels in transportation in 2008. Indonesian
biodiesel mandates expanded in 2015 with MERM Regulation 12/2015, which establishes a 10% biofuel
blending requirement. Since then, the biofuel blending rate has been progressively increased to its current
level of 35% for biodiesel across all uses (Halimatussadiah et al., 2021[6]). To ensure the success of the
blending mandate, the Indonesia Oil Palm Estate Fund (BPDP) provides a subsidy to biofuel producers.
The BPDP collects the additional export levy and redistributes it to producers of biofuels who sell their
products domestically. In 2021, 16% of palm oil production was dedicated to biofuels, 94% of which were
consumed domestically. A moratorium on the issuance of licenses for new palm oil plantations entered
into force in 2018, to combat palm oil-driven deforestation and loss of peatland, followed by a Presidential
Instruction on National Action Plan on Indonesian Sustainable Palm Oil 2019-2024.
Indonesia submitted its updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in July 2021. It aims to reduce greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions by 29% by 2030 compared to a business-as-usual (BAU) scenario, or by 41% of the
BAU contingent on sufficient international financial support. 1 The NDC also states Indonesia’s plans to
reach peak GHG emissions in 2030 and net-zero GHG emissions by 2060 or sooner (WRI, 2021[7]).
Indonesia’s Long-Term Strategy for Low Carbon and Climate Resilience (LTS-LCCR) 2050 aims to
contribute to global mitigation goals while achieving national development, and finding a balance between
objectives for emissions reduction, economic growth, justice and climate-resilience. Even though there is
not an agriculture-specific target for GHG mitigation, according to this strategy, the AFOLU sector could
become a net sink by 2050. The LTS-LCCR suggests technologies to apply to the agricultural sector but
does not include quantitative targets. These suggestions include: (1) adoption of low-emission varieties


376 

and water-saving cultivation systems in paddy fields; (2) utilisation of manure for biogas, and livestock feed
improvement in livestock management; and (3) reduced use of synthetic fertiliser.
The government of Indonesia has issued several regulations to reduce agricultural GHG emissions,
obliging farmers to implement environmentally sustainable practices. Activities such as the production of
inputs, irrigation, and the use of cultivation equipment must also comply with these regulations (Bapenas,
2021[8]). A Presidential Regulation in 2021 focused on the Implementation of Carbon Economic Value to
Achieve Nationally Determined Contribution Targets and Control of Greenhouse Gas Emissions in National
Development (Government of Indonesia, 2021[9]). This regulation defines a universal approach to
measurement of the effort in reducing emissions, to be reflected in targets that are set at the national level.
The economic value of carbon is used by the government to select the most efficient mitigation actions to
contribute to national targets and to manage the trade-off between environmental sustainability and
productivity. This is particularly the case for subsidised inorganic fertilisers and conventional irrigation
systems, which increase food production, but are also the largest contributors to GHG emissions from
agriculture in Indonesia.
Indonesia is a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC), and World Trade Organization (WTO). It participates in trade liberalisation between
ASEAN members and their major trading partners in the region, including China, Japan, India, Korea,
Australia, and New Zealand. The ASEAN economies committed in 2015 to complete the formation of the
ASEAN Economic Community by 2025. This is intended to develop a single market and production base,
a highly competitive economic region, a region of equitable economic development, and a region fully
integrated into the global economy (ASEAN Secretariat, 2017[10]).
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
Indonesia’s plan on Low Carbon and Climate Resilient Development 2050 is based on striking a balance
between future emissions reductions and economic development (Government of Indonesia, 2021[11]). The
plan implies mitigation, but also adaptation by improving crop productivity and cropping intensity,
implementing integrated farming systems, optimising the use of unproductive or idle land, and reducing
food loss and waste (Government of Indonesia, 2021[12]). To increase productivity, the strategy envisages
revitalising agricultural extension services; providing sufficient space for the private sector, research
agencies and universities to engage in empowering farmers; and improving agricultural vocational
education. Expanding value-chain financing schemes and credit schemes for farmers is also part of this
strategy to facilitate technology adoption.
Adaptation of Indonesian agriculture to the impacts of climate change is facilitated by programmes and
support to farmers that include insurance to buffer against shocks in the short term, technical support to
improve practices and technologies in the medium term, and investment in infrastructure to support long-
term transformation (MoA, 2018[13]).
Buffer against shocks in the short term
Agricultural insurance against production losses protects farmers’ income with respect to the increased
incidence of floods, droughts, and pests and diseases. Since 2015, Indonesia offers rice-farming insurance
(AUTP) and cattle and buffalo insurance (AUTS/K) in collaboration with the insurance company PT
Jasindo. PT Jasindo provides this insurance through a digital application, Protan (Proteksi Pertanian),
since 2021. For 2022, the MoA targeted coverage of 1 million hectares under crop insurance and of
120 000 heads under cattle insurance. Government subsidies cover 80% of the annual crop insurance fee.


 377

Support incremental changes in the medium term
The integrated planting calendar information system, Katam, provides farmers with spatial information on
specific shocks and local conditions based on climate information and forecasts. This information includes
seasonal forecasts, estimates for optimal planting dates and cropping patterns, potential planting area,
drought and flood-prone areas, recommended doses, and the appropriate composition of fertilisers.
As part of their adaptation policy, the ministry releases crop varieties that are tolerant to dry climate, such
as for rice and soybeans. Some rice varieties are tolerant to increasing salinity, supporting adaptation to
rising sea levels in coastal areas.
Technical support focuses on the use of adapted practices and technologies, particularly on water
management and double cropping. Rainwater harvesting is an alternative water-management technology
that follows the principle of collecting excess water during the rainy season to use during the dry season
for crop irrigation. This technology has been applied in line with infrastructure development, particularly
ditches (embung) and dams being built with government support. Ratoon rice farming refers to the
production of a second rice crop from the stubble after the harvest of the main crop, and is suitable for
certain rice production systems impacted by climate in Indonesia. These technologies are promoted
through technical provisions, such as irrigation systems, and non-technical aspects, including support to
extension workers, which motivate farmers’ adoption.
A long list of other technologies and practices are promoted to adapt to climate change: soil- and water-
conservation technology; balanced fertilisation and use of soil-enhancing organic fertiliser; integration of
crops and livestock through a zero-waste approach; planting in household gardens; use of varieties that
are adapted to climate change; Minapadi (rice-fish) technology, where feasible; agricultural mechanisation;
maps and information systems; no-burn technology; integrated pest management (IPM); and control and
management of animal diseases.
Support long-run transformation
Certain technologies for irrigation or direct seeding require investment in infrastructure development.
These investments aim to meet the water needs of plants when water availability is limited. Direct seed
planting methods without the use of nurseries is an adaptation to reduced water availability but requires
significant transformation of the production system. Investments into these methods are supported and
implemented together with other modern agricultural technology, improved varieties, balanced fertilisation,
biological fertilisers, compost, and integrated pest control.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
Institutional changes
The National Food Agency (NFA/Bapanas), along with related ministries, has issued a regulation on the
Management of Government Food Reserves (Government of Indonesia, 2022[14]) and is in the process of
drafting a guideline for accelerating food diversification based on local resources and culture. The
regulation requires the establishment of government food reserves of up to 5% of domestic consumption
needs for 11 staple commodities, doubling the previous target of 2.5%. The new rules also seek to ensure
adequate food supplies to low-income communities and to that end reserves are released in case of
shortages, price spikes, natural disasters, supply chain disruptions and other emergencies. Food reserves
will be amassed through the purchase of domestically produced goods at specific reference purchase
prices set by the NFA. In a first phase, several institutions are involved in preparing technical procedures
under the supervision of the State Logistics Agency (BULOG) to lay out detailed technical regulations on
the planning, procurement and distribution targets for national and regional stocks of rice, maize and
soybeans (AMIS, 2022[15]).


378 

A new Agricultural Instrument Standardization Agency (Badan Standardisasi Instrument Pertanian, BSIP)
was created in 2022 by Presidential Decree. This agency was created via the transformation of the
Indonesian Agency for Agricultural Research and Development (IAARD) whose research and development
functions were integrated into the National Research and Innovation Agency (BRIN). BSIP has a mandate
to formulate, implement and harmonise agricultural instrument standards (Government of Indonesia,
2022[16]). Agricultural items covered by this standardisation agency include materials, equipment, methods,
documents, infrastructure and facilities used in the agricultural sector. Examples of items within the purview
of the agency are seeds and seedlings, fertilisers, pesticides, land and soil, water and standard operating
procedures of agricultural technologies. Integration of IAARD research functions into BRIN may create
uncertainty on the delivery of its former function to disseminate agricultural technology to small farmers as
BRIN is more focused on technology development than on the adoption of innovations. BSIP at the
provincial level may need to take over the function of providing advice to farmers, as well as the
dissemination and adoption of technology.
Animal health
A foot and mouth disease (FMD) outbreak took place in the province of East Java in May 2022, which had
been declared free from FMD since 1986. The disease spread to several other areas of Indonesia. The
affected area contributes about three-quarters of the national production of beef cattle and dairy cows
(MoA, 2022[17]). The estimated economic loss from the disease is USD 1.37 billion, with the most severe
impact on small-scale farmers (Jakarta Post, 2022[18]) (Beazley, 2022[19]). These losses are due to reduced
milk productivity, slower growth rate of beef cattle, declining fertility and slowing of pregnancy, mortality
and culling of chronically infected livestock (Ristiani, 2022[20]). Moreover, supply chains are disrupted due
to restrictions on livestock transportation.
Indonesia has implemented a multilevel strategy to limit the spread of the epidemic across regions and
country borders. First, the Head of the National Disaster Mitigation Agency (NDMA) determined the
Emergency Status due to FMD, allowing the heads of regional governments to trigger and accelerate
protection measures in their respective regions, financed by the central government budget (NDMA,
2022[21]). Second, a Circular Letter of the Minister of Agriculture on Control and Management of FMD in
Livestock triggers contingency plans to prepare for and control FMD (MoA, 2022[22]). Third, a Decree of
the Minister of Agriculture creates a Task Force for mitigating FMD impacts on animal health, the
environment and other economic and social aspects (MoA, 2022[23]). Fourth, a Decree of the Director
General of Livestock and Animal Health Services specifies standard operating procedures for control and
management of FMD outbreaks (DGLAH, 2022[24]).
Biosecurity standards are applied through the Animal Health Posts on the ground, including
decontaminating or destroying cages, equipment, vehicles, and other materials. A massive vaccination
programme is underway, together with strengthened surveillance in areas that have not been infected. A
zone-based biosecurity system was applied to the archipelagic structure of the country, where islands are
separated by sea, to slow or stop the spread of disease.
Fertiliser subsidies
In 2022, the Indonesian fertiliser subsidy budget was IDR 25 trillion (USD 1.67 billion), which was provided
to 16 million farmers (MoA, 2022[25]). An October 2022 Regulation by the Minister of Agriculture (MoA,
2022[26]) set the highest retail price (HET) of subsidised fertiliser and allocated subsidies to 9 million tonnes
of fertiliser. Beneficiaries must be registered on-line through the e-RDKK platform that supports national
food security.
Under the new fertiliser policy programme, subsidies are restricted to three types of fertilisers (urea, NPK
and NPK special formula) and to nine commodities, compared to 70 commodities previously. The highest


 379

retail price of urea has significantly increased from IDR 1 800 (USD 0.12) per kilogramme to IDR 2 250
(USD 0.15) per kilogramme, following to some extent the global price of fertiliser.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
In response to the high market price conditions created by the war in Ukraine, the government of Indonesia
took steps to tighten and better target the distribution of subsidised fertilisers, by preparing data on
beneficiaries using digital technology and strengthening supervision. Despite the increase in the highest
retail price, the disparity in prices between subsidised and non-subsidised fertilisers has grown
significantly. The price of non-subsidised fertilisers in Indonesia has significantly increased compared to
previous years (CMEF, 2022[27]).
The large disparity in the prices of subsidised and non-subsidised fertilisers creates challenges due to the
hoarding of subsidised fertilisers and fertiliser counterfeiting. New non-subsidised fertilisers have emerged
with trademarks very similar to those of subsidised fertilisers, such that some farmers have received low-
quality products that generate sub-optimal plant growth and increase the prevalence of pests and diseases.
Consequently, more strict supervision by law enforcement agencies has been implemented to control the
allocation and distribution of subsidised fertilisers.
Other policies
A Presidential Directive by the NFA set a reference selling price for soybeans at around IDR 10 000
(USD 0.67) per kilogramme and required state-owned enterprises to buy soybeans from local farmers.
Soybean subsidy programmes were launched in April and October 2022, involving BULOG and Kopti (the
tempeh and tofu producer’s co-operative). Kopti’s members are eligible to purchase soybeans from
BULOG with a government subsidy of IDR 1 000 (USD 0.07) per kg (FAS-USDA, 2022[28]). However, only
a fraction of these sales took place in practice due to difficulties in administering the programme. An
additional budget of IDR 400 billion (USD 26 000) has been earmarked for expanding the soybean planting
area (AMIS, 2022[29]).
The Palm Oil Plantation Fund Management Agency (BPDP-KS) finances actions to increase production
levels and the productivity of palm oil production systems, including through the programme for replanting
for small plantations (PSR). From 2017 to 2022 the programme facilitated replanting of 278 200 hectares
of palm, or almost 10% of the total area (MoA, 2023[30]).
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
To strengthen food security and prioritise the uptake of domestic food production, the following policy
directions, emphasising self-sufficiency policies, have been proposed (MoA, 2022[31]):
•
Controlling the import of high quality rice, which can be produced domestically, and to prioritise
demand for Indonesian farmers’ production.
•
Clearly distinguishing food corn from feed corn to be able to apply higher tariff rates to the former.
•
Substituting imported wheat products with domestically produced sorghum and cassava, and also
better identifying food and feed wheat trade flows.
•
Imposing import duties on corn, soybean, and wheat in accordance with WTO provisions, using
the tariff revenue to support corn, soybean, sorghum, and cassava farmers in Indonesia.
•
Using import controls to achieve food security objectives.
The export policies on palm oil have been adjusted in response to market conditions, in particular high
market prices for cooking oil (FAS-USDA, 2022[28]). In January 2022, the government subsidised the price
of simple-packed cooking oil with funds taken from the export levy (CPO fund) for two weeks. In February,
a new policy of Domestic Market Obligation (DMO) was enacted requiring all exporters to sell at least 20%


380 

of planned exports in the domestic market (with an increase to 30% starting in March). In April, the Ministry
of Trade banned palm oil exports to safeguard domestic availability and affordability of cooking oil. Up to
that date, increased rates of export levies – on top of an export tax of USD 200 per tonne – had been
applied when the reference price reached USD 1 050 per tonne (AMIS, 2022[32]). A ministerial regulation
extended the export ban to crude palm oil, red palm oil, palm oil mill effluent, refined bleached deodorised
palm oil as well as used cooking oil. Tariff revenues were used to subsidise bulk cooking oil sales (approx.
202 million litres per month) through the Oil Palm Plantation Fund Management Agency that continues the
distribution of bulk cooking oil to vulnerable communities. In June and August 2022, Indonesia relaxed
rules to allow more companies to export palm oil and reduce high palm oil inventories that prevented
refiners from buying more palm fruits from farmers (AMIS, 2022[33]). In February 2023, Indonesia
announced that only 33% of palm oil export permits would be granted until 1 May, a temporary restriction
aiming to secure short-run domestic supply ahead of Ramadan (AMIS, 2023[34]).
Contextual information
Indonesia is the fourth most populous country in the world with 274 million inhabitants, with rapid population
growth and high population density. Indonesia is also one of the world's largest agricultural producers.
Despite a reduction of the share of the sector in the economy in the last two decades, it still accounts for
13% of GDP. The reduction in the share of the work force employed in the agricultural sector has been
proportionally much larger, declining from 45% in 2000 to 29% in 2021, with an increase in the average
production per employed person in the sector.
Indonesia is a net agro-food exporter and the share of its total exports that come from the sector have
tripled in the last two decades to 22% in 2021. The country is also a large importer of agro-food products.
Total agricultural area in Indonesia has increased by almost one-third in the last two decades and currently
represents 2.1% of the agricultural land in all countries covered in this report. While food crop production
is predominantly based on small family farms, there are large commercial farms producing perennial crops,
particularly palm oil.




 381

Table 15.3. Indonesia: Contextual indicators

Indonesia
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
1 097
3 566
2.7%
2.9%
Population (million)
205
274
4.8%
5.2%
Land area (thousand km2)
1 878
1 878
2.3%
2.3%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
47 177
62 300
1.6%
2.1%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
112
143
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
5 346
13 027
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
26.3
18.0
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
15.6
13.3
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
45.3
29.0
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
6.8
22.3
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
12.7
12.5
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
84
77
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
16
23
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
43
42
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Indonesia's economy has grown at around 5% per year between 2000 and 2019, more than doubling the
real income per capita. In 2020, GDP decreased as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic and related
restrictions, but economic growth was back to 5.3% in 2022. The inflation rate has been steadily decreasing
from almost 10% in the 2000s to 1.6% in 2021, rebounding to 4.2% in 2022. The rate of unemployment
has remained stable for year slightly above 4%.
The value of agro-food exports has oscillated around USD 30 billion in the last decade but strongly
increased to USD 51.6 billion in 2021 driven by a large increase in palm oil export value due to a peak of
world prices for palm oil. Imports reached USD 24.5 billion in the same year. Around 79% of agro-food
exports are processed products to be further transformed by industries in other countries such as rubber
and palm oil. A similarly significant share of agro-food imports (72%) is destined for further processing in
Indonesia.


382 

Figure 15.5. Indonesia: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Figure 15.6. Indonesia: Agro-food trade

Indonesia - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
10
20
30
40
50
60


 383


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Indonesia's agricultural production increased at an annual rate of 3.6% in 2011-20, well above the global
average. Most of this growth is productivity driven: Total Factor Productivity (TFP) has increased by 2.5%
per year, also above the world’s average and representing technological improvements and improved
efficiency to combine different production factors. Additional primary factors, including land, and
intermediate inputs have contributed an additional 0.7 and 0.4 points to the production growth,
respectively. Unlike in the 1990s, Indonesia's growth in output and TFP has significantly outperformed the
global averages during the last 10 years.
Indonesian agriculture accounts for an increasing share of national water extractions, which was 85.2% in
2021. However, the sector's shares of energy used has fallen since 2000 to 0.6% in 2021, while the share
of GHG emissions has remained relatively stable at 13.3% in 2021, while the whole of agriculture, forest
and other land use -in particular deforestation and forest degradation- have represented more than half of
Indonesian emissions in 2000-18. The country's phosphorous balance is below the OECD average, while
the nitrogen balance has decreased in the last two decades to significantly negative levels in 2021.
Indonesia - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
79
79
35
35
5
5
37
37
12
12
16
16
5
5
12
12
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


384 

Figure 15.7. Indonesia: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 15.4. Indonesia: Productivity and environmental indicators

Indonesia
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
-0.1%
2.5%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
17.9
-68.3
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
1.5
0.4
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.4
0.6
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
13.2
13.3
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
11.5
10.8
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
81.9
85.2
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
..
..
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


Indonesia - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
2.47%
2.47%
1.12%
1.12%
0.71%
0.71%
0.35%
0.35%
0.41%
0.41%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Indonesia
World
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%


 385

References

Affairs, I. (ed.) (2022), Fixing the Subsidized Fertilizer Management, the Government Prepares
the Agricultural Sector to be More Innovative and Adaptive with Advances in Technology,
Press conference 15 July 2022.
[27]
AMIS (2023), AMIS Market Monitor 106.
[34]
AMIS (2022), AMIN Market Monitor 100.
[33]
AMIS (2022), AMIS Market Monitor 102, AMIS FAO.
[29]
AMIS (2022), AMIS Market Monitor 104.
[15]
AMIS (2022), AMIS Market Monitor 99, FAO-AMIS.
[32]
ASEAN Secretariat (2017), ASEAN Economic Community Factsheet, https://asean.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/05/7c.-May-2017-Factsheet-on-AEC.pdf.
[10]
Bapenas (2021), Rapid review of low carbon development policy and budget mapping: Input for
the 2022 government work plan (Kajian Cepat Pemetaan Kebijakan dan
AnggaranPpembangunan Rendah Karbon: Masukan untuk Rencana Kerja Pemerintah 2022),
Indonesian Ministry of National Development Planning, Jakarta.
[8]
Beazley (2022), “Foot-and-mouth disease: how Indonesia is trying to control the outbreak by the
end of the year.”, The Guardian Sidney, Vol. 10 August 202,
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2022/aug/04/foot-and-mouth-disease-indonesia-
fmd-bali-outbreak-control-plan-cattle-sheep-livestock-farm-cases.
[19]
DGLAH (2022), Decree of the Director General of Livestock and Animal Health Services Number
5429/2022 on Standard Operating Procedures to Control and Management of Outbreaks of
Foot and Mount and Disease in Indonesia, Directorate General of Livestock and Animal
Health Services. Jakarta.
[24]
FAS-USDA (2022), Oilseeds and Products Update. Indonesia, Foreign Agricultural Service
USDA, pp. ID2022-0021.
[28]
Government of Indonesia (2022), Peraturan Presiden Nomor 117/2022 tentang Kemeterian
Pertanian (Presidential Decree Number 117/2022 on the Ministry of Agriculture), Government
of Indonesia, Jakarta.
[16]
Government of Indonesia (2022), Peraturan Presiden Nomor 125 Tahun 2022 tentang
Penyelenggaraan Cadangan Pangan Pemerintah (Presidential Decree Number 125/2022 on
Administration of Government Food Reserves), Government of Indonesia, Jakarta.
[14]
Government of Indonesia (2021), Indonesia Long-Term Strategy for Low Carbon and Climate
Resilience 2050, Government of Indonesia, Jakarta.
[12]
Government of Indonesia (2021), Indonesia’s Updated NDC for A Climate Resilient Future.
Indonesia Green Growth Program, Bappenas and Global Green Growth Institute,
http://greengrowth.bappenas.go.id/en/indonesias-updated-ndc-for-a-climate-resilient-future/.
[11]


386 

Government of Indonesia (2021), President Regulation Number 98/2021 on Implementation of
Carbon Economic Value to Achieve Nationally Determined Contribution Targets and Control
of Greenhouse Gas Emissions in National Development, Government of Indonesia, Jakarta.
[9]
Government of Indonesia (2021), Updated Nationally Determined Conbtribution. Republic of
Indonesia.
[35]
Halimatussadiah, A. et al. (2021), “Progressive biodiesel policy in Indonesia: Does the
Government’s economic proposition hold?”, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
Vol. 150, p. 111431, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111431.
[6]
Jakarta Post (2022), “Foot-and-mouth could cost country estimated US$ 1.37 billion”, Jakarta
Post, Retrieved 10 August 2022. Jakarta Post, a daily English-language newspaper in
Indonesia. PT Niskala Media Tenggara. Jakarta,
https://www.thejakartapost.com/business/2022/05/29/foot-and-mouth-could-cost-country-
estimated-1-37b-a-year.html.
[18]
Ministry of Social Affairs (Kementerian Sosial) (2019), “PedomanUmumBantuanPangan Non-
Tunai (General Guidance of the Non-Cash Food Assistance)”, Ministry of Social Affairs,
Jakarta, Indonesia.
[4]
MoA (2023), National Palm Oil Coordination Meeting, Minister of Agriculture SYL Targets PSR
Program to Reach 180 Thousand Hectares per Year, Ministry of Agriculture, Jakarta,
https://bukamatanews.id/read/2023/02/27/rakor-sawit-nasional-mentan-syl-targetkan-
program-psr-capai-180-ribu-hektare-per-tahun.
[30]
MoA (2022), Decree of the Minister of Agriculture of Indonesia Number 734/2022 on the
Determination of the Allocation and the Highest Retail Price of Subsidized Fertilizers for 2023,
Ministry of Agriculture, Jakarta.
[25]
MoA (2022), Keputusan Menteri Pertanian Nomor 405 Tahun 2022 tentang Gugus Tugas PMK
(Decree of the Minister of Agriculture Number 405/2022 on Task Force of FMD), Indonesian
Ministry of Agriculture, Jakarta.
[23]
MoA (2022), Letter of the Minister of Agriculture Number 248/2022 dated 22 September 2022
concerning Import Control in the Framework of Strengthening Food Security, Ministry of
Agriculture, Jakarta.
[31]
MoA (2022), Regulation of the Minister of Agriculture of Indonesia Number 10/2022 on
Procedures for Determining the Allocation and Highest Retail Price of Subsidized Fertilizer in
the Agricultural Sector, Ministry of Agriculture, Jakarta.
[26]
MoA (2022), Statistik Peternakan dan Kesehatan Hewan (Livestock and Animal Health
Statistics), Directorate General Livestock and Animal Health, Ministry of Agriculture, Jakarta.
[17]
MoA (2022), Surat Edaran Menteri Pertanian Nomor 1 Tahun 2022 tentang Pelaksanaan
Pengawasan PMK pada Ternak (Circular Letter of the Minister of Agriculture Number 1/2022
on Control and Management of FMD in Livestock), Ministry of Agriculture, Jakarta.
[22]
MoA (2018), Regulation Number 39/2018 concerning Early Warning Systems and Management
of Climate Change Impacts in the Agricultural Sector. Peraturan Menteri Pertanian Republik
Indonesia Nomor 39 Tahun 2018 tentang Sistem Peringatan Dini dan Penanganan Dampak
Perubah, Ministry of Agriculture, Indonesia.
[13]


 387

NDMA (2022), Decree of Head of National Disaster Mitigation Agency Number 47/2022 on
Determination of Emergency Status of FMD in Indonesia, Indonesian National Disaster
Mitigation Agency. Jakarta.
[21]
OECD (2012), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Indonesia 2012, OECD Review of
Agricultural Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264179011-en.
[2]
Ristiani (2022), “Upaya Pencegahan dan Penanganan Penyakit Mulut dan Kuku (Efforts to
Prevent and Treat Foot and Mouth Disease)”, Agriculture and Food Security Office of Bali
Province. Denpasar. 12 August 2022, https://distanpangan.baliprov.go.id/upaya-pencegahan-
dan-penangananpenyakit-mulut-dan-kuku-pmk/.
[20]
Sudaryanto, T. (2018), “An Overview of Indonesia’s Agricultural Policies in 2018”, FFTC
Agricultural Policy Platform, http://ap.fftc.agnet.org/files/ap_policy/903/903_1.pdf.
[5]
USDA FAS (2019), “Indonesia Grain and Feed Annual Report 2019”, GAIN ID1904, USDA FAS.
[1]
USDA FAS (2018), “Indonesia Grain and Feed Annual Report 2018”, GAIN ID1808, USDA FAS.
[3]
WRI (2021), Statement: Indonesia Submits New 2030 Climate Targets and First Long-Term
Climate Strategy., World Research Institute. Jakarta, https://www.wri.org/news/statement-
indonesia-submits-new-2030-climate-targets-and-first-long-term-climate-strategy.
[7]




Note

1 The Business as usual scenario (BAU) implies an increase in GHG emissions of 115% higher than the
level of emissions in 2010 (see Table 1 in (Government of Indonesia, 2021[35]).


388 

Support to agriculture
The share of producer support in gross farm receipts (Producer Support Estimate, PSE) amounted to
13.5% in 2020-22, under the OECD average and below the 2000-02 level of 19%, but above levels seen
in the early 2010s. At the same time, the 89% share of potentially most-distorting forms of support remained
twice as high as the OECD average. This can be explained by the persistence of domestic price support
and border measures in favour of several meat and dairy products, and selected fruits and vegetables,
even though some are in the process of gradual reform. Poultry producers benefit from the largest share
of market price support, accounting for 45% of the total producer support in 2020-22.
Single Commodity Transfers (SCT) represented 84% of the PSE in 2020-22. Market price support is the
main component of SCT: poultry, tomatoes, apples, eggs, and grapes have the highest share of SCT in
commodity gross farm receipts.
The share of the General Services Support Estimate (GSSE) in total support amounted to 2.9% of the
value of the agriculture production in 2020-22, slightly below the OECD average, and just under the
proportion in 2000-02. These expenditures focused mostly on hydrological infrastructure and agricultural
innovation. The Total Support Estimate (TSE) amounted to 0.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in
2020-22, half the share of the OECD average.
Recent policy changes
The government approved tariff cuts on a wide range of fruits, vegetables, and agricultural inputs starting
in 2022. This follows Decision no. 213 of August 2021, which aimed to reduce customs duties on fresh
produce and to ease phytosanitary import restrictions while proposing direct payments to farmers and
support for investment and innovation in agriculture. Other elements of the decision are on hold pending
the new government’s position.
Important sector reforms were finalised for egg, dairy, and beef production. In the case of eggs, the reform
sets up the progressive elimination of production quotas by 2033, and halves existing tariffs. A second new
dairy agreement postpones the change of the target price mechanism to 2025, reduces the expected
increase in the price of milk, and lowers custom duties for specific cheeses. The beef sector agreement
eliminates the import tariff on chilled beef, with direct payments offered to producers in compensation along
with investment in domestic branding of beef products.
In response to the Russian war of aggression in Ukraine, Israel sought alternative suppliers of wheat, and
extended the duration of marketing of imported eggs in 2022.
The Free Trade Agreement with Korea entered into force in 2022. Israel also introduced electronic
phytosanitary certificates for fresh herbs and cut flowers exported from Israel to the European Union (EU),
and a computerised system for the management of plant imports.
16 Israel


 389

Assessment and recommendations
•
Israel made some important steps to assist the agricultural sector in adapting to climate change,
including by setting up an inter-ministerial government plan, conducting an in-depth climate-
change-impact assessment, research and development efforts, and adjusted insurance systems.
Continued efforts in co-ordination with farmers will be required to facilitate their transformative
adaptation to more volatile climatic conditions.
•
Water management has long been a priority and will continue to play a central role for Israel to
adapt to extreme water risks in a changing climate. Israel should maintain its investment path
towards alternative water sources (treated wastewater and desalinated water) and continue to
improve its water policies. A new Farmer Agreement should be pursued to ensure that producers
contribute appropriately to their improved water security by charging water prices in line with the
marginal costs of supplying water. The government could also facilitate water trading among
irrigating farmers and other water users and compensate farmers not using their entire water
quotas in severely dry years.
•
Israel accelerated its reforms of agricultural support in several sectors in 2022, covering selected
dairy and meat products, fruits, and vegetables. While the 2022 decline in market-distorting support
can be attributed mostly to international market conditions, implementing these reforms will limit
pressures on food prices and potentially on the environment.
•
Several commodities remain subject to high levels of border protection. Israel maintains high tariffs
for goods such as poultry meat, sheep meat, and certain fruits and vegetables. These tariffs could
be gradually removed and replaced by decoupled temporary payments on a transitional basis. The
tariff system for agriculture should also be simplified, avoiding non-ad-valorem tariffs.
•
Expenditure on agricultural knowledge and innovation systems recovered in 2022 after two years
of decline and should continue to grow to improve the sector’s productivity and environmental
performance. Limited production growth from 2011 to 2020 was driven by rising input use rather
than innovation, as measured by Total Factor Productivity (TFP), which is not sustainable in the
long term. Additional funding could be made available by redirecting market-distorting subsidies
– which amounted to about ILS 334 million (USD 100 million) annually during 2020-22 – towards
agriculture knowledge and information systems for sustainable productivity growth.
•
The government should build on recent initiatives to limit the sector’s greenhouse-gas (GHG)
emissions and the very high and rising nitrogen surplus associated with agriculture production.
Adopting a target for GHG emissions in the sector could ignite more mitigation efforts, including for
methane emissions generated by livestock. Regional agri-environmental programmes should be
scaled up and complemented by targeted policies and regulations that incentivise better
environmental performance, particularly in the case of nitrogen emissions. Research and
development (R&D), and agriculture extension activities should encourage sustainable productivity
improvements. Continuing reforms of support for animal production would also help.




390 

Figure 16.1. Israel: Development of support to agriculture


Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Israel - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
Israel - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Israel - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
Israel - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
Israel - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%


 391

Figure 16.2. Israel: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency. The producer price change and the border price change
are not calculated when both negative and positive market price support (MPS) occur at the commodity level for the previous year. Note that
negative MPS estimates for livestock products may arise in cases of aligned product prices if there is positive MPS for feed commodities.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 16.3. Israel: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
Israel - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE change decomposition
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Israel - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Milk
Beef and veal
Poultry meat
Sheep meat
Eggs
Apples
Bananas
Grapes
Tomatoes
0%
10%
20%
30%
-5%
5%
15%
25%
35%
40%


392 

Table 16.1. Israel: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
3 337
9 573
8 956
10 018
9 744
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
58.28
58.84
57.51
58.07
60.94
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
3 635
11 904
11 164
12 873
11 675
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
680
1 324
1 388
1 612
973
Support based on commodity output
485
1 101
1 178
1 382
744
Market Price Support1
475
1 084
1 162
1 364
726
Positive Market Price Support
489
1 087
1 163
1 365
734
Negative Market Price Support
-14
-3
0
-1
-7
Payments based on output
10
17
16
19
17
Payments based on input use
160
115
112
126
106
Based on variable input use
106
83
82
96
70
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
42
13
16
11
13
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
12
19
14
18
23
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
25
101
91
97
116
Based on Receipts / Income
21
81
73
78
93
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
4
20
18
19
23
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
8
7
7
7
7
With variable payment rates
5
7
7
7
7
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
2
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
1
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
19.02
13.48
15.12
15.70
9.74
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.18
1.13
1.15
1.16
1.09
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.23
1.16
1.18
1.19
1.11
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
100
281
304
272
267
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
51
108
109
103
113
Inspection and control
16
29
29
25
33
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
10
122
143
121
102
Marketing and promotion
11
1
2
1
1
Cost of public stockholding
12
11
12
11
11
Miscellaneous
0
9
9
11
8
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
12.96
17.55
17.96
14.42
21.56
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-612
-1 562
-1 493
-2 086
-1 106
Transfers to producers from consumers
-446
-1 100
-1 171
-1 386
-743
Other transfers from consumers
-172
-466
-324
-705
-369
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
5
4
2
5
5
Percentage CSE (%)
-16.60
-13.08
-13.37
-16.21
-9.48
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.20
1.15
1.15
1.19
1.11
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.20
1.15
1.15
1.19
1.10
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
781
1 605
1 692
1 884
1 240
Transfers from consumers
617
1 566
1 495
2 091
1 112
Transfers from taxpayers
335
505
521
497
497
Budget revenues
-172
-466
-324
-705
-369
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.59
0.34
0.41
0.39
0.24
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
305
521
530
520
514
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.23
0.11
0.13
0.11
0.10
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
134
131
133
139
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
4.34
3.34
3.44
3.23
3.36
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Israel are wheat, cotton, groundnuts, peanuts,
tomatoes, peppers, potatoes, avocados, bananas, oranges, grapefruit, grapes, apples, carrots, easy peelers, dates, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat,
poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 393

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Agriculture policy in Israel during its early years was driven by three main factors. First, the state needed
to settle undeveloped areas of the country for geopolitical security. Second it wanted to avoid food
shortages, due in part to an inability to import agricultural products from surrounding countries. Third, it
needed to provide employment and livelihoods for new immigrants to Israel (OECD, 2010[1]). Its objectives
are still to improve food supply and self-sufficiency in agricultural products that can be produced locally,
expand existing export markets, and maintain the rural population, particularly in the peripheral areas.
Over the past 30 years, Israel has reformed the way it provides subsidies, reduced central planning of
agricultural industries, and changed the way production quotas, price controls and import protection are
implemented. Major reforms in the agricultural sector began in the early 1990s with trade and market
reforms to limit the role of the state in agricultural markets. Reforms continued into the 2000s with a focus
on competitiveness and gradual efforts to limit interventions in the dairy and beef sectors. Over the course
of 2021 and 2022 the government renewed its impetus to reform in order to lower food prices. In particular,
in March 2022, a schedule of price reduction was approved for selected fruits and vegetables, in parallel
to agreements on egg, dairy and beef (Table 16.2).
Table 16.2. Israel: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1985-1990
Trade liberalisation
General economic reforms
Economic stabilisation programme
Privatisation of state-owned enterprises
Dismantling of state grain trading (imports) agency
Dismantling of regional co-operatives
Debt restructuring and write offs
Fruit and vegetable production quotas abolished
1991-1994
Market and trade reforms (export
liberalisation)
Gradual abolition of state monopoly of fruits and vegetables exports
State meat trading replaced with the Kosher Meat Import Law
Consumer price controls removed (except milk, eggs and flour)
Reform of agricultural production and marketing boards (diminishing functions)
Changes in water pricing
Uruguay Round Agricultural Agreement
1995-1999
Trade reforms (import liberalisation)
Non-tariff barriers removed and ceiling binding
Broiler sector reformed
Reduction of 40% of fresh water use for agriculture
FTAs signed
2000- 2010
Focus on competitiveness
Foreign exchange controls abolished
Dairy sector reform
Abolished minimum prices and surplus removal for fruit and vegetables
Abolition of broiler production quotas
Farmers’ agreement on water charges and water supplies
FTAs signed
2010-2022
Continued efforts to reform key sectors
Reform agreement in the beef sector opening import quotas
Dairy sector planning law 2011, second dairy agreement in 2022
Egg sector agreement and reform
Measures to improve the agriculture marketing systems
Water price reforms for equity reasons
Tariff reductions for specific fruits and vegetables
FTAs signed, use of electronic instruments to facilitate import inspections
Over the last 20 years, the trend in producer support in Israel, expressed as percentage of gross farm
receipts, unrolled in four main phases: (1) a steady reduction until the food crisis of 2007-08; (2) a rapid


394 

rebound in support after this crisis, leading to a plateau in 2008-11; then (3) a fall and new increase in
support from 2012-16; and (4) fluctuating levels since 2016. Fluctuations in agricultural support are largely
attributable to market price support (and to input support early-on), as budgetary support to producers
remained relatively stable. The market price support results largely from guaranteed minimum prices and
import tariffs, while budgetary support is mostly provided based on current production and input use
Stronger increase in world prices than in domestic prices and the initial effects of gradual market-oriented
reforms contributed to significantly lower total support to agriculture in Israel in 2022 (Figure 16.4).
Figure 16.4. Israel: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The government is involved in allocating key factors of production, including land, water and foreign
labour. Land and water resources are almost entirely state-owned. Land is allocated to farmers for a
nominal fee and is not tradeable. Water is allocated to farmers through a quota system; all water
consumption is metered and charged. The government also applies a yearly quota of visa for foreign
workers with permits to work in agriculture. Both the overall quota and the allocation of workers to individual
farmers are regulated. After adding about 6 000 new visas to be implemented between 2021 and 2023,
the total number of foreign worked visas under quotas reached about 31 000 in early 2023. In practice, not
all visas are used due to technical issues.
Some commodities are supported by guaranteed prices and production quotas. Guaranteed prices for
milk are based on the average cost of production and, while updated regularly, they diverge considerably
from the level and evolution of prices on international markets. Minimum prices are also guaranteed for
wheat, based on the Kansas market price, adjusted for quality and transportation costs. Egg production
Israel - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25


 395

quotas and recommended prices have been applied together with border protection as an instrument to
provide price support to producers and are the basis for calculating maximum retail prices (though the
system is under reform). At the same time, consumer price controls are applied for a range of basic food
products, including bread, milk and dairy products, and salt. Egg and poultry producers in “peripheral
areas” at the northern border receive payments based on output levels for egg producers and
encompassing a mixture of payments decoupled from production and output payments for poultry
producers (OECD, 2010[1]).
Farmers who participate in the investment support scheme receive capital grants for investments as well
as income tax exemptions and accelerated depreciation. Since 2009, an investment support programme
has been in place to reduce demand for foreign workers in the agricultural sector, but the budget for this
programme has declined in recent years.
The Insurance Fund for Natural Risks in Agriculture (Kanat) provides subsidised insurance schemes. The
government covers 80% of the cost of the total insurance premium in the case of the multi-risk insurance
schemes and 35% in the case of the insurance schemes against natural hazards. Since 2010, revenue
insurance is available for rain-fed wheat and barley to protect against a loss of revenue caused by price
falls, low yields or both.
In 2015, a credit fund was launched to help establish or expand small farms that specialise in crop
production. The government guarantees 85% of the value of bank loans to ensure that small farms with
insufficient collateral can access loans.
Israel’s economy is characterised by a transparent and open trade regime overall. However, border tariff
protection on agri-food products remains an important tool to support agricultural producers. Israel’s
average applied Most Favoured Nation (MFN) tariff on agricultural goods (WTO definition) was 11.9% in
2021, down from 27.7% in 2012 but higher than the 2.2% average for non-agricultural goods (WTO, ITC
and UNCTAD, 2022[2]; WTO, 2019[3]). Israel has WTO tariff rate quotas (TRQs) for wheat, fats and oils,
walnuts, prunes, maize, citrus juices, sheep meat and various dairy products (WTO, 2019[3]). Most of
Israel’s preferential trade agreements also include tariff-quota commitments for agricultural products, often
with reduced out-of-quota tariffs. In total, Israel implements over 250 preferential TRQs for agricultural
goods.
Israel’s tariff profile for agricultural products remains uneven. There are high or prohibitive tariffs for goods
such as dairy products, eggs, and certain fruits and vegetables (though under reforms), and low or zero
tariffs for other commodities such as certain coarse grains, sugar, oilseed, coffee and tea. The tariff system
on agriculture is complicated, involving specific, compound or mixed duties (WTO, 2019[3]); in 2021, 17%
of imported agricultural products were subjected to non-ad valorem rates, compared to around 3% for all
goods (WTO, ITC and UNCTAD, 2022[2]). At the same time, half of agriculture imports entered Israel duty-
free, mostly through MFN access and preferential agreements (notably with the European Union and the
United States). With the exception of beef, poultry, and mutton, and products thereof, there is no legal
requirement that imported food and agricultural products be kosher, although imported, non-kosher
products are rarely accepted by local marketing chains.
Budgetary allocations for research and development account for over 20% of the agricultural budget in
recent years. During 2020-22, ILS 358 million (USD 107 million) was allocated annually to agriculture
research and development, of which ILS 70 million (USD 21 million) was used for a competitive research
fund. Together with effective transmission of innovation to the farm level through a public extension service,
this allowed Israel to become a world leader in agricultural technology, particularly for farming in arid and
desert conditions.
While it has been actively supporting climate change adaptation in agriculture (see section below), Israel
has no sector-specific target for climate change mitigation in agriculture, which accounts for a limited share
of the country’s total GHG emissions (2.6% in 2019). Agriculture does not feature in Israel’s Nationally


396 

Determined Contribution or national mitigation plan, and GHG emission reduction potential in Israeli
agriculture has yet to be quantified. The government has facilitated the development and adoption of a
number of agriculture practices and technical measures to reduce GHG emissions in addition to generating
other environmental and economic benefits (OECD, 2022[4]).
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
Israel is involved in multiple programmes to support adaptation to climate change. The Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) views the sector as one of the most vulnerable and sees
effective adaptation policy as necessary to support a climate-smart and resilient agricultural sector.
Israel’s significant dependence on global and local food systems, and the projected climate-change
impacts on regional food availability and food security make climate-readiness relevant for all areas of its
food policy. An inter-ministerial committee was established in 2022 to prepare an implementation plan for
adapting food systems to climate change, including actions to mitigate climate-change impacts on the
agricultural sector and decrease GHG emissions from agricultural activities. The plan was scheduled to be
finalised at the beginning of 2023 and presented to the new government.
Efforts to assist farmers in buffering the impact from shocks in the short term
The agricultural insurance scheme has been enlarged to help farmers cope with climate-change risk. As
an initial step, agricultural insurance subsidies were increased and are expected to grow further.
The pest-monitoring system was improved and communications with other countries regarding pest
vectors were enhanced. Further efforts are ongoing, including R&D and an improved Pest Risk
Assessment (PRA) system.
Measures to support incremental changes in the medium term
A climate-change risk and opportunity assessment was initiated to better understand the possible climate-
change impacts and the vulnerability of the agricultural sector. The assessment was launched for
ten products: wheat, potatoes, carrots, tomatoes, bananas, olives, avocados, apples, citrus, and dairy milk.
It includes a survey of the implications of climate change and potential solutions for each product, a
literature review, and crop and economic modelling. The complete risk assessment is expected to be
completed by January 2024.
A farmers’ climate-smart agriculture toolkit is being developed through two funded research programmes
that aim to identify climate-smart practices. These programmes started in 2022 with expected finalisation
by 2024.
Efforts to support transformations that create a fundamentally new system in the long term
Research efforts have been engaged in climate-change adaptation. The MARD Chief Scientist established
a new research programme on science infrastructure for improved adaptation to climate change. Two
multidisciplinary research centres have been established with a view to support adaptation within the
National Agriculture Research Organisation (NARO):
•
The Center for Agriculture Adaptation under Climate Change has a broad research agenda,
covering field crops and vegetables, fruit trees, plant protection, and animal sciences. The Center
will also work on climate projections and modelling, and on improving breeding methods towards
the development of breeds adapted to climate change. The expected deliverables will include new
varieties highly adapted to different environmental stresses, and state-of-the-art technologies and
practices for Israeli farmers in a changing Mediterranean climate.


 397

•
The Center for Sustainable Agriculture covers five research areas: (1) precision irrigation and
fertilisation; (2) biological pest control; (3) soil conservation practices; (4) soil health and carbon
sequestration; and (5) GHG mitigation in mixed crop-livestock farming. The centre aims to use
innovative technologies (including biotechnology), models, and data and decision-support
systems, including artificial intelligence, to progress towards its objectives. These approaches are
intended to be adopted alongside more traditional methods, such as reduced tillage, the use of
compost, and crop rotation.
At the international level, Israel declared at the end of 2022 its intention to join the UN International Treaty
on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA). Israel joined the OECD Co-operative
Research Programme on Sustainable Agricultural and Food Systems (CRP), with effective entry on
1 January 2023.
In addition to climate-change programmes, continued efforts are being undertaken to improve water
infrastructure and management so that farming can continue under scarce water conditions. On the water
supply side, this includes building desalination plants, extended use of treated wastewater, and canal
construction and maintenance, along with investments in precision irrigation by farmers. On the demand
side, Israel has a unique water-management system that combines different levers, including annual water
quotas and an evolving water pricing system (Gruère, Ashley and Cadilhon, 2018[5]; OECD, 2021[6]).
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
Overall policy reforms
Actions are underway to implement the August 2021 Decision 213 “Increasing competition in agriculture
and streamlining regulation processes in the field of imports”, which aims to reduce custom duties on
agricultural fresh produce and to ease phytosanitary import restrictions, while at the same time proposing
direct payments to farmers and support for investment and innovation in agriculture (OECD, 2022[4]).
The schedule for the reduction of custom duties was published and implemented as of March 2022
(Customs Tariff Order, 16.3.2022). Custom duties were abolished with immediate effect for certain
vegetables and fruits (e.g. garlic, pineapple, avocado, mango) and agricultural inputs (plant propagation
material, fertilisers and pesticides). Custom duties for selected additional fruit and vegetables will be
decreasing gradually over a 5-year period to 10% of their January 2022 levels. The custom duties for eight
other major vegetables and fruits will also be lowered over time, but to a lesser extent (Table 16.3).




398 

Table 16.3. Scheduled reduced custom duties on specific vegetables and fruits
Proportion of custom duty applied compared to the January 2022 rate

20221
2023
2024
2025
2026
From 2027
Potatoes
85%
75%
65%
55%
50%
50%
Carrots
85%
75%
65%
55%
45%
45%
Onions
85%
70%
60%
50%
40%
40%
Sweet potatoes
85%
70%
60%
50%
40%
40%
Capsicum
85%
70%
60%
50%
40%
40%
Tomatoes
85%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
Cucumbers
85%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
Apples
85%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
Notes: 1. Reduction applied as of April 2022 compared to the January 2022 tariff rate.
Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD).
Following the dissolution of the Knesset in June 2022 and the announcement of a new election in
November 2022 the reform process was stalled. The coalition negotiations of the new government led to
an agreement that envisages a new reform of the agricultural sector, aiming for the “right balance” between
lower consumer prices and strengthening the agricultural sector. Until an agreement is reached on the
outline and details of the new reform, the reforms initiated by the previous government are halted (except
the above-presented declining custom duties).
Sector specific reforms
In June 2022, an agreement with the egg growers’ organisation was signed and turned into a legislation
reforming the egg sector support. The agreement includes abolishing the production quotas within ten
years (by 29 June 2033) with an option to extend the period for another three years. During the transition
period, the Minister of Agriculture can increase the total egg production quota each year by a maximum of
6% (a larger increase is possible with the permission of the Knesset’s Economic Affairs Committee). At
the same time, the government will provide grants of ILS 380 million (USD 113 million) for the construction
of chicken coops and ILS 100 million (USD 30 million) to redeem quotas from growers who choose to leave
the industry. These quotas will be reallocated in competitive tenders. Quotas allocated in 2022 do not
qualify for compensation and cannot be commercialised. In addition, custom duties on eggs were reduced
by 50% as of July 2022.
In June 2022, the Knesset’s Education, Culture and Sports Committee approved a regulation that will
prohibit housing egg-laying hens in cages starting in 2037. The new regulation also bans cages in any new
chicken shed, with immediate effect, and provides for a phased removal of existing cages.
In August 2022, after intensive negotiations of the Ministry of Finance, MARD and Milk producers, the
Board of Directors of the Milk Board approved a second new Dairy Agreement complementing the one
adopted in 2021. According to this agreement, the target price mechanism remains unchanged until 2025
(instead of 2024 as initially discussed). From May 2023, the update procedure of the controlled consumer
prices will be automatic, based on a formula taking into account the development of input prices without
the need of minister’s approval. The agreement postpones the price increase and reduces it for consumer
price-controlled milk products from 14% to 4.9%. The 2022 agreement also includes custom duty reduction
for various cheeses (cheese for spreading, mozzarella, haloumi, gorgonzola, jameed) in addition to those
on the 2021 agreed list of tariff reduction.
In June 2022, a new agreement was signed with the beef growers’ association, abolishing the remaining
import tariff for chilled beef, parallel to an increase in the annual support for grazing beef growers. The
total direct support for beef growers will reach ILS 348 million (USD 104 million) by 2029. In addition, the


 399

government supported branding and marketing actions for domestic beef with ILS 5 million
(USD 1.5 million) and provided grants to improve the efficiency of beef production (ILS 2 million,
USD 0.6 million).
Support for the Jewish Shmita (Sabbatical) Year
The Hebrew year 5782 (September 2021 to September 2022) was a Sabbatical Year. Sabbatical Year
(Shmita) is Jewish traditional law, which occurs every seven years. It applies only to the biblical land of
Israel and forbids the cultivation of agricultural land for one (Jewish) year, unless under specific
circumstances.
MARD allocated ILS 93 million (USD 28 million) for special Shmita grants to about 600 farmers, who
declared in advance of the Shmita year (during 2021) their intention to refrain from cultivating their farms
during the Shmita year. About one-third of these farms eventually decided to operate their farms, which
revoked their right to Shmita grants. The remaining close to 400 farmers received grants after their non-
cultivated fields and plantations were inspected during the Shmita year. The majority of the unused budget
returned to the treasury. Some Shmita entitlements were enlarged, in accordance with updated MARD
procedures. Ultimately, ILS 70 million (USD 21 million) of the planned ILS 93 million (USD 28 million) were
granted by the MARD to non-cultivating farmers.
In addition to the Shmita grants, the government allocated ILS 8 million (USD 2.4 million) to wheat and
wine farmers who encountered kosher requirements related to the Shmita rules. Furthermore, a total of
ILS 7 million (USD 2.1 million) was approved for 2021-22 investments in establishing new greenhouses in
the non-Jewish production area b) converting to soil-less beds and hydroponics (a “specific circumstance”
that allows cultivation during the Sabbatical Year).
The majority of the Jewish agricultural sector in Israel (more than 7 000 farmers) chose a different solution
for the Shmita year (“sale permits”). In the Sabbatical year, the land “is sold” to whoever is not Jewish and
thus it can be farmed in a similar way as a normal year. The Chief Rabbinate Office – a state institution –
is handling the sale permits (contracts, legal fees etc.) (OECD, 2022[4]).
Regulatory oversight
In pursuing the application of OECD recommendations and government resolutions 2118/2014 and
4398/2018, the Israeli Knesset passed the Law of Fundamentals of Regulation in November 2021 (as part
of the Arrangements Law for the 2021–2022 State Budget). The law entered into force on 1 January 2022
and established the Regulatory Oversight Body (ROB).
The role of ROB is to co-ordinate the government’s efforts to improve existing and new regulations. ROB
will oversee the procedures for issuing new regulations, optimise the development process of new
regulations and revise and streamline excessive ones. The law defines what an optimal regulation is, as
well as what must be considered in determining one. It anchors various principles to ensure optimal
regulation procedures – including examining considerations and alternatives, analysing data, and
engaging in public discussion. Based on the law, new regulations and changes in existing policy require
regulatory impact assessment (RIA) processes.
Several agriculture and food policy changes from the 2016 Burden Reduction Program were examined
during the 2022 review processes by MARD. The ministry decided to streamline registration procedures
for pesticides imported from authorised countries and to allow the transfer of about 75% of the work of
constructing residue decline curves to private laboratories by facilitating the recognition process. In
addition, MARD examined and decided to compare Israel’s policy related to breeding conditions of laying
hens with the policies practiced in other developed countries.


400 

Crop insurance against pest and diseases
To address concerns regarding the possible entry and establishment of new pests and diseases as
markets become more open, the government launched in early 2023 a special compensation fund. This
provides government-funded compensation for plant growers whose crops may need to be destroyed to
prevent the spread of new diseases and pests.
Credit fund expansion
The scope of the state-guarantee credit fund for small or expanding farms was enlarged in 2023 to include
livestock farmers. The government guarantees can be leveraged up to a maximum of ILS 125 million
(USD 37 million). In addition, a new loan option is now available, offering credits of up to ILS 1 million
(USD 0.3 million) for ten years to eligible farmers.
Water management
The year 2022 was the fifth year in a row with higher than average precipitation, exceeding the 80%
forecast to reach 111% of the multi-year average precipitations. Most aquifers remain above acceptable
sustainable level, as defined by the Water Authority. The Sea of Galilee maintained its high water level
and low salinity. Water supply in northern rivers started the winter season at an above average level though
low precipitation led to decreases in their levels between October and December 2022. In the southern
part of the country, the level of precipitation has been below average, which resulted in increased water
consumption from the national system.
The year 2023 precipitation forecast is 80% of the multi-year average. Water allocations for most of the
country have remained unchanged compared to 2022. If the precipitation exceeds the multi-year average,
the amount of water to farmers will be increased proportionally.
The work of connecting the Galilee and eastern valleys to the national system has been completed. Though
its use is not foreseen for 2023, it will be possible to be used in the future. There is also progress in the
Sorek Desalination Plant, and a new Desalination Plant in the Galilee is in its early phase.
The scheduled water price increases for farmers, as set out under the 2006 Farmers Agreement, ended in
June 2022. The Water Authority is expected to increase water prices for all uses in 2023, although
discussions continue between the Water Authority, the Ministry of Finance and the farmers representatives
regarding the price schedule and compensation for farmers in the coming years.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
In 2022 the Plant Protection and Inspection Services began using the IPPC GeNS (Generic ePhyto
National System) for issuing electronic phytosanitary certificates for fresh herbs and cut flowers exported
from Israel to the European Union. The e-Phyto certificate replaces the Phytosanitary Certificate that was
dispatched manually and printed on dedicated paper. The certificate is issued under the international
ISPM12 standard. During 2023 the use of e-Phyto in a computerized system for the management of plant
import will begin.
In 2022, the Plant Protection and Inspection Services launched the “Ye’ela system”, a computerised
system for the management of plant imports, including issuing import permits and clearance of
consignments at the port of entry. The system aims to provide convenient and efficient access to all
relevant information. Through the system, importers can receive the required service online, without the
need to physically come to the office. The “Ye’ela system” also enables interfaces with other systems, such
as e-Phyto, and the customs systems “Sha’ar olami” and “Maslul.”


 401

The free trade agreement (FTA) with Korea, which was signed in 2021, entered into force in
December 2022. The comprehensive economic partnership agreement (CEPA) with the United Arab
Emirates is in ratification process and expected to enter into force in early 2023. Negotiations on new FTAs
with the People’s Republic of China, Viet Nam, Guatemala, India, and a new comprehensive economic
partnership agreement (CEPA) with Bahrain are at varying stages of progress. Revised FTAs with
MERCOSUR and the United Kingdom are under negotiation.
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
In response to the war in Ukraine, Israel has been seeking to diversify import sources, especially of primary
commodities. This particularly relevant for wheat, where the MARD actively investigated alternatives to
diversity its wheat resources, when price increased by 26% in the month following the launch of the
Russian war.
The Russian war in Ukraine impacted egg imports to Israel, as Ukraine had supplied 30% of egg imports.1
To ensure the appropriate supply of eggs, whose consumption increases by about 10% in preparation of
the Jewish holiday of Passover, Israel extended the permitted duration for the marketing of imported eggs
from 21 days to 28 days following the day of laying in the country of origin. In return, the government also
shortened the consumption period for eggs from 30 days after this marketing deadline in refrigerated
conditions to 18 days, as approved by the Ministry of Health’s Food Service.
Contextual information
Israel’s economy is relatively small but has been growing rapidly and its GDP per capita more than doubled
over the last two decades, even as the population increased by 50%. The share of agriculture in total
employment has been halved to under 1%, while the share of agriculture in GDP declined to 1.4% of during
the same period.
Israel is unique among developed countries in that land and water resources are nearly all state-owned.
Jewish rural communities, principally the kibbutz and moshav, dominate agricultural production, accounting
for about 80% of agricultural output. Partly due to this structure, total agricultural area has moderately
increased over the past twenty years. While the agricultural sector is relatively diversified, most of the value
of production and exports is generated by high value fruits and vegetables.




402 

Table 16.4. Israel: Contextual indicators

Israel
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
162
413
0.40%
0.34%
Population (million)
6
9
0.15%
0.18%
Land area (thousand km2)
22
22
0.03%
0.03%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
566
646
0.02%
0.02%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
290
426
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
25 628
44 061
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
24.7
15.6
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
1.7
1.4
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
2.2
0.8
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
3.1
4.2
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.3
8.9
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
55
58
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
45
42
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
60
59
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Israel has maintained robust GDP growth exceeding 3% per year on average and close to full employment
from 2017 to 2019. Its economy contracted in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and associated
lockdown measures, but recovered quickly in 2021-22, while unemployment remained relatively low. At
the same time inflation went up in 2021 to reach 4 % in 2022 after multiple years of fluctuations around
zero (Figure 16.5).


 403

Figure 16.5. Israel: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
The agriculture trade balance of Israel continued to decline in 2021, with the value of imports of mostly
processed food products exceeding the value of exports of mainly products for final consumption
(Figure 16.6). This gradual shift may be partly influenced by the relative appreciation of the Israeli currency
compared to the US dollar and the Euro since 2015.
Figure 16.6. Israel: Agro-food trade

Israel - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
2
4
6
8
10


404 


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Despite investments in agriculture innovation, the overall productivity of Israeli agriculture, measured by
total factor productivity (TFP), has been declining between 2011-20. The modest agriculture output growth
in this period can be attributed to the increased use in inputs, particularly land and the use of farm
machinery, and intermediate inputs such as animal feed (Figure 16.7).
Agriculture’s water use performance has improved. Despite a significant increase in irrigation area,
agriculture’s share of freshwater abstraction has declined by 46%, largely due to changes in water
management, encompassing the use of recycled water, efficient irrigation technologies and water demand
policies. Beyond water use, the environmental performance of Israel’s agriculture has deteriorated since
2000. Nutrient surpluses have grown over time, particularly due to the increase in the use of fertilisers, to
reach a level over seven times the OECD average levels for nitrogen and over twenty times for phosphorus
(Table 16.4).
Israel - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
7
18
18
15
15
25
25
35
35
46
46
44
44
11
11
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 405

Figure 16.7. Israel: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 16.5. Israel: Productivity and environmental indicators

Israel
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
2.3%
-1.3%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
188.8
224.4
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
65.7
69.9
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
1.2
2.1
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
3.3
2.8
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
43.4
69.7
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)¹
64.0
34.8
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
61.0
45.1
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
1. Share of agriculture fresh water abstraction in total fresh water abstraction.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.
Israel - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
-1.32%
-1.32%
1.12%
1.12%
1.54%
1.54%
0.35%
0.35%
0.50%
0.50%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Israel
World
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%


406 

References

Gruère, G., C. Ashley and J. Cadilhon (2018), “Reforming water policies in agriculture: Lessons
from past reforms”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 113, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/1826beee-en.
[5]
OECD (2022), “Israel”, in Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2022: Reforming
Agricultural Policies for Climate Change Mitigation, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/65b56695-en.
[4]
OECD (2021), Agriculture and water policies: Main characteristics and evolution from 2009 to
2019- ISRAEL, Country profile, OECD, Paris., https://www.oecd.org/agriculture/topics/water-
and-agriculture/documents/oecd-water-policies-country-note-israel.pdf.
[6]
OECD (2010), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Israel 2010, OECD Review of Agricultural
Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264079397-en.
[1]
WTO (2019), Trade Policy Review: Israel 2018, Trade Policy Reviews, World Trade
Organization, Geneva, https://doi.org/10.30875/5b4abf07-en.
[3]
WTO, ITC and UNCTAD (2022), World Tariff Profiles 2022, WTO, ITC, UNCTAD, Geneva,
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/booksp_e/world_tariff_profiles22_e.pdf.
[2]



Note

1 Other countries are also important providers. In particular, imports from Spain have increased in recent
years and, in 2021, it exported about 61 million eggs to Israel, which constitutes about 35% of all imported
eggs.


 407

Support to agriculture
Despite notable reductions, support to producers in Japan remains among the highest in OECD countries.
The Producer Support Estimate (PSE) equalled 38% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22, down from 54%
20 years earlier but still twice the OECD average.
Market Price Support (MPS) remains the main element of Japan’s agricultural support. It is largely
sustained by border measures, particularly for rice, pork, and milk. MPS fell from 2021 to 2022, mainly due
to a narrowing gap between domestic and border prices, particularly for rice and pork. Slightly lower
domestic prices and rising border prices, together with a depreciation of the Japanese yen (JPY) have
contributed to this evolution. Still, producer prices for many commodities remain well above world prices,
and the resulting MPS generally represents the main part of single-commodity transfers (SCT).
Budgetary support to producers consists mostly of payments based on area, income, or output. Payments
based on variable input use increased drastically in 2022 due to introduction of support schemes to
alleviate the effects of price surges for raw materials. The share of potentially most-distorting support
(i.e. MPS, support based on output and variable input use without input constraint) declined but still
accounted for 81% of PSE in 2020-22.
Expenditures for general services (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) account for 23% of Japan’s
total support to the sector (2020-22). GSSE corresponds to almost 12% of the value of agricultural
production, higher than the OECD average but lower than in the 2000s. About 80% of the GSSE goes to
developing and maintaining agricultural infrastructure (particularly irrigation), while 11% goes to financing
the agricultural knowledge and innovation system. The Total Support Estimate (TSE) for the agricultural
sector represented 0.9% of Japan’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2020-22, most of which was directed
to individual producers.
Recent policy changes
The Act to Promote Low Environmental Impact Business Activities for the Establishment of
Environmentally Harmonized Food Systems (the MIDORI Act) was passed in April 2022 to facilitate the
implementation of the strategy MIDORI. The act requires that prefectural and municipal governments jointly
develop a “Basic Plan” that includes the introduction and implementation of environmental measures
(focused on improving soil health, reducing use of chemical pesticides and fertilisers, and reducing
greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions) suited to the natural, economic, and social conditions of their regions.
The act establishes a certification system to encourage the adoption of environmentally-friendly practices
and technologies. Producers can have their environmentally-friendly activities certified if they develop an
activity plan in co-ordination with the “Basic Plan” of their region. Business operators who offer innovative
technologies to reduce the environmental impact of agriculture are also eligible for certification. Certified
producers and business operators can enjoy several tax and financial benefits as well as other services
such as simplified administrative procedures to facilitate their business development.
17 Japan


408 

The Japanese Cabinet approved a cross-sector emergency relief package of JPY 6.2 trillion
(USD 47 billion) in April 2022 to cushion the economic blow from rising raw-material costs. Within this
package, JPY 75.1 billion (USD 571 million) was allocated to the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries (MAFF) for several measures to alleviate the effects of price surges for food and raw materials.
MAFF provided payments to compensate livestock farmers for higher feed costs and subsidised the costs
of food producers to aid in development, manufacturing, and material sourcing of new food products. MAFF
also subsidised transportation and storage costs for fertiliser manufacturers to compensate for costs
associated with changing suppliers.
MAFF allocated JPY 164.2 billion (USD 1.25 billion) in December 2022 to strengthen food security, with
an emphasis on reducing import dependence by increasing domestic production of agricultural products
and inputs. The main measures include support payments to facilitate organic fertiliser production,
increased support for forage crop production, and the establishment of domestic supply chains. The
Japanese Government also released the Food Security Reinforcement Policy Framework, which presents
a roadmap to ensure a stable food supply and sets several 2030 targets, such as doubling manure compost
and sewage sludge use for fertiliser, increasing production areas of wheat, soybeans and feed crops, and
halving food loss and waste in the food industry businesses.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Japan’s agricultural sector is particularly vulnerable to climate change and has already experienced
its negative effects on production and product quality. Japan’s approach – of promoting
development and dissemination of suitable production technologies and varieties, and improving
preparedness and response to disasters caused by extreme weather events – is promising. Due
to its diverse climatic conditions and farming systems, these adaptation measures should be
tailored locally and implemented through co-operation between national and local governments.
•
Japan has made progress in reforming agricultural support policies since the early 2000s but
support to producers remains twice the OECD average and continues to be dominated by MPS,
which distorts markets and contributes to high food prices. Moreover, MPS and other commodity-
specific support can create barriers to changing production systems, limiting its ability to adapt to
climate change. Further improvements should be envisaged to reduce MPS and eliminate
measures impeding climate-change adaptation.
•
The annual value of agriculture, food, forestry, and fishery exports continued to increase. While
this signals a move towards a more competitive agricultural sector, the exclusion of key products
from trade agreements limits the economic gains of opening the country to international trade. A
gradual reduction of trade barriers on agricultural products would contribute to structural change
and productivity growth in the Japanese agro-food sector.
•
Japan’s food system policy, the strategy MIDORI, is a promising sector-wide initiative to increase
the sustainability and productivity of its food systems. In particular, the new certification system
under the MIDORI Act could facilitate the adoption of environmentally-friendly practices and
technologies by farmers and other stakeholders. This initiative should be complemented by further
efforts in promoting R&D, networking, capacity-building, strategic advice, and multi-actor
partnerships.
•
Japan’s agricultural sector is facing major challenges, with surging raw-material and ingredient
costs. The policy response should be proportionate and targeted in order not to hamper Japan’s
other food-system objectives, including environmental sustainability.



 409

Figure 17.1. Japan: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Japan - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
Japan - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Japan - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.25
1.5
1.75
2
2.25
2.5
Japan - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
Japan - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%


410 

Figure 17.2. Japan: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 17.3. Japan: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
Japan - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Border price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
Border price change decomposition
Change in producer price
PSE change decomposition
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Japan - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Barley
Rice
Soybeans
Sugar
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Eggs
Apples
Grapes
Cabbage
Cucumbers
Mandarins
Pears
Spinach
Strawberries
Welsh onions
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
-10%


 411

Table 17.1. Japan: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
72 767
76 354
77 290
83 709
80 521
67 639
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
68.36
63.81
67.63
67.85
67.31
67.71
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
94 458
107 904
110 276
120 368
117 575
92 886
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
44 611
43 964
32 503
40 267
33 121
24 122
Support based on commodity output
40 996
40 837
26 072
33 609
27 277
17 331
Market Price Support1
39 458
38 480
24 136
31 049
25 519
15 841
Positive Market Price Support
39 458
38 480
24 136
31 049
25 519
15 841
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
1 539
2 358
1 936
2 560
1 758
1 491
Payments based on input use
1 434
976
1 138
1 007
737
1 670
Based on variable input use
403
85
358
8
9
1 055
with input constraints
403
85
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
890
724
504
732
391
390
with input constraints
403
85
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
142
167
276
267
336
226
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
621
613
2 250
2 820
1 990
1 940
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
236
183
178
348
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
621
613
2 014
2 637
1 813
1 593
with input constraints
0
0
1 582
2 168
1 356
1 222
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
1 560
1 538
3 030
2 831
3 118
3 142
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
1 560
1 538
3 030
2 831
3 118
3 142
with commodity exceptions
1 560
1 257
2 806
2 593
2 883
2 943
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
13
0
0
38
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
13
0
0
38
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
57.42
53.62
37.55
43.33
37.59
31.77
Producer NPC (coeff.)
2.24
2.07
1.50
1.66
1.52
1.34
Producer NAC (coeff.)
2.35
2.16
1.60
1.76
1.60
1.47
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
8 769
12 141
9 514
12 424
8 661
7 456
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
514
861
1 017
1 060
1 047
943
Inspection and control
55
66
108
119
111
92
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
7 747
10 620
7 558
10 276
6 685
5 713
Marketing and promotion
152
248
715
843
702
600
Cost of public stockholding
301
345
116
126
115
108
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
16.29
21.66
22.68
23.58
20.73
23.61
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-53 525
-49 487
-34 685
-43 316
-36 280
-24 460
Transfers to producers from consumers
-38 964
-38 469
-24 539
-31 181
-26 280
-16 157
Other transfers from consumers
-14 520
-11 104
-10 667
-12 686
-10 697
-8 619
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
-108
35
5
6
5
5
Excess feed cost
68
51
516
546
691
311
Percentage CSE (%)
-56.73
-45.82
-31.14
-35.99
-30.86
-26.34
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
2.31
1.85
1.46
1.57
1.46
1.36
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
2.31
1.85
1.45
1.56
1.45
1.36
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
53 272
56 139
42 022
52 697
41 788
31 582
Transfers from consumers
53 485
49 573
35 206
43 867
36 977
24 776
Transfers from taxpayers
14 308
17 670
17 483
21 516
15 508
15 425
Budget revenues
-14 520
-11 104
-10 667
-12 686
-10 697
-8 619
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
2.10
1.24
0.88
1.05
0.85
0.76
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
13 814
17 659
17 886
21 648
16 268
15 741
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.54
0.39
0.38
0.43
0.33
0.38
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
105
97
98
97
97
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
147.09
118.19
115.99
106.76
109.77
131.43
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Japan are: wheat, barley, soybean, rice, sugar, milk,
beef and veal, pig meat, poultry, eggs, apples, cabbage, cucumbers, grapes, mandarins, pears, spinach, strawberries and Welsh onions.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




412 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Agricultural land reform was implemented immediately after World War II, transferring farmland ownership
from landlords to previously tenanted farmers in order to improve their economic and social position. It
restricted sales of farmland to non-farmers and strongly protected farmers’ rights. This policy applied until
2009, when the Agricultural Land Act was revised to allow non-agricultural companies to lease farmland.
Japan also invested in agricultural research, extension services, and land infrastructure to recover from
the devastation of the war. At the same time, the government kept controls on rice procurement – from
production to distribution to consumers – under the Food Management Law in order to secure food supply.
To address the rising disparity in living standards and productivity between agriculture and other sectors,
Japan implemented the Agricultural Basic Act in 1961 to increase farmers’ incomes by promoting the
modernisation of agriculture. From the mid-1950s to the mid-1990s, agricultural policies focused on price
and marketing control, including tariffs for key products, particularly rice, to ensure affordable food prices
for consumers while increasing farm income in rural areas.
In 1993, at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round trade negotiations, Japan agreed to a preferential quota
on rice imports. The Food Management Law was repealed in 1995, introducing market mechanisms for
rice distribution. Following the replacement of the GATT with the WTO in1995, Japan converted non-tariff
border measures to tariff rate quotas (TRQs) for major commodities, including rice.
Rapid globalisation of the economy, together with the continued decline in farming population and farmland
area adversely impacted Japanese farming communities. In response, the Agricultural Basic Act was
replaced by the Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas Basic Act in 1999 to establish four basic principles: 1) a
stable food supply; 2) the desired multifunctional roles of agriculture; 3) sustainable development of
agriculture; and 4) development of rural areas. Under the act, ten-year agricultural policy plans, named the
Basic Plan for Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas, have been formulated since 2000.
Recent agricultural policy reforms have been aimed at helping the sector become more competitive and
resilient. The government-administered rice production quota system was abolished in 2018, and other
pro-competitiveness reforms have encouraged farmland consolidation and re-organising agricultural
co-operatives. In 2019, non-product specific revenue insurance was introduced to diversify farmers’
risk-management tools. The strategy “MIDORI” was introduced in 2021; this is a sector-wide initiative to
improve environmental, social, and economic outcomes throughout supply chains by 2050.1
Promoting agricultural and food exports has also become a key policy goal, as demand for Japanese food
products increases. Japan improved market access through large-scale trade agreements in recent years,
including the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) in 2018,
the Japan-EU Economic Partnership Agreement (Japan-EU EPA) in 2019, the Japan-US Trade Agreement
in 2020, and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) in 2022.




 413

Table 17.2. Japan: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Policy directives
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to1960

Eradication of rural poverty and
securing food supply

Agricultural land reform implemented to help farmers own farmland
Arrangements to increase food production (Agricultural Co-operatives Act of 1947,
Agricultural Disaster Compensation Act of 1947, Agricultural Land Act of 1957)
Policy priority given to increasing rice production to solve serious food shortage (Food
Management Law of 1942, Five Year Food Production Increase Plan of 1952)
1960-1980
Reduction of income disparities
between agriculture and other
industries

Basic Agricultural Act (1961) to increase farmers’ income by increasing farm size,
improving farmland, adopting agricultural machinery and technology and shifting from rice
and wheat-based production to livestock, vegetables and fruits.
Rice policy goal changed from increasing rice production to managing quantity as full self-
sufficiency achieved in 1967
Rice production adjustment control introduced in 1971
1980-2010
Adjusting towards
internationalisation, bringing
market principles to the
agricultural sector, and
integrating concepts of ‘rural
area’ and ‘food’ into agricultural
policies

Agricultural Management Framework Reinforcement Act (1993) systematises support for
qualified farmers
Act on Stabilization of Supply, Demand and Prices of Staple Food (1994) changes the role
of government in rice state trading; government only purchases for stockpiling purposes
Quantitative quotas of rice replaced by tariff rate quota (1999)
Act on Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas (1999) aims to establish stable agricultural
structure in the new economic and social conditions; food self-sufficiency goal and direct
payments for farmers in mountainous areas introduced
2010-Present
New agricultural reforms to
enhance competitiveness and
resilience
Farmland reforms (2009 revision of Agricultural Land Act to allow leases, 2013 Act on
Promotion of Agricultural Land Intermediary Management to facilitate agricultural land
consolidation)
Amendment of Agricultural Co-operatives Act (2015)
Abolition of rice production quota system (2018)
Introduction of the revenue insurance programme (2019)
Large-scale trade agreements (CPTPP, Japan-EU EPA, Japan-US Trade Agreement,
RCEP) and export promotion of agricultural and food products
Formation of the strategy MIDORI with sustainability and food related goals (2021)
Support to farmers declined from close to 57% of gross farm receipts in the mid-1980s to less than 32%
in 2022. The share of market price support also declined but, while Japan provides a range of budgetary
forms of producer support, higher domestic prices continue to provide the majority of transfers to
producers, accounting for close to 80% of PSE in 2020-22 (Figure 17.4).


414 

Figure 17.4. Japan: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The Basic Plan for Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas revised in 2020 (hereafter the 2020 Basic Plan) sets
Japan’s agricultural policy direction for the next decade. The 2020 Basic Plan aims to ensure a stable food
supply and improved food self-sufficiency and continues necessary agricultural policy reforms both to make
the sector competitive and manage issues facing the sector, while putting an increased emphasis on rural
communities, smart agriculture and digitalisation, and risk management (e.g. with respect to natural
disasters.
The 2021 strategy MIDORI defines the path to transform Japan’s food systems and increase the agriculture
and food systems’ sustainability and productivity potential until 2050. This strategy involves: 1) enhancing
engagement of stakeholders all along the food supply chain; and 2) promoting innovation to reduce
environmental pressures. It defines 14 Key Performance Indicators (KPI) and a roadmap for developing
and implementing innovative technologies and production methods by 2050. More specifically, the
agriculture-related KPIs include:
•
Zero CO2 emission from fossil fuel combustion in agriculture, forestry and fisheries
•
50% reduction in risk-weighted use of chemical pesticides2 by increased use of Integrated Pest
Management and newly-developed alternatives that will be available by 2040
•
30% reduction in chemical fertiliser use
•
Increase of land under organic farming to 1 million ha (equivalent to 25% of farmland)
•
At least 30% enhancement in productivity of food manufacturers (by 2030)
•
Sustainable sourcing for import materials (by 2030)
Japan - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65


 415

In June 2022, the 14 KPIs for 2050 were complemented by an additional nine intermediate KPIs with a
2030 time horizon. The new agriculture-related KPIs for 2030 include:
•
10% reduction in risk-weighted use of chemical pesticides
•
20% reduction in chemical fertiliser use (-720 000 tonnes)
•
Increase of land under organic farming from 25 000 hectares in 2020 to 63 000 hectares in 2030
•
50% of horticultural facilities (by heated area) use hybrid heating system with heat pumps and fossil
fuel heaters.
Japan maintains a system of high border protection and domestic price support for key agricultural
products. Average tariffs on agricultural products were 14.9% in 2021, compared to 2.5% for non-
agricultural products. However, agricultural tariffs vary considerably. More than 35% of tariff lines are duty-
free, but 2.9% of them are above 100% (ad valorem equivalent), while 13.3% of agricultural tariff lines
have non-ad valorem tariffs (WTO, 2022[1]). Tariff rate quotas with high out-of-quota tariffs apply to some
commodities, like starch and dairy products.
Rice imports are managed by a state trading enterprise, fulfilling Japan’s minimum-access commitment
under the WTO Agreement on Agriculture. A TRQ of 682 200 tonnes (milled) applies. The maximum mark-
up (collected by the government when importing and selling on domestic markets) for rice imports is set at
JPY 292 (USD 2.2) per kg, and the out-of-quota tariff-rate is JPY 341 (USD 2.6) per kg.
A revenue-based payment is available for farmers meeting certain requirements who produce rice, wheat,
barley, soybean, sugar beet and starch potato. The payment covers 90% of the difference between current
revenue and a benchmark based on the previous five years’ revenues, with the cost shared between the
government (75%) and the farmers’ reserve fund (25%).
The direct support payment for upland crops (wheat, barley, soybean, sugar beet, starch potato,
buckwheat and rapeseed) is based on both area and output. The area-based payments are based on
current planting, and output-based payments according to the volume of sales and the quality.
A crop diversification payment goes to farmers who switch their use of paddy fields from table rice
production to other crops (wheat, soybeans, or rice for feed and processing). This payment is area-based,
but output is also taken into account for rice for feed and flour. Within this crop diversification programme,
a payment is also provided to municipal governments if the production area employs high-yield rice variety
for feed and processing, or cultivates buckwheat or rapeseed.
The Livestock Stabilisation Programme, known as Marukin, provides support payments to beef cattle and
hog producers when the standard sales price falls below the standard production cost. Ninety per cent of
the difference between costs and sales prices are paid to producers, to which the government contributes
75% and the rest are provided by the producers’ reserve fund. Apart from the Marukin, output-based
compensation goes to producers of raw milk used for dairy processing.
Agricultural mutual aid is a form of commodity insurance that is voluntary and available for a range of
commodities (rice, wheat, barley, livestock, fruit, and other field crops) and horticultural facilities. It covers
yield losses, damage to facilities from pests and natural disasters, losses caused by death or culling of
livestock and veterinary expenses. Crop quality losses are also insured for some agricultural products
including rice, wheat, barley, and fruit. Government support covers around 50% of the insurance premium.
In 2019, Japan launched the non-product specific revenue insurance programme. The programme
compensates the loss of farm revenue stemming from both market and natural causes, relative to a
benchmark based on the previous five years’ revenues. The government supports 50% of the insurance
premium and 75% of the reserve fund. Farmers must choose between participating in the agricultural
mutual aid programme or revenue insurance programme to avoid duplicate payments.


416 

Japan provides financial support to young farmers (under 50 years old) during a training period and initial
operation period. Annual subsidies are also available for agricultural management entities to employ and
train young farmers.
The Agricultural Land Act establishes Agricultural Committees in municipalities to manage agricultural land
use. Purchasing, selling and leasing of agricultural land need to be approved by the Committee. In 2014,
Farmland Banks were established in all prefectures to reinforce the intermediary role of the government in
land transactions.3 The banks improve farmland conditions and infrastructure (e.g. enlarging plot size and
investment in drainage facilities) if necessary and then lease the consolidated farmland to business
farmers. Subsidies are provided to landowners and regional authorities that lease farmland to the banks.
Public investment in rural and agricultural infrastructure is a core agricultural policy, including agricultural
roads, dams and irrigation, and drainage facilities. The government also invests natural disaster
preparedness and restoring farm infrastructure, as well as constructing public health and recreational
facilities associated with agriculture.
About 40% of both total agricultural land and total agricultural output take place in hilly and mountainous
areas. Area-based direct payments go to farmers in these areas to compensate for the physical
disadvantages of these locations for agricultural production in order to avoid the abandonment of
agricultural land. Other payments are available to support collective engagement of local stakeholders in
maintaining the multifunctional roles of agriculture.
In line with the strategy MIDORI, Japan has defined an agricultural greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
reduction target of 49.5 MtCO2eq by 2030. GHG mitigation efforts in agriculture are conducted mostly via
support payments, grants, credits or non-financial services. For instance, direct payments for
environmentally-friendly agriculture are provided to farmers who conduct GHG mitigation activities, such
as applying compost and extending midseason drainage in paddy field. These activities must be in
conjunction with synthetic fertilisers and pesticides use that less than half of that of conventional farming
practices in the region. The government provides investment support for farmers using climate-smart
technologies such as renewable energy and biomass-based greenhouse heating systems in horticulture.
In addition, the government is setting up a labelling system of agricultural products that visualises farmers’
efforts of GHG reduction to effectively appeal to consumers.
Japan currently has 20 Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) and other trade agreements with
Singapore, Mexico, Malaysia, Chile, Thailand, Indonesia, Brunei Darussalam, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), the Philippines, Switzerland, Viet Nam, India, Peru, Australia, Mongolia, CPTPP,
the European Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and RCEP. In addition, Japan is engaged in
EPA negotiations with Colombia, with Türkiye, and with the People’s Republic of China and Korea for the
plurilateral free trade agreement.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
Japan’s agricultural sector is vulnerable to climate change and is already experiencing its negative effects
on production and product quality. The scale of recent typhoons and heavy rains has been unprecedented,
causing major damage to the economy and to the agricultural sector specifically (Shigemitsu and Gray,
2021[2]). High temperatures have resulted in less quality and yields of rice. They also affect fruit production,
such as by discolouring apples and grapes, increasing mandarin sunburn, and causing flowering disorders
among Japanese pears.
The 2018 Climate Change Adaptation Act is Japan’s legal foundation for adaptation measures. It mandates
the establishment of Japan’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan, with monitoring and updates every five
years. The National Climate Adaptation Plan was last revised in October 2021. In parallel, Japan submitted
its adaptation communication to the UNFCCC, outlining the latest impacts of climate change and
expanding its adaptation intentions to areas such as agriculture, disaster-risk reduction, and health.


 417

The 2021 Plan includes strategies to co-ordinate and collaborate on adaptation policies across relevant
ministries; develop climate research and an information infrastructure; disseminate climate information;
implement local adaptation measures; improve public awareness; promote adaptation actions in the
business sector; and provide aid for climate-change adaptation in developing countries.
MAFF formulated its first Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the agriculture, forestry, and fisheries sector
in August 2015. The Agriculture Adaptation Plan deals with managing climate risks, such as by developing
and utilising new plant varieties and natural-disaster-resilient infrastructure, and envisions taking
advantage of opportunities that could arise. Due to the long, narrow north-south orientation of the country
and consequently diverse climatic conditions and farming systems, the plan emphasises that adaptation
measures should be tailored locally and implemented through co-operation between national and local
governments.
The subsequent 2021 Agricultural Adaptation Plan was developed to respond to the 2020 Assessment
Report on Climate Change Impacts in Japan and designed to be coherent with the strategy MIDORI. The
Plan comprises six strategies: (1) developing plans to respond accurately and effectively to the impacts of
climate change in the next 10 years; (2) promoting development and dissemination of stable production
technologies and varieties adapted to climate change; (3) maintaining and improving prevention of and
response to disasters caused by extreme weather events; (4) exploiting opportunities such as the
northward shift of some horticultural products to favourable temperature zones; (5) facilitating collaboration
and sharing information among stakeholders; and (6) promoting initiatives by continuously reviewing and
optimising the plan.
Adaptation measures for agricultural production are being undertaken under MAFF’s guidance. These
include research into ongoing climate-change impacts and facilitating knowledge transfer, such as
demonstration projects and reports that make producers aware of new adaptive technologies and
heat-tolerant varieties. MAFF published an “innovative technology catalogue” in November 2022 to collect
and promote 167 available technologies and 81 to be developed by 2030, which can contribute to achieving
the strategy MIDORI’s KPI.
In co-operation with all 47 prefectural governments, MAFF monitors the impacts of global warming on
crops and livestock production. The results of this exercise, together with adoption rates of adaptive
technologies and heat-tolerant varieties, are disseminated in the annual "Global Warming Impact Survey”
and via the MAFF website.
The 2021 Agricultural Adaptation Plan focuses on adaptive actions for paddy rice, fruit production, and
crops damaged due to pests and diseases, identified as “facing particularly significant climate change
impacts” and “requiring high urgency of response” in the 2020 Assessment Report on Climate Change
Impacts in Japan, published by the Ministry of the Environment. These actions include:
•
Promoting high-temperature-resistant varieties of rice to farmers and advising them to plant rice
varieties with various ripening periods. High-temperature-resistant varieties were used in 35 out of
47 prefectures and covered 12.4% of total paddy rice production area in 2021. This will limit the
impact of high temperatures during the rice grain ripening period.
•
Promoting the introduction of superior-coloured cultivars, or yellow-green cultivars for apples and
grapes, and encouraging growers to switch from satsuma mandarin to medium-late maturing citrus
to limit the impact of climate change on fruit. MAFF also distributes guidance documents for apple,
grapes, and mandarin growers. At the same time, MAFF promotes opportunities created by climate
change for agriculture, notably the expansion of suitable areas for fruit production. Peaches, blood
oranges, and tropical fruits (e.g. avocado and atemoya) are some of the high-value crops that can
now be grown in new areas of Japan.
•
Promoting a pest-forecasting service to control pests within appropriate time periods, and early-
detection and control systems for invasive pests and diseases.


418 

Agricultural infrastructure in rural areas faced unprecedented levels of damage and loss due to typhoons
and heavy rain events in recent years. Following the 2018 Fundamental Plan for National Resilience and
the Basic Plan for Food, Agriculture and Rural Areas, MAFF manages agricultural infrastructure using
different types of measures. They include extending the service life of agricultural irrigation facilities;
renovating high-risk agricultural reservoirs; and creating hazard maps and contingency plans for
agriculture-related facilities (Shigemitsu and Gray, 2021[2]).
Two types of subsidised insurance programmes are available for farmers to mitigate climate risks
(Shigemitsu and Gray, 2021[2]). The agricultural mutual-aid programme and the non-product specific
revenue insurance programme (described above) provide risk protection for natural hazards.
To achieve greater resilience in rural areas, MAFF’s rural development policy supports economic
diversification and innovation. For instance, Support for Innovations from Rural Areas is a scheme
launched in 2022 to create new businesses and added value by using local resources. The scheme
supports those who seek diversification by facilitating investment and building platforms among
entrepreneurs. Having multiple sources of income can stabilise incomes and provide new opportunities.
Income sources could include farm tourism, food processing, and renewable-energy production. Inter-
sectoral collaboration is key for these to succeed.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
Food systems sustainability
In April 2022, the Diet (the Japanese parliament) enacted the “Act to Promote Low Environmental Impact
Business Activities for the Establishment of Environmentally Harmonized Food Systems” (hereinafter the
MIDORI Act) to facilitate the implementation of the strategy MIDORI. The act entered into force on 1 July
2022. The MIDORI Act sets out principles for the environmentally sustainability of Japan’s food system, in
which producers, consumers, and other stakeholders work in partnership to reduce the environmental
impact of food production and supply chains.
The MIDORI Act stipulates that local governments are responsible for setting and implementing
environmental measures (improving soil health, reducing use of chemical pesticides and fertilisers, and
reducing GHG emissions) suitable to the natural, economic, and social conditions of their regions. MAFF
promotes prefectural and municipal governments to develop a “Basic Plan” to set targets for improving
environmental outcomes in their respective regions.
The MIDORI Act establishes a certification system for environmentally-friendly practices and technologies.
Producers (including farmers, fishers, or foresters) can have their environmentally-friendly activities
certified if they develop an activity plan in co-ordination with the “Basic Plan” of their region. Business
operators, including food manufacturers, processors, distributors, input manufacturers, machinery
manufacturers, seed developers, plant breeders, and extension service providers who offer innovative
technologies to reduce the environmental impact of agriculture are also eligible for certification. Certified
producers and business operators can enjoy several tax and financial benefits as well as other services
such as simplified administrative procedures to facilitate their business development. In particular, the
Japan Finance Corporation offers certified producers an extension of two years for their interest-free loans.
It also offers low-interest and long-term loans for certified machinery, input, and materials manufacturers.
In application of the MIDORI Act, MAFF allocated a total of JPY 11.7 billion (USD 89 million) to the Green
Food System Strategy and Environment Program in 2022. About JPY 8.4 billion (USD 64 million) was
invested to support R&D and demonstration programmes for “Smart Agriculture”, pelletised composted-
manure application, and data-based soil management.4 The remaining JPY 3.3 billion (USD 25 million)
was spent to facilitate the reduced use of chemical fertilisers and pesticides on farms and organic farming.


 419

As of November 2022, a total of 318 projects were initiated. To accelerate the progress, MAFF plans to
allocate JPY 12.3 billion (USD 93.6 million) to the same programme in 2023.
The strategy MIDORI also puts high priority on organic farming. In addition to direct payments for
environmentally-friendly agriculture, MAFF also supports organic agriculture through the establishment of
model areas for organic farming clusters, and marketing promotion and sales channel expansion for
organic products including their use in school lunch programmes.
To reach the 2030 strategy MIDORI’s target of a 10% reduction in risk-weighted use of chemical pesticides,
MAFF encourages the adoption of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) systems and the application of
advanced pest control technologies, such as precision pesticide spraying by drone and early detection
technology for pests and diseases using Artificial Intelligence.
Innovation and digitalisation
Accelerating the implementation of Smart Agriculture and digitalisation is one of the key objectives of the
2020 Basic Plan. In June 2022, MAFF published an updated version of the 2020 Smart Agriculture
Promotion Comprehensive Package. The document identifies specific measures necessary to reach the
digital agriculture target of having “most of principal farmers in Japan practice data-driven agriculture by
2025.” These measures include conducting pilot studies and providing training opportunities. The revisions
are aligned with the strategy MIDORI and clarify the roles of smart agriculture for stable and sustainable
domestic food production.
In December 2022, the “Digital Garden City Nation Initiative” was established to promote regional
development. It focusses on digitalisation in rural areas as a way to eliminate the digital divide between
urban and rural regions. MAFF also provides financial support to Region Management Organization for
rural areas (RMO) that work to support communities and preserve rural areas. The goal of these actions
is to increase the number of people moving from the Tokyo area to rural regions to 10 000 per year by
Japanese fiscal year (JFY) 2027, and to increase the number of municipalities engaging in digitisation to
1 500 nationwide.
Risk management
A series of torrential rains hit Japan in July and August 2022. They triggered severe flooding especially in
northeast Japan, leaving extensive damage to agriculture, forestry and fisheries. Total estimated damages
were JPY 118.3 billion (USD 826 million). In September, typhoons Nanmadol and Talas caused
JPY 75.2 billion (USD 554.7 million) in damage to agriculture. The record snowstorm in 2022-23 also
caused damage costing JPY 65.3 billion (USD 401.7 billion) to the sector. The government earmarked a
total budget of JPY 72.1 billion (USD 549.3 billion) for restoration efforts in the sector, mostly intended to
support the recovery of farmland and agricultural facilities.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
On 26 April 2022, the Japanese Cabinet approved an emergency relief package to cushion the economic
blow from rising raw material costs. The JPY 6.2 trillion (USD 47 billion) relief package, funded mostly by
the Supplementary Budget for the JFY2022 and reserves set aside under the JFY2022 budget, included
subsidies to gasoline wholesalers and support payments to low-income households with children, among
others. Within this package, JPY 75.1 billion (USD 571 million) was allocated to MAFF to alleviate the
effects of price surges for food and raw materials through several measures as discussed in this section.
To address high fertiliser prices, JPY 10 billion (USD 76.1 million) was allocated to help fertiliser
manufacturers to diversify suppliers of raw materials, by covering additional transportation and storage
costs of fertiliser raw materials associated with changes in supplying countries. The support payments
were available to cover fertiliser materials imported until autumn 2022.


420 

MAFF also helped livestock farmers with feed costs. JPY 43.5 billion (USD 331 million) was allocated to
compensate the additional payments of the compound feed price stabilisation funds to livestock farmers.
The compensation is activated when the average import price in a given quarter exceeds 115% of the
average import price for the previous 12 months.
About JPY 10 billion (USD 76.1 million) was provided to food producers facing high raw materials costs.
This support was available to cover the cost of developing and manufacturing new food products and
sourcing costs when alternative raw materials were required for new food products.
MAFF distributed JPY 2.5 billion (USD 19 million) to incentivise farmers to increase wheat production.
Financial supports were available to wheat producers who increased wheat planting or who purchased or
adopted new machinery and practices. MAFF also supported groups of local producers seeking to enlarge
wheat production on a collective basis. Investment supports were offered to flour mills and distributors to
build storage facilities for domestic wheat.
To help low-income households confront surging food prices, MAFF allocated JPY 123 million
(USD 0.9 million) to urgently promote the dispatch of experts to help food banks secure food supply
sources and to strengthen their activities. Upon requests from food banks all over the country, the experts
support in expanding the amount of food that food banks can handle, matching food providing companies
with e.g. children's dining rooms, and providing the necessary know-how for formulating activity plans.
On 9 September 2022, the government announced an additional relief package to alleviate rising food and
energy costs, funded through the JFY2022 reserve fund. The package includes measures to keep the
import wheat selling price from rising, payments to livestock farmers to compensate for the increased cost
of compound feed, support to mitigate rising fertilisers costs, and grants to localities to support local
inflation countermeasures.
In line with MIDORI strategic objectives, MAFF also encouraged the reduction in mineral fertiliser use, by
covering 70% of the increased fertiliser costs compared to the previous year to farmers who adopt
measures to reduce chemical fertiliser use at least 20%. Approved measures include use of livestock
manure and sewage sludge compost, cover crops, and fertiliser application based on soil analysis. The
support payments are applicable to fertiliser applications in autumn 2022 and in spring 2023.
On 2 December 2022, MAFF allocated JPY 164.2 billion (USD 1.25 billion) from the JFY2022
supplementary budget to strengthen food security, with an emphasis on reducing import dependence, by
increasing domestic production of agricultural products and inputs. The main measures include support
payments to livestock farmers and compost manufacturers to partially cover costs for building facilities for
the manufacture and pelletisation of compost. MAFF also provided support to cover the costs of pilot
projects for the use of domestic materials such as sewage sludge in fertiliser. Support payments were also
increased for forage crop production and the establishment of domestic supply chains for domestic forage.
Some of the programmes will continue to be funded under the JFY2023 annual budget.
On 27 December 2022, the Japanese Government released the “Food Security Reinforcement Policy
Framework” which presents a roadmap to ensure a stable food supply. The Policy Framework sets several
targets to facilitate the structural transformation by increasing production and utilisation of domestic
resources, such as:
•
Doubling manure compost and sewage sludge use for fertiliser and increasing the ratio of domestic
materials (e.g. nitrogen from livestock manure and phosphorus from sewage sludge) in fertiliser
use (on a phosphorus basis) from 25% in 2021 to 40% by 2030.
•
Increasing production areas by 9% for wheat, 16% for soybeans, and 32% for feed crops compared
to 2021 levels by 2030.
•
Halving food loss and waste in the food industry businesses to 2.7 million tonnes by 2030 from
2000 levels.


 421

Trade policy developments in 2022-23
Japan’s agriculture, food, forestry and fishery exports reached a new record of JPY 1.4 trillion
(USD 10.7 billion) in 2022. To build on this trend and reach the objectives of JPY 2 trillion by 2025 and
JPY 5 trillion by 2030, Japan renewed the 2020 Strategy of Export Expansion of Agricultural, Forestry,
Fishery Products and Food in December 2022.
In May 2022, MAFF revised the Act on Facilitating the Export of Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery Products
and Food to incorporate the certification system for export promotion associations covering major
commodities. The export promotion associations bring together stakeholders within a marketing chain to
develop overseas markets. Certified export promotion associations are expected to create standards, set
quality standards and production methods and unify sales strategies for specific Japan-made products.
These groups can seek advice from Japan External Trade Organization (JETRO) and Food and
Agricultural Materials Inspection Centre (FAMIC). By the end of December 2022, MAFF certified seven
associations, including “All Japan Trade Association of Confectionery Manufactures”, “Japan Sake and
Shochu Makers Association”, “Japan Rice and Rice Industry Export Promotion Association” and “Japan
Fruit and Vegetables Export Promotion Council”.
Contextual information
Japan is the world’s third largest economy after the United States and China with relatively small land area
and high population density (Table 17.3). Agriculture constitutes 1% of GDP and 3% of employment in
2021, but the agriculture and agro-food sector as a whole accounts for 9% of GDP if all food-related
industries are considered (MAFF, 2023[3]). Livestock accounted for more than one-third of the total
agricultural production value in 2021, followed by vegetables (24%), rice (16%) and fruits (10%) (MAFF,
2023[4]).
Two-thirds of the country area is covered by mountains, leaving only 12% of the total land area for
agriculture, more than half of which are rice paddy fields. Total agricultural land has decreased from
4.8 million hectares in 2000 to 4.3 million hectares in 2021 (MAFF, 2021[5]) due to the abandonment and
conversion of farmland to non-farm uses (e.g. residential, industrial, or commercial uses). The agricultural
workforce declined by more than half since 1980 to 1.9 million in 2021, and the pace of this decline has
accelerated in the last decade (SBJ, 2022[6]). The average farm size increased from 1.4 hectares to
3.2 hectares between 1990 and 2021 (MAFF, 2021[7]), but still remains small compared to other OECD
countries. The average age of farmers was 67.9 years in 2021 and about 70% of farmers in Japan are
over 65 years old (MAFF, 2022[8]; MAFF, 2021[9]).



422 

Table 17.3. Japan: Contextual indicators

Japan
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
3 461
5 300
8.6%
4.3%
Population (million)
127
126
3.0%
2.4%
Land area (thousand km2)
365
365
0.4%
0.4%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
4 830
4 372
0.2%
0.1%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
340
336
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
27 290
42 230
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
8.7
15.5
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
1.5
1.0
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
5.0
2.9
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
0.3
1.0
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
9.7
8.3
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
74
61
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
26
39
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
93
94
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
The country has experienced slow economic growth and deflation for most of the past two decades, but
has one of the lowest unemployment rates among OECD countries (Figure 17.5). Since the Russian
aggression against Ukraine, the energy shock has pushed up inflation, hurting economic growth around
the world, as well as Japan. Energy and food prices remain the biggest driver of headline consumer price
inflation in Japan, which reached 3% in August and September 2022 (OECD, 2023[10]).


 423

Figure 17.5. Japan: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Japan is one of the world’s largest importers of agro-food products, and the United States is the biggest
source of agricultural imports. The food self-sufficiency rate was 38% in 2021 on a calorie basis, meaning
that more than 60% of Japanese calorie supply depended on imports. Agro-food exports are much smaller
than imports, but the export value in 2021 increased by 22.7% from 2020, reaching its highest level at
JPY 804 billion (USD 6.1 billion). It is about five times higher than that of 2000 (MAFF, 2021[11]). Most of
Japan’s agro-food exports are directed at final consumers (Figure 17.6). Processed food products such as
alcohol and beverages, sauces and seasonings, and snacks account for the majority of Japan’s agro-food
exports. Among unprocessed products, apples, beef and green tea are the most exported.


424 

Figure 17.6. Japan: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Japan’s agricultural Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth averaged 1.4% a year between 2011 and 2020,
which is slightly above the global average and twice the growth estimated for 1993-2002 (Figure 17.7,
Table 17.4). Recent TFP growth in Japan’s primary agriculture has allowed some modest output growth,
offsetting reductions in the use of primary production factors, in particular labour, and intermediate inputs.
Japan’s nitrogen and phosphorus balance remain among the highest in OECD countries (Table 17.4). The
high and increasing nitrogen balance is due to a combination of high fertiliser use and livestock production
Japan - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
20
40
60
80
Japan - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
10
10
14
14
5
25
25
75
75
43
43
10
10
18
18
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 425

on limited pasture land. The high phosphorus balance, in contrast, is partly a result of soil characteristics
(OECD, 2019[12]; Shindo, 2012[13]). Agriculture’s share of total energy use is below the OECD average, as
is its share in GHG emissions – partly a consequence of the sector’s below-average contribution to the
national GDP. The volume of agricultural water use has remained stable for the past few decades. In 2019,
the Japanese agricultural sector used 67.9% of water of which over 90% was directed for paddy field
irrigation (MLIT, 2022[14]). While average water stress in Japan has fallen somewhat, it remains much
higher than the OECD average.
Figure 17.7. Japan: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 17.4. Japan: Productivity and environmental indicators

Japan
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.7%
1.4%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
170.8
179.3
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
72.0
56.8
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
1.2
1.3
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
2.6
2.8
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
54.7
54.4
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
65.8
67.4
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
20.7
18.8
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year. Data for nutrients balance refer to the year 2016.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.
Japan - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
1.37%
1.37%
1.12%
1.12%
-0.72%
-0.72%
0.35%
0.35%
-0.30%
-0.30%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Japan
World
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%


426 

References

MAFF (2023), GDP calculation for agriculture and food related sector (in Japanese),
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kouhyou/keizai_keisan/attach/pdf/index-3.pdf.
[3]
MAFF (2023), Total agricultural output (national estimate) (in Japanese),
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kouhyou/nougyou_sansyutu/.
[4]
MAFF (2022), Agricultural structure statistics 2021 (in Japanese),
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/sihyo/data/07.html.
[8]
MAFF (2021), Agricultural structure statistics 2021 (in Japanese),
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kouhyou/noukou/attach/pdf/index-1.pdf.
[7]
MAFF (2021), Agriculture and Forestry Census 2020 (in Japanese),
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kekka_gaiyou/noucen/2020/index.html.
[9]
MAFF (2021), Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Import and Export Statistics (in Japanese),
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kouhyou/kokusai/.
[11]
MAFF (2021), Arable land area as of 15 July 2021 (in Japanese),
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kouhyou/sakumotu/menseki/.
[5]
MLIT (2022), Water resources in Japan (in Japanese),
https://www.mlit.go.jp/mizukokudo/mizsei/mizukokudo_mizsei_tk2_000014.html.
[14]
OECD (2023), Measuring Progress towards Inclusive and Sustainable Growth in Japan, OECD
Publishing, https://doi.org/10.1787/3ced6c79-en.
[10]
OECD (2019), Innovation, Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability in Japan, OECD Food and
Agricultural Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/92b8dff7-en.
[12]
SBJ (2022), Labour Force Survey, Statistics Bureau of Japan (in Japanese), https://www.e-
stat.go.jp/dbview?sid=0003007108.
[6]
Shigemitsu, M. and E. Gray (2021), “Building the resilience of Japan’s agricultural sector to
typhoons and heavy rain”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 159, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/4ed1ee2c-en.
[2]
Shindo, J. (2012), “Changes in the nitrogen balance in agricultural land in Japan and 12 other
Asian Countries based on a nitrogen-flow model”, Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems,
Vol. 94/1, pp. 47-61.
[13]
WTO (2022), World Tariff Profiles 2022.
[1]







 427

Notes

1 Originally named the MeaDRI Strategy, based on an abbreviation of “Measures for Achievement of
Decarbonisation and Resilience with Innovation”. “MIDORI” means “Green” in Japanese.
2 The risk-weighted use of chemical pesticides is estimated on the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) level of
a chemical in humans.
3 Officially called the Public Corporations for Farmland Consolidation to Core Farmers through Renting
and Subleasing.
4 According to MAFF, Smart Agriculture uses robot technology and ICT to achieve ultra-labour-saving and
high-quality production.


428 

Support to agriculture
Support to producers in Kazakhstan has been volatile for most of this century, accounting for 4.5% of
Gross Farm Receipts (GFR) in 2020-22, compared to 8.6% in 2000-02. The share of potentially
most-distorting producer transfers fell from an average of 98% in the early 2000s to 59% in 2020-22, mostly
based on Market Price Support (MPS) and variable input use without constraints. On average, domestic
prices were lower than world prices for several agricultural commodities, generating aggregate MPS worth
about -2.4% of GFR in 2020-22, as negative MPS worth -3.9% of GFR more than outweighs smaller
positive MPS worth 1.4% of GFR. Single Commodity Transfers (SCT) in 2020-22 were negative for rice,
sunflower, and maize, reflecting individual commodity price gaps. SCTs with the largest positive transfers
were barley, poultry, and cotton.
Support based on variable input use and fixed capital formation account for most budgetary transfers to
producers. Together with limited other forms of payments, budgetary producer support amounted to 7.0%
of GFR in 2020-22.
Support to general services (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) accounted for 16% of budgetary
support to agriculture in 2020-22 and corresponded to 0.6% of the value of agricultural production. Of this,
spending on inspection and control accounted for 55% and spending on infrastructure (mostly irrigation
and drainage, and the establishment of a digital land cadastre) accounted for 21%. Total agricultural
support (Total Support Estimate, TSE) declined from 1.7% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in the early
2000s to 0.6% in 2020-22.
Recent policy changes
Developments in 2022 focused on land management and digitalisation, following priorities defined in the
2021 National Project and Concept. State land-control functions were centralised in a single body. The
government launched the “JerInSpectr” platform across the country to improve institutional efficiency and
identify issues related to unused agricultural land. It uses remote-sensing data for improved land-resource
management without on-site visits.
A new Unified State Information System for Subsidies (USISS) launched in early 2023 to combat corruption
by automating many of the functions of subsidy delivery. These include registration for and distribution of
subsidies, checking subsidy recipients’ compliance with obligations, and keeping track of which subsidies
were paid to applicants.
Baiterek Holding, the state-owned national development institution, was reorganised, allowing agricultural
producers to apply for loans in a “one-stop shop” process. Existing financing conditions were not changed.
An amendment to the Tax Code in 2022 doubles the tax rate on unused agricultural land. This change is
intended to encourage land to be put into productive use.
18 Kazakhstan


 429

Assessment and recommendations
•
Limited effort has been made to facilitate the adaptation of the agricultural sector to a changing
climate, despite adaptation’s mention among the government’s priorities in the national Concept
framework, and the sector’s vulnerabilities to the effects of climate change. Steps were taken to
develop state and regional action plans through the ministry’s “Rules of organisation and
implementation of the process of adaptation to climate change”. However, Kazakhstan should look
to move beyond planning and begin implementing adaptation-specific policy. This should be done
with a co-ordinated effort across levels of government to monitor and measure progress.
•
Adverse weather conditions, pests and diseases, and price volatility pose challenges for farmers
and agribusiness firms, and responding to these can strain government finances. Kazakhstan
should enhance the resilience of its agricultural sector by adopting a broader, more integrated
approach to risk management, replacing ad-hoc, ex-post emergency responses to local disasters,
ensuring that disaster assistance does not impede the development of on-farm strategies and
market solutions, such as insurance.
•
Agriculture is the second largest emitter of greenhouse gases (GHG) after the energy sector, and
Kazakhstan should specify targets and approaches to reduce agricultural emissions to meet the
country’s overall emission-reduction commitments.
•
While total support to agriculture is small relative to the economy, most producer support is
provided in forms that are potentially most-distorting to agricultural production and trade, and likely
to exacerbate pressures on natural resources. Subsidies for inorganic fertilisers, chemical inputs
and industrial feed have strong potential to harm the environment. Kazakhstan should consider
phasing out such types of support. Freed funds could be used for needed services for the sector,
notably the relatively underfunded agricultural knowledge and innovation system, and advisory
services. Giving strategic priority and incentives to orient innovation and growth towards reducing
environmental pressures could keep the pace of productivity growth while ensuring a more
environmentally sustainable path.
•
Positive developments in land management have been observed, such as the introduction of digital
monitoring of land use. Kazakhstan should clarify its land-use objectives with respect to production,
adaptation and conservation. The doubling of taxation on unused land and the commitment to
increase labour productivity 2.5 times demonstrates Kazakhstan’s ambition to increase production,
but should not neglect the potentially harmful environmental effects of over-production.
•
The introduction of a digital system to register and distribute subsidies is an important step towards
improving transparency and the accuracy of monitoring.




430 

Figure 18.1. Kazakhstan: Development of support to agriculture


Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Kazakhstan - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
Kazakhstan - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Kazakhstan - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
0.975
1
1.025
1.05
1.075
1.1
Kazakhstan - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
Kazakhstan - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%


 431

Figure 18.2. Kazakhstan: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency. The producer price change and the border price change
are not calculated when both negative and positive market price support (MPS) occur at the commodity level for the previous year.  Note that
negative MPS estimates for livestock products may arise in cases of aligned product prices if there is positive MPS for feed commodities.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 18.3. Kazakhstan: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
Kazakhstan - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE change decomposition
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
Kazakhstan - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Barley
Maize
Rice
Sunflower
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Sheep meat
Eggs
Cotton
-160%
-140%
-120%
-100%
-80%
-60%
-40%
-20%
0%
20%
40%


432 

Table 18.1. Kazakhstan: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
3 367
17 668
15 301
17 614
20 088
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
76.61
61.58
61.78
59.46
63.48
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
2 933
15 374
13 083
15 212
17 828
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
290
870
1 028
1 012
570
Support based on commodity output
272
-373
-93
-236
-789
Market Price Support1
272
-463
-176
-330
-882
Positive Market Price Support
372
268
336
420
47
Negative Market Price Support
-100
-731
-513
-750
-929
Payments based on output
0
90
83
94
93
Payments based on input use
18
1 218
1 081
1 228
1 344
Based on variable input use
8
286
264
284
310
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
10
927
814
938
1 029
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
0
5
4
6
6
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
13
22
10
5
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
13
22
10
5
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
12
18
10
10
Percentage PSE (%)
8.61
4.51
6.23
5.34
2.65
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.09
0.98
1.00
1.00
0.96
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.09
1.05
1.07
1.06
1.03
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
67
255
300
215
251
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
3
37
37
40
36
Inspection and control
29
140
140
140
141
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
28
54
113
28
23
Marketing and promotion
0
4
4
4
3
Cost of public stockholding
5
19
7
3
48
Miscellaneous
1
0
0
1
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
18.76
22.13
21.87
16.82
30.02
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-316
448
241
314
791
Transfers to producers from consumers
-291
343
132
136
762
Other transfers from consumers
-21
0
0
0
0
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
37
44
51
15
Excess feed cost
-4
68
65
126
14
Percentage CSE (%)
-10.80
2.98
1.85
2.07
4.44
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.12
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.96
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.12
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.96
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
357
1 162
1 372
1 278
836
Transfers from consumers
312
-343
-132
-136
-762
Transfers from taxpayers
65
1 505
1 504
1 414
1 597
Budget revenues
-21
0
0
0
0
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.65
0.59
0.80
0.65
0.39
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
85
1 624
1 548
1 608
1 718
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.39
0.84
0.91
0.82
0.81
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
858
802
914
..
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
147.38
433.41
413.36
426.03
460.85
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Kazakhstan are: wheat, rice, maize, barley,
sunflower, potatoes, cotton, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, sheep meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.


 433

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
In the Soviet era, all sectors of Kazakhstan’s economy, including agriculture, were regulated by central
planning. Production, the marketing of agricultural inputs and outputs, and processing and distribution of
food were controlled by state enterprises. Agriculture was supported by high administered prices and
considerable input and output price subsidies, in addition to policies such as cheap energy and transport,
which were not agriculture-specific.
Kazakhstan became an independent country in 1991 following the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Stabilisation and transition to a market economy were its main economic challenges. During the transition,
the agricultural sector was affected by economic shocks, land reform and reduced government support.
The main agricultural policies were geared towards decreasing food import-dependency and increasing
domestic food production (Baubekova, Tikhonova and Kvasha, 2021[1]).
Agricultural products and inputs became exposed to market forces post-independence in the 1990s. After
this early period of market reform, Kazakhstan made little progress in pursuing further trade liberalisation.
It was not until its accession to the WTO in 2015 that the country restarted trade liberalisation measures.
However, Kazakhstan continues to apply a range of border and domestic price intervention measures such
as tariff rate quotas and non-tariff measures. They have also imposed export restrictions in times of global
uncertainty or high prices, such as 2008, 2020 and 2022.
The State Programme of Agro Industrial Complex Development for 2017-2021 (hereafter, “the 2021 State
Programme”) provided the main agricultural policy framework in Kazakhstan up until the end of 2021. While
maintaining the principles of the previous framework (Agribusiness-2020 Programme), the 2021 State
Programme put a stronger emphasis on the development of, and support to, individual household plots
and small farms, agricultural producer co-operatives and agriculture supporting services and infrastructure.
In addition, some input subsidies including on seed, fertiliser and pesticides were increased.
Table 18.2. Kazakhstan: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1992
Soviet era
Closed economy
Government control of the agricultural economy through regional trade controls,
input supply controls, and the continuation of soft budget constraints
Taxation of the agricultural sector to support the industrial sector
Tariffs
Low administrated prices on energy and transport
1992-1997
Initial structural reforms towards an open
economy
Price liberalisation of agricultural products and inputs
Emergence of new policy institutions
1998-2002
Economic crisis
Stabilisation measures
Debt rescheduling
Limited support to the sector
Agrarian Credit Corporation created as main agricultural lender (credit at
preferential rates)
Restructuring agricultural enterprises
2003-2015
Agriculture as part of economic
diversification
Price support
Support for import-competing products
Tariff protection for meat
Taxation of agricultural exports


434 

Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
2015-present
Reforms to trade liberalisation
WTO accession 2015
EAEU membership in 2015
Elimination of payments per hectare for priority crops
Promotion of agricultural co-operatives
Increase in land tax rates
Debt restructuring programme
Introduction of investment subsidies
Introduction of interest concessions
Agricultural insurance reform
Source: (OECD, 2013[2]; Baubekova, Tikhonova and Kvasha, 2021[1]).
Producer support in Kazakhstan tends to vary considerably between years. Levels of support from price
interventions have declined over time in favour of budgetary support. The %PSE fluctuated considerably
between 1995 and 2020. In some years, negative support provided through depressed market prices for
some products offset budgetary allocations and positive support provided through higher domestic prices
for others. However, net producer support was positive in most years (Figure 18.4), due to increasing
support related to the use of production inputs, in particular credit, over the past ten years. Overall, total
budgetary support to agriculture increased relative to the size of the economy and is now about 2.6% of
gross farm receipts.
Figure 18.4. Kazakhstan: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Kazakhstan - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30


 435

Main policy instruments
The National Project for the Development of Agriculture for 2021-2025 (hereafter “the National Project”)
and the Concept for the Development of Agriculture for 2021-2030 (hereafter “the Concept”) provide
overarching policy frameworks for the development of the agricultural sector. The National Project was
endorsed in October 2021 while the Concept was endorsed in December 2021.
The National Project sets out four goals to be achieved in the next five years:
•
Increasing labour productivity by 2.5 times compared to 2019.
•
Increasing the supply of locally produced basic food products.
•
Doubling food exports compared to 2019 and raising the share of processed foods in total food
exports to 70%.
•
Generating higher and more stable incomes for 1 million rural people by establishing 7 sustainable
food value chains (meat, fruits, vegetables, sugar, dairy, grains, and oilseeds) and related
investment projects.
To achieve these goals, the National Project develops and expands existing state support measures
including:
•
lending and leasing programmes for agribusiness
•
agricultural insurance
•
financing of crop cultivation through short and long-term loans
•
subsidy mechanisms and introduction of new forms of state support
•
forward contracting of agricultural products to stimulate the cultivation of priority crops
•
maintenance of reserve stocks of grain, a forage fund, and stabilisation funds for socially significant
food products
•
improvements to the taxation system
•
R&D measures and build capacity for agro-industrial production.
The Concept sets out a number of key priority areas including:
•
ensuring food security and improving quality of food
•
adjusting support mechanisms to focus on competitive products
•
industry development based on manufacturing, digitalisation, sustainability and development of
human capital
•
commercialisation and knowledge transfer; development and strengthening of phytosanitary and
veterinary services
•
more efficient land use systems and water use for the production of agricultural products
•
growth of incomes and social support systems for the rural population, development of rural
infrastructure
•
the creation of production and distribution chains.
The Concept also sets goals to build on those of the National Project by setting more ambitious targets for
productivity and exports, while also expanding its set of development goals to also include for agro-
industrial investments and food availability.
Kazakhstan applies a range of border and domestic price intervention measures. Border measures are
implemented within the Customs Union of the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) and include tariff rate
quotas (TRQs) and non-tariff measures. TRQs apply to imports of lower-grade beef and of poultry products.


436 

Intervention in domestic markets is twofold. The State Commission for the Modernisation of the Economy
undertakes intervention purchases of grains to support domestic producer prices. At the same time,
consumption price stabilisation is in place for 29 commodities.
Purchases of mineral fertiliser and high-quality seeds are supported by subsidies per unit of input.
Administered prices below market prices apply to diesel fuel sold to agricultural producers for pre-
determined volumes during sowing and harvesting periods.
Investment subsidies, together with concessional credit, represent the principal forms of support to
agriculture. Concessional credit comes through numerous channels. Several credit agencies provide loans
at reduced interest rates under the umbrella of the state company Baiterek Holding, which has absorbed
the subsidiaries and functions of KazAgro Holding since 2021. Along with agricultural producers, food
processors benefit from concessional credit and leasing of machinery and equipment from credit agencies
of Baiterek Holding.
For crops, output payments go to oilseeds, rice, sugar beet and cotton used for processing. Headage and
output payments support the livestock sector. Large commercial livestock producers receive most of these
as they account for the largest shares of production and herd size. Other forms of support to livestock are
silage and fodder subsidies, support to artificial insemination and to the purchase of young cattle for
feedlots.
The current interest rate subsidy applies to loans issued by financial institutions with a nominal interest
rate not exceeding 17% per annum. The interest rate subsidy reduces nominal rates by 10% for loans for
the purchase of agricultural machinery, equipment and farm animals, purchase of fixed assets and
construction; by 7% for replenishment of working capital; and by 9% for spring field work and harvesting.
There are separate terms for interest rate subsidies for loan agreements concluded under the Economy of
Simple Things programme, designed by the Ministry of National Economy to raise domestic production
and reduce imports of consumer products such as of food, textiles, and furniture. These loans are targeted
towards production and processing of products deemed of strategic importance. The programme is
financed by the National Bank and applies to loans with a nominal interest rate not exceeding 15% per
annum. For this programme, the interest rate subsidy is transferred through the Damu Entrepreneurship
Development Fund and local governments, and reduces the nominal interest rate by 10% for loans for
investment purposes, by 9% for loans to replenish working capital and for spring field and harvesting work.
The Credit guarantee system is a mechanism for guaranteeing loans from second-tier banks through the
Damu Entrepreneurship Development Fund.1 The terms of the guarantee provide for the issuance of a
loan of up to KZT 3 billion (USD 7 million) at a rate of no more than 17% per annum, for a period of up to
10 years. The commission for guaranteeing is 30% of the amount of the guarantee, of which 29.9% is paid
by the local executive body and 0.1% is paid by the agricultural producer. The guarantee is provided for
the implementation of investment projects in all types of activities in agriculture, as well as in the field of
food production. At the same time, within the framework of the guarantee, there are priority investment
areas, which are supported with higher guarantee rates.
Land tax applies since 2015. Individual farms of less than 3 500 hectares can pay an alternative Single
Land Tax set as a percentage of the cadastral value of land owned or used, which replaces the land tax
and five other business taxes. Finally, since 2015, individual farms pay a 10% income tax for physical
persons on an income above KZT 150 million (USD 0.3 million).
Kazakhstan is a member of the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) established in 2015,
together with Armenia, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan and the Russian Federation. Kazakhstan’s border measures
are implemented within the Customs Union of the EAEU and a number of national responsibilities in the
area of custom regulations are transferred to the EAEU, including SPS and technical regulations.


 437

Kazakhstan is a party to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. Through its Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC), Kazakhstan set an economy-wide target starting in 2021 to reduce GHG emissions
by 15% compared to 1990 by 2030. This target covers all emissions, including from agriculture. Specific
targets or reduction plans for the agricultural sector were not defined.
There are no mitigation policies directed at the agricultural sector. There are however cross-compliance
requirements linked to some support payments that could help lower GHG emissions from agriculture. For
example, some interest rate subsidies provided to livestock producers require rehabilitation of pasture
lands.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
While no policies specifically target climate adaptation, one of the government’s 2030 agricultural
development priorities in the Concept is the “Establishment of a sustainable, intensive crop sector with
stable and high yields and profitability that is adapted to climate change”. Measures relevant to adaptation
undertaken by the government include support for the development of irrigation, crop diversification, and
research and development in drought-resistant species. The country is also working with the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) on a National Action Plan to Combat Desertification.
In 2021 the Ministry of Ecology, Geology and Natural Resources endorsed the “Rules of organisation and
implementation of the process of adaptation to climate change”. This document outlines the process for
developing and implementing climate-change adaptation measures by central and local executive bodies
in regions and cities. It emphasises the need to assess vulnerabilities, establish clear and measurable
goals, and prioritise adaptation measures based on efficiency, feasibility, cost, financing availability, and
implementation timeline. Involvement of interested parties is encouraged through focus-group discussions,
and measures are to be integrated into state and regional programs. Co-ordination, monitoring, and
evaluation among various executive bodies are crucial to ensuring adaptation to climate change. However,
no active steps have been taken in this direction.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
Forward contracting and price stabilisation
In 2022, the financing amount for forward contracting by the Food Contract Corporation was doubled to
KZT 80 billion (USD 174 million). The list of purchased crops was expanded to ten items, including soft
wheat, hard wheat, barley, oats, sunflower seed, soybeans, flax, rapeseed, buckwheat, and corn. In 2022,
agricultural products were delivered to the Food Corporation’s funds under forward purchasing with a total
amount of KZT 125.9 billion (USD 273 million).
In mid-2022, two new developments were introduced on forward contracts. The first involves new forward
contracting of vegetables to ensure their sale in the off-season. This is provided a year in advance to
guarantee timely sowing and subsequent market supply during off-season periods. The second involves
the provision of working capital to processing plants for raw material purchases. Currently, sugar refineries
receive working capital financing under a memorandum between the Integrated Tariff Information System,
regional authorities, and sugar refineries. Additional forward contracting for buckwheat, rice, and sunflower
producers through processing plants is under consideration.
Subsidy delivery
Harnessing information technologies is part of Kazakhstan’s long-term strategy to simplify, facilitate
control, and improve the transparency and effectiveness of government support to agriculture. Starting
from 1 January 2023 all subsidy applications are now accepted through the “Unified State Information
System for Subsidies,” (USISS) replacing the previous Qoldau platform. The main distinction of the new


438 

platform is that farmers no longer need to pay a subscription fee for its use. The subsidy database is
maintained by the Ministry of Agriculture.
An electronic mechanism was established for allocating and distributing diesel fuel to agricultural work
within the USISS. This mechanism is designed to ensure transparency in the distribution of diesel fuel and
enable effective monitoring and control. This is implemented via amendments to the Law on State
Regulation of Production and Circulation of Certain Types of Petroleum Products
Merging of KazAgro Holding with Baiterek Holding
On 25 July 2022, Baiterek Holding, a state-owned finance corporation, transferred 100% of its subsidiary
KazAgroFinance (KAF) shares to the Agrarian Credit Corporation (ACC). KAF, will continue its core
activities of providing leasing for agricultural machinery and equipment as a subsidiary of ACC. This follows
from a series of restructurings of other state-owned corporations in 2021 that saw Baiterek absorb KazAgro
Holdings and three of its subsidiaries. The reorganisation will provide a “one stop shop” to agricultural
producers for loans through the large branch network of the ACC. Conditions for financing agribusiness
are otherwise unchanged.
Digitalisation of agriculture
Efforts began in October 2022 to digitise records of agricultural lands, covering 205.4 million hectares, or
75% of the republic’s total territory. A digital agricultural map is expected to be completed by the end of
2024. Work is also underway to create the “Unified State Real Estate Cadastre” information system.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
The National Project sets the objective to double food exports and raise the share of processed food in
agro-food exports to 70%. Some of the new measures include developing a network of trade and logistics
infrastructure, wholesale distribution centres, eliminating trade barriers, and harmonising veterinary and
phytosanitary requirements. These measures will be implemented through negotiations with potential
importers, foreign partners, as well as participation in the work of international organisations (WTO, OIE,
IPPC, Codex Alimentarius Commission, FiBL and IFOAM).
On 24-25 July 2022, a Protocol on sanitary and technical requirements for the import of Kazakh beef and
mutton into Saudi Arabia was signed. The signed protocol opens up opportunities for Kazakhstan beef and
mutton producers to expand their market and further enhance co-operation in the agricultural sector.
In January 2023 Kazakhstan introduced a three-month ban on onion exports. This was associated with an
increase in demand for domestic vegetables from third countries. In accordance with the Order, territorial
inspectors have suspended the issuance of phytosanitary certificates for exports. As of 31 December 2022,
the Ministry of Agriculture introduced new regulations for the export of live animals. The regulations
introduce quota limits of 60 000 bulls and 120 000 lambs.
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
Kazakhstan did not introduce any policies specifically in response to the war in Ukraine. However, in
May 2022, following the outbreak of the war and resulting volatility in global agricultural markets, the
Ministry of Agriculture issued the “On some issues of exporting white sugar and raw cane sugar” to prevent
the possibility of mass sugar export. This comes in response to a decline in sugar production volumes in
the Eurasian Economic Union countries. The order imposes a temporary ban on the export of white sugar
and raw cane sugar for a period of six months. Similarly, an export quota of 550 000 tonnes for wheat was
introduced from April to September 2022.


 439

Contextual information
Kazakhstan has the ninth largest land area in the world and is one of the least densely populated countries.
It has the second-highest per-capita availability of arable land in the world. Kazakhstan is also an important
exporter of fossil fuels. The country is an upper middle-income economy and the richest country in Central
Asia, but its economy remains highly dependent on oil and commodity markets. Its high share of trade in
GDP (25%) highlights the strong focus on international markets.
Although the contribution of agriculture to the economy has declined sharply since the early 1990s,
agriculture remains an important economic sector, contributing to 5% of GDP and 15% of national
employment. Over 75% (or 214 million hectares) of the country’s territory is suitable for agricultural
production, but only about half of that is currently under agricultural production. Kazakhstan is one of the
top ten grain exporters in the world, exporting to over 70 countries. The country’s major crops are wheat,
barley, cotton and rice, with wheat exports a major source of foreign currency. Livestock products, including
dairy, leather, meat and wool also comprise an important share of agricultural output.
The farm structure is dualistic: with large-scale and often highly vertically integrated operations dominating
the production of the sector, while rural and subsistence-farming households account for the majority of
farms. Kazakhstan’s agricultural sector is particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change, as
increasingly frequent hot weather and severe droughts reduce water availability.
Table 18.3. Kazakhstan: Contextual indicators

Kazakhstan
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
115
545
0.3%
0.4%
Population (million)
15
19
0.4%
0.4%
Land area (thousand km2)
2 700
2 700
3.3%
3.3%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
215 393
214 003
7.2%
7.3%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
6
7
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
7 725
28 685
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
37.4
24.9
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
8.1
5.0
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
36.2
15.0
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
2.0
7.0
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
0.7
10.4
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
56
58
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
44
42
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
14
14
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Kazakhstan’s GDP grew by 4.3% in 2021 coming out of the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic hit the
economy more than the crises in 2008 and 2015-16. The recovery in 2021 was also more muted than that
following the 2008 crisis, but in line with that of 2015-16. Economic data is not yet available to describe the
Kazakh economy following the outbreak of war in Ukraine.


440 

Figure 18.5. Kazakhstan: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Kazakhstan has been a net agro-food importer since the mid-2000s, yet the country remains one of the
world’s largest wheat exporters. More than 60% of agro-food exports are in primary commodities, the vast
majority of which goes to processing by industry. More than 60% of agro-food imports are processed
commodities, the bulk of which are for final consumption.


 441

Figure 18.6. Kazakhstan: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural output grew very rapidly in Kazakhstan in the decade 2011-20, at an annual average rate of
2.9%. Intermediary inputs grew at only 1.1% and agricultural labour force fell with labour moving out of
agriculture to other sectors. The strong output growth was only possible because of high productivity gains
of 4.58% per year, well above the world average.
Kazakhstan - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2020 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
0
1
2
3
4
5
Kazakhstan - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2020 (Percentage)
25
25
11
11
55
55
9
12
12
56
56
8
8
24
24
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


442 

The persistent negative average nutrient balances suggest that soil fertility is being eroded which will have
a negative impact on yields and output. Studies indicate that there is a high degree of land degradation in
Kazakhstan and that soils are very poor in nitrogen and phosphorus, particularly in the rangelands (Shpedt
and Aksenova, 2021[3]; Hu, Han and Zhang, 2020[4]). Agriculture’s share of energy use and agriculture’s
share of GHG emissions have both declined and appear to be converging with OECD averages. The share
of agriculture in abstracted water has increased slightly, and remains much higher than the OECD average.
Figure 18.7. Kazakhstan: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 18.4. Kazakhstan: Productivity and environmental indicators

Kazakhstan
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.8%
4.6%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
-14.8
-13.9
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
-2.7
-2.3
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
4.0
2.1
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
12.1
11.9
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
0.9
0.7
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
66.7
67.2
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator


8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.
Kazakhstan - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
4.58%
4.58%
1.12%
1.12%
-2.73%
-2.73%
0.35%
0.35%
1.10%
1.10%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Kazakhstan
World
-4%
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%


 443

References

Baubekova, A., A. Tikhonova and A. Kvasha (2021), “Evolution of Agricultural Policy in
Kazakhstan”, in Kazakhstan’s Developmental Journey, Springer Singapore,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-6899-2_3.
[1]
Hu, Y., Y. Han and Y. Zhang (2020), “Land desertification and its influencing factors in
Kazakhstan”, Journal of Arid Environments, Vol. 180, p. 104203,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaridenv.2020.104203.
[4]
OECD (2013), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Kazakhstan 2013, OECD Review of
Agricultural Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264191761-en.
[2]
Shpedt, A. and Y. Aksenova (2021), “Modern assessment of soil resources of Kyrgyzstan”, IOP
Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, Vol. 624/1, p. 012233,
https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/624/1/012233.
[3]



Note

1 The Damu Entrepreneurship Development fund took over the provision of credit guarantees from the Fund for
Financial Support to Agriculture in 2021.


444 

Support to agriculture
Producer support for agriculture (Producer Support Estimate, PSE) in Korea amounted to 46% in 2020-22,
down from 53% in 2000-02, but still much higher than the OECD average. Market Price Support (MPS) is
the dominant form of producer support, representing 87% of support to farmers in 2020-22 and covering
key imported commodities, from rice and soybeans to animal products and selected vegetables. These
market-distorting transfers result from the maintenance of Tariff Rate Quotas (TRQs) with high out-of-quota
tariffs. On average, domestic producer prices are 70% higher than comparable world prices.
Most remaining producer support was in the form of direct payment programmes, agricultural insurance
schemes and subsidies based on variable input use. These payments accounted for 13% of overall
producer support in 2020-22.
General services expenditures (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) grew in absolute terms but
declined in relative terms to 13% of the Total Support Estimate (TSE) in 2020-22. The majority (53%) of
GSSE went to developing and maintaining infrastructure, particularly irrigation facilities, with most of the
remainder going to agricultural knowledge generation (20%), public stockholding (10%), and inspection
and control (10%). TSE declined from 7.6% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 1986-88 to 1.6% in
2020-22, still higher than the OECD average, and dominated by producer support.
Recent policy changes
The Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs (MAFRA) was reorganised in December 2022 to
respond to the objectives set by the new government, including sustainable growth, carbon neutrality, food
security, a safety net for farms, improved rural spaces, and enhanced animal welfare. As part of the
reorganisation, MAFRA established the Agricultural Innovation Policy Office and set up the Animal Welfare
and Environment Policy Directorate to promote innovation, animal welfare, and carbon neutrality.
The laws and regulations for the direct payment system were amended in October 2022 to relax the
requirement related to farming, allowing some additional farm households to receive direct payments. A
new direct payment system for strategic crops was introduced in January 2023. It aims to increase the
production of major grain crops and enhance food security by providing additional direct payments to farms
that grow some crops, such as soybeans and coarse fodders.
The Act on Rural Support for Restructuring and Regeneration was enacted in March 2023 to institutionalise
rural-area planning. The Act introduced the concept of specialised rural districts that facilitate the
systematic and efficient use of rural spaces. The central government must set out a long-term vision for
the development of rural spaces every ten years and review it every five years. Local governments use
this to formulate their basic plans and comprehensive implementation plans.
In January 2023, MAFRA announced measures to improve the distribution of agricultural products. These
expand the scale of distribution, facilitate the digitalisation of trade in agricultural products, and create a
19 Korea


 445

competitive distribution system. The government plans to establish 100 smart Agricultural-product
Processing Centres (APCs) in major production areas by 2027. An online wholesale market for agricultural
products will be launched in 2023, starting with vegetables and fruits.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Climate-change adaptation measures, as defined in the national adaptation plan, focus on information
provision and research and development (R&D). Investment and support for strengthening the capacity
of the private sector should be expanded. Further targeted efforts, such as introducing incentives for
farmers to adopt more-resilient production systems, are also needed to support farmers in their climate
adaptation and mitigation activities. Moreover, investments should focus on infrastructure for
sustainable water use and diversification of varieties.
•
Producer support in Korea is still much higher than the OECD average and MPS accounts for most
producer support. The use of potentially distorting support such as MPS should be reduced through
policy reforms. More targeted policies can help achieve MAFRA objectives such as stabilising farm-
household income, improving productivity in the long term, and addressing ageing and decrease of the
farm-household population.
•
MAFRA was recently reorganised to reflect growing societal needs such as sustainable growth, carbon
neutrality, improved animal welfare, and food security. An office for agriculture innovation was created
to progress towards these goals. This shows the new government’s shift in emphasis of agricultural
policy towards innovation and sustainability. The related reallocation of budget and manpower will help
MAFRA strengthen its functions to enhance agricultural sustainability, though progressing further will
require targeted and tailored measures so that sustainable productivity growth remains and to reform
the current system of support.
•
The COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine increased the need for a stable
agricultural supply chain in Korea. Although Korea's Medium and Long-term Food Security Plan aims
to expand the domestic base for production and consumption, and to secure a more stable overseas
supply chain, this plan should be implemented in a market-oriented manner so as not to cause
disruption to international agricultural markets.
•
The direct payment system in Korea has been revised several times to limit market distortions. Further
reforms should align with government priorities, such as strengthening food security and achieving
carbon neutrality. For instance, payments could be directed towards low-emitting production methods.
•
Systematic management of rural areas was institutionalised through the Act on Rural Support for
Restructuring and Regeneration. Co-operation between the central and local governments is an
essential element. Successful co-ordination between governments requires incentives for local
governments and the private sector to align local rural area planning with the national long-term vision
for rural development. This could include help for building local decision-making capacity and fund
projects with national and local development benefits.




446 

Figure 19.1. Korea: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Korea - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
Korea - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Korea - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Korea - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
Korea - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%


 447

Figure 19.2. Korea: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 19.3. Korea: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
Korea - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Border price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
Border price change decomposition
Change in producer price
PSE change decomposition
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Korea - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Barley
Rice
Soybeans
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Eggs
Chinese cabbage
Garlic
Red peppers
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%


448 

Table 19.1. Korea: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
16 985
26 360
47 514
42 515
51 743
48 284
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
74.33
63.27
59.24
60.34
61.06
56.33
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
17 247
33 199
64 267
58 570
67 921
66 311
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
10 682
14 466
23 498
21 865
26 710
21 920
Support based on commodity output
10 562
13 505
20 427
18 732
23 401
19 148
Market Price Support1
10 562
13 505
20 427
18 732
23 401
19 148
Positive Market Price Support
10 562
13 505
20 427
18 732
23 401
19 148
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
90
470
599
652
651
493
Based on variable input use
29
207
257
301
312
159
with input constraints
4
34
46
49
45
44
Based on fixed capital formation
57
246
148
144
149
150
with input constraints
0
18
40
41
44
34
Based on on-farm services
4
17
194
207
191
184
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
29
490
480
481
463
496
Based on Receipts / Income
29
292
78
78
81
74
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
198
402
403
382
421
with input constraints
0
160
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
1 942
1 999
2 045
1 784
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
1 942
1 999
2 045
1 784
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
1
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
1
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
50
0
150
0
Percentage PSE (%)
62.26
52.66
46.32
47.90
48.52
42.93
Producer NPC (coeff.)
2.50
1.97
1.70
1.73
1.75
1.64
Producer NAC (coeff.)
2.65
2.11
1.86
1.92
1.94
1.75
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
1 066
2 676
3 392
3 247
3 555
3 374
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
67
243
876
854
903
870
Inspection and control
26
126
341
349
357
317
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
467
1 811
1 799
1 704
1 925
1 769
Marketing and promotion
0
26
38
38
42
35
Cost of public stockholding
505
471
338
302
330
383
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
8.92
15.62
12.63
12.92
11.73
13.31
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-10 147
-15 375
-25 781
-23 961
-28 609
-24 775
Transfers to producers from consumers
-10 015
-12 814
-19 220
-17 180
-21 776
-18 704
Other transfers from consumers
-205
-2 654
-6 602
-6 811
-6 874
-6 122
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
73
93
41
30
41
51
Excess feed cost
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-58.95
-46.08
-40.03
-40.93
-42.15
-37.39
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
2.45
1.86
1.67
1.69
1.73
1.60
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
2.44
1.85
1.67
1.69
1.73
1.60
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
11 821
17 235
26 931
25 142
30 306
25 345
Transfers from consumers
10 220
15 468
25 822
23 991
28 649
24 826
Transfers from taxpayers
1 805
4 421
7 711
7 962
8 530
6 640
Budget revenues
-205
-2 654
-6 602
-6 811
-6 874
-6 122
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
7.64
2.93
1.57
1.53
1.67
1.51
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
1 258
3 731
6 504
6 410
6 905
6 197
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.81
0.64
0.38
0.39
0.38
0.37
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
209
303
296
304
310
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
812.03
1 224.03
1 205.33
1 180.13
1 144.46
1 291.41
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Korea are: barley, garlic, red pepper, Chinese
cabbage, rice, soybean, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 449

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Korea’s agricultural sector has undergone rapid structural change, following the country’s rapid
industrialisation and economic growth. After the Korean war, it was vital for Korean agriculture to be able
to feed the population. From the 1950s to the 1970s, the focus was on increasing crop productivity and
achieving self-sufficiency in staple crops, particularly rice. During the process of industrialisation, the
agricultural sector also provided cheap and high-quality labour to the manufacturing sector and laid a
foundation for stable economic growth.
Throughout the late 1980s and 1990s, the main policy objectives shifted to restructuring the agricultural
sector and improving its competitiveness. The government adopted more market-oriented policy
frameworks, and this period was marked by the progressive liberalisation of agriculture and food markets
via free trade agreements. In the late 1990s, policy objectives further diversified into areas such as
enhancing productivity, improving long-term agricultural sustainability and increasing provision of public
goods.
During the late 1990s and 2000s, non-tariff measures on agricultural products were gradually converted
into tariffs and tariff rate quotas (TRQs), with the exception of rice as agreed in the Uruguay Round
Agreement on Agriculture. In January 2015, the non-tariff measure on rice was also replaced by a TRQ.
Slowed economic growth and demographic changes moved objectives in the 2000s further from growth to
broader public policy goals. These goals included revitalising the rural economy, expanding export
markets, improving the environmental performance of agriculture and promoting the food industry. A
holistic food policy began to take shape that took into account production, consumption, safety, nutrition,
welfare and the environment, as well as food availability for low-income groups. This entailed a shift from
central government leadership to horizontal governance for participation and collaboration with a larger
role for local governments and the public.
Table 19.2. Korea: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1970s
Relatively closed economy
Policy focus on productivity and self-sufficiency
Price support and government procurement programmes for crops
Subsidies for inputs (including fertilisers and seeds)
Land reclamation, land consolidation and water system projects to rearrange
the production base
R&D and extension projects to enhance productivity (the Rural Development
Administration established in 1962)
Development of new rice varieties such as Tongil
1980-1990
Exposure of domestic producers to open market
Structural adjustment programmes
Non-tariff measures replaced by tariffs and tariff rate quotas (except for rice)
Rural restructuring plan (announced in 1991)
Government procurement programme for crops
Direct payment programmes (early retirement payments from 1997)
Agricultural insurance scheme (from 1997)
Investment in the renovation of the production base and modernization of
distribution facilities
2000-present
Responding to changing market demands
Diversified policy objectives
Tariffs and tariff rate quotas
Tariff concession through Free Trade Agreements
Public stockholding scheme for major staple crops
Direct payment programme for rice (2005-2019)
Direct payment scheme reformed (from 2020)
Environment-friendly agricultural programmes


450 

Overall support to farmers as a share of gross farm receipts considerably declined in the 1990s and early
2000s but has been relatively stable for the last ten years, fluctuating around 45%. Korea’s PSE still
remains much higher than the OECD average. Market price support is a dominant component of total
support to agriculture. The share of the MPS in total support showed only a moderate decrease during the
last three decades (Figure 19.4).
Figure 19.4. Korea: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The Framework Act on Agriculture, Rural Community and Food Industry, enacted in 2007, establishes
Korea’s agricultural policy framework. It requires the government to establish a national policy plan every
five years with the purpose of providing direction for national policies to pursue the sustainable
development of agriculture and rural communities, to ensure the stable supply of safe agricultural products
and quality food, and to enhance the level of income and quality of life of farmers. The 3rd National Plan to
Develop Agriculture, Rural Communities and the Food Industry (2023-27) was established in 2023,
reflecting the national policy agenda and the agricultural policy goals of the government newly formed in
2022. This recent plan includes five policy objectives: 1) securing food sovereignty; 2) fostering the agro-
food industry as a new growth engine; 3) strengthening the safety net for farm households; 4) enhancing
food safety in the supply chain; and 5) creating a comfortable and attractive rural space.
The public stockholding scheme for rice, known as the Public Storage System for Emergencies, was
established in 2005. One of its objectives is to guarantee food security in times of natural disaster or
temporary shortage driven by the mismatch between supply and demand. Under the scheme, the
government purchases rice from farmers at market price during the harvest season and releases the
Korea - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75


 451

stockpiled rice at market price when necessary. The government has a similar purchasing programme for
soybeans.
The new Direct Payment System, in force since May 2020, combines and replaces the previous agricultural
direct payments for landscape conservation, environment-friendly agriculture, livestock products, paddy
field farming (in the form of selective direct payments), and the income compensation scheme for rice. The
system aims to stabilise the incomes of small to medium-sized farms and to improve farm compliance with
regulatory obligations in order to promote public good in the agriculture and rural communities. In total,
farmers must comply with 17 regulatory obligations covering environmental protection, food safety, and
farm management standards such as standards for pesticide application. There is also a direct payment
for the transfer of the farm management rights to enable retired farmers to sell or lease their farmlands
while maintaining their incomes, and to create more opportunities for young farmers.
The Korean Government announced the Enhanced Update of its First Nationally Determined Contribution
for achieving the Net-zero across all the sectors in November 2021. This requires GHG emissions in
agriculture and fisheries to decline 27.1% relative to 2018 levels by 2030 and 37.7% by 2050. Accordingly,
the 2050 Agri-Food Carbon Neutrality Strategy was revealed in December 2021. This sectoral strategy
contained a detailed implementation plan for carbon neutrality including GHG emission reduction for food
production, distribution, consumption and energy conversion. Moreover, as a member of the Global
Methane Pledge, Korea makes efforts to reduce methane emissions in the agricultural sector by 20.6%.
Agricultural disaster insurance, revenue insurance and work safety insurance are provided by private
companies with government subsidies covering 50% of the insurance premiums. The agricultural disaster
insurance scheme, which covers 67 crops and 16 livestock products, protects farmers against losses in
crop yield and livestock. Agricultural revenue insurance covers seven crops: grapes (coverage began in
2015), onions (2015), soybeans (2015), garlic (2016), potatoes (2017) sweet potatoes (2017), and
cabbage (2018). Work safety insurance covers injuries, illnesses and accidents, or deaths of farm workers
that occur during on-farm work and contributes to stabilising farm income.
Rapid economic growth has led to several challenges in rural areas. It has exacerbated the urban-rural
gap in terms of living conditions and community services, resulting in rural out-migration. The Spatial Plan
for Rural Communities aims to address this gap via improved land use systems, restructured rural areas,
and revitalisation of the function of rural villages. MAFRA also has a role to play to help improve rural
residential areas, relocate locally unwanted facilities and provide necessary social services. The Act on
Support for Rural Restructuring and Regeneration was passed by the National Assembly in February 2023
and laid the legal foundation for the systematic management of rural spaces (see below for more details).
Tariffs and tariff-rate quotas (TRQs) continue to be the main agriculture trade policy measures. Trade
restrictions on all agricultural products were converted to tariffs and TRQs, with non-tariff measures on
rice, which had been an exception in the Uruguay Round, being replaced by a tariff scheme since
1 January 2015. A total of 63 agricultural products are subject to TRQs, including rice, corn and soybeans.
In-quota tariff rates range from 0% to 50% with out-of-quota rates between 9% and 887%. Since the
tariffication of rice trade, a TRQ volume of rice (408 700 tonnes, about 10.7% of annual rice consumption)
has been maintained at a 5% tariff rate (the out-of-quota tariff is 513%).
Korea is engaged in 22 bilateral and regional free trade agreements (FTAs). Some of these agreements
include significant tariff reductions for livestock and fruit products, but rice is excluded from tariff
concessions. Import tariffs on beef from the United States, Australia and Canada are being progressively
phased out over a 15-year period from the entry into force of the respective agreements (March 2012 for
the United States, December 2014 for Australia, and January 2015 for Canada). Tariffs on pork from the
European Union, the United States and Chile are being phased out over 10 years, and on pig meat from
Canada over 13 years. Tariffs on chicken meat from the United States and the European Union are being
abolished in phases over a period of 10 years to 13 years after the respective FTAs came into effect (2012
for the United States and 2011 for the European Union).


452 

Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
In accordance with the Framework Act on Low Carbon and Green Growth enacted in 2010, the Korean
central and local governments establish the National Climate Change Adaptation Plan every five years to
adapt to climate change and cope with its public-health problems and natural disasters.
The Plan includes: (1) improving the capability to observe, forecast, and provide information on climate
change including weather disasters; (2) assessing the impact and vulnerability of climate change by sector
and region; (3) implementing measures for adaptation by sector and region; and (4) preventing disasters
for vulnerable people and regions influenced by climate change. In addition, the framework act mandates
a detailed plan for practical implementation of the National Climate Change Adaptation Plan by relevant
ministries.
The 3rd National Climate Change Adaptation Plan was established in December 2020, covering 2021-25.
This plan was formulated with the participation of the government, experts, and representatives from the
regions, industry and civil society. A list of 84 national climate-change risks in six major areas, including
the agricultural sector, was compiled using scientific evidence, and customised implementation tasks for
each risk were laid out. It also included inspection and evaluation systems by the public evaluation group
(Korean Government, 2020[1]).
MAFRA carries out several tasks to help the sector adapt to climate change and maintain a sustainable
agricultural environment and stable food production. These include:
•
Providing information to improve climate resilience. The government and its research institutes
develop technologies for sectoral productivity evaluation and prediction, and improve the early-warning
system of agrometeorological disasters. They also strengthen forecast and evaluation technologies to
improve agricultural productivity, such as projecting changes in the area suitable for the cultivation of
major crops.
•
Strengthening the production base in the face of climate change. Government institutes develop
and distribute production facilities and technologies, such as improved energy efficiency. They also
develop damage-reduction technologies and climate-adaptive crop varieties in response to extreme
weather, and strengthen disaster management of agricultural facilities and infrastructure by developing
and distributing standards for disaster-resistant facility structures.
•
Preserving a safe agricultural environment. The government is strengthening pest management,
including the control of invasive species, and improving agricultural environment management by
assessing impacts and vulnerabilities, including soil erosion and quality of agricultural water.
Within the framework of national climate-change adaptation measures, relevant ministries and local
governments established detailed implementation plans in 2021 and selected performance indicators for
each task to secure implementation. MAFRA conducts an annual survey and research to assess the
impacts of and vulnerability to climate change in agriculture and rural areas. The results are evaluated and
disclosed every five years.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
Reorganisation of the Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs (MAFRA)
MAFRA reorganised itself in December 2022 to prepare for future demands in the agricultural sector. This
responds to the objectives declared by the new government: promoting sustainable growth in agriculture,
strengthening food security and building a safety net for farms, improving rural spaces, achieving carbon
neutrality and enhancing animal welfare.
Within MAFRA, the Agricultural Innovation Policy Office was established and charged with promoting new
industries and innovations related to food, such as expanding smart farming, stabilising farm household


 453

income, enhancing the provision of public goods, fostering generational renewal and developing new
technologies such as alternative meat. The Food Policy Office handles the overall production and
distribution of agricultural products and is responsible for ensuring a stable food supply. To actively respond
to changes in the policy environment such as increased public interest in animal welfare and the growth of
companion animal industry, a new Animal Welfare and Environment Policy Directorate was set up. It is in
charge of animal welfare and health such as enforcing the Animal Protection Act and fostering related
industries including veterinary service and pet food. The temporary task force team in charge of climate
change was converted into a formal organisation, the Rural Carbon Neutrality Policy Division, to promote
carbon neutrality in agriculture and rural areas and respond to climate change.
Improving and supplementing the direct payment system
In line with the goals of the direct payment system to stabilise farm household income and promote the
public values of agriculture, MAFRA has operated a public service direct payment system since 2020 and
revamped the system to strengthen its function.
In October 2022, the laws and regulations relevant for the direct payment system were amended. In
particular, conditions related to the requirement of farming have been relaxed, thereby expanding the
targeted beneficiary group such that farm households that have engaged in farming but not received direct
payments can now receive public service direct payments. In 2023, an additional plan was announced to
gradually expand the direct payment system to strengthen food security and realise carbon neutrality in
the agricultural sector. This plan includes expanding the production of strategic crops to improve self-
sufficiency and facilitating activities to cut carbon emissions in response to climate change. Accordingly, a
direct payment system for strategic crops has been introduced to increase the production of major grain
crops with low self-sufficiency rates and support the diversification of the rice-centred production structure.
The operation management system will be continuously improved to prevent illegal receipt of payment by
strengthening on-site inspections and supplementing institutional loopholes.
Medium and Long-term Food Security Plan
In December 2022, MAFRA announced the Medium and Long-term Food Security Plan to prepare for food
security-related risks, such as extreme weather events and international market shocks. It endeavours to
stabilise the supply and demand of major crops in the event of such shocks. The main goal of this plan is
to expand the domestic production and consumption base and secure a stable overseas supply chain of
major import commodities such as wheat, soybean and corn, including in times of crisis.
In addition to using the direct payment system to encourage production of strategic crops, the Plan aims
to expand integrated production areas for specific products, and systematically manage farmlands
necessary for improving food self-sufficiency. It aims to strengthen a domestic consumption base in co-
operation with food companies and support them in securing overseas grain distribution channels. In order
to expand overseas grain distribution facilities owned by domestic companies, the government plans to
promote a low-interest loan support project worth KRW 50 billion (USD 38.7 million) on an annual basis
(Korean Government, 2022[2]).
Generational renewal, attracting young farmers and activating smart farming
The Agricultural Innovation and Management Stabilisation Measures were announced in October 2022
and are designed to achieve the goal of 30 000 young farmers by 2027. The measures include
strengthened financial support for start-ups beginning from their earliest stages and significantly expand
leasing of farmlands to young farmers. A new start-up complex for young farmers is created to facilitate
the growth of agricultural start-ups. Gimje and Sangju were recently selected as candidates for the start-
up complex. Loans are provided to alleviate the financial burden of young farmers, and housing support is
expanded to help young farmers settle in rural communities. The government aims to convert 30% of


454 

horticultural facilities and livestock barns into smart facilities, create large-scale smart farm complexes
using reclaimed and idle land, and strengthen private-sector-led governance. It supports the distribution of
environmental control and data management equipment centred on strawberry, melon and flower
greenhouses, and prepares guidelines for each item for smart greenhouse design. It facilitates the
development of self-driving agricultural machines and agricultural drones and robots.
The Act on Support for Rural Restructuring and Regeneration
Rural area planning has been institutionalised via the “Act on Support for Rural Restructuring and
Regeneration”, enacted in March 2023. The act introduces the concept of rural specialised districts that
facilitate systematic and efficient use of rural spaces and enable the zoning of rural areas. Seven types of
rural specialised districts can be designated according to need, such as for rural industry, livestock, rural
convergence industry, renewable energy, agricultural landscape, agricultural heritage or rural village
protection. The central government provides direction for rural spatial planning but local governments take
the lead in a bottom-up approach that takes into account regional characteristics and conditions. The
central government must set out a long-term vision for the development of rural spaces every ten years
and review it every five years. Based on this, local governments formulate their basic plans and
comprehensive implementation plans suitable for regional characteristics. A supporting system helps with
rural spatial planning through multi-level government policy councils that deliberate on rural space policies
and designate organisations to support them.
Measures for advancing the distribution structure of agricultural products
In January 2023, MAFRA announced measures for improving the distribution of agricultural products that
transform production areas into hubs for distribution. These measures further expand the scale of
distribution, facilitate the digitalisation of trade in agricultural products and create a competitive distribution
system.
Under these measures, the government aims to establish 100 smart Agricultural product Processing
Centres (APCs) in the major production areas by 2027 and foster integrated production and distribution
organisations for the dedicated operation of these centres. These APCs help ensure the production area
provides a stable supply of the products that consumers want. A related electronic trading system is under
development so that an online wholesale market for agricultural products can be launched by the end of
2023. Starting with vegetables and fruits, this system is gradually expanded to include other products,
allowing wholesalers to trade agricultural commodities nationwide. The government supports the
digitisation of wholesale market transactions which had previously been operated manually and improves
related logistics systems. It also supports the training of experts such as online marketers specialising in
agricultural products and establishes an online direct transaction support centre for activating direct
transactions between producers and consumers.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
Financial and tax support was expanded to help with the increased cost of raw materials for industries and
farmers. In March 2022, the interest rate on the policy fund for feed and food companies to finance their
purchase of raw materials was lowered by 0.5%. In addition, through revised supplementary budgets in
May 2022, the government provided special feed purchase funds of about KRW 10.9 billion
(USD 8.4 million) for livestock farmers for a limited period and offered KRW 124 billion (USD 96.0 million)
to cover part of the increase in fertiliser prices to ease the burden on farms. In addition, the budget to
support the purchase of processed raw materials by food companies was increased by about
KRW 37 billion (USD 28.7 million), and interest rates on that policy fund were lowered further.


 455

Trade policy developments in 2022-23
A number of free trade agreements (FTAs) have recently entered into force, including the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (February 2022) and FTAs with Israel (December 2022), Cambodia
(December 2022) and Indonesia (January 2023). The Korea-Philippines FTA was concluded in October
2021 and domestic ratification procedures are underway. In total, Korea currently has 22 FTAs with
59 countries, and is also negotiating FTAs with Ecuador and with the Gulf Co-operation Council as of
March 2023. Korea has dealt with the existing FTAs and the ongoing FTA negotiations in the direction of
protecting sensitive agricultural products including rice, guaranteeing sanitation and quarantine rights for
public safety and expanding exports of its agricultural products.
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
In order to stabilise markets for agricultural products and raw materials, tariff quotas for unhulled barley,
wheat hull and root vegetables for feed, which can replace wheat and corn for feed, were expanded. To
alleviate upward pressure on prices, an in-quota tariff of 0% was applied to wheat and flour by the end of
2022, and edible oil (soybean oil, sunflower seed oil) and raw materials for inorganic fertiliser (urea,
diammonium phosphate) by the end of 2023.
Contextual information
Korea’s economy has been growing dramatically and GDP per capita has more than doubled over the last
two decades. Korea is a high-income country with per-capita incomes at twice the average of the countries
covered by this report. At 35% of the GDP (2021), trade is an important driver of the economy. In contrast,
the share of agriculture’s contribution to GDP fell from 4.3% to 2.0%, and its share of national employment
declined from 10.6% to 5.3% during the period of 2000-2021. Although the proportion of agricultural
commodities in total exports slightly increased, Korea still remains a large importer of agricultural products
(Table 19.3).
Crop production accounted for 58% of the total value of agricultural production in 2021 down from 75% in
2000, due to dietary changes and the diversification of production towards livestock and high-value
products (Table 19.3).




456 

Table 19.3. Korea: Contextual indicators

Korea
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
871
2 426
2.2%
2.0%
Population (million)
47
52
1.1%
1.0%
Land area (thousand km2)
96
98
0.1%
0.1%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
1 973
1 621
0.1%
0.1%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
473
521
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
18 539
46 889
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
28.9
34.8
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
4.3
2.0
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
10.6
5.3
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
0.9
1.3
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.2
5.7
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
75
58
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
25
42
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
87
83
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
After the economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, Korea’s economy recovered in 2021,
but growth slightly slowed to 2.6% in 2022. The unemployment rate fell from 3.7% to 2.9%, but the inflation
rate rose significantly from 2.5% to 5.1% (Figure 19.5). Sound health management and supportive policies
helped Korea emerge swiftly from the pandemic. Even prior to the war in Ukraine, inflation had risen mainly
because of soaring energy prices and pandemic-induced supply bottlenecks. The war in Ukraine pushed
up inflation further (OECD, 2022[3]).


 457

Figure 19.5. Korea: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Over the past 20 years, both agro-food imports and exports in Korea have shown a steady increase.
However, the agro-food import value is more than three times bigger than the agro-food export value. In
2021, agro-food imports exceeded USD 30 billion for the first time. While over 87% of agro-food exports
are products for final consumption, about 50% of agro-food imports are used for final consumption. Key
imported agricultural commodities include maize, soybeans and wheat for animal feed (Figure 19.6).


458 

Figure 19.6. Korea: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
At 1.3% per year, total factor productivity (TFP) growth in Korea was slightly higher than the global average
over the period of 2011-20. As the declining use of primary factors was only partly offset by higher use of
intermediary inputs, agricultural output grew more slowly over the last decade (Figure 19.7).
The average nitrogen and phosphorus surpluses remain well above OECD averages and have not
changed significantly over the last two decades. The share of agriculture in water abstractions also remains
Korea - Figure 6A. Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
10
20
30
40
Korea - Figure 6B. Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
9
23
23
4
25
25
70
70
43
43
17
17
9
9
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 459

high compared to the OECD average, due to the high proportion of rice paddy fields in agricultural land
areas, and water stress has been increasing and remains very high compared to other OECD countries.
The annual GHG emissions from the agricultural sector accounted for 3% of total emissions, well below
the OECD average of 10.5% (Table 19.4).
Figure 19.7. Korea: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 19.4. Korea: Productivity and environmental indicators

Korea
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
3.4%
1.3%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
230.6
229.9
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
45.4
45.9
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.9
1.0
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
4.3
3.0
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
41.0
41.3
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
53.4
53.0
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
27.1
31.4
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


Korea - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
1.29%
1.29%
1.12%
1.12%
-0.64%
-0.64%
0.35%
0.35%
0.50%
0.50%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Korea
World
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%


460 

References

Korean Government (2022), The Medium and Long-term Food Security Plan.
[2]
Korean Government (2020), The 3rd National Climate Change Adaptation Plan 2021-25.
[1]
OECD (2022), OECD Economic Surveys : Korea 2022, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/20bf3d6e-en.
[3]



 461

Support to agriculture
Mexico’s Producer Support Estimate (PSE) for 2020-22 was equal to 11.3% of gross farm receipts, about
a third of that in 1991-93 (31%) and lower than the OECD average. Although the PSE is relatively low, it
mainly comprises potentially most-distorting forms of support. Market Price Support (MPS) and payments
based on output and input subsidies decreased over the past 20 years from 77.9% in 2000-02 to 68.9% in
2020-22. While trade liberalisation and domestic policy reforms in the 1990s reduced these forms of
support, MPS increased again after 2016. The ratio of producer to border prices (National Protection
Coefficient, NPC) is 1.07, suggesting that domestic prices are an average 7% higher than those in
international markets. Single Commodity Transfers (SCT) are highest for sugar, milk, poultry, and rice.
Budgetary transfers allocated to producers in 2020-22 were mainly for payments based on input use,
particularly for electricity (pump groundwater for irrigation) and the fertiliser programme. Direct payments
based on land are another important form of support used in two major policy instruments, the production
for well-being programme (direct payments based on land); and the sowing life programme (direct
payments based on area for afforestation and agroforestry). Payments based on input use and land
represent 80% of total budgetary transfers to producers.
General services expenditures (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) in 2020-22 equalled around 1%
of agriculture’s value of production, and 8% of the Total Support Estimate (TSE), lower than the OECD
average on both counts. Most of those expenditures are directed at agricultural innovation, extension, and
training (55%, predominantly technical institutes and vocational schools), and development and
maintenance of infrastructure, particularly on large hydrological works (37%). Total support to agriculture
in Mexico was 0.6% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2020-22, well below the 1.3% observed in
1991-93.
Recent policy changes
Agricultural policies in 2022-23 focused on consolidating the implementation and reach of the main
agricultural support programmes – part of a multi-year process. The emphasis is on supporting small-scale
producers of basic grains such as maize, beans, wheat, milk, and rice, and supporting rural women,
indigenous populations and vulnerable groups.
The most significant change occurred in the geographic coverage of the fertiliser programme, which had
been implemented in only the five poorest states of the country. Implementation was expanded nationally
as of 2023 while continuing to target the poorest communities of each state. The budget allocated to this
programme
increased
from
MXN 1.9 billion
(USD 88.4 million)
in
2020
to
MXN 16.7 billion
(USD 938.2 million) in 2023. Around 55% of beneficiaries of the programme are in communities with
indigenous populations and 41% are women.
20 Mexico


462 

The guaranteed minimum price programme run by SEGALMEX was updated to support more than
117 000 small and medium-scale farmers. It purchased 9 million tonnes of maize and wheat, and
618 million litres of milk in 2022. Additionally, the maximum amount eligible to receive the guaranteed price
increased from 20 tonnes to 35 tonnes of maize per farmer, while for milk it went from 25 litres to 30 litres
per cow. The maximum amount for rice was reduced from 120 tonnes to 80 tonnes per farmer. For
medium-sized farms whose production is not purchased by SEGALMEX, a price-hedging mechanism was
introduced in 2021-22, where the difference between the guaranteed price and a reference price is covered
by insurance, for which the government pays part of the premium. Lastly, the National Financing Agency
for Agricultural, Rural, Forestry and Fisheries Development (FND) is under a dismantling process, which
meant a suspension of credit granting in 2023.
Assessment and recommendations
•
The 2022 national adaptation guidelines for agriculture set out measures largely in alignment with
good adaptation practices. However, more detailed and concrete actions embedded in the
country’s agricultural policy instruments can be developed to strengthen the resilience of the sector
and its adaptation to climate change. Moreover, more and better climate-change adaptation
information, such as adaptation actions, and the use of agri-environmental indicators are key to
assessing policy impact. Lastly, Mexico should consider reforming its electricity subsidies, which
continue to encourage water overuse, and more broadly improve water management as this will
be key for the future of agriculture under a changing climate.
•
Within its economy-wide targets to reduce greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions by 22% and black-
carbon emissions by 51% relative to business-as-usual (BAU) by 2030, a specific target for
agriculture calls for an 8% reduction relative to BAU. Additional actions are needed to achieve this,
as support and financing to increase the use of bio-digesters in livestock farms and conserve and
restore grasslands are insufficient to deliver the needed results.
•
Mexico should enhance activities in training, technology transfer and adoption, and capacity
building related to sustainable agriculture, and promote related techniques. This is even more
important given that Mexico’s significant agrobiodiversity resources need better protection. More
needs to be done to encourage sustainable production. Climate-smart practices, zero till, crop
diversification, soil recovery, and others are relevant in this context. Traditional knowledge should
be acknowledged as a valuable resource. Moreover, transitioning to schemes that promote
agrobiodiversity using local plant genetic resources (a main ecosystem service that small-scale
farmers in poor areas provide) could be more cost-effective in helping poor farmers and increase
the resilience of agricultural systems and the genetic diversity of plants.
•
Mexico’s efforts to reorient its payment schemes to focus on vulnerable populations is a remarkable
development – particularly the tailored and targeted nature of new and old policy instruments – and
follows previous OECD recommendations. This includes area-based Production for Wellbeing
payments that target small and medium-size producers and those in marginalised, indigenous
communities in the poorest states; the expanded and more-targeted Fertiliser Programme; and the
Sowing Life programme supporting small farmers’ agroforestry projects in poor municipalities.
•
Despite these efforts to reorient payments, improvements are needed to ensure that programmes
deliver on their sustainability objectives. The Fertiliser Programme should only tackle market
imperfections that limit poor farmers’ access to fertiliser, inputs, or credit and could be accompanied
by training in good agricultural practices. To improve implementation, the fertiliser programme
should systematically consider soil characteristics and nutrient needs when distributing fertilisers.
The Sowing Life programme needs to ensure that it does not incentivise farmers to deforest their
parcels to become beneficiaries. One way is to offer complementary payments for environmental
services that work as incentives to preserve existing forests. In addition, the efficiency of these


 463

programmes would be improved by parallel development of a zoning system that identifies land
use based on agri-climates and soil fertility. Moreover, conditioning payments on the
implementation of sustainable farming practices could reduce the sector’s environmental impact.
Support to producer organisations (e.g. co-operatives), and output and input market access for
small-scale and poor farmers could also help overcome barriers related to scale.
•
Mexico’s support to agriculture is relatively low, yet most of it is potentially most-distorting, such as
MPS for products like sugar, milk, and poultry. MPS has been increasing since 2016, after some
decrease due to reforms in the 1990s and 2000s. Given the transition to targeted policies already
mentioned, the objectives of remaining MPS policies can be re-evaluated. Mexico should consider
gradually phasing out price regulations for sugarcane and continue efforts to re-orient payments
towards schemes targeting poor smallholders and environmentally sustainable practices.
•
Public allocations to general services and public goods are limited even though these can improve
the sector’s performance and create an enabling environment. In particular, the sector would
benefit from greater investments in extension and technical assistance services, price and weather
information systems, better agricultural knowledge, innovation systems, and agricultural research
and development.




464 

Figure 20.1. Mexico: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Mexico - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
1991-93
2000-02
2020-22
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
Mexico - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
1991-93
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Mexico - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
1991-93
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
Mexico - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
1991-93
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
Mexico - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
1991-93
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%


 465

Figure 20.2. Mexico: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Figure 20.3. Mexico: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
%
Mexico - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Border price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
Border price change decomposition
Change in producer price
PSE change decomposition
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Mexico - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Rice
Sugar
Milk
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Coffee
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%


466 

Table 20.1. Mexico: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1991-93
2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
28 112
31 345
63 200
55 967
63 731
69 902
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
68.31
66.28
63.04
62.39
64.01
62.71
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
28 196
34 362
65 654
69 657
53 538
73 766
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
9 144
8 539
7 456
7 862
7 374
7 132
Support based on commodity output
7 698
6 282
4 613
5 265
4 572
4 003
Market Price Support1
7 646
5 967
4 478
5 137
4 507
3 790
Positive Market Price Support
7 693
5 999
4 478
5 137
4 507
3 790
Negative Market Price Support
-47
-32
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
52
315
136
129
65
213
Payments based on input use
1 443
953
859
766
807
1 004
Based on variable input use
746
349
519
413
494
650
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
545
362
196
213
173
202
with input constraints
0
4
29
23
28
38
Based on on-farm services
152
241
144
139
140
151
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
3
137
0
0
0
0
Based on Receipts / Income
0
59
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
3
78
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
574
499
564
658
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
1 167
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
1 167
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
1 410
1 332
1 431
1 468
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
1 410
1 332
1 431
1 468
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
30.91
25.22
11.31
13.40
11.07
9.74
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.41
1.26
1.07
1.10
1.06
1.06
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.45
1.34
1.13
1.15
1.12
1.11
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
1 048
621
602
548
579
679
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
288
304
354
331
358
374
Inspection and control
0
102
54
60
50
51
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
284
112
194
157
171
254
Marketing and promotion
83
103
0
0
0
0
Cost of public stockholding
392
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
9.49
6.52
7.28
6.40
7.13
8.42
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-7 013
-5 520
-3 060
-3 956
-2 377
-2 848
Transfers to producers from consumers
-7 668
-5 893
-3 250
-4 114
-2 541
-3 094
Other transfers from consumers
-396
-124
-2
0
-4
-3
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
852
348
192
158
168
250
Excess feed cost
199
149
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-25.65
-16.27
-4.70
-5.69
-4.45
-3.87
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.40
1.21
1.05
1.06
1.05
1.04
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.35
1.19
1.05
1.06
1.05
1.04
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
11 044
9 508
8 250
8 569
8 121
8 061
Transfers from consumers
8 064
6 017
3 252
4 114
2 544
3 098
Transfers from taxpayers
3 376
3 616
5 000
4 455
5 580
4 966
Budget revenues
-396
-124
-2
0
-4
-3
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
2.60
1.28
0.65
0.78
0.64
0.55
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
3 398
3 541
3 772
3 432
3 613
4 271
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.80
0.48
0.30
0.31
0.28
0.29
GDP deflator (1991-93=100)
100
396
1 073
996
1 066
1 159
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
3.08
9.49
20.56
21.40
20.22
20.07
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Mexico are: wheat, maize, barley, sorghum, coffee,
dried beans, tomatoes, rice, soybean, sugar, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




 467

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Starting in the 1980s, reforms to price support reduced its prominence in the policy mix. In 1988-89,
guaranteed prices for wheat, sorghum, barley, rice and oilseeds were eliminated. After the enactment of
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 1994, guaranteed prices for maize and beans were
phased out and the government withdrew from procurement and marketing except for beans and maize,
for which government involvement was reduced but not eliminated.
The old system of market supports was replaced by a new one of direct income support payments
(PROCAMPO) based on historic cultivated crop area, which was given to all farm sizes. During this period
of trade liberalisation, subsidies for financial instruments to reduce financial risks (price hedge instruments)
were also put in place. Input subsidies for seeds, fertiliser, pesticides, machinery and diesel fuel were
reduced in the 1990s, but the input subsidy for electricity to pump groundwater was maintained.
In 2018 direct payments were redirected to target small and medium-scale farmers located in poor regions
of the country. Minimum guaranteed prices for staple crops were reinstated in the form of government
purchases of crops from a limited number of farmers, mainly smallholders, at a minimum price. Crops
purchased under this intervention were then distributed to poor households at subsidised prices in both
rural and urban areas. The Procampo programme was renamed “Production for Wellbeing” and reformed
to provide support only to small and medium scale farmers, with particular focus on those located in poor
communities. Furthermore, subsidies for large farms and food processors to encourage price hedging were
dismantled.
Table 20.2. Mexico: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1990s
Import substitution model
Agricultural tariffs and import quotas
Minimum prices for staple food (maize, rice, beans, wheat, etc.)
State food marketing enterprise (CONASUPO)
Subsidies for inputs (fertilisers, seeds, electricity for water pumps)
Preferential agricultural credit
1990-2018
Trade liberalisation
Dismantling of tariffs on agricultural products (except sugar)
Dismantling of state marketing enterprise
Elimination of input subsidies, except electricity for water pumps
Elimination of minimum prices
Reforms to land tenure
NAFTA and other FTAs signed
Preferential agricultural credit
Creation of direct payment to farmers (PROCAMPO)
Insurance and price hedge subsidies
2018- present
Reforms to target and tailor
direct payments to smallholders
Guaranteed minimum prices on staples (maize, beans, wheat, rice and milk) are targeted
to smallholders and limited to a certain amount of production volume.
PROCAMPO was renamed “Production for Wellbeing” and reformed to provide payments
to only small- and medium-size producers, emphasising the poorest states located in the
south of the country.
Preferential agricultural credit.
Electricity subsidies for water pumps.
Fertiliser support targeted to small and medium-scale farmers and limited to only 600kg.
Producer support, PSE was mostly comprised of market price support until end of 1990s. After this period,
the share of market price support declined while that of budgetary support grew, until 2016 when market
price support and input-based support again became the largest components of producer support
(Figure 20.4)


468 

Figure 20.4. Mexico: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Agricultural support policies in Mexico are guided by the Sectoral Programme for Agriculture and Rural
Development 2019-2024. The current Sectoral Programme focuses on several objectives: improve
agricultural productivity for food self-sufficiency; bring down poverty rates in rural areas; increase the
income of small-scale agricultural producers; develop an inclusive, sustainable, healthy, and nutritional
agri-food system; and promote a sustainable use of soil and water.
Farmers’ support policies in Mexico are delivered via three main programmes: 1) guaranteed prices for
small-scale farmers for staple grains; 2) payments based on area under the programme “Production for
Wellbeing”; and 3) fertiliser programme. Other relevant support policies include those directed to
consumers in vulnerable areas via the distribution of staple foods, and sanitary and phytosanitary
measures for early detection of pests and diseases.
For the Guaranteed Minimum Prices Programme, prices are granted to small and medium-sized producers
of maize, beans, wheat, milk, and rice, defined as those with up to 30 rain-fed hectares or 5 irrigated
hectares. Guaranteed minimum prices are lower than market prices and try to address market failures
encountered by farmers. These market failures are created by lack or limited infrastructure like rural roads,
storage facilities, market information, or lack of co-operatives, this situation constrains farmers who end up
selling at low prices their products to middlemen. In this sense, guaranteed prices set a minimum price
that must be paid to farmers but that is still below market prices.
For small-scale farmers of wheat and rice, SEGALMEX (the agency in charge of food security in Mexico)
buys directly or pays the difference between the reference and guaranteed prices. For medium-scale maize
Mexico - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40


 469

producers (those with more than 5 hectares of rain fed), support is provided through a price hedging
mechanism, where the difference between the guaranteed price and a reference price is covered by an
insurance for which the SEGALMEX pays part of the premium. The reference price is calculated as the
sum of the average future price of maize published in the Chicago Board of Trade, and a commercialisation
fee based on transportation costs determined by SEGALMEX. In all cases, there are limits based on
volume to the support a single farmer can receive. Lastly, under SEGALMEX, small-scale maize producers
are eligible for a transportation subsidy.
The state enterprise DICONSA operates the Rural Supply Program (PAR), with SEGLMEX as provider of
food. The PAR programme aims to facilitate physical access to product of the basic food basket to improve
the food security of the population living in the rural areas in poverty conditions. DICONSA has fixed or
mobile convenience stores and sells staple food to vulnerable populations at reduced prices. DICONSA
distributes and sells the products purchased by SEGALMEX such as beans, rice, and maize, among other
basic products at subsidised prices in its stores located in vulnerable and poor rural and urban populations.
DICONSA can also purchase some of its products directly from smallholders. Another state enterprise,
LICONSA, buys milk from small-scale producers, then processes and distributes it in established stores in
limited quantities at subsidised prices for low-income consumers included in social programs. Both
DICONSA and LICONSA support food actions for vulnerable poor populations.
In 2022, LICONSA institution that provides fortified milk to vulnerable populations, had 6.2 million
beneficiaries, distributing 808 million litres of milk with an estimated average of 11 litres of milk per
household per month. Around 60% of all beneficiaries were women. This programme reached around
3.5 million children between 0 and 15 years old. People with chronic diseases, with disabilities and over
60 years old are permanent beneficiaries of the programme. In 2022, DICONSA that buys from
smallholders and sells the products through its convenience stores to vulnerable populations, covered
25 881 communities, of which 12 273 are in indigenous communities. It is estimated that DICONSA
benefited about 23 million inhabitants throughout the country.
The Production for Wellbeing programme focuses on area-based payments that target small and medium-
scale producers, including from indigenous communities. Payment rates decrease with farm size
increments and differ by product. The products covered are grains (e.g. maize, rice, beans, wheat),
amaranth, chia, sugarcane, coffee, cocoa, nopal-cactus, honey and milk. Furthermore, these programmes
have a gender and indigenous component, as the programme stipulates that at least 28% of beneficiaries
need to be women, and 45% of beneficiaries need to be in the 1 033 municipalities with indigenous
populations.
Under the Wellbeing programme, small-scale farmers (those with up to 5 rain-fed hectares) receive a
payment per hectare of MXN 2 000 (USD 100); medium-scale farmers (those between 5 and 20 rain-fed
hectares or up to 5 irrigated hectares) receive MXN 1 200 (USD 60) per hectare, and both small and
medium-scale producers of chia and amaranth receive MXN 3 000 (USD 150) also per hectare. For 2023,
the Production for Wellbeing programme is expected to reach more than 2 million smallholders and
medium-scale farmers; of which around 57% of beneficiaries are in municipalities with indigenous
population, 34% are women, and 61% are located in the poorest regions of the country in the south.
The Fertiliser Programme provides up to 600 kg per year of nitrogenous and phosphate fertiliser to small-
scale producers of maize, beans, rice, or any other crop with cultural and economic impact at the state or
regional level holding no more than three hectares and located in highly marginalised communities of the
country. The programme was launched in 2019 in the state of Guerrero and expanded in 2021 to the states
of Morelos, Puebla, Tlaxcala, and Chiapas (some of the poorest states in the country). In 2023 the
programme has been further expanded to the whole country (see below). In addition, a key input subsidy
is provided for on-farm electricity consumption for water pumping via reduced electricity tariffs.
The Secretariat of Wellbeing (Social Development Ministry) operates the Sowing Life programme, which
supports agroforestry projects implemented by small-scale farmers (having up to 2.5 hectares of available


470 

land) located in poor municipalities. The programme provides direct payments, in-kind support (e.g. plants,
seeds, sowing tools and nurseries) and technical support for afforestation and agroforestry projects.
Investments in general services or public goods are mostly allocated to agricultural knowledge and
innovation systems, hydrological infrastructure and on animal and plant health inspection and control.
Investments in hydrological infrastructure have been for rehabilitation and maintenance of off-farm
irrigation systems. SENASICA, the agency in charge of implementing sanitary measures in the agri-food
chain, implements sanitary and phytosanitary campaigns and measures for early detection of pests and
diseases. This programme supports inspection and monitoring projects of sanitary risks, control and
prevention of pests and diseases, inspection of goods that are transported in the country, implementation
of systems for reducing contamination risks in production units and promotion of good sanitary practices.
In terms of climate change mitigation, agriculture contributes around 13% of GHG emissions in Mexico.
The country’s pledge to the Paris Climate Conference in December 2015 includes unconditional and
conditional targets. Under the 2020 update of its NDC, Mexico committed to unconditionally lower GHG
emissions by 22% and black carbon emissions by 51% relative to BAU by 2030. Agriculture GHG
emissions reduction targets are -8%. Depending on international support, this could increase to 36% of
total emissions and to 70% of black carbon emissions. To achieve these targets, the agricultural sector
strategy promotes agricultural practices adapted to climatic and environmental conditions such as soil
conservation and reduced burning of residues considering community and scientific knowledge; and
adopting agroforestry, agroecology and biodigesters on livestock farms.
Lastly, Mexico continues to use its free trade agreements that involve more than 50 countries, and a large
share of Mexico’s agricultural trade occurs under these agreements for both agricultural products and
inputs.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
The Strategic Plan for Climate Change on Agriculture Plan Estratégico de Cambio Climático del sector
Agroalimentario, PLECCA) was produced in 2022 and identify the agricultural sector as requiring particular
focus for adaptation efforts. Alongside agriculture, they point out the need to strengthen the country’s water
and food security, and to conserve and recover natural ecosystems and the ecological functions and
environmental services they provide, among others (Agricultura, 2022[1]).
Climate-change adaptation strategies include promoting sustainable production and consumption
practices, incorporating climate risks into value chains, addressing sanitary and phytosanitary risks,
protecting native crops, and promoting financing mechanisms targeting the negative impacts of climate
change. In addition, the government aims to strengthen the adaptive agricultural capacity of at least 50%
of municipalities most vulnerable to climate change, establish early-warning and risk-management systems
at every level of government, and reach a 0% net deforestation rate by 2030.
Agricultural technical workshops have been created since 2019, in the states of Chiapas, Campeche,
Mexico, Oaxaca, Puebla, and Yucatan. At these discussion roundtables (MTA), producers, technicians,
academics, and the federal government discuss climate-change risks and their incidence on crops, and
aim to define the main adaptation practices to be promoted by the government. These practices include
changing planting seasons, diversifying plant varieties, promoting practices to retain soil moisture and
improve its fertility, and integrating pest/disease management.
The National Soil Strategy for Sustainable Agriculture (ENASAS) was developed in 2022 to promote the
sustainable management of agricultural soils. The strategy is currently informing policy instruments for the
conservation and restoration of degraded agricultural soils. The strategy is promoted by the National
University (UNAM) in co-ordination with the Ministry of Agriculture and the Global soil Partnership (FAO).
Also in 2022, the Soil Doctors programme was implemented in Michoacán, Puebla, and Morelos to promote
a self-sufficient system for training farmers in the sustainable management of agricultural soils.


 471

The Water Footprint Working Group was set up in 2022 with the participation of several water related public
institutions to explore the development and implementation of estimation and reduction systems for the
water footprint of the agricultural sector. The Working Group is implementing a pilot program with different
models to estimate the water footprint of agricultural crops in seven Irrigation Districts in the states of
Sonora, Chihuahua, Guanajuato, Jalisco, Hidalgo, and the Lagunera Region. The water footprint in these
entities will be estimated for crops such as maize, wheat, beans, barley, avocado, walnuts, alfalfa, and
agave.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
Agricultural policies continued to focus on consolidating the implementation and reach of the main
agricultural support programmes, such as the fertiliser programme and the guaranteed minimum price
programme. Implementation of the Production for Wellbeing programme remained unchanged, its
emphasis remained on supporting small-scale producers of basic grains such as maize, beans, wheat,
and rice, as well as support for rural women, indigenous population, and vulnerable groups.
The most significant change occurred in the geographic coverage of the fertiliser programme, which used
to be implemented in five of the poorest states of the country only; as of 2023 implementation began
throughout all national territory, while continuing to target the poorest communities of each state. The
budget allocated to this programme, which had amounted to MXN 1.9 billion (USD 88.4 million) in 2020,
was increased to MXN 2.2 billion (USD 108.4 million) in 2021 and to MXN 16.7 billion (USD 938.2 million)
in 2023, an almost nine-fold increase within two years in nominal terms. For 2023 the programme is
expected to also increase and reach 3 million hectares, benefiting 2 million smallholders. Around 55% of
beneficiaries of the programme are in communities with indigenous populations and 41% are women.
The guaranteed minimum price programme run by SEGALMEX was updated to support 117 118 small
and medium-scale farmers and to acquire 9 million tonnes of maize and wheat and 618 million litres of milk
in 2022. Prices for maize went from MXN 6 278 (USD 312.2) to MXN 6 805 (USD 338.4) per tonne; for
beans, from MXN 16 000 (USD 795.6) to MXN 17 340 (USD 862.2) per tonne; for wheat, from MXN 6 900
(USD 343.1) to MXN 7 480 (USD 372) per tonne; for rice, from MXN 7 300 (USD 363) to MXN 7 913
(USD 393.5) per tonne; and lastly, for cow milk, from MXN 9.2 (USD 0.46) to MXN 10.6 (USD 0.53) per
litre. Additionally, the maximum amount eligible to receive the guaranteed price increased from 20 tonnes
to 35 tonnes for maize, while for milk it went from 25 litres to 30 litres per cow. For rice the maximum
amount was reduced from 120 tonnes to 80 tonnes.
For medium-sized farms whose production is not purchased by SEGALMEX, a price hedging mechanism
was introduced in 2021-22, where the difference between the guaranteed price and a reference price is
covered by an insurance for which the government pays part of the premium. For wheat, the guaranteed
price for these medium-scale producers (i.e. those with more than 8 hectares) increased from MXN 6 400
(USD 318.2) to MXN 6 938 (USD 345) per tonne. For maize medium-scale producers (i.e. those with more
than 5 and less than 50 hectares), the incentive corresponds to the difference between the guaranteed
price for small producers and the reference price (also calculated by SEGALMEX). Eligible quantities are
limited to a maximum of 600 tonnes of maize and 200 tonnes of wheat.
In 2023 a decree was published that announced the dismantling of the National Financing Agency for
Agricultural, Rural, Forestry and Fisheries Development (FND), which meant a suspension of credit
granting in 2023 after its reduction by 35.1% in 2022 compared to 2021.
Following a December 2020 decree, through which the country started phasing out the use of glyphosate
and genetically modified (GMO) maize for human consumption, another decree published in
February 2023 and coming into effect on 1 January 2024 prohibits the use of GMO in white maize used
for human consumption (maize dough and maize tortilla). The use of GMO in yellow maize used for the
agroindustry and for animal feed remains possible. The government argues several aspects for this


472 

measure: 1) to safeguard human health; 2) protect the environment and in particular biodiversity given the
country’s role as a major centre of origin for maize; and 3) ensure food security for poor rural populations
as poor and indigenous farmers use traditional maize varieties for self-consumption that can be polluted.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
Following the inflationary pressures caused by the war in Ukraine, a decree with a package against inflation
and shortage (APECIC) signed in May 2022 reduced to zero import tariffs for 21 basic basket products
(e.g. vegetable oils, rice, tuna, pork, poultry, beef, some horticultural products, dry beans, milk, lemon,
sardines, grains, among others) and 5 strategic agricultural inputs (maize and wheat flour, sorghum, wheat
and maize). Moreover, administrative procedures were relaxed to facilitate the imports of such goods; this
rule change does not exempt compliance with sanitary and food safety requirements. This decree, that
aims to reduce domestic inflation, was extended twice in October 2022 and in January 2023, and
expanded to incorporate more food products, personal hygiene products, animal feed and agricultural
inputs (e.g. such as live bovine animals, beef, swine and poultry meats, tuna, sardines, milk, eggs,
potatoes, tomatoes, onions, carrots, dry beans, citrus, apples, wheat, maize, rice, sorghum, pasta, bread,
canned vegetables, some fertilisers, toilet paper, among others).
In January 2023, a 50% export tariff was introduced by decree on white maize intended for human
consumption (1005.90.04). The aim of this measure is to contain price increases of this staple grain. The
decree, which is to remain in force until 31 December 2023, complements the above-mentioned tariff
elimination on basic foodstuff imports.
Mexico is heavily dependent on fertiliser imports, a quarter of which used to originate from Russia. Mexico
continues, in the short term, to rely on its FTA partners to procure the national demand. The country is
investigating longer-term options to replace imported fertilisers, such as expanding the use of local organic
and bio-fertilisers, as well as to increase national production of mineral fertilisers.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
In May 2022, Mexico and the United Kingdom began negotiations for a free trade agreement. The countries
are seeking an agreement that strengthens trade in goods and services, increases investment flows, and
promotes digital and cross-border trade.
Contextual information
Mexico had a population of 128 million in 2021, ranks as the 13th largest world economy and has a per
capita GDP just below the average of all countries covered in this report. Agriculture’s contribution to GDP
has increased slightly since 2000 from 3.3% to 3.9% in 2021. Despite the decline over the past two
decades, however, agriculture’s share of total employment remains comparatively high at more than 12.2%
in 2021. Trade is an important driver of Mexico’s economy; in 2021 it represented 39.2% of GDP and has
grown 14.8 percentage points since 2000. Agro-food trade is an important fraction of total trade, both in
terms of exports and imports, representing 7.4% and 5.1% of each, respectively.




 473

Table 20.3. Mexico: Contextual indicators

Mexico
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
1 097
2 481
2.7%
2.0%
Population (million)
101
128
2.4%
2.4%
Land area (thousand km2)
1 944
1 944
2.4%
2.4%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
106 330
97 138
3.5%
3.3%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
52
65
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
10 870
19 445
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
24.4
39.2
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
3.3
3.9
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
17.3
12.2
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
4.6
7.4
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.5
5.1
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
57
59
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
43
41
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
22
21
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Economic growth has been slowing since 2010 and stalled in 2019. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
and related restrictions, economic output fell by 8.1% in 2020. After rebounding growth in 2021, economic
growth in 2022 declined to 2.5%, resulting in economic output remaining below the pre-pandemic level.
Inflation registered a high level of 7.9% in 2022, while the unemployment rate fell to 3.3%.
Figure 20.5. Mexico: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.


474 

Since 2015, Mexico has registered a positive and growing net agro-food balance reaching USD 10.8 billion
surplus in 2021. Whereas most agro-food exports are primary and processed for final consumption, more
than half of agro-food imports are intermediate products for further processing.
Figure 20.6. Mexico: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Mexico - Figure 6A. Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
10
20
30
40
Mexico - Figure 6B. Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
4
19
19
3
38
38
50
50
36
36
43
43
7
7
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 475

Mexico’s significant agricultural output growth, around 3%, over the past decade was due predominantly
to the increased use of primary factors, notably capital and land. In addition, total factor productivity (TFP)
grew by 1.2% per year between 2011 and 2020, slightly faster than the world average. Increased use of
intermediate inputs, notably fertilisers and feed, contributed less to the output growth.
In contrast to the average trend observed in the OECD area, nutrient balances in Mexico have increased
in the last decade and reached nearly 35 kg/ha for nitrogen and 4 kg/ha of phosphorus in 2021. Agricultural
GHG emissions represent 19% of the country’s total, which is higher than the OECD average and is also
above its relative contribution to the country’s economy. Water stress is well above the OECD average,
and agriculture is partly responsible for this pressure due to its high share of total water abstractions.
Figure 20.7. Mexico: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 20.4. Mexico: Productivity and environmental indicators

Mexico
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
5.1%
1.2%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
26.5
34.8
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
1.8
4.0
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
3.0
3.0
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
19.1
19.1
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
4.5
6.2
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
82.0
75.7
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
15.6
19.8
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data
Mexico - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
1.21%
1.21%
1.12%
1.12%
1.37%
1.37%
0.35%
0.35%
0.45%
0.45%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Mexico
World
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%


476 


Reference

Agricultura (2022), Plan Estratégico de Cambio Climático del Sector Agropecuario (PLECCA).
[1]




 477

Support to agriculture
Support to agricultural producers in New Zealand consistently ranks among the lowest in the OECD. During
2020-22, the Producer Support Estimate (PSE) averaged 0.7% of gross farm receipts, slightly higher than
the 0.5% reported for 2000-02 but far below the OECD average. Almost all prices align with world market
prices. Exceptions are fresh poultry and table eggs, and some bee products, which cannot be imported
into New Zealand due to the absence of Import Health Standards (IHS) for these products – the standards
that imports considered a biosecurity risk must meet. These restrictions result in some market price support
(the only form of support to individual commodities in New Zealand), amounting to 12% of gross commodity
receipts for poultry meat and 33% for eggs in 2020-22. Additional minor producer support is provided
through on-farm services, mainly related to animal health and disaster relief.
Agricultural policies in New Zealand focus on animal disease control, relief payments in response to natural
disasters, and investments in the agricultural knowledge and information system. The government also
provides support to community-scale off-farm investments in irrigation systems. Over the past decades,
the share of agricultural land under irrigation expanded significantly.
Thanks to structurally low producer support, more than 70% of all support to the sector was for general
services for most of the past two decades. Still, such support for general services (General Service Support
Estimate, GSSE) is estimated at just under 2% of the value of agricultural production during 2020-22, well
below the OECD average. On average, total support to the sector represented just over 0.2% of Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) during 2020-22, less than half the average share across the OECD.
Recent policy changes
The New Zealand Government provided funding to support recovery after a record number of adverse
weather-related events, including flooding, drought, and cyclone damage. By April 2023, the government
had paid out NZD 37 million (USD 23 million) to aid rural communities and the agricultural sector with
cyclone recovery and clean up, about half of what had been allocated by then. The Ministry for Primary
Industries and the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research also developed a new drought-
forecasting tool, with a first version available for testing since early 2023.
Important reforms related to animal welfare were conducted in 2022. A ban on battery cages for housing
layer-hens came into effect on 1 January 2023 after a long phase-in period that started in 2012. In
September 2022, new legislation was passed to end the export of livestock by sea, effective from
April 2023. The ban follows a transition period to allow impacted businesses to adjust.
Several new land regulations were passed. These include an amendment to the Overseas Investment Act
2005, now requiring certain overseas investors to demonstrate the benefits of their investments to New
Zealand; the National Policy Statement for Highly Productive Land, requiring identification and protection
of the most productive land; and an update of the Intensive Winter Grazing regulations, with an updated
farm-planning module released for the 2023 winter grazing period.
21 New Zealand


478 

In May 2022, New Zealand published its first Emissions Reduction Plan. Its key actions include the
introduction of an agricultural-emissions pricing mechanism by 2025 and the establishment of a Centre for
Climate Action on Agricultural Emissions, to accelerate the development and uptake of mitigation
technologies, among others. Options for such a pricing mechanism have been proposed by the He Waka
Eke Noa Partnership and the Climate Change Commission.
The Organic Products and Production Act in force since April 2023 helps develop standards for organic
products and set requirements for businesses in the organic sector, from production through sale.
The New Zealand-United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement (FTA) was signed in February 2022 and
negotiations on a New Zealand-European Union FTA were concluded in June 2022. When implemented,
both will expand export opportunities for New Zealand’s agricultural and food products.
Assessment and recommendations
•
New Zealand’s move towards pricing agricultural emissions is remarkable on the international
stage as a first-of-its-kind trying to reduce the climate footprint of the agricultural sector. While of
significant economic importance, the sector also represents a large share of New Zealand’s total
emissions due largely to ruminant livestock production. Parallel investments in climate-related
research at national and international levels rightly focus on the mitigation of methane emissions.
Strengthening research and development (R&D) efforts in collaboration with other countries will
also help limit potential competitiveness losses and carbon leakages.
•
At the same time, New Zealand’s farmers must adapt to a changing climate and growing frequency
and intensity of weather-related adverse events. In addition to the government’s engagement in
climate-change-related research and adaptation planning, New Zealand could consider enhancing
measurement of adaptation outcomes, possibly complemented by resilience-oriented measures.
Short-term responses to adverse weather-related events should be complemented by longer-term
measures to help the sector transition to more climate-resilient production structures and methods.
For example, given expected increases in drought frequencies, climate-change-related challenges
need to be fully reflected in New Zealand’s water-management policies.
•
New Zealand’s agricultural sector focuses on foreign markets and trade. Its export-orientation
(underlined by the country’s low level of producer support and laudable absence of formal trade
barriers) is buoyed by New Zealand’s engagement in many FTAs, which cover two-thirds of its
agricultural exports. The recently signed FTA with the United Kingdom and the one concluded with
the European Union are important additions to this set of trade agreements.
•
New Zealand’s IHS are key to the country’s biosecurity vis-à-vis imported products. However, some
livestock products (including eggs, fresh chicken meat, and honey) cannot be imported because
they do not have IHS. While representing a small share of New Zealand’s agricultural output and
consumption, the development of relevant IHS would provide consumers lower prices and larger
choice (not least in times of short domestic supply) without compromising biosecurity.
•
Kiwifruit exports to markets other than Australia by entities besides Zespri (the main company)
continue to be subject to regulatory authorisation by Kiwifruit New Zealand. New Zealand should
aim to ease these restrictions, as they burden participation in kiwifruit exports by other firms wishing
to do so, reducing competition and efficiency in the kiwifruit trade.
•
New Zealand’s policy mix rightly focusses on key general services. In addition to pest- and disease-
control, significant investments target the agricultural knowledge and innovation system. In the long
term, this should improve agricultural productivity growth, which has been low in recent years.
Mandatory funding by private investors often complements public expenditures for general
services. This can help ensure that investments are allocated efficiently and that the beneficiaries
of these services contribute to their funding. However, public investments in general services


 479

relative to the sector’s size remain below the OECD average, suggesting that additional funding
could be considered, notably towards sustainable productivity growth. New Zealand’s engagement
in international co-operation is key for accelerating progress in this area.
•
Data suggests that New Zealand’s agricultural sector continues to face large (and increasing in the
case of nitrogen) nutrient surpluses due to its large livestock sector and fertiliser use. This puts
soil, water, and air quality at risk. The 2020 Resource Management Regulations limiting chemical
nitrogen fertiliser application on pastureland should help limit agricultural pollution of freshwater
ecosystems and reduce such pressures. The extent to which additional efforts could be required
should be carefully monitored. Such efforts might include revisiting the production mix or changes
in production practices – even though this transition could be supported by the planned pricing of
agricultural emissions.




480 

Figure 21.1. New Zealand: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
New Zealand - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
New Zealand - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
New Zealand - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.005
1.01
1.015
New Zealand - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
New Zealand - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%


 481

Figure 21.2. New Zealand: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
Figure 21.3. New Zealand: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en
%
New Zealand - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Border price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
Border price change decomposition
Change in producer price
PSE change decomposition
-75
-50
-25
0
25
50
New Zealand - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Poultry meat
Eggs
0%
10%
20%
30%
5%
15%
25%
35%
40%


482 

Table 21.1. New Zealand: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
4 067
6 371
22 222
20 139
24 587
21 940
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
72.09
73.07
76.28
74.78
77.79
76.27
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
1 624
2 649
9 564
9 302
10 147
9 242
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
424
33
147
199
172
70
Support based on commodity output
54
15
112
168
131
37
Market Price Support1
53
15
112
168
131
37
Positive Market Price Support
53
15
112
168
131
37
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
1
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
179
17
32
29
39
29
Based on variable input use
2
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
154
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
23
17
32
29
39
29
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
26
1
3
1
3
4
Based on Receipts / Income
26
1
3
1
3
4
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
165
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
10.16
0.52
0.66
0.98
0.70
0.32
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.01
1.00
1.01
1.01
1.01
1.00
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.11
1.01
1.01
1.01
1.01
1.00
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
119
85
393
407
412
360
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
60
46
176
195
186
147
Inspection and control
31
28
192
187
201
189
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
27
11
25
24
25
24
Marketing and promotion
0
0
0
0
0
0
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
20.97
71.98
70.33
65.10
67.87
80.44
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-53
-13
-86
-142
-102
-14
Transfers to producers from consumers
-51
-13
-106
-161
-125
-32
Other transfers from consumers
-2
0
0
0
0
0
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
20
19
23
18
Excess feed cost
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-3.36
-0.51
-0.89
-1.53
-1.01
-0.15
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.03
1.01
1.01
1.02
1.01
1.00
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.03
1.01
1.01
1.02
1.01
1.00
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
542
118
559
625
606
447
Transfers from consumers
53
13
106
161
125
32
Transfers from taxpayers
491
105
453
463
481
415
Budget revenues
-2
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
1.50
0.21
0.24
0.30
0.25
0.19
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
489
103
448
456
476
410
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.36
0.18
0.19
0.22
0.19
0.17
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
137
218
210
216
228
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
1.71
2.25
1.51
1.54
1.41
1.58
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for New Zealand are: wheat, maize, oats, barley, milk,
beef and veal, sheep meat, wool, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




 483

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Prior to the 1970s, New Zealand exported more than half its agricultural production to the United Kingdom
and support for agricultural producers was largely non-existent except for some import-competing sectors
such as eggs and poultry. At the same time, New Zealand’s Statutory Marketing Boards, operating since
the end of World War I, enjoyed significant rights to regulate supply and trade of several key export
products. Overall, relative to the more protected manufacturing sectors, agriculture was implicitly taxed
(Anderson et al., 2008[1]).
The accession of the United Kingdom to the European Economic Community in 1973 weakened New
Zealand’s access to its most important market, and the oil shock of the mid-1970s generated significant
foreign exchange shortfalls given the country’s dependence on oil imports. In response, the government
introduced policy measures to support agricultural production (MPI, 2017[2]). These included input
subsidies, minimum prices supported by import barriers and export incentives, tax concessions, low-
interest loans and development grants (MPI, 2017[2]; Harris and Rae, 2004[3]).
In response to macroeconomic problems, including the substantial fiscal burden of these support
measures, a new government implemented significant economic reforms during the second half of the
1980s. By the end of that decade, production and trade distorting policies supporting the farm sector
practically disappeared (Table 21.2). In the context of these reforms, New Zealand’s Statutory Marketing
Boards lost most of their authority or were dissolved (Nayga and Rae, 1993[4]).
Table 21.2. New Zealand: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1975
Export-oriented agriculture with little policy
intervention. Implicit taxation notably of exporting
agriculture relative to the manufacturing sector
Statutory Marketing Boards with significant authority to regulate
production and trade of key export products
Agricultural and manufacturing import tariffs
Limited farm support, including some input subsidies
1975-1984
Incentivising agricultural production
Introduction of significant farm support measures: price support, input
subsidies, tax concessions, low-interest loans, development grants
Late 1980s
Reforms to market and trade liberalisation
Dismantling of price support and most other forms of direct farm
support, along with economy-wide reforms liberalising the
manufacturing industry as well
Restricted function or dismantling of the Statutory Marketing Boards.
Exit packages and debt restructuring programmes for farmers who
had to stop operating
1990-present
Continuing trade liberalisation
Focus on general services and disaster aid
Since the policy reforms in the late 1980s, New Zealand’s level of support to agricultural producers has
been the lowest among OECD countries (Figure 21.4). Consequently, for the last three decades, total
support to the sector was driven mainly by policies related to general services to agriculture, such as
agricultural research and biosecurity controls for pests and diseases. For the last almost 20 years, PSE
has been consistently below 1% of gross farm receipts, and while this low support has been dominated by
SPS-related market price support, most of the budgetary producer support has consistently been provided
for livestock disease control. Most of the support for the sector, however, has consistently been in the form
of provision of general services to the sector, notably through the agricultural knowledge and information
system and related to the country’s pest and disease control.


484 

Figure 21.4. New Zealand: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Agricultural support in New Zealand is limited largely to expenditures on general services, primarily
agricultural research and biosecurity controls for pests and diseases. A significant share of the costs of
regulatory and operational functions, including for border control, is charged to beneficiaries (e.g. farmers)
or those who create risks (e.g. importers).
Market and trade regulations
Practically all of New Zealand’s agricultural production and trade is free from economic regulation. Since
the phasing out by the end of 2010 of restrictions on dairy exports directed to specific markets protected
by TRQs, export rights have been allocated to dairy companies based on the proportion of milk-solids
collected. Export regulations continue to exist for kiwifruit: the New Zealand company Zespri has the default
right, although not an exclusive right, to export kiwifruit to all markets other than Australia. Other traders
can export kiwifruit to non-Australian markets in collaboration with Zespri, subject to approval by the
relevant regulatory body, Kiwifruit New Zealand. Kiwifruit exporters to Australia are required to hold an
export licence under the New Zealand Horticulture Export Authority Act 1987, which provides for multiple
exporters to that market.
As a trade-dependent economy geographically distant from export markets, New Zealand currently has
ten Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) in force, which cover approximately two-thirds both of the value of New
Zealand’s total exports and of its agro-food exports. Four additional agreements are concluded but not yet
in force: the New Zealand-European Union FTA; the New Zealand-United Kingdom FTA (see section on
trade policy developments on these two agreements); the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
New Zealand - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
0
5
10
15
20
25


 485

(RCEP);1 and the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA).2 Negotiations are ongoing between New
Zealand and the countries of the Pacific Alliance.3
Biosecurity and food safety
Import Health Standards (IHS) issued under the Biosecurity Act 1993 state the requirements for importing
risk goods4 into New Zealand. Risk goods can be imported only with an IHS in place for the product, and
with the product meeting all relevant IHS measures. For some products (table eggs, uncooked chicken
meat, honey), no IHS is in place. These products therefore cannot be imported, leading to some market
price support as their domestic prices are above the world market level.
The New Zealand Government engages with industry and stakeholders to build biosecurity readiness and
response capability. The Government Industry Agreement for Biosecurity Readiness and Response (GIA)
established an integrated approach to preparing for and responding to biosecurity risks through voluntary
partnerships between the government and primary industry sector groups. Signatories share decision-
making, costs and responsibility in preparing for and responding to biosecurity incursions. In total, the
number of industry groups having joined with the Ministry for Primary Industries under GIA now stands at
22.5
The Food Act 2014 came into force on 1 March 2016. Since March 2019, all agro-food business operates
under this new law. The Food Act 2014 applies a risk-based approach focused on safe and suitable food,
rather than using prescriptive regulation. It aligns the domestic food system with the risk-based approach
of other New Zealand food statutes that have more of an export focus and with international trends in food
regulation.
Farm assistance services
Under the Commodity Levies Act 1990, “Industry good” activities (such as research and development,
forming and developing marketing strategies, and providing technical advice) previously undertaken by
statutory marketing boards are now managed through industry organisations funded by producer levies.6
Under this legislation, levies can only be imposed when approved by producers, and producers themselves
decide how to spend the levies. With a limited number of exceptions, levy funds may not be spent on
commercial or trading activities. To provide accountability to levy payers, the Act requires that levying
organisations seek a new mandate to collect levies every six years through a referendum of levy payers
held prior to the expiry of their levy orders.
Sustainable Food and Fibre Futures (SFF Futures) is a public co-investment programme that finances
projects that create value and improve sustainability in the food and fibre industries. SFF Futures has a
budget of NZD 40 million (USD 25 million) per year and provides a single gateway for farmers, growers,
harvesters, and industry to apply for investment in a range of projects that deliver economic, environmental
and social benefits. Projects range from small, one-off initiatives to long-running multi-million dollar
partnerships. Community projects require co-investment from the partner organisation of at least 20% of
costs. Commercially-driven projects require a co-investment of at least 60% of costs. SFF Futures supports
projects that contribute to:
•
improved environmental performance for the benefit of current and future generations
•
economically prosperous food and fibre industries
•
thriving and sustainable rural families and communities
•
New Zealand’s innovative, world-leading, and future-ready food and fibre sector.


486 

Sustainability and sustainable productivity growth
The Ministry for Primary Industries’ Productive and Sustainable Land Use package promotes farmland use
practices aimed to improve value creation and environmental outcomes. One part of the programme,
Extension Services, supports and enables producers to improve environmental, social and wellbeing
outcomes in their communities by helping them design their own solutions. Extension Services emphasises
partnering with farmers through catchment groups, regional stakeholders and agricultural professionals to
ensure services are relevant to the needs and priorities of local communities. The programme’s
NZD 35 million (USD 22 million) budget over four years from July 2019 supports up to 2 200 producers
across targeted catchments and regions.
The Māori Agribusiness: Pathway to Increased Productivity (MAPIP) framework supports Māori primary
sector asset owners who seek to sustainably increase the productivity of their primary sector assets,
including land, agriculture, horticulture, forestry, and seafood. Introduced in 2015, the MAPIP programme
offers a one-on-one approach to achieving primary sector aspirations. The Māori Agribusiness Extension
Programme (MABx) additionally enables the Government to partner with Māori (in a one-to-many
approach) to achieve economic, environmental, social and cultural aspirations through sustainable
development of primary sector assets. The government committed NZD 12 million (USD 7.6 million) to
facilitate MAPIP and MABx projects. Such projects may also be eligible for funding under the SFF futures
fund and the Maori Agribusiness workforce skills and training programme (see above).
The Essential Freshwater package, introduced in 2020, contains national policies and regulations to stop
further degradation of New Zealand’s freshwater resources, improve water quality within five years, and
restore freshwater ecosystems to a healthy state within a generation. The Resource Management
(National Environmental Standards for Freshwater) Regulations 2020 implement part of the package and
set requirements for activities posing risks to freshwater and freshwater ecosystems. The standards set
minimum requirements for feedlots and other stockholding areas; define requirements for managing
intensive winter grazing of forage crops; restrict further agricultural intensification until the end of 2024;
and set a cap on the application of synthetic nitrogen fertiliser for pastoral farming at 190 kilogrammes per
hectare per year.
As part of the Essential Freshwater package, the Government introduced The National Policy Statement
for Freshwater Management 2020 (Freshwater NPS), which requires regional councils to work
collaboratively with Māori and the community to develop a plan for maintaining or improving the state of
freshwater in the region, in line with national freshwater health indicators. Other Freshwater NPS
requirements include avoiding further loss or degradation of wetlands and rivers, and protecting the
habitats of indigenous freshwater species.
The Sustainable Land Management Hill Country Erosion Programme (HCEP) aims to protect New
Zealand’s estimated 1.4 million hectares of pastoral hill country classified as erosion prone. It funds
councils to develop four-year erosion control projects. The government approved a total of
NZD 35.3 million (USD 22.4 million) for the period 2019-23. Selected projects include: the development of
whole-farm plans to manage erosion on farms with highly erodible land; the development of agroforestry
plans; wide-spaced planting of poplars and willows; land retirement from production to revert to native
vegetation; and soil conservation and sustainable land management programmes. Although the main
purpose of the HCEP is to reduce erosion, it also aims to reduce sediment loss to waterways, increase on-
farm biodiversity, and contribute to the sequestration of carbon in small-scale forests and through planting
of poplars and willows.
Climate change mitigation
Primary agriculture is responsible for about half of New Zealand’s gross GHG emissions. This share is
large relative to other OECD countries, due to the prevalence of livestock-based agriculture and the large


 487

share of renewable sources in the electricity mix. Most agricultural emissions are methane emissions from
dairy, sheep, and beef cattle.
In its 2021 Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the Paris Agreement, New Zealand committed to
reducing national net GHG emissions by 50% below gross 2005 levels by 2030, an economy-wide target
covering, among others, agriculture and other land use sectors. This corresponds to a 41% reduction on
a multi-year emissions budget for the 2021-30 period.
The Zero Carbon Amendment Act 2019 (Zero Carbon Act) sets separate long-term emission reduction
targets for long-lived and short-lived GHG emissions, including a target for biogenic methane. In particular,
the emissions reduction targets set out in the Zero Carbon Act aim to reduce all GHG emissions, except
biogenic methane, to net zero by 2050; and reduce gross biogenic methane emissions to 10% below 2017
levels by 2030 and 24-47% by 2050.
An independent Climate Change Commission advises on setting carbon budgets and policies to meet
them. On 31 May 2021, the Climate Change Commission provided the government with its final advice on
the first three emissions budgets (2022-2025, 2026-2030, 2031-2035) and on the proposed policy direction
for New Zealand’s first Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) which was published in May 2022. Key actions
include introducing an agricultural emissions pricing mechanism by 2025, establishing a new Centre for
Climate Action on Agricultural Emissions to drive a step change in mitigation technology innovation and
uptake on farms, and supporting producers to make changes through programmes to support needs and
aspirations of Māori and climate-focused extension and advisory services.
The New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme (NZ ETS) is the main policy tool to reduce GHG emissions.
It requires companies in the agricultural supply chain (e.g. meat processors, dairy processors, nitrogen
fertiliser manufacturers and importers) to report their agricultural emissions. However, these companies
are not required to pay for their emissions. The NZ ETS also imposes a cost on emissions from transport
fuels, electricity production, synthetic GHGs, waste and industrial processes, including in primary sectors.
One of New Zealand’s major projects tackling climate change is He Waka Eke Noa - the Primary Sector
Climate Action Partnership. This brings together resources, expertise and knowledge from industry, Māori
and the government. The partnership aims to implement a framework by 2025 to reduce agricultural
greenhouse gas emissions specifically and build the sector’s resilience to climate change. This is to be
achieved through: 1) measuring, managing and reducing on-farm emissions; 2) recognising, maintaining
or increasing integrated carbon sequestration on farms; and 3) adapting to a changing climate. The
framework will include incentivising farmers and growers to take action through an appropriate pricing
mechanism by 2025, in line with legislation.
In mid-2022, the He Waka Eke Noa Partnership provided the government with its recommendations for a
farm-level emissions pricing system. In this system a levy is raised from the sector, with discounts given
for on-farm sequestration and the uptake of mitigation technologies. The Climate Change Commission
contributed its own advice on agricultural emissions. Officials across government departments worked with
He Waka Eke Noa partners to develop advice for ministers on the pricing mechanism for greenhouse gas
emissions from agriculture. The government intends to introduce legislation in 2024. If an alternative pricing
system is not implemented by 1 January 2025, the Climate Change Response Act 2002 states that
agricultural emissions will be priced under the NZ ETS.
Recognising the need to drive increased afforestation, the government introduced a package of changes
to the NZ ETS in 2020, designed to stimulate afforestation and ease forestry owners’ compliance burden.
In 2023 these changes came into force, including a shift in forestry accounting to a simpler averaging
system, and also a category for permanent forestry.
The One Billion Trees programme aims to double the previous planting rate (including re-planting following
harvest and new planting) to plant one billion trees over the decade from 2018-28. The programme is
supported both by direct government investment (such as the One Billion Trees Fund and joint ventures


488 

between Crown Forestry and private landowners), and adjustments to regulatory settings (such as the
Emissions Trading Scheme) to encourage and support tree planting.
The One Billion Trees Fund was launched in November 2018 as part of the One Billion Trees programme.
The fund has provided NZD 77.8 million (USD 49 million) for tree planting grants to landowners including
farmers, in order to generate environmental, landscape and productivity benefits. It has also provided
NZD 98.8 million (USD 63 million) for partnership initiatives to help in overcoming the barriers to tree
planting. The fund closed to new applications in June 2021 but the programme is continuing until 2028 for
grants that have already been approved.
Within the SFF Futures programme, a total of 40 projects were completed between July 2022 and
April 2023. The Ministry for Primary Industries has committed up to NZD 258 million (USD 164 million)
since the inception of the SFF Futures Fund in 2018. The total ministry and industry investment in SFF
Futures programmes as of 30 April 2023 was approximately NZD 555 million (USD 352 million).
The New Zealand Government researches and develops mitigation technologies to reduce agricultural
GHG emissions. It does so primarily through the Centre for Climate Action on Agricultural Emissions
(CCAAE), comprised of the New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre (NZAGRC), and
a joint venture between government and industry leaders, as well as in co-ordination with the member
countries of the Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases (GRA).
As part of the Climate Emergency Response Fund, New Zealand has allocated nearly NZD 339 million
(USD 215 million) to accelerate the development of high-impact technologies and practices to reduce
agricultural greenhouse gas emissions. To achieve these objectives, the new Centre for Climate Action on
Agricultural Emissions has been established. The centre has two key components – a new public–private
joint venture with some of New Zealand’s top companies and an enhanced NZAGRC. These play
complementary roles in driving research and development for reducing biological emissions. The new
centre will compliment work done by He Waka Eke Noa, and will also include knowledge-based
approaches to support Māori land owners with climate change mitigation.
The NZAGRC, funded by the Ministry for Primary Industries and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and
Employment, brings together nine organisations that conduct research to reduce agricultural GHG
emissions. The research focuses on practical ways to reduce on-farm methane and nitrous oxide
emissions while improving productivity and sequestering soil carbon, as well as Māori-focused research
and future farm systems’ research. Industry partners co-invest in some of the research led by NZAGRC.
The Pastoral Greenhouse Gas Research Consortium (PGgRc) holds the intellectual property (IP)
generated by the research and develops commercialisation pathways for greenhouse gas mitigation
solutions to reach livestock farmers.
The GRA, a network of 67 member countries and 29 partner organisations, was established in 2009. New
Zealand hosts the Secretariat and GRA Special Representative, and co-chairs its Livestock Research
Group. The GRA facilitates collaborative and evidence-based dialogue and knowledge sharing. New
Zealand collaborates with other GRA members on research, development and extension of technologies
and practices to deliver more climate-resilient food systems without growing GHG emissions. New Zealand
builds future capability and capacity through running training programmes and supporting GRA scholarship
programmes in developing countries, including in South-East Asia and southern and eastern Africa. New
Zealand funds international collaborative efforts to accelerate global research in mitigating GHG emissions
from agriculture, especially for pastoral livestock farming, and co-funds and participates in several
international research calls designed to decrease agricultural emissions.7
Land rights policies
The Overseas Investment Act 2005 makes acquisitions of “sensitive land” involving “overseas persons”,
as defined under the Act, subject to consent of the Toitū te Whenua Land Information New Zealand. Most


 489

New Zealand land is considered as “sensitive” under the Act. The criteria that apply depend on the land
being acquired and the pathway under which the application is made. For applications under the benefit to
New Zealand pathway, there are additional criteria that apply where the land includes farm land. The
amended act also places conditions on overseas investors – they must demonstrate how their investment
will benefit the country.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
The New Zealand Government published its first National Climate Change Risk Assessment in 2020. It
sets out the priority and significant risks New Zealand faces from the impacts of climate change. The
government published its first National Adaptation Plan in August 2022, which sets out actions to address
these risks. Unlike the ERP, the National Adaptation Plan does not have a chapter dedicated to either the
agriculture or forestry sector. Rather, agricultural and forestry adaptation measures, policies, and
strategies are subsumed within the Natural Environment and the Economy domains of the Plan.
Agricultural actions in the Plan include: strengthening border and on-farm biosecurity, water availability
and security, plant health and capability, animal health, research, indigenous landowners, and the
aquaculture industry; and reducing hill country erosion.
In addition, the government provides funding to Rural Trust Funds (RSTs) after climatic and other adverse
events to help affected primary producers, and their families and employees. Rural Assistance Payments
can be provided to cover essential living costs for farmers in hardship.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
Responses to biosecurity threats and adverse events
New Zealand is currently five years into a 10-year programme to eradicate Mycoplasma bovis, a bacterial
disease that affects cattle and can generate significant animal welfare issues, resulting in production losses
for farmers. Farmers impacted by the eradication programme are eligible for compensation, and in the
fiscal year ending June 2022, the government paid out NZD 14.3 million (USD 9.1 million). The current
phase of the M. bovis response aims to control the last known pockets of the disease.
New Zealand endured a record six climatic events between mid-2021 and early 2023 that required a
response under the Primary Sector Recovery Policy. Government funding allocated by the Ministry for
Primary Industries enabled rural support trusts (RSTs) to increase psychosocial support, run information
sessions and coordinate local recovery efforts. In total, in the fiscal year ending June 2022, the government
provided the RSTs with NZD 1.5 million (USD 0.95 million) in funding. Some of the most significant
adverse events were floods followed by droughts which affected the South Island.
In July 2021, flooding was experienced across the West Coast and the top of the South Island. The Ministry
for Primary Industries supported the work of two local RSTs, provided animal welfare services and worked
with local civil defence and industry partners to assess property damage and wellbeing needs.
In early 2022, drought conditions were affecting Southland, Clutha and the Queenstown Lakes districts.
The Ministry for Primary Industries worked with all 14 RSTs, industry groups and the Caring for
Communities network to provide a range of recovery activities. This included arranging social events,
motivational speakers and access to technical advice.
In early 2023, New Zealand was once again hit by three adverse weather events, first by a cyclone in the
upper and east coast of the North Island, then by widespread flooding in Northland, Auckland, Waikato
and Bay of Plenty, followed by a cyclone only a few weeks later resulting in further significant flooding and
storm damage in these areas. Some areas recorded record rainfall which flooded farmland, damaged
infrastructure, and washed away crops. Funding of about NZD 1.2 billion (USD 770 000) was allocated to
RSTs to implement support following these events. The government then approved funds to aid rural


490 

communities and the agricultural sector with cyclone recovery and clean up. By April 2023, the total funding
allocation reached NZD 78 million (USD 49 million), of which NZD 37 million (USD 23 million) had been
paid out.
In response to these kinds of adverse weather events, in October 2021 the Ministry for Primary Industries
and the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research began developing a new drought-
forecasting tool that uses climate modelling to provide 35-day soil moisture forecasts. Soil moisture
observations can warn of drought or flood conditions before other, more traditional weather indicators are
triggered. Testing of the first version of the tool by user groups began in late 2022.
In April 2022, New Zealand reactivated the national Feed Coordination Service, initially established to help
farmers find grazing and connect with surplus feed following nationwide shortages due to the COVID-19
pandemic and earlier droughts. A monthly survey on regional feed supply, to support feed budgeting and
planning, was also reinstated in February 2023.
Farm services and workforce initiatives
The Ministry for Primary Industries is establishing an on-farm support service to deliver assistance to
farmers and growers. The service aims at connecting farmers and growers to resources, advice, funding
opportunities and extension services. These are provided by the public sector, organisations. As of
March 2023, the Ministry had 41 staff in the regions and expects this to grow to 90 across all regions over
time. The service has been allocated NZD 55 million (USD 35 million) over four years.
The Opportunity Grows Here workforce attraction campaign launched in June 2020 as part of a wider
programme to get more New Zealanders employed in the primary sector workforce and to address longer
term workforce issues. This programme was launched to employ 10 000 more New Zealanders in the food
and fibre sector over four years. As of February 2023, the Ministry for Primary Industries and its sector
partners have helped over 14 000 people to enter the food and fibre sector through the programme.
Animal welfare
On 7 December 2012, the Minister for Primary Industries issued an amended code of welfare for layer
hens that created a phased transition away from housing layer hens in battery cages by 1 January 2023.
The Animal Welfare (Care and Procedure) Regulations 2018 outlined the transition deadlines in regulation,
making them directly enforceable. The phase-out was to ensure that industry had sufficient time to adjust
and to lessen a short-term increase in the price of eggs. However, in December 2022, 10% of the industry
was still using battery cages for layer hens. This contributed to a temporary shortage of eggs, as well as
an increase in wholesale egg prices, once the ban came into effect. This was compounded by a recent
decision by two major supermarkets to also phase out the sale of colony cage eggs by 2025 and 2027.8
This was further impacted by ongoing impacts of COVID-19, and a global rise in the cost of grains.
A review of the livestock export trade was undertaken in 2019 in response to concerns that the welfare of
livestock during long-distance sea transport could be a risk to New Zealand’s reputation, and was an
opportunity to examine the welfare of livestock being exported. New Zealand’s remoteness means animals
are at sea for extended periods of time, posing a risk to their welfare. New legislation ending the export of
livestock by sea was passed in September 2022 and came into effect in April 2023. The ban follows a
transition period which has allowed impacted businesses, including in importing countries, to adjust. The
impact on New Zealand’s total primary sector exports is low, as livestock exports by sea represent 0.6%
of total primary sector exports.
Natural resource policies and organic farming
In the fiscal year ending June 2022, more than NZD 1.3 million (USD 0.82 million) was committed through
the Sustainable Land Management and Climate Change Freshwater Mitigation fund (SLMACC FM) to a


 491

four-year project aimed at quantifying the effectiveness of mixed species and soil cover-based
management approaches that avoid or reduce the transfer of contaminants from soil to water. In
partnership with industry, over NZD 600 000 (USD 380 000) has also been committed to a Sustainable
Food and Fibre Futures project (SFF Futures) to quantify nutrient, sediment and faecal losses from sheep
winter crop grazing.
New Zealand has benefited from overseas investment in developing the forestry sector and in bringing to
it new skills and thinking. The August 2022 amendment to the Overseas Investment Act 2005 was
introduced to ensure that new investments involving conversion of farm land into production forestry benefit
New Zealand – including by bringing tangible community, economic and environmental benefits. Prior to
the amendment, overseas investors wishing to convert land, such as farmland, into production forestry
(i.e. for the intention of harvesting, replanting and long-term management) could apply under a streamlined
“Special Forestry Test” which was designed to encourage investment in production forestry. With the
passage of the Overseas Investment (Forestry) Amendment Act 2022, new proposals by overseas
investors to convert land into production forestry will need to clearly explain how the proposed investment
will contribute to New Zealand, as assessed against factors set out in the “benefit to New Zealand test”.9
The new rules give decision makers additional discretion to determine the appropriateness of investment
in a forestry conversion and whether it benefits New Zealand, as well as discretion to impose consent
conditions to ensure delivery of benefits. The law change applies only to land conversions and does not
affect overseas investments in existing forestry land, which will continue to be assessed under the Special
Forestry Test.
In October 2022, New Zealand launched the National Policy Statement for Highly Productive Land. About
15% of New Zealand (3 830 000 hectares) is estimated to be highly productive. In the last 20 years, over
35 000 hectares of highly productive land has been lost to urban or rural residential development while
lifestyle blocks10 under 8 hectares occupy more than 170 000 hectares of highly productive land. This
National Policy Statement requires the country’s most productive land to be identified and managed to
prevent inappropriate subdivision, use and development.
The Intensive Winter Grazing (IWG) regulations were updated in November 2022. To help farmers manage
their winter grazing, a farm planning module, co-developed by government and industry stakeholders, has
been updated and released for the 2023 winter grazing period. The Freshwater Farm Plan system, to be
introduced in mid-2023, will provide a risk-based, tailored approach to managing fresh water, including
intensive winter grazing. The low-slope map used in the stock exclusion regulations has been updated to
improve its accuracy.
In April 2023, the Organic Products and Production Act became law. This Act aims to help with developing
new standards for organic products, and to set requirements for businesses in the organic sector from
production through to sale.
Dairy Industry Restructuring (Fonterra Capital Restructuring) Amendment Act
In November 2022, New Zealand passed the Dairy Industry Restructuring (Fonterra Capital Restructuring)
Amendment Bill to support Fonterra’s move to a new capital structure. The act also included measures to:
•
Increase the number of ministerial nominees to Fonterra’s Milk Price Panel from one to two to
improve the transparency and robustness of Fonterra’s base milk price-setting arrangements.
•
Clarify the requirement that the Chair of Fonterra’s Milk Price Panel be fully independent of
Fonterra.
•
Require that Fonterra only appoint a Chair of the Milk Price Panel who has been approved by the
minister.
•
Give the Commerce Commission the power to issue binding directions to Fonterra on matters
arising from its reviews of Fonterra’s Milk Price Manual and base milk price calculation.


492 

•
Support liquidity and transparency in the trade of Fonterra shares in its restricted farmer-only
market by, for example, requiring Fonterra to engage one or several designated market makers
and to make independent financial markets analysis of its performance accessible to farmers and
unit holders.
•
Require Fonterra to maintain and publish a dividend and retentions policy, to support Fonterra’s
ability to access internal capital for investment in innovation.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
Throughout 2021 and 2022, the government communicated with industry leaders through the Supply Chain
Forum. The forum had representation from across the food and fibre sector and met fortnightly. By of the
end of June 2022, the forum had provided up-to-date information to the food and fibre sector and enabled
a range of experts to discuss the implications of world events. It helped ensure communication channels
worked effectively and intervened successfully to resolve logistical challenges. It also ensured the sector
was well represented at cross-governmental workshops that led to the development of the New Zealand
Freight and Supply Chain Strategy.
New Zealand’s distance from Russia and Ukraine combined with limited bilateral trading relationships has
helped insulate New Zealand from the direct economic effects of the invasion. The most significant impacts
on New Zealand have been through higher fuel and commodity prices, financial market volatility, and the
drag on global economic activity. Exports historically going to Russia were able to be largely diverted to
other markets.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
New Zealand lifted the annual cap on Recognised Seasonal Employee Scheme (RSE) workers by
3 000 places to allow access to 19 000 workers. This is in response to ongoing sector growth and
subsequent increased demand for seasonal workers with a corresponding regional supply shortage,
reduced working holiday makers in New Zealand as a result of COVID-19 and global workforce
shortages.11 Employers, unions, and the government were all involved in the decision for the new cap, with
Pacific representatives brought in as the work developed.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
The New Zealand-United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement was signed on 28 February 2022. In 2022, food
trade between the two countries represented 2.4% of New Zealand’s total food exports, and 2% of its food
imports. The new free trade agreement, once in force, will remove customs duties for a range of food
products, such as wine, honey, onions, kiwifruit, and a range of dairy products. Dairy and horticultural
products will be 100% tariff free within 7 years of the agreement’s entry into force. Trade in beef and sheep
meat will be liberalised over a longer time frame of 10 years and 15 years, respectively.
Negotiations on a New Zealand-European Union Free Trade Agreement were concluded on 30 June 2022.
In 2022, New Zealand’s food trade with the European Union represented 4.5% of New Zealand’s total food
exports, and 19.1% of its food imports. The new free trade agreement, once in force, will reduce tariffs on
a number of agro-food products. For horticultural products, 99.9% of New Zealand’s current trade with the
European Union will enter tariff free at entry into force. Dairy and meat will see a reduction in tariffs, as
well as new FTA quota access, some of which will be duty free. Other agricultural products, such as wine,
honey, and seeds, will see 97% of tariff lines eliminated as of the FTA’s entry into force, rising to 99.5% on
full implementation.
New Zealand has reopened negotiations with the Gulf Co-operation Council on a Free Trade Agreement
(involving Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates).


 493

Contextual information
New Zealand is a relatively small and sparsely populated country with a per capita GDP that is slightly
above the OECD average, but well above the average of all countries covered by the report. It has a high
degree of market openness that is related to its high dependency on international trade. Agriculture has a
comparatively high, albeit slowly shrinking, importance to the economy, accounting for around 6% of both
GDP and employment. Moreover, agro-food products account for more than two-thirds of New Zealand’s
total exports.
With little arable land, grass-fed livestock products represent the backbone of the agricultural sector, and
livestock products account for 80% of its total production value. New Zealand is the world’s largest exporter
of sheep meat, and among the largest exporters of dairy products. Beef, fruit and horticultural products
also contribute significantly to the country’s agro-food exports.
Table 21.3. New Zealand: Contextual indicators

New Zealand
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
83
241
0.2%
0.2%
Population (million)
4
5
0.1%
0.1%
Land area (thousand km2)
263
263
0.3%
0.3%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
15 413
10 154
0.5%
0.3%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
15
19
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
21 458
47 045
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
24.5
24.4
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
8.3
6.2
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
8.5
6.1
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
50.7
68.3
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.9
11.5
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
18
20
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
82
80
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
10
5
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
New Zealand has a stable economy having featured robust growth and a relatively low inflation rate for
most of the past decade. However, after rebounding from the COVID-19 related recession to a growth rate
close to 5% in 2021, the globally difficult economic situation due to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
reduced GDP growth in 2022 to just over 2%, while inflation rose to 7.3%, the highest level in more than
three decades.


494 

Figure 21.5. New Zealand: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
New Zealand is a consistent and growing net exporter of agro-food products, which after some drops in
2015 and 2016 due to, among others, lower dairy prices, have picked up again since 2017 and reached
record levels in 2021. Most of New Zealand’s agro-food trade, particularly its exports, is processed food
for final consumption. On the import side, however, intermediary products represent two-fifths of the trade
basket.


 495

Figure 21.6. New Zealand: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
New Zealand’s growth in agricultural output over the 2011-20 decade has been below the global average,
driven by relatively low productivity growth: at 0.7%, the estimated average growth in total factor
productivity (TFP) is well below the global average. It is also well below the TFP growth measured for the
1990s.
New Zealand - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
New Zealand - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
10
10
32
32
5
9
70
70
50
50
15
15
10
10
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100
New Zealand - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35


496 

Due among others to the large share of renewables in electricity generation and the dominant role of dairy
and ruminant meat, agriculture is responsible for half of New Zealand’s GHG emissions. Almost three-
quarters of agricultural emissions are in the form of enteric methane from ruminant livestock. Nutrient
surpluses are also well above the respective OECD averages, although those of phosphorous have
declined somewhat from their levels in the 1990s. The sector is also the country’s prime consumer of
freshwater as irrigated land has expanded, partly in response to climate related uncertainties. Nonetheless,
its overall level of water stress, while higher than in the 1990s, is relatively low.
Figure 21.7. New Zealand: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 21.4. New Zealand: Productivity and environmental indicators

New Zealand
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
3.3%
0.7%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
36.7
63.3
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
13.2
8.3
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
3.6
5.4
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
49.8
50.0
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)¹
3.7
7.3
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
..
61.7
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
0.7
2.2
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
1. Data are not comparable between time periods due to change in methodology.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.
New Zealand - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
0.73%
0.73%
1.12%
1.12%
0.64%
0.64%
0.35%
0.35%
0.28%
0.28%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
New Zealand
World
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%
2.5%


 497

References

Anderson, K. et al. (2008), “Distortions to Agricultural Incentives in Australia and New Zealand”,
Agricultural Distortions Working Paper, No. 09, World Bank, Washington, DC,
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/28184.
[1]
Harris, D. and A. Rae (2004), “Agricultural Policy Reform and Industry Adjustment in Australia
and New Zealand”, Conference paper for International Agricultural Trade Research
Consortium, Philadelphia, 6-7 June 2004, https://doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.15762.
[3]
MPI (2017), New Zealand Agriculture. A policy perspective, Ministry for Primary Industries, New
Zealand, https://www.mpi.govt.nz/dmsdocument/27282/direct.
[2]
Nayga, R. and A. Rae (1993), “New Zealand’s statutory marketing boards: Their history and
some recent developments”, Journal of Food Distribution Research, Vol. 24, pp. 94-100,
https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/6988122.pdf.
[4]
NZIER (2007), Productivity, profitability and industry good activities. Report to Dairy Insight, New
Zealand Institute of Economic Research,
https://nzier.org.nz/static/media/filer_public/11/cb/11cb415e-a97b-4ac9-b86c-
a0b238de9b61/productivity_profitability_and_industry_good_activities_feb_2007.pdf.
[5]


Notes

1 RCEP comprises the ten countries that make up the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
Australia, the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”), India, Japan, Korea and New Zealand.
2 Other ACTA signatories include Australia, Canada, the European Union and 22 of its Member States,
Korea, Japan, Mexico, Morocco, Singapore, and the United States.
3 Pacific Alliance countries are Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru.
4 Risk goods are any items that may constitute, harbour, or contain an organism that may cause unwanted
harm
to
natural
or
physical
resources,
or
to
human
health
in
New
Zealand
(https://www.mpi.govt.nz/import/importing-into-nz-how-it-works/import-health-standards).
5 Three more industry groups, which have not signed the deed, are represented by other signatories.
6 Activities “beneficial to the industry, but whose benefits cannot be captured by those who fund or provide
the activity”, or “long-term investments in the industry made with the expectation of accelerating delivery
of better technology and products for the industry” (NZIER, 2007[5]).
7 Other funders of the GRA include the Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security programme of the
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR-CCAFS) and the government of the
Netherlands.



498 


8 A colony cage is an inside enclosure that can house up to 60 hens.
9 The benefit test is considered to be met where a) the overseas investment will, or is likely to, benefit New
Zealand (this benefit being assessed against 7 broad factors outlined in Section 17 of the Overseas
Investment Act 2005, including economic benefits, benefits to the rural environment, and others; and b) if
the relevant land is, or includes, residential land, the relevant Ministers are satisfied that the conditions
imposed on the consent are likely to be, met (https://www.linz.govt.nz/guidance/overseas-
investment/overseas-investment-tests/benefit-new-zealand-test).
10 Rural land which has been turned into residential housing.
11 Working holiday schemes allow young adults from other countries that participate in the programme to
work and make holidays in New Zealand for up to 6, 12 or 23 months depending on the nationality.


 499

Support to agriculture
Norway provides the highest relative levels of support to agriculture among the 54 countries covered in
this report. Total support in 2020-22 equalled 83% of the value of production at farmgate prices. While this
is down significantly from the 125% average in 2000-02, it remains much higher than the OECD average
of 25%. Transfers to producers made up 51% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22, also the highest in the
OECD. The value of support received by farmers was slightly higher than the value of farm production
when valued at world market prices.
Much of Norway’s support is in forms considered most market distorting, accounting for just over half of all
support to producers. This is slowly changing as the share of potentially most-distorting transfers has
declined since the mid-1980s, from 78% in 1986-88, to 61% in 2000-02, to 52% in 2020-22. Domestic
market prices are supported through border protection and market regulations. This Market Price Support
(MPS) remains the largest component of support to producers (37% in 2020-22) and affects most major
commodities except sheep meat and wool. Payments based on current production factors such as area
and animal numbers also account for a large share of support to producers (33%).
Support for general services (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) accounts for a relatively small
share of overall support. In 2020-22, GSSE accounted for 4.9% of total support to the sector, equivalent
to 4% of the value of agriculture production. Almost two-thirds of this is for agricultural education services
through the Norwegian University of Life Sciences, with most of the remainder for agricultural product-
safety and inspection services through the Norwegian Food Safety Authority.
Recent policy changes
The annual agricultural agreement between the government and the two farmers’ organisations included
significant increases in support to producers. These large increases were partly an effort to compensate
for rising input costs stemming from the war in Ukraine. The agreement included an increase in target
prices, additional budgetary support, an increase in agricultural tax deductions, and increased funding for
regional environmental programmes.
A temporary electricity subsidy was introduced in response to rising power prices in late 2021 and was
continued following the outbreak of the war in Ukraine. Agricultural enterprises were given special
treatment in the form of higher consumption limits than households and other businesses, and no
consumption limits on greenhouse and irrigation operations. The scheme compensates a given percentage
of electricity consumption above NOK 0.7/kWh (USD 0.07/kWh) – currently 100% for greenhouses and
80% for all other agricultural enterprises.
Changes to the milk quota system took effect in 2022. Farmers wishing to sell their milk quotas must now
sell a minimum of 40% of the quota to the government at a fixed price of NOK 4 per litre (USD 0.4 per
litre). This is an increase from the 20% minimum which existed since 2017. There are no price controls on
22 Norway


500 

the sale of the remaining 60% of the quota, which can be sold privately to other producers within the seller’s
production region.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Norway has taken some positive steps to adapt and prepare for a changing climate, including
investments in flood preparedness, research and innovation into climate-adapted production
processes and genetics, soil management, and contingency storage. These could be
complemented with activities that boost forecasting and recovery. Early-warning systems for
extreme events such as droughts, floods or pest incursions could help affected communities
prepare for and minimise these risks as much as possible. Consideration could also be given to
enhancing farmers’ role in managing their business risk from changing climate. This could be
achieved by introducing voluntary risk-management programmes such as mutual funds, or tax-
beneficial contingency savings accounts that allow farmers to smooth out income in the face of
rising business risks, as such measures have proven effective in other countries.
•
Norway’s producer support structure runs the risk of leading to climate maladaptation in the
medium-to-long term. Production subsidies and market price supports insulate producers from
external signals and lock them into production patterns that might become less tenable as climate
patterns shift. Agricultural policy should help producers prepare for change, guiding them towards
more sustainable and competitive production. Norway could consider reducing border protection
and commodity-specific support in a gradual and predictable way to let markets play their role in
allocating production resources. This would help producers respond more efficiently to climate
pressures.
•
The climate-mitigation strategy for the agricultural sector as laid out in Norway’s Climate Action
Plan for 2021-2030 largely relies on changing consumer dietary preferences away from high-
emitting commodities. Reducing the share of ruminant meat and dairy products in consumers’ diets
can reduce greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions related to food. However, relatively high payments
coupled to the production of high-emitting commodities such as beef and other livestock means
focus will likely remain on producing these outputs and might not respond to changing consumer
preferences. Making support less commodity-specific can allow more flexibility in production
planning and provide income support to farmers without compromising the government’s goal of
land retention in the agricultural sector.
•
Re-orienting support towards general services – especially for the agricultural knowledge and
innovation system – could increase productivity growth while maintaining environmental protection
and sustainable natural-resource management. Much of Norway’s productivity growth in recent
years came from labour-saving initiatives, but did little to reduce environmental pressures.
Research and outreach programmes should target sustainable agricultural practices to reduce the
use of harmful inputs and emissions. Support for pest and disease control will also increase in
importance as climate change could drive new incursions into Norway.
•
The framework of negotiations between farmers’ associations and the government provides
stability and a platform for regular evaluation and gradual adjustment. Recent inclusions of agri-
environmental programmes are welcome. However, the agreements focus overwhelmingly on
annual farm incomes, and the gradual nature of the negotiations makes it difficult to make more
transformational change. This can be a barrier to needed reforms, such as responsiveness to
markets and concerns around climate, agri-environmental outcomes, and the provision of
ecosystem services. Norway could consider limiting the scope of negotiations, such as by
exempting programmes that provide public goods.




 501

Figure 22.1. Norway: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Norway - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
Norway - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Norway - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
1
2
3
4
5
Norway - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
Norway - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%


502 

Figure 22.2. Norway: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency. The producer price change and the border price change
are not calculated when both negative and positive market price support (MPS) occur at the commodity level for the previous year. Note that
negative MPS estimates for livestock products may arise in cases of aligned product prices if there is positive MPS for feed commodities.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 22.3. Norway: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
Norway - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE change decomposition
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Norway - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Barley
Oats
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Sheep meat
Eggs
Wool
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
55%
60%


 503

Table 22.1. Norway: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
2 533
2 052
3 859
3 490
4 140
3 947
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
73.28
80.83
73.29
75.39
71.64
72.84
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
2 687
2 085
4 076
3 653
4 457
4 118
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
2 844
2 339
2 896
2 808
3 016
2 865
Support based on commodity output
2 070
1 348
1 384
1 398
1 465
1 287
Market Price Support1
1 397
1 011
1 080
1 103
1 142
994
Positive Market Price Support
1 397
1 011
1 082
1 110
1 143
994
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
-3
-7
-1
0
Payments based on output
673
337
304
295
323
293
Payments based on input use
250
117
199
184
179
232
Based on variable input use
149
71
107
85
88
147
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
91
38
82
90
80
76
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
11
8
10
10
11
10
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
524
871
962
890
1 008
988
Based on Receipts / Income
0
49
77
72
80
80
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
524
822
885
818
928
908
with input constraints
371
644
728
666
761
757
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
346
330
357
351
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
3
6
5
7
6
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
3
6
5
7
6
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
71.44
69.03
51.04
54.05
50.15
49.24
Producer NPC (coeff.)
4.11
2.56
1.49
1.64
1.48
1.39
Producer NAC (coeff.)
3.50
3.23
2.04
2.18
2.01
1.97
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
129
158
156
151
168
150
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
74
62
100
99
107
95
Inspection and control
5
25
33
29
37
33
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
29
54
14
15
15
13
Marketing and promotion
21
15
9
9
10
9
Cost of public stockholding
0
2
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
4.04
6.16
4.87
4.88
5.00
4.73
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-1 388
-1 036
-1 050
-1 144
-1 130
-876
Transfers to producers from consumers
-1 675
-1 101
-1 076
-1 200
-1 150
-877
Other transfers from consumers
-178
-75
-95
-103
-122
-59
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
220
71
152
133
172
150
Excess feed cost
244
70
-31
26
-30
-89
Percentage CSE (%)
-56.34
-51.15
-26.73
-32.49
-26.38
-22.06
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
3.23
2.28
1.40
1.55
1.40
1.29
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
2.29
2.05
1.36
1.48
1.36
1.28
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
3 193
2 568
3 204
3 092
3 356
3 164
Transfers from consumers
1 853
1 176
1 171
1 303
1 272
937
Transfers from taxpayers
1 518
1 467
2 128
1 892
2 206
2 286
Budget revenues
-178
-75
-95
-103
-122
-59
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
3.49
1.42
0.70
0.85
0.70
0.59
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
1 796
1 557
2 124
1 989
2 214
2 170
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.96
0.86
0.46
0.55
0.46
0.41
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
163
328
275
322
388
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
6.88
8.59
9.21
9.41
8.59
9.61
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Norway are: wheat, barley, oats, milk, beef and veal,
sheep meat, wool, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




504 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Historically, Norway’s agricultural policies relate to food security and ensuring farm incomes, employment
opportunities and regional distribution of production. Today, these objectives are complemented by
consumer and societal concerns such as sustainability and environmental issues, climate, food safety and
animal welfare, cultural landscape, innovation, agri-tourism, and the small-scale food industry. Norway
adopts a four-pillar approach to implement these objectives: i) border protection; ii) legal frameworks to
secure family-owned farms; iii) annual negotiations between the state and farmers’ organisations to
determine producer prices, budget transfers and allocation of funds; and iv) domestic regulations to
balance the market through producer co-operatives.
Since the mid-1980s there has been modest policy reform towards market orientation, and modest
reductions in the level of support. Farmers in Norway remain heavily supported through border measures,
domestic market regulations, budgetary payments and tax breaks.
Environmental cross-compliance was introduced in 1991 with the Acreage and Cultural Landscape
Programme which grants payments on the condition that farmers meet cultural landscape requirements.
Norwegian agri-environmental policies are underpinned by the premise that certain environmental public
goods are most cost-effectively provided through positive externalities of agricultural commodity
production.
Prompted by the WTO Uruguay Agreement on Agriculture, in force since 1995, a number of changes were
introduced to agricultural policies, to improve cost efficiency and market orientation, including increased
flexibility in milk quotas, removal of administered prices for eggs, poultry, pork, beef and sheep, and
phasing out of export subsidies. But high levels of protection remain against imports of the most important
and sensitive agricultural products, such as meat, dairy, eggs and grains. Moreover, the primary
agricultural sector is exempt from standard competition law.
Most of Norway’s tariff rate quotas (TRQs) were eliminated in 2000 when the WTO bound tariff rates
became equal to the in-tariff quota rates. Tariffs for some products, particularly livestock products are set
between 100% and 400%. However, there is a system of “open periods” allowing imports at reduced tariff
rates in the event that domestic prices rise above threshold levels due to a deficit in domestic production.
Since 1 January 2015, Norway unilaterally eliminated import duties on 114 agricultural tariff lines. While
these duties were low (and not important for protecting Norwegian agricultural production), their elimination
resulted in reduced customs procedures and administrative costs. Export subsidies were abolished at the
end of 2020.




 505

Table 22.2. Norway: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1985
Closed economy
High agricultural import tariffs and non-tariff measures
Administered prices of agricultural products
Production quotas of certain products
1985-1994
Modest domestic reforms
Modest reduction in agricultural import tariffs
Removal of several administered prices
Increased flexibility in the milk quota system
1995-2000
Implementation of the WTO Uruguay Agreement on
Agriculture; more emphasis on environmental
sustainability issues
Modest import tariff reduction; tariffication of non-tariff measures
Introduction of environmental cross-compliance
2000-present
Continuation of trade reforms
Lower border protection
Abolition of export subsidies
Removal of several administered prices
Introduction of environmental programmes
Source: (OECD, 2021[1]).
Today, agriculture in Norway remains among the most highly protected in the OECD. Market price support
is provided through border protection and domestic market regulation and forms the main component of
support to producers (Figure 22.4). The share of MPS in the PSE has been slowly declining over time, but
still represents about 34.8% of support. Payments based on output are now around one-third of 1986-88
levels largely as a result of declines in deficiency payments to milk producers throughout the 1990s.
Payments based on current production factors have increased with the introduction of new environmental
programmes in the 2000s and rising subsidies for livestock and grazing animals (represented in the series
payments based on current A/An/R/I in Figure 22.4).
Figure 22.4. Norway: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Norway - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80


506 

Main policy instruments
The strategic objectives of Norway’s agricultural and food policies are set out in the 2016 White Paper
“Change and development – A future oriented agricultural production”. They include: food security,
agriculture throughout the country, increasing value creation; and sustainable agriculture with lower
greenhouse gas emissions.
The principal policy instruments supporting agriculture include border measures, budgetary payments
differentiated by commodity and region, and domestic market regulation based on the Marketing Act. The
Marketing Act covers certain types of meat (beef, mutton, pork and poultry); milk, butter and cheese; eggs;
cereals and oilseeds; potatoes, vegetables, fruit and berries; and fur skins.
Target prices are provided for milk, grains and some fruits and vegetables. The government and farmers’
organisations annually negotiate target prices and the budgetary framework for payments to farmers.
Marketing fees are collected from producers and used to finance marketing activities dealing with
surpluses.
Dairy production is controlled by a milk quota system. Milk quotas are farm-specific and tradeable only
within the same regional area. Quotas were introduced in 1983, with trading of quotas being introduced in
1997 and leasing of quotas allowed since 2009. Each year the quotas are multiplied by a set factor to fix
the amount of milk each producer can deliver to a dairy processor and control the overall supply of milk.
New entrants to the dairy industry must procure quotas either through leasing or purchasing existing quotas
from farms or the Norwegian Agricultural Agency. Currently a minimum of 40% of all quotas sold must be
to the government at NOK 4 per litre (USD 0.42 per litre).
Various direct payments are provided to farmers, including acreage and headage payments, as well as
payments based on product quantities for meat. Many of these are differentiated by region and farm size
in order to equalise incomes across all types of farms and regions. This is designed to maintain the
geographic distribution of farms and production in the country.
Since 2004, agri-environmental measures have been implemented as part of the National Environmental
Programme (Nasjonalt miljøprogram), which aims to contribute to sustainable agriculture production with
reduced greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, as well as to fulfilling Norway’s international commitments on
environment and climate in the agricultural sector.
The most important agri-environmental measures are the Acreage and Cultural Landscape Support (Areal-
og kulturlandskapstilskudd), which provides payments to farmers as an incentive for land to remain in
production and prohibits major changes to the natural landscape, such as levelling agricultural land,
spraying edge vegetation or channelling rivers or streams. There are requirements and support for
livestock on pasture, with extra payments for grazing on unimproved land. Other measures include those
for organic agriculture, payments for regional environmental programmes for specific agri-environmental
measures, Special Environmental Measures in Agriculture (Spesielle Miljøtiltak I jordbruket) and organised
grazing measures (Tiltak I beiteområder). Environmental levies are applied on agricultural pesticides
The Selected cultural landscapes in agriculture (Utvalgte kulturlandskap I jordbruket, UKL) initiative
supports farmers who want to make an extra effort to care for the environmental values of cultural
landscapes in 51 selected areas deemed important or exceptional. The investment is based on voluntary
agreements between the state and landowners. Co-ordination of these cultural landscapes nationally is
the responsibility of the Norwegian Directorate of Agriculture, in collaboration with the Norwegian
Environment Agency and the National Heritage Board. Each of the selected areas is co-managed by the
municipality, landowners and agricultural enterprises, in collaboration with regional agricultural, natural and
cultural heritage management.


 507

The Regional Environmental Programme includes payments to reduce water pollution from agricultural
fields, environmentally-friendly spreading of manure, management of fields deemed of high natural value
or with special biodiversity, maintenance around heritage sites in the agricultural landscape, etc.
Article 19 of the European Economic Area (EEA) Agreement concerning trade in basic agricultural
products is reviewed periodically. The last round of these reviews was finalised in April 2017 and changes
agreed entered into force in October 2018. Under the EEA, tariff rate quotas (TRQs) expanded on several
products, including meat, cheese, vegetables and certain products used in the food industry for making
processed agricultural goods. Through the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), Norway has
negotiated 30 free trade agreements (FTAs) with 41 partner countries. All agreements include agricultural
products, although average tariffs remain above those outside the agricultural sector. For agricultural
products, simple average MFN applied tariffs were 37.1% and bound tariffs were 143.1% in 2017.
In 2017 the government introduced the Climate Change Act as part of its goal to transition to a low-emission
society by 2050. The Act prescribed into law the country’s targets for emissions reductions by 2030 and
2050 which are to be reviewed every five years. In 2021, these economy-wide targets were officially set at
a reduction in emissions of at least 50-55% by 2030 and 90-95% by 2050 relative to 1990 levels (an
increase in ambition from the reduction targets of 40% and 80-95% prescribed in the initial 2017 iteration
of the Act). The government has since announced its intention to increase its 2030 target to a minimum
reduction of 55% based on 1990 levels, however this had not been enshrined into law as of March 2023.
The agricultural sector in Norway also has a sectoral target to reduce net CO2 equivalent emissions by
5 million tonnes (or around 70% of agricultural emissions including land use and land use change) in the
10-year period 2021-30. This target was formed as part of the 2019 annual agreement with the farmers’
organisations and was included in the government’s climate action plan in 2021. Most of this reduction is
anticipated to come from government efforts to change consumption patterns and various climate
measures in the agricultural value chain (Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment, 2021[2]).
Policies, strategies and measures in agriculture are under continuous development to contribute to the
fulfilment of international agreements and commitments, typically for the protection of the environment.
Fossil fuel emissions from the agriculture sector are subject to the nation’s carbon tax. A combination of
economic and regulatory instruments exists to reduce run-off and comply with commitments of the EEA
agreement for water protection. For instance, autumn tillage is restricted in areas surrounding the
vulnerable Oslofjord estuary to reduce run-off.
Regarding measures related to animal welfare, there is a ban on routine prophylactic use of antibiotics and
the use of antibiotics as growth promoters in animal feed. Veterinary services are provided in the whole
country to ensure all animals have access to treatment. Investments to promote animal welfare are given
priority in the ordinary investment programme for agriculture. A new white paper on animal welfare is due
to be presented to the parliament in 2024.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
Norway’s northern position, landscape and production systems provide unique challenges for agriculture
under a changing climate. Adverse weather events, such as the 2018 summer drought and regular “iced-
in” winter pastures, can affect critical stages of production. A warming climate has the potential to provide
the benefits of longer growing seasons, higher yields, and expanded production areas for various crops at
Norway’s northern latitude. However, it also carries additional risks of extreme weather events and new
pests and diseases. Norway is expected to receive increased rainfall in the future due to climate change,
which brings higher risk of landslides and floods (Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment, 2013[3]).
Migration of some animal species driven further north by climate change might also be a challenge for
farmers – the most recent example being wild boars. Similarly, incursions of new diseases such as
bluetongue, tick-borne diseases, West Nile fever, Leishmaniasis, and African horse sickness also pose a
threat to Norwegian agriculture (OECD, 2021[1]).


508 

Norway published the white papers “Climate challenges – agriculture part of the solution” in 2009 and
“Climate change adaptation in Norway” in 2013. These discuss adaptation actions the government will
take, such as monitoring and reporting, plant-breeding provision, contingency storage of seed, disease
preparedness and legislation, pest research, and sustainable landscape management.
Sustaining agricultural activity throughout the country has been a policy objective since the 1950s to
provide economic opportunities in rural and remote areas where there are few alternatives and to promote
self-sufficiency. More recently, the government also views this objective as a means to safeguard food
supply against extreme weather events, pests, and diseases by spreading production geographically.
Agricultural land in Norway is scarce, so the government aims to limit land conversion away from
agriculture to a target maximum of 300 ha per year, corresponding to 0.03% of total agricultural land. In
2022, additional support was provided for agriculture in marginal regions and to promote the use of
pastures that might otherwise be abandoned.
The political platform of the current government emphasises adaptation solutions that bind soils, store
carbon, and guard against damaging erosion, floods and water out of place. Several adaptation policies
that support this platform were adopted in 2022 as part of the annual negotiations with farmers’
organisations. These include support for investments in drainage systems to handle excessive water and
for cropping practices that abate erosion and run-off. Support was also provided for contingency storage
of seed and grain. Norway takes part in missions under Horizon Europe, which has a focus on soil
management and adaptation in agriculture.
Research on climate-adapted production, improving agronomic practices, and technology development is
a priority for the government. Increased funding was provided this year for research and promotion of
climate-adapted varieties of grass, legumes, crops, and vegetables. Funding is also provided for research,
extension services, veterinary services, and plant breeding suitable for the unique geographic challenges
of Norway’s northern position.
Norway invests in conservation and management of genetic resources for food and agriculture. The
Svalbard Seed Vault and the national strategy and action plan for management of genetic resources aim
for the survival and further development of genetic material as a resource for plant breeding and food
production under a changing climate.
The government and farmers’ organisations negotiated a climate agreement for agriculture in June 2019
with a target to reduce emissions and enhance carbon sinks by 5 MtCO2eq. This equals around 70% of
the 7.1 million tonnes emitted in 2019 (including emissions from land use and land-use change, transport,
and heating) (Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment, 2021[2]). The farmers’ organisations
presented a plan to fulfil the target through eight areas:1
•
deployment of a climate calculator and increased investment-in-climate advice to all farms by 2030
•
targeted efforts to improve roughage quality and use of feed additives, livestock breeding in cattle,
sheep and pigs, and improved animal health
•
adoption of machinery that runs on electricity, biofuels, biogas or hydrogen
•
adoption of fossil-free heating sources
•
better use of fertilisers through more environmentally-friendly spreading methods, better storage
capacity, and timing.
•
increased use of livestock manure for biogas production to reduce GHG emission in agriculture
and other sectors
•
use of cover crops, biocarbon and grazing to remove carbon from the atmosphere and store it in
plant biomass and soil
•
Development and application of new technologies that reduce GHG emissions and increase carbon
storage


 509

In 2022, the government announced the establishment of Bionova, which began operating in January 2023
as a financing mechanism for initiatives addressing the impact of climate change on agriculture and
increasing value creation in the circular bioeconomy. It will serve as an important tool to reach the climate
objective of the agreement between the government and farmers’ associations.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
Main policies in agriculture are subject to annual negotiations with farmers’ organisations leading to an
annual agricultural agreement. In May 2022, the Norwegian Government agreed to a significant expansion
of support for 2022-23 during these annual negotiations, in part to compensate for the recent significant
increases in input costs stemming from the war in Ukraine. Projected budget outlays of the agricultural
agreement are projected to grow by approximately 9% higher in 2022 and 31% in 2023. This is in line with
an objective of the government’s platform on agriculture – to address what it considers insufficient income
of farmers and low self-sufficiency of Norwegian agriculture. The main elements of the agreement were:
•
An increase in target prices with an effect on revenue of about NOK 1.5 billion (USD 156 million)
from 1 July 2022. Target prices for grains were increased by NOK 1.00 (USD 0.1) per kg for food
grains and NOK 0.93 (USD 0.9) per kg for feed grains, on average. The food grade wheat target
price was increased by 26% to NOK 4.80 (USD 0.50) per kg and the feed barley target price was
increased by 28% to NOK 4.06 (USD 0.42) per kg. This was done to encourage increased
production of grains in response to increasing costs of key inputs.
•
An extraordinary payment of NOK 2 billion (USD 208 million) in autumn 2022.
•
Increased tax deductions for agriculture by NOK 367 million (USD 38 million) from 2022 to 2023.
•
The marketing arrangements for cereals were temporarily changed to prevent animal feed prices
from changing as a result of fluctuations in global prices for cereals.
•
A 30% increase in funds for Regional Agri-Environmental Programmes. These were mostly
dedicated to measures to abate run-off in the vulnerable Oslofjord estuary. This continues a trend
in recent years towards a more climate and environmentally friendly direction.
•
Increased direct and investment subsidies for small and medium-sized farms. The direct subsidies
are prioritised for producers of sheep and cattle.
From 2022, at least 40% of milk quotas sold must be to the government at a fixed price of NOK 4 per litre
(USD 0.42 per litre). There are no price controls on the remaining 60% that is allowed to be sold privately
to other producers within the seller’s production region. By restricting quota sales between the
14 production regions for cow milk, the government seeks to maintain geographical distribution,
cost-effective food production and equal economic opportunities for producers in all regions.
Each year, milk supply is controlled by milk quotas and a set quota ratio is determined by the government
which dictates the maximum amount of milk that can be produced per quota allotment. For the 2023 quota
year (1 January 2023 to 31 December 2023), the cow milk quota ratio was set at 0.95, meaning that farms
can deliver a maximum of 95% of their allotted milk quota. This is a four-percentage point drop from the
0.99 ratio in the 2022 quota year. The goat milk quota ratio in 2023 remained unchanged at 0.99 of quota
levels.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
The government held extraordinary negotiations in autumn 2021 to compensate for rising building material
and fertiliser costs already being experienced before the war. These negotiations yielded an extraordinary
payment of approximately NOK 750 million (USD 78 million) to the agricultural sector. Following the
outbreak of war, the 2022 annual agreement (as discussed in the section above) included several
measures specifically designed to compensate for rising input costs. These include an additional


510 

extraordinary
payment
totalling
NOK 2 billion
(USD 208 million),
investment
grants
totalling
NOK 200 million (USD 21 million) and an extension of the tax deduction for agriculture.
To compensate for rising energy costs, a general electricity support scheme was introduced. The scheme
provided relief to both households and businesses but provided special treatment to agricultural
operations. Agricultural holdings were provided with higher consumption limits than households and other
businesses, including unlimited consumption limits on greenhouse and irrigation operations. The electricity
support compensates a given percentage of electricity prices above NOK 0.70 per kWh (USD 0.07).
Initially this percentage was set at 55% for all entities but was later increased to 80% for agricultural
holdings, compared to 90% for households. For greenhouse farming, 100% of costs over NOK 0.70 per
kWh (USD 0.07) are covered. This scheme will be continued until 31 December 2024.
The marketing arrangement for cereals was also temporarily changed through the agricultural agreement
in 2022. Deficiency payments were introduced in July 2022 for imported carbohydrate raw materials used
for animal feed. Separate subsidy rates were calculated on various crops such as wheat, barley, corn and
peas. This was done to ensure that costs of carbohydrate raw materials for animal feed did not change as
a result of volatile world cereal prices caused, or exacerbated, by Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
Norway is party to the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) through which it is currently negotiating
several free trade agreements. In June 2022, the EFTA officially launched free trade negotiations with
Kosovo. Negotiations remain ongoing for free trade agreements with India, Thailand, Malaysia, Viet Nam
and Moldova. Negotiations with Mercosur (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay) concluded in
substance in August 2019, however had not yet entered into force as of May 2023.
Contextual information
Norway’s agricultural production is dominated by livestock, accounting for around 70% of the value of
agricultural production. This largely reflects Norway’s geographic endowments, with a shortage of land
suitable to crops, but an abundance of grassland and pastures. The most favourable land is dedicated to
arable crops as a matter of policy design, while ruminant livestock is allocated to regions with less
favourable conditions. As a result, crop production mainly takes place in central parts of Norway, and
production of cow and goat milk, and bovine and sheep meat takes place in rural areas.
Due to climatic conditions that are generally unfavourable to broadacre agriculture, the agricultural sector
produces a rather narrow range of commodities. The primary activities have traditionally been sheep
farming, cattle (both for milk and meat) and cereals (mainly used as animal feed). The farm structure is
dominated by relatively small family farms, many of which are in remote locations.




 511

Table 22.3. Norway: Contextual indicators

Norway
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
166
435
0.4%
0.4%
Population (million)
4
5
0.1%
0.1%
Land area (thousand km2)
365
364
0.4%
0.4%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
1 042
986
0.03%
0.03%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
12
15
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
36 941
80 496
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
27.5
27.1
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
2.1
1.8
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
4.1
2.3
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
0.8
0.9
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.6
10.1
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
29
30
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
71
70
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
84
82
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Norway’s GDP grew by 2.5% in 2022, slightly slower than the OECD average of 2.8%. Norway’s GDP per
capita is among the highest in the world, helped by a substantial petroleum sector and a regulative
framework conducive to business development. The country is broadly successful in its prioritisation of low
inequality and the universal provision of core public services, including health and education. The gap
between the highest and lowest incomes is among the smallest in the OECD area and rates of poverty are
low (OECD, 2022[4])
Strong headline consumer price inflation in 2022 has been driven by large electricity price increases. Global
supply bottlenecks in computer chips, lumber and shipping were also strong contributors to inflation
(Figure 22.5). Housing in Norwegian cities has become still more expensive with a new surge in prices
during the pandemic (OECD, 2022[4]).


512 

Figure 22.5. Norway: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Norway is a net importer of agricultural products (excluding fish). Agro-food products represent around
10.1% of total imports, compared to only 0.9% of total exports. The European Union is Norway’s main
trading partner, accounting for about two-thirds of both imports and exports. Within the European Union,
Sweden and Denmark together account for one-third of Norwegian agro-food exports, whereas imports
are more broadly sourced. Outside the European Union, the United States and Japan are important export
destinations. Most agro-food exports are in products for final consumption, while a small majority of imports
are for further processing.


 513

Figure 22.6. Norway: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural output in Norway grew at an average rate of 1.7% between 2011 and 2020, only slightly lower
than the global average growth rate of 1.9% (Figure 22.7). Norwegian growth has been driven primarily by
advances in productivity, as captured by the total factor productivity (TFP) indicator, and to a lesser degree
by the intensification of intermediate input use such as nitrogen fertilisers. This has more than offset
declining use of primary inputs, such as labour and machinery. Despite having relatively high TFP growth
Norway - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Norway - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
50
50
32
32
5
5
10
10
43
43
37
37
1
1
21
21
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


514 

since 2000 compared to the OECD average, the rising use of nitrogen fertilisers alongside declining total
agricultural land and stable livestock numbers has resulted in little improvement in environmental
outcomes. Norway’s current levels of nitrogen and phosphorus surpluses, which place pressure on soil,
water, and air quality, are amongst the highest in the OECD (OECD, 2021[1]).
Figure 22.7. Norway: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 22.4. Norway: Productivity and environmental indicators

Norway
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
5.7%
1.4%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
85.3
94.5
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
12.0
11.0
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
1.6
1.5
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
8.4
9.2
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
4.2
3.3
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
..
..
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
..
..
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.
Norway - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
1.45%
1.45%
1.12%
1.12%
-0.07%
-0.07%
0.35%
0.35%
0.32%
0.32%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Norway
World
-0.5%
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%
2.5%


 515

References

Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment (2021), Norway’s Climate Action Plan for 2021-
2030, http://www.government.no/.
[2]
Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment (2013), Climate change adaptation in Norway.
White paper, http://www.government.no.
[3]
OECD (2022), OECD Economic Surveys: Norway 2022, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/df7b87ab-en.
[4]
OECD (2021), Policies for the Future of Farming and Food in Norway, OECD Agriculture and
Food Policy Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/20b14991-en.
[1]



Note

1 See http://www.bondelaget.no/tema/landbruketsklimaplan/landbrukets-klimaplan.


516 

Support to agriculture
Support to agricultural producers (Producer Support Estimate, PSE) in the Philippines averaged 22% of
gross farm receipts in 2020-22, like 20 years earlier but below a peak of 28% in 2014. The current support
level is the highest among the emerging economies covered in this report.
Although budgetary support gained in prominence over the last three years, support to farmers continues
to be dominated by Market Price Support (MPS), mainly provided by transfers from consumers. Rice
producers are the main beneficiaries of MPS, which is primarily provided through import tariffs. Sugarcane
and animal products also receive substantial MPS. As a result, domestic producer prices were 29% higher
than world market prices on average in 2020-22. Payments to farmers support variable inputs and
investment in agricultural equipment and facilities. MPS and payments for inputs (which, together with
payment based on output volumes, represent the most production- and trade-distorting measures) account
for 96% of support to farmers.
The General Services Support Estimate (GSSE) in 2020-22 equalled close to 5% of the sector’s value of
production, almost double the value observed 20 years earlier. It is dominated by investments in
infrastructure (notably in irrigation systems and farm-to-market roads) and in the agricultural knowledge
and innovation system (in particular for extension programmes). Overall, total support to the agricultural
sector accounted for 2.3% of GDP in 2020-22, down from 2.9% in 2000-02 but still the highest among
countries reviewed in this report.
Recent policy changes
The President-elect took over the responsibilities for the Department of Agriculture (DA) in 2022 and
became Secretary of Agriculture. This is the first time a president has also held this role. The budget
allocated to agriculture increased 40%, from PHP 117.29 billion (USD 2.2 billion) in 2022 to
PHP 163.5 billion (USD 3 billion) in 2023.
The government introduced several measures to mitigate the impacts of Russia’s war of aggression
against Ukraine. These include programmes to reduce the cost of fertilisers and fuel, and tariff reductions
to facilitate access to imports. In addition, the government continues to impose Suggested Retail Prices
(SRP) for specific food items.
During the 2022-23 school year, the Milk Feeding Programme, which provides milk and milk products to
often underfed and nutrient-deficient students in public day care, kindergartens, and elementary schools,
received 80% of its needed milk volumes from local dairy farmers and co-operatives. This follows direct
distributions of food and milk packs to homes or through a pick-up system during school closures that
started during the COVID-19 pandemic. PHP 3.7 billion (USD 68 million) was earmarked for this
programme.
23 Philippines


 517

The Agriculture, Fisheries and Rural Development Financing Enhancement Act of 2022 replaced the Agri-
Agra Law in July. While government and private financial institutions used to be required to allocate at
least 15% of their lending portfolios to the agricultural sector and 10% to agrarian reform, the new law
offers these institutions greater flexibility in allocating the minimum total 25% of their loanable funds
between the agricultural sector or agrarian reform. The Act also expands agricultural credit to include
agriculture and fisheries-related activities such as agricultural mechanisation and modernisation, agri-
tourism, public rural infrastructure, marketing and processing, and digitalisation of agriculture.
The Coconut Farmer and Industry Development Plan was approved in June 2022. The 2021 Coconut
Farmers and Industry Trust Fund Act makes PHP 75 billion (USD 1.4 billion) available for five years to
modernise the coconut industry and increase the income and competitiveness of coconut farmers.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Since the late 2000s, the DA has prioritised climate-change adaptation in the national policy
framework and taken important steps to mainstream resilient building and disaster reduction in its
programmes and operations. However, adaptation policies should have defined and measurable
outcomes, and efforts should be undertaken to monitor their impacts. While funding for adaptation
measures is increasing, their implementation should be carefully monitored, and public funding
should encourage private investment to address the sector’s needs. The effectiveness of current
risk-management tools should be assessed – particularly the extent to which insurance and cash-
transfer schemes encourage risk-reducing decision making on farms. Moreover, the current system
of strong support for specific commodities (notably sugar and rice) creates a barrier to adjusting
production structures to a changing climate. The prevailing price support should be reformed to
incentivise needed transformation of the sector.
•
The Philippines must accelerate development and implementation of climate-change mitigation
policies for agriculture to meet commitments to reduce emissions by 75% of projected business-
as-usual emissions between 2020 and 2030 (subject to the provision of climate finance and help
with implementation), as outlined in its 2021 Nationally Determined Contribution. Targeted actions
should focus on the most important emission sources and economically viable solutions, such as
by changing rice-production methods and encouraging rice farmers to diversify their production.
•
The Philippines’ agricultural policy focuses on food security and poverty alleviation through a
guaranteed supply of staple food (rice) at affordable prices, backed by policies supporting rice
producers that make rice one of the most heavily supported agricultural commodities. Reducing
tariff rates for rice, pig meat, and poultry on a temporary basis since 2021 to ensure food security
has marked a significant policy shift. Further reductions in tariff rates should be pursued in the
future. Removing commodity-specific support can enable diversification of farm income sources
and spread farmers’ risk, reducing vulnerability to climate shocks.
•
GSSE increased since 2000-02 but plateaued in the last ten years. Boosting long-term investment
in infrastructure and R&D should lift productivity in the agricultural sector, which is growing slower
than the global average and than most countries in the region.



518 

Figure 23.1. Philippines: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Philippines - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
Philippines - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Philippines - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Philippines - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
Philippines - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%


 519

Figure 23.2. Philippines: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 23.3. Philippines: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
Philippines - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Border price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
Border price change decomposition
Change in producer price
PSE change decomposition
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Philippines - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Maize
Rice
Sugar
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Eggs
Coconuts
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
55%
60%
65%


520 

Table 23.1. Philippines: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
9 727
32 307
30 722
32 791
33 409
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
89.19
93.51
93.12
93.41
93.99
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
9 950
37 139
34 021
38 762
38 634
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
2 167
7 328
6 535
7 261
8 187
Support based on commodity output
2 094
6 784
6 134
6 666
7 552
Market Price Support1
2 094
6 784
6 134
6 666
7 552
Positive Market Price Support
2 134
6 784
6 134
6 666
7 552
Negative Market Price Support
-40
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
69
526
385
579
615
Based on variable input use
36
274
158
339
325
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
32
252
227
240
290
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
5
17
17
15
20
Percentage PSE (%)
22.03
22.36
21.00
21.75
24.05
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.31
1.29
1.29
1.29
1.30
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.28
1.29
1.27
1.28
1.32
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
244
1 555
1 723
1 595
1 347
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
56
370
417
395
298
Inspection and control
14
77
98
67
66
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
155
896
991
913
784
Marketing and promotion
6
50
49
52
50
Cost of public stockholding
12
137
141
142
128
Miscellaneous
1
24
27
26
21
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
10.11
17.39
20.87
18.01
14.13
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-2 250
-8 016
-7 058
-8 258
-8 731
Transfers to producers from consumers
-2 299
-7 122
-6 714
-7 135
-7 517
Other transfers from consumers
-152
-1 365
-962
-1 688
-1 445
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
201
471
617
564
231
Percentage CSE (%)
-22.53
-21.62
-20.75
-21.30
-22.60
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.32
1.30
1.29
1.29
1.30
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.29
1.28
1.26
1.27
1.29
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
2 411
8 883
8 259
8 856
9 533
Transfers from consumers
2 451
8 487
7 676
8 822
8 963
Transfers from taxpayers
112
1 761
1 545
1 721
2 016
Budget revenues
-152
-1 365
-962
-1 688
-1 445
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
2.91
2.30
2.28
2.25
2.36
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
318
2 099
2 125
2 190
1 981
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.38
0.54
0.59
0.56
0.49
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
186
184
188
..
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
48.96
51.12
49.62
49.26
54.48
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Philippines are: maize, rice, sugar, beef and veal, pig
meat, poultry, eggs, bananas, coconut, mango and pineapple.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 521

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Heavy government interventions in agricultural markets within a closed economy characterised the
Philippines during the period from 1970 to 1986. The government had monopoly control over trade in rice,
sugar and maize, operated by the National Grains Authority (NGA) established in 1972 (later renamed the
National Food Authority [NFA]). Sugar trade was nationalised under the National Sugar Trading
Corporation. At the same time, high-yield rice varieties were introduced and their use was encouraged with
input subsidies, as was the use of fertilisers and pesticides. Public spending in the sector increased
(particularly on irrigation), financed by a mix of taxes on major agricultural exports and foreign loans.
Access to credit was facilitated by legally obliging financial institutions to provide 25% of their loans to the
agricultural sector. Budgetary expenditures financed extension services to the farming sector (OECD,
2017[1]).
Partial liberalisation of the sector was implemented gradually from 1986 to 2000. Reforms undertaken in
the 1990s aimed to improve services provided to agriculture, particularly extension services, and
infrastructure. Market interventions were gradually reduced, as were tariffs and non-tariff measures on
agro-food imports. The policy of self-sufficiency in rice continued with the provision of input subsidies to
farmers, mainly for fertilisers and certified seeds, but also with credit facilitation and the provision of support
to public services for agriculture, such as investments in irrigation and farm-to-market roads. At the
beginning of the 1990s, the Philippines negotiated a number of trade agreements (for example, it is a
founding member of the ASEAN Free Trade Area). Upon joining the WTO in 1995, the country committed
to removing quantitative restrictions on imports of sensitive agricultural products, with the exception of rice,
and to gradual liberalisation of agro-food trade. Public expenditure on agriculture declined substantially in
the late 1990s, due to tight fiscal policies adopted in the aftermath of the Asian Financial Crisis (OECD,
2017[1]).
Since 1988, the Philippines has undertaken an ambitious agrarian reform to redistribute agricultural land
to landless farmers and land workers. The reform covered close to three-quarters of the country’s
agricultural area. While the redistribution of land was effectively complete by the end of 2015, property
rights remained unsettled and almost half of the reform beneficiaries still have collective ownership
certificates instead of individual property rights.
During the 2000s, the government undertook policy measures to further reduce market interventions in
agriculture. Subsidised credit programmes were terminated, and private traders allowed to import rice at
limited levels. However, the focus on food (rice) self-sufficiency was reinforced and after the global food
price crisis in 2008 spending on irrigation and input subsidies increased substantially. The Food Staples
Sufficiency Programme, launched in 2011, retained a focus on rice and other selected staples, but shifted
emphasis away from input subsidies towards providing public services to agriculture, such as extension
and infrastructure (OECD, 2017[1]). Following the Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture, the system
of quantitative restrictions for rice was abolished in March 2019 and replaced by a tariff rate quota system.
The government established the Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund (RCEF) in 2019 to offset the
effect of the liberalisation of rice imports on producers’ incomes. This fund has an annual appropriation of
PHP 10 billion (USD 203 million) for six years (until 2025).




522 

Table 23.2. Philippines: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1986
Closed economy with heavy state
interventions in agricultural markets
and trade
Agricultural import tariffs; Export taxes on agricultural products
State monopoly control over rice and maize trade (NGA, now NFA)
Food self-sufficiency (rice and other staples); Increasing support to those commodities
Nationalisation of sugar production; Creation of the National Sugar Trading Corporation
1986-2000s
Gradual reforms towards trade
liberalization
Continued policy of food self-sufficiency (rice)
Land reform started in 1988 (redistribution of land)
National Sugar Trading Corporation reduced its functions and changed to the Sugar
Regulatory Administration
Investments in general services (irrigation, roads)
Input subsidies declined due to the Asian financial crisis
Removal of quantitative restrictions of all agricultural products except rice
FTAs and WTO accession
2000-present
Minor policy change, some forms of
state intervention in markets and
trade maintained
Food self-sufficiency (rice) continues to be the main objective
Quantitative quotas for rice imports
High tariffs of some agricultural products, particularly rice and maize
Subsidised credit was dismantled
Input subsidies for rice
Import quantitative restrictions for rice abolished and replaced by import tariffs (2019)
Increased budgetary support to rice producers
Support to farmers as a share of gross farm receipts (percentage PSE) gradually increased until 2014
where it reached its maximum level of 28% before declining to 21% in 2020. Support has then been
growing over the last two years, stabilising to 24% in 2022. This is the highest among the emerging
economies included in this report. MPS for imported commodities (i.e. rice, maize, beef, poultry, pig meat
and eggs) constitutes almost all of the support to farms and largely reflects existing trade barriers mainly
in the form of tariffs and tariff rate quotas (Figure 23.4). Rice is the most important commodity in terms of
value of production, so the level and fluctuation of market price support for rice largely drives the evolution
of total MPS. MPS for rice is implemented through multiple policies that include support prices, release
prices, government procurement and import restrictions. Most of the exported commodities covered
(coconut, bananas, mangoes and pineapple) are not subject to trade or domestic policies and hence do
not receive any MPS. Sugar receives price support through sugar production quotas, regulation of foreign
trade and protection with high tariffs. Budgetary support to producers is low, and exclusively made up of
payments based on input use. Most of these payments are based on production support services (such as
the distribution of seeds or fertilisers) and provision of agricultural machinery, equipment and facilities
linked to commodity specific programmes.


 523

Figure 23.4. Philippines: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 2000 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Price support policies are an important part of the policy mix. These mainly focus on rice and sugar and
take the form of trade barriers (tariffs and TRQs) and domestic market regulations for rice. The National
Food Authority (NFA) implements rice price support by buying buffer stocks at administered prices from
domestic producers and selling these stocks at subsidised prices to consumers. For sugar, production
quotas and trade barriers (tariffs and TRQs) provide producer price support and market regulation.
Tariff protection is the Philippines’ main trade policy tool. Trade liberalisation primarily occurs within
regional trade agreements, particularly the ASEAN Free Trade Area. The simple average applied Most
Favoured Nation (MFN) tariff on agricultural products was 9.8% in 2020. Tariff lines applied are ad valorem
and range from 0% to 66.9% (USTA, 2022[2]).
Tariff rate quotas are applied to 14 agricultural products, with in-quota tariffs ranging from 30% to 50%
and out-of-quota from 35% to 65%. Products covered include live swine, goats and poultry and
poultry meat, potatoes, coffee, maize, rice and sugar. Import licensing is required for all regulated products
(including those under TRQs), and is intended to safeguard public health, national security and welfare.
Quantitative restrictions on rice imports were replaced with an import tariff system in March 2019, under
the Rice Tariffication and Liberalisation Law (RA 1120) implemented to comply with the Philippines’ WTO
obligations. In place of a quota on imports from ASEAN countries, a single tariff of 35% for rice applies.
For rice imports from non-ASEAN countries, a TRQ applies. Applied MFN in-quota and out-of-quota tariffs
for rice are set at 40% and 50% respectively. Additionally, grains, grain products and sugar require export
Philippines - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35


524 

permits. To offset the effects of rice liberalisation and to encourage self-sufficiency, the Philippines
Department of Agriculture (DA) has implemented several support programmes for rice producers.
Budgetary support to agricultural producers, both through payments provided to farmers individually and
to the agricultural sector as a whole (general services), is small compared to the level of price support.
Budgetary support to producers focuses on subsidising the use of variable inputs, including seeds and
fertilisers. General service payments are mainly for infrastructure and agricultural research and
development.
In April 2021, the Philippines submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution which committed to reduce
GHG emissions by 75% relative to projected business-as-usual cumulative emissions between 2020 and
2030, of which 2.7% is unconditional and 72.3% is conditional (UNFCCC, 2021[3]).1 For 2021-30, the
conditional target GHG emission reduction for agriculture is 29.4% below the business-as-usual scenario
of 539.09 MtCO2eq cumulative emissions (Department of Agriculture (DA), 2022[4]). In 2022, the
agricultural sector accounted for around a quarter of national emissions and was the second-highest
emitter of GHGs in the Philippines, after the energy sector. The Philippine’s ambition is to focus mitigation
efforts on the major sources of agricultural GFG emissions (paddy rice cultivation, livestock enteric
fermentation, soil cultivation, and livestock manure management) by adopting nature-based solutions
(e.g. microbial inoculants or diet modification to reduce emission from livestock), crop management
techniques (such as supplements like biochar and organic fertiliser to increase soil friability) or renewable
energy for water management,
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
Located along the Pacific “Ring of Fire”, the Philippines frequently experience earthquakes and volcanic
eruptions. The archipelago of 7 109 islands is also at the centre of a typhoon belt and typically experiences
20 typhoons every year, in addition to risks of flooding, drought, and rising sea levels.
In 2022, the Philippines had the highest disaster risk according to the World Risk Index, which measures
both the exposure and vulnerability of a country’s population to potential impact from natural hazards
(IFHV, 2022[5]). Due to climate change, the Philippines face an increased frequency of extreme weather
events, the consequences of rising sea levels, temperature increases, and changes in rainfall patterns.
Natural disasters aggravated by climate change cause considerable damage to the agricultural sector and
pose major risks to agricultural output and productivity growth. From 2010 to 2019, damage to agriculture
amounted to around USD 5.7 billion or 63% of total estimated damage from extreme natural events and
disasters (The World Bank Group, 2022[6]; OECD, 2017[1]).
As the impact of climate change became increasingly visible, the Climate Change Act was enacted by the
government in 2009 and established the Climate Change Commission (CCC) as the policy-making body
to co-ordinate, monitor, and evaluate national climate-change programmes and action plans. The CCC’s
advisory board comprises government agencies (e.g. DA, Department of Environment and Natural
Resources, Local Government Units) and representatives from academia, the business sector, and non-
governmental organisations. The CCC also supports efforts to reduce GHG emissions and promotes
activities to increase resilience to natural disasters (e.g. using early-warning systems) with the National
Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC). Through the CCC, the Philippines
submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution, which identified both mitigation and adaptation measures
(Department of Agriculture, 2022[7]).
Strategic climate-change adaptation priorities are integrated in the Philippines’ policy framework through
the 2010-22 National Framework Strategy on Climate Change (NFSCC) and the 2011-28 National Climate
Change Action Plan (NCCAP). The NFSCC seeks to build the adaptive capacity of communities, increase
the resilience of natural ecosystems to climate change and optimise mitigation opportunities towards
sustainable development (Climate Change Commission (CCC), 2010[8]). The NCCAP determines climate-


 525

related objectives and provides priorities for action in seven thematic areas, including food security, water
sufficiency, and ecosystem and environmental stability, among others.
The DA launched the Climate Change Systems-Wide Programme in 2013, which cuts across policy
instruments and agencies of the Department and allows it to address climate-change vulnerabilities and
risks in designing and implementing its programmes. Within the DA, the Climate Resilient Agriculture Office
(CRAO) oversees programmes focused on climate-change adaptation and mitigation in agriculture. The
CRAO and DA Regional Field Offices (RFOs) partner to provide farming communities assistance, and
prepare and disseminate farm and fishery advisories based on weather outlooks.
The flagship programme of the DA’s climate agriculture policy is the national and system-wide Adaptation
and Mitigation Initiative in Agriculture (AMIA), which enhances climate-resilient agriculture technologies
and practices in local communities, helping farmers and fishers build sustainable living conditions and
enterprises. The programme aims to increase the capacity of individual farmers and fishers to use and
apply climate information and support services that: (1) improve their food, nutrition, and livelihood security;
(2) promote climate-resilient and sustainable production and management practices and technologies;
(3) develop and adopt risk-transfer mechanisms to protect their income and livelihoods from sudden and
slow-onset climate-related stress and shocks; and (4) support the development of climate-resilient
agricultural and fisheries infrastructure (Department of Agriculture, 2022[7]).
AMIA is implemented by the DA in partnership with the RFOs, universities, international organisations,
financial institutions, and non-government organisations. As of December 2022, there were 163 climate-
resilient “AMIA villages” in different stages of implementation, located in 55 provinces, and 213 additional
climate-resilient pilot sites under development. Through the AMIA village approach, productivity-enhancing
technologies and integrated support services tailored to the needs of the community are continuously being
delivered to farmer-beneficiaries, such as the provision of drought-tolerant varieties, drip irrigation and
water harvesting, and the use of coconut husks as mulch in the upland agro-ecological zone (Department
of Agriculture (DA), 2022[4]).
In 2022, the DA launched training modules for local government units (LGUs) on evidence-informed
planning, and provided on-line presentations on climate information services and workshops for farmers.
These additional training and extension services aim to disseminate adaptative tools, technologies and
practices.
The CRAO also provides climate and weather-informed services; and helps complete climate-risk and
vulnerability assessments, and disaster-risk reduction financing and risk transfer. The CRAO partners with
national and local government units to expand regional coverage of climate-risk and vulnerability
assessments, and develop an understanding of the current and future climate risks facing the region. As
of December 2022, 58 provincial Climate-Risk Vulnerability Assessment (CRVA) maps were completed to
focus the investment projects of DA Banner Programs. CRVA maps are among the decision-support tools
developed under the AMIA programme, designed to ensure that climate-resilient technologies are applied.
RFOs provided regular farm and fishery advice based on the climate outlook in 2022. Three types of
information have been generated: (1) the 10-day Farm Weather Outlook and Advisory (FWOA) provides a
weather forecast and farm actions to avoid losses or ensure effective farm-management practices; (2) the
Seasonal Climate Outlook and Advisory provides information on expected extreme events during the
upcoming six months, such as typhoons, drought, and dry spells; and (3) the special FWOA tracks
incoming typhoons and provides advice on climate-resilient agriculture practices to prevent or limit damage
before, during, and after a typhoon (Department of Agriculture (DA), 2022[4]).
The Survival and Recovery Loan Assistance Programme is the DA Agricultural Credit Policy Council’s
(ACPC) umbrella loan programme for post-disaster recovery. It supports small farmers and fishers through
loan and grant assistance in areas affected by calamities. Borrowers can receive interest-free financial
assistance up to PHP 25 000 (USD 459) to contribute to finance the rehabilitation of farming, fishing, and
livelihood activities. ACPC’s partners (co-operatives, NGOs, associations, and rural or co-operative banks)


526 

granted a total of PHP 418 million (USD 7.7 million) in loans to small farmers and fishers from 2019 to
2022.
The government’s lead agricultural insurer, the Philippines Crop Insurance Corporation (PCIC) provides
farmers and fishers with insurance against losses of crops and non-crop agricultural assets due to natural
calamities, pests and diseases, and other risk factors. The PCIC provided almost 3.2 million farmers and
fishers with insurance coverage amounting to PHP 103.47 billion (USD 1.9 billion) in 2021. Insured crop
area accounted for 18% of total crop land, with two third of the insured coverage devoted to rice, maize,
and high-value crops. Farmers can choose between natural-disaster coverage (including typhoon, flood,
drought, earthquake, volcanic eruption, and tornado) or multi-risk coverage (including crop losses caused
by natural disasters, plant diseases, or pest infestation). With an additional premium, livestock (cattle,
swine, poultry) are eligible for natural-disaster coverage (typhoon and flood). The budgetary expenditures
allocated by the government to the PCIC to provide subsidised agricultural insurance amounted
PHP 4.5 billion (USD 83 million) in 2022.
In 2022, the DA attributed PHP 24 billion (USD 480 million) to its programmes and activities devoted to
climate-change adaptation, a 23% increase over 2021.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
After the May 2022 election, the new president took over as Secretary of Agriculture, a first in the
Philippines. The new administration set itself a key objective to ensure a sufficient and affordable food
supply in the face of numerous challenges and disruptions, including those caused by Russia’s war of
aggression against Ukraine, the COVID-19 pandemic, and natural disasters.
In 2022, the DA published the National Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Plan (NAFMIP) 2021-30
that serves as a directional plan for the agricultural sector for the next decade. The plan sets out strategies
to encourage investments and ensure sustained growth in the agricultural and fishery sector, as well as to
achieve a resilient food production and distribution system. It focuses on spatial planning and a balanced
portfolio of investments in agriculture infrastructure development (e.g. the construction of production and
post-harvest infrastructure facilities), the provision of machinery and equipment, and the intensification of
research and extension services.
The budget of the DA and its attached agencies increased from PHP 117.29 billion (USD 2.2 billion) in
2022 to PHP 163.5 billion (USD 3 billion) in 2023. The 40% increase is intended to support the
transformation of the sector towards a more competitive, sustainable and resilient agriculture while helping
the country to overcome the rising cost of inputs and to reduce inflation in food prices.
In April 2022, the National Irrigation Administration (NIA) was relocated from the Office of the President
(OP) to the DA as an attached agency. The NIA ensures the development and maintenance of irrigation
systems to support agricultural productivity and farmers’ income in line with water management principles.
The 2022 return of the NIA to the DA, after a series of transfers between the OP and other departments,
seeks to further integrate the agency in the agricultural sector, to strengthen agencies’ mandates in a
complementary way and to synchronise both agency’s strategies.
The Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines enacted the Agriculture, Fisheries and Rural
Development Financing Enhancement Act of 2022 which replaced the Republic Act No. 1000, known more
commonly as the Agri-Agra Law. The Agri-Agra Law required all financial institutions, whether government
or private, to allocate at least 15% of their lending portfolio to the agricultural sector and 10% to agrarian
reform. The new act still requires these institutions to allocate a minimum of 25% of their total loanable
fund but with greater flexibility between the agricultural sector and the agrarian reform. It also expands
agriculture credit to include different agriculture and fishery-related activities, such as agricultural
mechanisation and modernisation, agri-tourism, public rural infrastructure, marketing and processing and
digitalisation of agriculture. The new law’s objectives are to enhance the productivity, competitivity and


 527

sustainability of the agriculture and fisheries sectors and to promote the livelihoods of rural community
beneficiaries.
The Coconut Farmer and Industry Development Plan (CFIDP), which aims to modernise the coconut
industry and increase income and competitiveness of coconut farmers, was approved in June 2022. The
CFIDP was developed and funded through the creation of the Coconut Farmers and Industry Trust Fund
Act in February 2021, allowing PHP 75 billion (USD 1.4 billion) to be used over the next five years for the
benefit of the country’s coconut industry and its farmers. The Philippines Coconut Authority started to
implement the programme in partnership with other government agencies under several priority areas:
provision of social protection, strengthening of coconut farmers’ organisations, programmes of research
and development, intercropping/livestock integration systems, development of the coconut value chain and
provision of support services. As of mid-October, the PCA identified 2.9 million out of the 3.1 million
coconut farmers listed in the National Coconut Farmers Registry System as potential beneficiaries of the
CFIDP programmes. Eligible beneficiaries include farm owners or coconut growers who own at least
0.5 hectares of land with a minimum of 20 coconut trees; tenants or tenant-workers; and farm workers.
In 2022, the National Food Authority (NFA) intervened in the domestic market by buying rice for buffer
stocks at a price set at PHP 19 (USD 0.38) per kg of rice, and by selling domestic rice from its stocks at
administratively fixed prices comprised between PHP 23 (USD 0.42) and PHP 27 (USD 0.50) per kg
according to the variety of rice and the type of buyers (authorised retail outlets, government agencies or
private institutions). Buffer stocks of rice are maintained by the government for the stated purposes of
ensuring food security (especially for emergency situations) and stabilising prices. In effect, these stocks
are used to support domestic producers with price floors while at the same time protecting consumers with
price ceilings. As of 31 December 2022, NFA maintained the equivalent of three and a half days of the
average national consumption of rice, with the objective to increase the buffer stock to the equivalent of
9 days of average consumption. In 2022, the Department of Budget and Management in the Philippines
raised the allocated funding for the NFA’s buffer stock programme from PHP 7 billion (USD 128 million) in
2022 to PHP 12 billion (USD 220 million) in 2023 to ensure sufficient supply of rice in times of global food
crisis.
As defined under the Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund (RCEF), support to rice farmers accounted
for a total of PHP 10 billion (USD 203 million) in 2022 and was allocated across four components: 50% to
rice farm machinery and equipment, 30% for rice seed development, propagation and promotion, 10% for
the provision of credit to farmers, and 10% for extension services This fund was initiated in 2019 to offset
the effect of the replacement of quantitative restrictions on rice imports with tariffs. It is available for six
years (2019-24) and has an annual budget of PHP 10 billion (USD 203 million) financed with the receipts
from rice import tariffs. Since its implementation, the programme reduced retail prices of regular milled rice
from PHP 45 (USD 0.80) per kg in 2018 to PHP 37 (USD 0.70) per kg in 2021, and provided wider varieties
of rice choice to consumers.
The excess rice tariff collection from financial year 2021, above the PHP 10 billion (USD 183 million)
mandated under the RCEF, was allocated to the Rice Farmers Financial Assistance programme (RFFA).
In the third and fourth quarters of 2022, almost 1.6 million eligible small rice farmers (with 2 hectares or
less planted to rice) registered in the government’s Registry System for Basic Agriculture, benefitting from
a cash transfer of PHP 5 000 (USD 92) per farm. Funding for this cash assistance amounted to PHP 8
billion (USD 147 million). Under the programme of Cash and Food Subsidy for Marginal Farmers and
Fishers, small producers of maize, coconut and sugar cane received similar support in the form of cash
and food assistance amounting to PHP 3 000 (USD 55) in cash and PHP 2 000 (USD 37) equivalent in
food per farm.
In 2022, an African Swine Fever (ASF) outbreak continued to spread in the Mindanao region and in
December 2021 the Rai typhoon damaged pork facilities in Central and Western Visayas, offsetting the
herd rebuilding effort happening in the Luzon region. As a result, there was zero growth in pig meat


528 

production relative to the 2021 level. Since 2019, when the Philippines reported its first outbreak of African
Swine Fever, the country has been struggling to contain the virus, which has resulted in a loss of over
3 million pigs. National zoning measures are in place and the DA is providing financial and technical
support to ASF-affected producers under the public and private programme Bantay ASF sa Barangay
(BaBay ASF), launched in February 2021. This initiative, still in place, targets improvements in biosecurity
and disease control measures through co-operation between local authorities, specialist biosecurity
officers and farmers. It also provides insurance to hog farmers. Coupled with the BaBay ASF, the DA
implemented the Integrated National Swine Production Initiatives for Recovery and Expansion (INSPIRE),
a rebuilding programme focusing on restoring breeders’ pig numbers and enhancing biosecurity. This
programme, which covers the 2021-23 period, has an initial budget of PHP 400 million directed at ASF-
affected hog producers, farmer’s co-operatives and associations, semi-commercial farms, local
government units, and state colleges and universities. To accelerate the rebuilding programme, the DA
has also encouraged partnerships between private groups and the Land Bank of the Philippines, which
provided credit assistance for building swine biosecurity facilities.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
In March 2022, the government launched the “Plant, Plant, Plant Program Part 2” to mitigate the effects of
high input prices, high logistics costs, decreased agri-food exports and increased food inflation, while
boosting local food production. Most (PHP 20 billion, USD 367 million) of the total funding of PHP 24 billion
(USD 441 million) was allocated to finance a balanced fertilisation strategy and the fertiliser subsidy, with
the remainder equally shared between urban and peri-urban agriculture; local feed production;
strengthening of aquaculture and mariculture fisheries; and the mobilisation of food.
After the average retail price of urea more than doubled between May 2021 and May 2022. the government
began in March 2022 to provide fertiliser discount vouchers valued at PHP 1 131 (USD 21) per hectare for
inbred rice, PHP 2 262 (USD 41) per hectare for hybrid rice, and PHP 2 000 (USD 37) for maize and
cassava. These vouchers covered the 2022 wet season and the 2022 and 2023 dry seasons. In
February 2022, the DA distributed for free 33 500 tonnes of fertiliser in different regions of the country. To
reduce the Philippines’ dependence on imported fertiliser, the Department of Agriculture’s Fertilizer and
Pesticide Authority developed the Balanced Fertilization Strategy to promote the use of combined organic
and non-organic fertiliser to help maintain soil fertility while minimising the use of chemical fertilisers.
To protect consumers from rising commodity prices, the government imposed suggested retail prices
(SRPs) on several food items, including processed milk, beef and poultry meat, pork, canned fish and
sugar, soy sauce, bread and noodles. A purchase limit of 1 kg of white or washed sugar per consumer per
day was implemented temporarily. SRPs had previously been implemented during the COVID-19
pandemic in 2020-21 to avoid a sharp rise in the prices of basic food items.
Another response to high food prices was promoting urban gardening. The DA signed a Memorandum of
Agreement with local government units, non-government organisations, private companies and
universities to intensify the National Urban and Peri-urban Agriculture Programme. The programme
provided starter kits including seeds and fertiliser, technical assistance and agricultural training to
4 580 households and communities (DA, 2021[9]).
In March 2022, the DA launched the Fuel Discount for Farmers and Fisherfolk, created through the General
Appropriations Act of 2022 with a budget of PHP 500 million (USD 9 million), to mitigate the impacts of the
rising price of fuel. This measure provided fuel discount vouchers of PHP 3 000 (USD 55) to eligible
farmers and fisherfolk for the purchase of gasoline or diesel from a Department of Energy designated fuel
station.


 529

Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
In 2022, while pandemic restrictions were eased, the DA continued to intervene to ensure adequate,
accessible, and affordable food to Filipino households, particularly in Metro Manila and other major centres.
In addition to the network of government stores (KADIWA ni Ani at Kita) which sells basic food items
supplied by small producers to Metro Manila residents at regulated prices, the DA Agribusiness and
Marketing also launched eKadiwa, an ecommerce website linking producers to consumers across the
Metro Manila area. In 2022, new direct marketing platforms were established, including physical food
terminals (Kadiwa Retail Selling), mobile markets (Kadiwa on-wheels) and transportation and distribution
networks (Kadiwa express), and the eKadiwa online marketing platform was further developed.
In 2021-22, to help children and students during the pandemic, the government earmarked PHP 3.7 billion
(USD 68 million) for its national feeding programmes. These include the School-based Feeding
Programme (implemented by the Department of Education), the Supplemental Feeding Programme for
children in day care (Department of Social Welfare and Development in co-ordination with local
government units) and the Milk Feeding Programme (DA in co-ordination with the National Dairy Authority
and the Philippine Carabao Center). In total, these programmes benefitted more than 3.1 million students.
National feeding programmes seek to address under-nutrition and nutrient-deficiency among children in
public day care, kindergarten, and elementary schools. During school closures until August 2022, nutritious
food and milk packs were distributed directly at homes or scheduled via a pick-up system. Local dairy
farmers and co-operatives supplied 80% of the target milk volume required by the Milk Feeding Programme
for 2022. Around 60% of the domestic fresh milk production goes to this programme, which remains a
growth driver for the Philippines’ dairy production (USDA, 2022[10]).
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
In 2022, the DA issued several temporary import bans on the importation of domestic and wild birds and
their products, including poultry meat and eggs. The bans were imposed for veterinary and phytosanitary
reasons, mostly in response to outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI). Thus, imports of
live birds, poultry and eggs were prohibited for several months from Croatia, Spain, Burkina Faso, Moldova,
Canada (Nova Scotia), and from the United States (Missouri, South Dakota, North Dakota, Minnesota, and
Iowa). Imports of live birds, poultry and eggs have been allowed back into the Philippines starting in June
from Belgium, the Czech Republic, and Denmark, in August from Japan, and in September from Hungary.
The Philippines lifted the restriction on the importation of live cattle, meat and meat products from Canada
and Germany in January and from the United Kingdom in March. A ban on the importation of domestic and
wild pigs and their products originating from Italy and Thailand was put in place in January 2022.
The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) was ratified by the Senate in February 2023,
Once the RCEP enters into force, 75% of the country’s 1 718 agricultural tariffs will be set to zero and a
further 15% of agricultural tariffs will be reduced. Some agricultural products including rice, sugar, swine
and poultry meat will remain excluded from tariff reductions.
The Philippines, which has benefited for a long time from the United States’ tariff rate quotas system for
its sugar exports, has not been able to export sugar to the United States since the previous crop year
2021-22. The Sugar Regulatory Administration (SRA), which oversees Philippine sugar policy, trade, and
domestic prices, allocates the sugar output before each crop year depending on its destined market: sugar
allocation classification A for the US market, B for the domestic market, D for the world market and C as a
reserve that could be classified later on according to the needs of the country. These allocations are
updated as the season progresses. The SRA recommended that all raw sugar be allocated to the domestic
market in the current crop year 2022-23 as the country experimented a sugar shortage partly due to the
impacts of typhoons in production areas and the high cost of fertilisers. To address the supply gap, in
September 2022 the president in his role as Secretary of Agriculture and the SRA authorised the import of


530 

150 000 metric tonnes of refined sugar. Half of the sugar imported will be for industrial use and half will be
for domestic consumption.
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
Lower MFN tariff rate for rice (Executive Order 171, series of 2022) to 35 % were extended until the end
of 2022, the same level as rice from ASEAN member countries. The usual in-quota tariff rate is 40% and
the out-of-quota rate is 50%. The temporary liberalisation of the rice market was originally taken to boost
supply and the diversity of rice suppliers during the pandemic and to reduce the impact of climate change
on food security. The extension is intended to mitigate the impact of Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine on the rising domestic price of rice and on supply shortages. (USDA, 2022[11]).
The temporary tariff rate on imported pig meat (15% in-quota; 25% out-of-quota) that were reduced to
address rising pork prices due to African Swine Fever, were also extended until the end of 2022 to cushion
the impact of supply constraints caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The Minimum Access Volume
(the TRQ) that was temporarily increased in 2021 to 254 000 metric tonnes is now back at its normal level
of 54 000 metric tonnes (February 2022 to January 2023) (USDA, 2022[12]). To facilitate the import of
maize, an important feed component for poultry and pigs, the government lowered in-quota tariffs on maize
imports to 5% (from 35%) and out-of-quota imports to 15% (from 50%) until the end of 2022. Reduced tariff
rates for mechanically deboned or mechanically separated poultry (from 40% to 5%) and frozen whole
turkey (from 40% to 20%) implemented in June 2019, remained in place until 31 December 2022.
Contextual information
The Philippines is a mid-size country in terms of land area, but its population of 114 million makes it the
world’s 12th most populous country. Just under half, 48%, of Filipinos live in urban areas. With a median
age of 24 years, the Philippines has a comparatively young population. At USD 8 893 in purchasing power
parity (PPP), GDP per capita accounts for less than 40% of the average GDP per capita of all countries
analysed in this report (Table 23.3). Overall, the Philippines’ economy is well integrated into international
markets as measured by a ratio of trade to GDP of 25% in 2021.
Agriculture remains an important sector for the Philippines, but the sector’s 24% share in total employment
compared to its 10% contribution to GDP highlights a significant gap in labour productivity. Farms tend to
be small in size, with an average landholding of just 1.3 hectares.




 531

Table 23.3. Philippines: Contextual indicators

Philippines
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
268
1 013
0.7%
0.8%
Population (million)
78
114
1.8%
2.2%
Land area (thousand km2)
298
298
0.4%
0.4%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
11 234
12 675
0.4%
0.4%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
260
380
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
3 437
8 893
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
44.9
25.3
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
13.9
10.1
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
37.1
24.3
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
4.0
8.1
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.3
13.3
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
63
58
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
37
42
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
45
44
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Since 2012, the Philippines has achieved a relatively stable GDP growth of around 6% annually and enjoys
comparatively low levels of unemployment that had been falling since 2015 to approach 2% in 2019
(Figure 23.5). However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the economy contracted by around 10% in 2020
and unemployment levels increased. In 2021, the Philippines’ GDP growth rate rebounded to 5.7 %, close
to pre-pandemic levels. Inflation has been fluctuating, after lower rates in 2019 and 2020 inflation rose to
4% in 2021.


532 

Figure 23.5. Philippines: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
The Philippines has been a consistent and increasing net agro-food importer since 2000 but agro-food
exports have been growing over the last two decades (Figure 23.6). While agro-food exports plateaued
since 2017, agro-food imports have continued to increase at a higher rate during this period. The significant
increase in agro-food imports since 2020 has been driven notably by stronger imports of grains (wheat and
rice), oilcake, meat and palm oil. Processed products for final consumption dominate the Philippines’ agro-
food imports representing 41% of the total in 2021. In turn, processed products for the industry (mainly
crude coconut oil) is an important export category, accounting for 34% of agro-food export, followed by
primary products for final consumption (mainly fruit such as bananas or pineapple).


 533

Figure 23.6. Philippines: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural production increased in the Philippines by only 0.5% per year on average from 2011-20, well
below the world average (Figure 23.7). This was due to declining primary factor use (-0.5% per year) and
a low total factor productivity growth (+0.4% per year). The contribution of intermediate input growth (0.6%)
to agricultural output growth is above the world average.
Philippines - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
5
10
15
20
Philippines - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
34
34
33
33
10
10
18
18
26
26
41
41
30
30
8
8
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


534 

Agriculture remains the most important user of water, accounting for 79% of total water consumption in
2021. However the sector’s share in total energy abstractions remains low (0.8%). The country's nitrogen
and phosphorous balances have increased and are comparatively high.
Figure 23.7. Philippines: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 23.4. Philippines: Productivity and environmental indicators

Philippines
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.3%
0.5%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
50.8
59.8
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
7.7
9.3
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
0.4
0.8
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
29.2
..
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
15.3
14.9
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
82.4
79.0
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
..
..
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


Philippines - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
0.45%
0.45%
1.12%
1.12%
-0.54%
-0.54%
0.35%
0.35%
0.59%
0.59%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Philippines
World
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%


 535

References

Climate Change Commission (CCC) (2010), National Framework Strategy on Climate Change
2010-2022, Office of the President of the Philippines, Climate Change Commission, Manila,
Philippines.
[8]
DA (2021), Department of Agriculture 2021 Annual report, https://www.da.gov.ph/media-
resources/da-annual-reports/.
[9]
Department of Agriculture (2022), Climate-Resilient Agriculture in the Philippines,
https://amia.da.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/CRA_Profile_Philippines.pdf.
[7]
Department of Agriculture (DA) (2022), Information provided to the OECD Secretariat by the
Philippines Department of Agriculture.
[4]
IFHV (2022), World Risk Report, Institute for International Law of Peace and Armed Conflicts,
https://reliefweb.int/report/world/worldriskreport-2022-focus-digitalization.
[5]
OECD (2017), Agricultural Policies in the Philippines, OECD Food and Agricultural Reviews,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264269088-en.
[1]
The World Bank Group (2022), Philippines - Country climate and development report,
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/philippines/publication/philippines-country-climate-and-
development-report.
[6]
UNFCCC (2021), Republic of the Philippines, National Determined Contribution, Communicated
to the UNFCCC on 15 April 2021,
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Philippines%20First/Philippine
s%20-%20NDC.pdf.
[3]
USDA (2022), Philippines: Dairy and Products Annual,
https://apps.fas.usda.gov/newgainapi/api/Report/DownloadReportByFileName?fileName=Dair
y%20and%20Products%20Annual_Manila_Philippines_RP2022-0057.pdf.
[10]
USDA (2022), Philippines: Grain and Feed Update, https://www.fas.usda.gov/data/philippines-
grain-and-feed-update-19.
[11]
USDA (2022), Philippines: Livestock and Poultry Update,
https://www.fas.usda.gov/data/philippines-livestock-and-poultry-update-4.
[12]
USTA (2022), Philippines - Country Commercial Guide, https://www.trade.gov/country-
commercial-guides/philippines-trade-barriers.
[2]


Note

1 Unconditional refers to policies and measures which can be undertaken using nationally mobilised
resources. Conditional refers to policies and measures which require support or the means of
implementation under the Paris Agreement.


536 

Support to agriculture
Support to producers in South Africa amounted to 4.5% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22, up slightly from
3.9% in 2000-02. The share of potentially most-distorting gross producer transfers – mostly composed of
Market Price Support (MPS) and support for variable input use without constraints – fell marginally from
an average of 97% in 2000-02 to 95% in 2020-22. However, domestic prices for most commodities align
with world prices. Sugar is an exception, mainly due to import tariffs, leading to single-commodity support
worth 35% of gross receipts. Most direct payments are provided as input subsidies (fuel tax refund) or as
investment subsidies directed towards small-scale farming.
Support for general services to the sector (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) has declined relative
to the size of the sector. The GSSE averaged 1.3% of the value of agricultural production during 2020-22,
below the 3.8% observed in the early 2000s, and below the average of other countries in this report. Most
payments to general services go to the agricultural knowledge and innovation system, and to infrastructure
(mainly related to land reforms, irrigation, and other infrastructure). Support in these categories targets an
enabling environment for small-scale farming, which became a priority following land reforms.
Expenditures for inspection and control are also an important and growing element of services. Total
support to the sector fell in relative terms from an average 0.6% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in
2000-02 to 0.3% in 2020-22, with more than two-thirds of the support transferred to individual producers.
Recent policy changes
The National Assembly (NA) passed the Expropriation Bill on 28 September 2022, though it remains to be
passed by the National Council of Provinces before being signed by the president. The bill is intended to
provide for expropriation with zero compensation in certain circumstances, when in the public interest.
These circumstances include abandoned land, state land, or land held for speculative purposes, among
others.
The national budget item on Agriculture, Land Reform, and Rural Development (Vote 29) passed into law
by the National Assembly in 2022 aims to provide equitable access to land, integrated rural development,
sustainable agriculture, and food security for all. It provides the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform
and Rural Development (DALRRD) with resources and a mandate to develop agricultural value chains,
provide agricultural inputs and facilitate rural development.
The Agriculture and Agro-processing Masterplan (AAMP) was signed by the Minister of DALRRD and
sector stakeholders in May 2022. The plan aims to promote investment in infrastructure critical to industry,
and to facilitate market expansion.
In October 2022, a ZAR 3.2 billion (USD 195.48 million) Blended Finance Scheme was launched by
DALRRD with Lank Bank to assist farmers. The dual-funding scheme (loan and grant) is intended to assist
alignment with the Agriculture and Agro-processing Master Plan (AAMP) for a ten-year period.
24 South Africa


 537

Assessment and recommendations
•
Useful steps have been taken in preparing plans and programs to enhance the adaptation of
agriculture to climate change. However, it is urgent to move from planning to the implementation
of policy actions – including the planned early-warning system, especially given the vulnerability of
South African agriculture to droughts, floods, storms, and other natural disasters. Adaptation
measures that have co-benefits with mitigation and other food system objectives should be
prioritised, given the persistent challenges of poverty and unemployment. Greater support should
be provided for transformative capacity, to help farmers build long-term resilience to climate
change.
•
Carbon taxes in place since January 2022 under the Carbon Tax Act have not been applied to
agricultural emissions. South Africa could consider extending the scope of the carbon tax to
progressively include agricultural emissions, along with social safety-net policies to offset potential
food-price increases and income losses for poor households and producers caused by this change.
Furthermore, a sectoral emissions target for agriculture could be established under the Climate
Change Bill once it becomes law, as such targets can be helpful for focusing mitigation efforts and
measuring progress.
•
With significant policy reforms in the mid-1990s, South Africa opened its agricultural markets by
eliminating MPS for most products except sugar. Overall support is now low, but the support that
remains is highly distorting and should be phased out.
•
Budgetary spending continues to be oriented towards land reform and its beneficiaries (mainly
smallholders and emerging commercial farmers) in the form of general services to the sector
through R&D, knowledge transfer, and infrastructure. The challenge continues to be timely funding
of economically viable projects, and coordination and targeting of support programmes tailored to
the needs of emerging farmers.
•
If support programmes are to help emerging entrepreneurs become commercial producers, they
must draw upon the experiences of successful commercial farmers. Specifically, public-private
partnerships and industry associations can address weaknesses in programmes and services by
public authorities.
•
Expropriation of property without compensation remains a concern. Despite the failed attempt to
amend the constitution for this purpose, uncertainty about property rights remains, and could
undermine investor confidence in the sector.
•
The pace of land reform should be linked to developing an enabling environment for its
beneficiaries, including education, training, infrastructure, and access to modern farming
equipment, finance and markets. Particularly important is upskilling public-extension officers and
providing them with resources to service rural communities and emerging commercial producers.
Capacity in the private sector, and learning and training institutions can be leveraged to revitalise
public-extension services quicker. Without these developments, land redistribution cannot deliver
the expected outcomes, such as improving the welfare of rural black populations, increasing food
security in rural areas, and developing a viable commercial sector.
•
Very low nutrient balances (negative in the case of nitrogen) across South Africa raise questions
about soil fertility in parts of the country. The government should focus on improving soil fertility
though conservation practices and improving market access to fertilisers where appropriate.


538 

Figure 24.1. South Africa: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
South Africa - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
South Africa - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
South Africa - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
South Africa - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
South Africa - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%


 539

Figure 24.2. South Africa: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 24.3. South Africa: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
South Africa - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Border price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
Border price change decomposition
Change in producer price
PSE change decomposition
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
South Africa - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Sugar
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%


540 

Table 24.1. South Africa: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
6 824
23 691
20 491
25 214
25 366
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
74.75
77.39
75.72
77.25
79.20
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
6 000
19 224
17 013
20 262
20 397
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
477
636
736
635
537
Support based on commodity output
438
468
582
458
365
Market Price Support1
438
468
582
458
365
Positive Market Price Support
451
468
582
458
365
Negative Market Price Support
-13
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
36
168
154
177
172
Based on variable input use
25
132
121
139
138
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
11
34
32
38
34
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
1
1
1
1
1
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
3
0
0
0
0
Based on Receipts / Income
3
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
7.32
2.67
3.57
2.50
2.10
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.08
1.02
1.03
1.02
1.01
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.08
1.03
1.04
1.03
1.02
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
264
298
301
323
271
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
146
121
124
129
110
Inspection and control
39
65
68
70
58
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
78
92
89
103
85
Marketing and promotion
0
20
20
21
18
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
34.18
31.84
29.00
33.70
33.52
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-350
-357
-426
-357
-288
Transfers to producers from consumers
-347
-332
-366
-342
-288
Other transfers from consumers
-17
-25
-59
-16
0
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
14
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-6.03
-1.86
-2.50
-1.76
-1.41
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.07
1.02
1.03
1.02
1.01
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.06
1.02
1.03
1.02
1.01
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
741
934
1 037
957
808
Transfers from consumers
364
357
426
357
288
Transfers from taxpayers
394
602
670
616
520
Budget revenues
-17
-25
-59
-16
0
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.62
0.25
0.34
0.23
0.20
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
304
466
454
500
443
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.25
0.12
0.15
0.12
0.11
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
335
317
336
352
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
8.69
15.87
16.46
14.78
16.37
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for South Africa are: wheat, maize, sunflower, sugar,
milk, beef and veal, pig meat, sheep meat, poultry, eggs, groundnuts, grapes, oranges and apples.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




 541

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Widespread support, regulation, and price and production control within a closed economy characterised
agricultural policy in South Africa under the apartheid regime between 1955 and 1990.
Post-apartheid, quick and substantial reforms in the mid-1990s reduced state intervention in agricultural
markets and led to more market-oriented commercial farming. Domestic marketing of agricultural products
was deregulated, and barriers to agricultural trade were reduced by replacing direct import controls with
tariffs, removing state controls over exports, and eliminating export subsidies. These reforms reduced
market price support and budgetary support to commercial farming.
As stated in the White Paper on Land Policy of 1997, land reform aimed to redress past injustices, foster
reconciliation and stability, support economic growth, improve household welfare, and alleviate poverty.
Key elements of the land reform included land restitution, land redistribution and land-tenure reform. The
land reform process is on-going and further legislative regulations have been submitted to facilitate the
acceleration of the land reform process: 13.22 million hectares (or 17% of land used for agriculture) has
been transferred away from white landowners (this includes restitution, redistribution, private transactions,
and State procurement) by 2020 (Sihlobo and Kirsten, 2021[1]). Of this, 3.08 million hectares have been
transferred to the state and 10.14 million hectares have been transferred to black owners. In several
instances, communities elected to receive financial compensation where land was successfully identified
for restitution (2.34 million hectares in addition to the transferred land). Since it started, the land reform has
been accompanied by agriculture support exclusively targeting black smallholders and emerging producers
(mainly provided within the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, CASP). These include
subsidies for variable and fixed input credit and financial support, extension, marketing, and training
services (Table 24.2).
Table 24.2. South Africa: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to mid-1990s
Closed economy under the apartheid
regime
Large subsidies for commercial agricultural producers
Import controls; export subsidies for agricultural products
Price and production controls under the Agricultural Marketing Act of
1937
Mid-1990s-present
Post-apartheid period; democratic
government; market deregulation and trade
liberalisation
Land redistribution; emphasis on black
small-scale producers’ development
Marketing of Agricultural Products Act (1996) brings market deregulation
and trade liberalisation
WTO accession
Agricultural tariffs replace import controls
Import tariffs applied to sugar and livestock products (except eggs), with
tariff-free imports of maize (since 2007) and wheat (since 2021)
Land restitution and redistribution
Land reform-related programmes supporting black smallholder farmers:
- Increased spending to finance the land reform process
- Direct support targeting black smallholders
Support to farmers has been decreasing as a share of gross farm receipts (with some year-to-year
variation) during 1995–2007 because of policy reforms and deregulation of the market. Since then, support
has tended to stabilise at a relatively low level, around 4% of gross farm receipts. Market price support is
the main component of support, provided mainly to sugar (Figure 24.4). Budgetary support to producers,
mostly input subsidies, is targeted to black smallholders. Budgetary expenditures on general services to
the sector are increasing and spent mainly on knowledge transfer and infrastructure.


542 

Figure 24.4. South Africa: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1994 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The current system has no domestic market support interventions or export subsidies. Border measures,
applied on Southern African Customs Union (SACU1) common borders, are the only price support policy
for all commodities except sugar (see Sugar Agreement below).
Import protection for agricultural and food products is based on specific and ad valorem tariffs applied at
the SACU level. The average applied Most Favoured Nation (MFN) tariff for agricultural products is 8.8%,
well below the average bound tariff on agricultural products of 39% (WTO, 2022[2]). Tariff rate quotas
(TRQs) exist for a range of agricultural products under the WTO minimum market access commitments.2
The zero import-tariff for maize applies since 2007. No tariffs have been levied on wheat imports since July
2021.
The Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development (DALRRD) has an ongoing
commitment to build sustainable rural livelihoods. As part of this commitment the Agricultural Land Holding
Account (ALHA) was established in terms of the Provision of Land and Assistance Act, 1993 (Act No. 126
of 1993). Through the ALHA the state can proactively and legally target and acquire land using funds
appropriated by parliament and use this to meet the demand or need for land. Over the medium term, the
entity aims to acquire 110 850 hectares of strategically located land, of which 50% is set to be allocated to
women, 40% to young people, and 10% to people with disabilities.
The Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme (CASP) was set up to assist new beneficiaries of
Land reform to access credit and means of support from commercial banks and the government-owned
Land and Development Bank. The CASP focuses on providing on- and off-farm infrastructure and
South Africa - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-5
0
5
10
15
20


 543

production inputs; capacity building; marketing and business development support; advisory services;
regulatory services; and financial services.
The Micro Agricultural Financial Institutions of South Africa (MAFISA) provides financial services to
smallholders in the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sector. The objective of the scheme is to address the
financial services needs of smallholders. Services provided through the scheme include production loans,
the facilitation of savings by MAFISA clients, and capacity building for member-owned financial institutions
(intermediaries).
South Africa is a founding member of the SACU, a full customs union with a common external tariff. In
1994, South Africa became a member of the Southern African Development Community (SADC3). From
2012, the SADC free trade agreement (FTA) was fully implemented. Trade between South Africa and the
European Union takes place under the SADC-EU Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) regime. This is
a free trade agreement between the SADC EPA States (comprised of all SACU Member States plus
Mozambique) and the European Union. The most important benefit for South Africa is the enhanced market
access for agricultural products such as sugar, wine, some dairy products, flowers, fruits and nuts as well
as their preparations. The Agreement has contributed to an increase in South Africa’s exports of
agricultural products to the European Union in recent years.
Other free trade agreements relevant to agriculture include the SACU-EFTA FTA, a free trade agreement
between members of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and the SACU which came into force
in 2008, and the SACU and Mercosur Preferential Trade Agreement (PTA) which came into force in 2016.
Trade between South Africa and the UK is currently taking place under the SACUM-UK EPA following the
departure of the UK from the EU. The UK is a significant trading partner for SA in terms of agriculture. The
SACUM-UK EPA is a replicate of the SADC-EU EPA in terms of market access commitments except for
few provisions that were modified during negotiations. Some important benefits for South Africa include
enhanced market access for wines and sugar into the UK.
South Africa is also a beneficiary of the US African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), a non-reciprocal
trade preference programme that grants eligible Sub-Saharan African countries duty-free, quota-free
(DFQF) access to the United States for selected export products. AGOA was enacted in 2000 for eight
years. The Act has been extended twice and is now in place until 2025. AGOA affects in particular exports
of wine, macadamia nuts and oranges.
South Africa committed to restricting its economy-wide greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to 350-
420 MtCO2eq in in its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), updated in September 2021. This
represents a 12-32% reduction in its GHG emission targets for 2030 contained in its first NDC submitted
in 2015. Total GHG emissions in South Africa amounted to 447 MtCO2eq in 2020 (including FOLU), and
agriculture contributed 9.0% of these between 2000 and 2020 (Department of Forestry, Fisheries & the
Environment, 2022[3]).
Neither the original or updated NDC sets sector-specific targets, nor do they commit to a carbon neutrality
goal.
The Carbon Tax Act is an integral part of government policy on climate change and will be implemented
in three phases. The carbon tax rate since January 2022 was ZAR 144 (USD 8.80) per tonne carbon
dioxide equivalent (tCO₂eq) and is set to increase to reach USD 30/tCO₂eq by 2030. Carbon Taxes do not
currently apply to agricultural emissions.
If it is passed into law, the Climate Change Bill that was introduced to Parliament in February 2022, and is
currently with the Portfolio Committee on Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment, will serve as the legal
framework for action on climate change to move to a net-zero emissions economy by 2050. It will establish
sectoral emission targets, including for agriculture.


544 

Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
Agriculture in South Africa is particularly vulnerable to drought, and all municipalities experienced droughts
in the past 30 years (Meza et al., 2021[4]), which are anticipated to worsen along with other natural disasters
such as floods and storms due to climate change (World Bank, 2023[5]). In 2018, DALRRD approved the
Climate Smart Agriculture Strategic Framework (2018). The framework outlines Climate Smart Agriculture
(CSA) measures to combat problems that relate to climate change facing South Africa’s agricultural sector.
Sector responses developed by DALRRD include climate-change adaptation and mitigation programmes
focusing on enhancing the resilience of farmers, food and agricultural production systems, and reducing
agricultural GHG emissions while ensuring national food security.
The process includes: (1) guidelines developed for the implementation of agricultural policies, plans and
strategies by provinces to address climate change; and (2) climate-change adaptation and mitigation
programmes developed to implement sector policies, plans, and strategies. Relevant programmes for
adaptation include the promotion of food gardens outside of land classified as agricultural land or farmland,
promotion of urban agriculture, and provincial committees to assist in the implementation of an early-
warning system.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
The National Assembly (NA) passed the Expropriation Bill in September 2022 to repeal the existing
Expropriation Act of 1975 and to provide a framework that is aligned with the Constitution. It is intended to
guide the processes and procedures for the expropriation of property by organs of state. Furthermore, it is
intended to provide for expropriation with nil compensation in certain circumstances, which may be
appropriate in the public interest. Special circumstances include, amongst others, abandoned land, state
land, or land held for speculative purposes. The bill is pending passaged by the National Council of
Provinces (NCOP). If it is passed by the NCOP, the bill will be signed into law by the president.
The Expropriation Bill is separate from the attempt to amend the South African Constitution to allow for the
expropriation of land without compensation for the purposes of land reform. The key difference is that the
Expropriation Bill is not aimed exclusively at expropriating property or land for land reform, but its objectives
are for the expropriation broadly of property including land for a public purpose or in the interest of the
public, such as for building infrastructure, industrial development, etc.
The national budget item on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development (Vote 29), passed into law
by the National Assembly in 2022, provides DALRRD with resources and a mandate to develop agricultural
value chains, provide agricultural inputs, increase equitable access to land, and facilitate rural
development. The 2022-23 financial year Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) budget allocation
is ZAR 17.287 billion (USD 1.056 billion) and is expected to increase to ZAR 18.168 billion
(USD 1.11 billion) by 2024-25. Noteworthy developments include:
•
DALRRD’s plans to employ 10 000 extension officers aimed to a five-fold improvement in the ratio
of extension officers to farmers at an expected cost of ZAR 936 million (USD 57.18 million) through
the comprehensive agricultural support programme grant.
•
Upgrading of the 21 municipal fresh produce markets across the country and revitalise 5 irrigation
schemes at a cost of ZAR 2.1 billion (USD 128.28 million) through the Rural Infrastructure
Development subprogramme in the Rural Development programme.
•
Acquiring 130 687 hectares of productive land at an estimated cost of ZAR 3 billion
(USD 183.26 million) as part of its Food Security, Land Reform and Restitution programme
(Treasury, 2022[6]).
In May 2022 the Agriculture and Agro-processing Masterplan (AAMP) was signed by the Minister of
DALRRD and sector stakeholders. The plan has the following intervention pillars:


 545

•
resolving policy ambiguities and creating an investment friendly environment
•
investing in and maintaining an enabling infrastructure critical to industry
•
providing comprehensive farmer support
•
improving food security
•
facilitating market expansion and promoting trade
•
Increasing local production and reducing reliance on imports.
On 24 October 2022, a ZAR 3.2 billion (USD 195.48 million) Blended Finance Scheme was launched by
DALRRD with Lank Bank to assist farmers. The dual-funding scheme (loan and grant) is intended to assist
for a ten-year period in alignment with the Agriculture and Agro-processing Master Plan (AAMP). It is
envisaged that DALRRD and Land Bank each invest ZAR 325 million (USD 19.46 million) per annum over
the next three years to grow the fund to ZAR 1.95 billion (USD 119.12 million). The objective of the fund is
to support the land and agrarian reform initiatives by assisting qualifying black producers to acquire and
develop land and expand production. The value chains that will be targeted include fruits, nuts, vegetables,
grains, sugarcane, poultry and red meat (South African Government, 2022[7]).
The Department of Science and Innovation (DSI) and DALRRD launched the National Biosecurity Hub
in October 2022. The National Biosecurity Hub forms part of the DSI’s Agricultural Bioeconomy Innovation
Partnership Programme. The programme seeks to enable collaboration towards the system of innovation
to support the prevention, reduction and management of crop and animal diseases. DALRRDs MTEF
allocation, as part of its Agricultural Production, Biosecurity and Resources Management programme, is
ZAR 1.3 billion (USD 79.41 million) to strengthen biosecurity, sanitary and phytosanitary standards for
agricultural products.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
The customs duty on sugar was adjusted two times during 2022, first from 414.85c/kg (USD 25.34) to
299.46c/kg (around USD 18.29) in June 2022, and again to 195.28c/kg (USD 11.93) in August 2022.
Safeguard duties, which have been applied to all EU countries since 2018, expired entirely in March 2022.
Anti-dumping duties on bone-in poultry meat from Brazil, Denmark, Ireland, Poland, and Spain, were
suspended by the Minister of Trade, Industry and Competition in August 2022 for twelve months.
A tariff rebate is in place, rebating the full anti-dumping duties on the importation of frozen bone-in cuts of
chicken meat, imported from or originating in the United States. In 2023 an import tariff rate quota (TRQ)
of 71 290 tonnes was set, which is free of the anti-dumping duty of ZAR 9.40/kg (USD 0.57/kg).
South Africa ratified the African Continental Free Trade Agreement (AfCFTA). The African Union (AU)
Heads of State and Government decided that preferential trade should start on 1 January 2021. Practical
trade was planned to take place during 2022 once outstanding issues mainly on finalising the Rules of
Origin, were concluded. On 25 February 2023 SACU finalised its outstanding tariff offer to the AfCFTA.
Negotiations to finalise remaining work continued as part of the Built-in Agenda. South Africa has already
published new tariff rates through the South African Customs and Excise that applies under this agreement.
Contextual information
South Africa has the most industrialised and diversified economy in Africa, and the second largest economy
(after Nigeria) on the African continent. With the largest GDP per capita of the continent, it ranks as an
upper middle-income country. However, income inequality is high and widespread poverty persists.
The importance of agriculture in the economy is relatively low, contributing 3% of GDP, although it makes
a more important contribution to employment (Table 24.3). South Africa has abundant agricultural land,


546 

but only 12% of it is arable, while the remaining agricultural area is mostly semi-arid pastures with extensive
livestock production. The farm structure is highly dualistic, with a well-developed and market-oriented
sector of large-scale commercial farms and a large number of smallholder farms.
Table 24.3. South Africa: Contextual indicators

South Africa
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
382
869
1.0%
0.7%
Population (million)
44
59
1.0%
1.1%
Land area (thousand km2)
1 213
1 213
1.5%
1.5%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
98 125
96 341
3.3%
3.3%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
38
49
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
8 154
14 624
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
19.4
25.5
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
3.3
2.5
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)2
20.5
21.3
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
8.5
9.9
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.2
7.4
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
56
53
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
44
47
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
14
12
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
2. These figures are based on ILO modelled estimates and have a high degree of uncertainty.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; ILO and national data.
South Africa has experienced a relatively moderate inflation – below 5% in most recent years, but climbed
to 7% in 2022. However, a persistently high and increasing rate of unemployment remains an obstacle for
alleviating poverty. Real GDP growth has been declining since 2011 and dropped below to -6% in 2020,
in response to COVID-19 restrictions and impacts, before rebounding strongly in 2021 to 5% and then
slowing to just 1.7% in 2022 (Figure 24.5).


 547

Figure 24.5. South Africa: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
South Africa is consistently a net exporter of agro-food products (Figure 24.6). In 2021, the share of agro-
food exports in total exports was around 10%, while the share of agro-food imports was around 7% in 2021
(Table 24.3). The majority (57%) of agro-food exports are primary agricultural products, whereas around
three-quarters of agro-food imports are processed products (Figure 24.6).


548 

Figure 24.6. South Africa: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural output growth has been similar to the global average over the 2011-20 period, but driven
predominantly by increased use of intermediate inputs (Figure 24.7). This was not the case in the 1990s,
where annual TFP growth averaged 1.6%, however TFP growth has slowed significantly since then,
growing by only 0.4% per year during 2011-20, well below the world average (Table 24.4).
South Africa - Figure 6A. Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
South Africa - Figure 6B. Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
13
13
33
33
15
15
18
18
30
30
42
42
42
42
8
8
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 549

Phosphorus and nitrogen balances are very low and negative, respectively, and well below the OECD
average. Although agriculture uses most (58%) of abstracted water, only a few regions have irrigated land,
and water resources are scarce in most of the agricultural areas (Table 24.4). The livestock sector is
another important user of water in agriculture. Agriculture’s share in energy use has increased and remains
above the OECD average.
Figure 24.7. South Africa: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 24.4. South Africa: Productivity and environmental indicators

South Africa
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.6%
0.4%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
-6.3
-6.0
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
0.2
0.0
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.6
2.9
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
..
..
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
1.5
1.7
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
61.5
57.9
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
41.7
..
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.

South Africa - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
0.41%
0.41%
1.12%
1.12%
0.30%
0.30%
0.35%
0.35%
1.18%
1.18%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
South Africa
World
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%
2.5%


550 

References

Department of Forestry, Fisheries & the Environment (2022), National GHG Inventory Report,
South Africa 2000-2020,
https://www.dffe.gov.za/sites/default/files/reports/8nationalgreenhousegasreport2022.pdf.
[3]
Meza, L. et al. (2021), “Drought risk for agricultural systems in South Africa: Drivers, spatial
patterns, and implications for drought risk management”, Science of The Total Environment,
Vol. 2021, p. 149505, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.149505.
[4]
Oqubay, A., F. Tregenna and I. Valodia (eds.) (2021), Agriculture in South Africa. The Oxford
Handbook of the South African Economy,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780192894199.013.10.
[1]
South African Government (2022), Minister Thoko Didiza launches R3.2 billion Blended Finance
Scheme with Land Bank, https://www.gov.za/speeches/minister-didiza-launches-r32-billion-
blended-finance-scheme-land-bank-assist-farmers%C2%A0-24 (accessed on
10 January 2023).
[7]
Treasury (2022), Vote 29 Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development,
https://www.treasury.gov.za/documents/national%20budget/2022/ene/Vote%2029%20Agricul
ture,%20Land%20Reform%20and%20Rural%20Development.pdf (accessed on  2023).
[6]
World Bank (2023), Cliamte Change Knowledge Portal: For Development Practitioners and
Policy Makers, https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/south-africa/vulnerability
(accessed on 9 June 2023).
[5]
WTO (2022), Tariff profiles - ZA,
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/daily_update_e/tariff_profiles/ZA_e.pdf (accessed
on 19 February 2022).
[2]



Notes

1 The SACU members are: Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, Eswatini (former Swaziland) and South Africa.
2 TRQ's are allocated based on historical trade as specified under each TRQ. If the TRQ's are unused by
1 September each year, then unused TRQ's are available to other member states. The establishment of a
permanent TRQ Management System at the SACU level is still in progress.
3 The SADC member countries are: Angola, Botswana, Democratic Republic of Congo, Lesotho,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Seychelles, South Africa, Eswatini, Tanzania,
Zambia and Zimbabwe.


 551

Support to agriculture
Since the 1980s, Switzerland has undertaken gradual reforms to liberalise agricultural trade, resulting in
moderate reductions in support to agriculture, which then plateaued in the early 2010s. Support to
producers as a share of gross farm receipts remains high at 49% on average in 2020-22, more than three
times the OECD average. However, changes in the structure of support have been pronounced, as direct
payments replaced a substantial share of market price support (MPS).
MPS remains the main component of support, arising mostly from tariff rate quotas (TRQs) with high out-
of-quota tariffs. MPS represented 86% of total producer support in 1986-88, but decreased since to about
40%. Domestic prices were 46% above world prices on average in 2020-22. Large price gaps lead to
substantial shares of Single Commodity Transfers (SCT) in commodity gross farm receipts for many
products – notably poultry, eggs, and pig meat – while sugar benefits from direct budgetary support.
Switzerland provides significant direct payments to farms, almost all of which are subject to environmental
cross-compliance. Total payments to farmers have been relatively stable over the past 20 years at 28% of
gross farm receipts. The share of these payments in total support increased from 14% in 1986-88 to 60%
in recent years, following the phase down of MPS. Direct support was reformed in 2014 towards more
decoupling and mostly consists of area payments to agricultural land not tied to a specific commodity,
payments to maintain farming in less-favoured conditions, and payments to farmers who apply stronger
environmental or animal-welfare-related practices.
Switzerland’s expenditures for general services (General Services Support Estimate, GSSE) are high.
GSSE relative to agricultural production value rose from below 6% in 2000-02 to nearly 9% in 2020-22,
among the highest of countries covered in this report. Almost half of GSSE expenditure goes to the
agricultural knowledge and innovation system. Total support to agriculture (Total Support Estimate, TSE)
fell as a share of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) from 2% in 2000-02 to less than 1% in 2020-22.
Recent policy changes
The Federal Council published its report on the future orientation of agricultural policy in June 2022. It
responded to Parliament’s request to further analyse the food security and sustainability implications of
policy reform options, after the 2021 suspension of a first reform proposal (AP22+). The report proposes a
long-term strategy for Swiss agriculture and food systems to 2050, structured around food-supply
resilience, climate, environment- and animal-friendly food production, value-added creation, and healthy
and sustainable consumption.
To start implementing this plan, new water-quality measures approved by the Federal Council in April 2022
came into force on 1 January 2023. These include a ban on high-risk pesticides, more-restrictive spraying
rules, and adjustments in direct payments to disincentivise pesticide use, supporting the goal to reduce
the risks associated to the use of pesticides by 50% by 2027. Additional measures were approved,
tightening fertiliser application rules and allocating 3.5% of cropland area to the promotion of biodiversity.
25 Switzerland


552 

Entry into force of these latter measures was postponed to 2024 due to the Russian war of aggression
against Ukraine.
Switzerland implemented measures to ensure its supply of nitrogen fertilisers, in response to various
crises, among which the COVID-19 pandemic, the high energy prices, and later the war in Ukraine. As of
December 2021, the Confederation had released 20% of its strategic reserve of nitrogen fertilisers in
response to early supply difficulties in international markets, which corresponds to 8% of annual national
need. Tariffs on feedstuff were also lowered in reaction to high grain prices, whereas sanctions similar to
those of the European Union targeted fertiliser imports from Russia, without substantial impact on Swiss
production.
In winter 2022 and spring 2023, Switzerland’s Parliament approved new socioeconomic measures initially
part of the AP22+ package, including federal support to crop-insurance schemes. This evolution is in line
with the Adaptation Action Plan for 2020-25, which defines a series of measures for agriculture.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Switzerland is now implementing its second climate-change adaptation plan, including detailed
measures on agriculture, which illustrates the commitment for climate action in that area. Large
investments in research and innovation – including adapting breeds and practices, and better
monitoring climate and natural resources – provide a strong basis for adapting to future climate
changes and reinforce the sector’s resilience.
•
At the same time, successive political reversals in past years – notably rejection of the revised CO2
Act by referendum and postponement of agricultural reform AP22+ in 2021 – have delayed
concrete climate action and the necessary transformations to food and agriculture. New legislative
proposals will have to demonstrate the capacity of the country to align the sector with long-term
objectives in a timely manner.
•
While Switzerland reduced its share of most-distorting producer support over the past decades,
border measures and output-based payments remain among the highest in the OECD. Continuing
efforts to decouple income support from farm output would decrease pressure on food prices and
the environment, and facilitate adaptation in the sector consistent with its food-system objectives.
•
High level of support to the agricultural knowledge and innovation system has not translated into
increased total factor productivity. Further investments in improving the resource-efficiency of
production would support environmental and climate goals.
•
Large payments allocated to environmental preservation have helped reduce environmental
pressures, but the nitrogen surplus is still twice the OECD average. The new clean-water
programme should support further reduction in fertiliser application, but stronger regulatory efforts
may be needed to address this structural issue in the long run.
•
The sector must reconsider its production mix to achieve its food security and sustainability
objectives, within a broader food systems perspective also encompassing consumers. Announced
climate targets for 2050 and the goals of the Global Methane Pledge will be difficult to meet without
reducing the ruminant herd. High levels of livestock production also increase the country’s reliance
on crop imports and are a major driver of observed nitrogen and phosphorus cycle imbalances.


 553

Figure 25.1. Switzerland: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Switzerland - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Switzerland - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Switzerland - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
1
2
3
4
5
Switzerland - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
Switzerland - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%


554 

Figure 25.2. Switzerland: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 25.3. Switzerland: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.


%
Switzerland - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Border price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
Border price change decomposition
Change in producer price
PSE change decomposition
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Switzerland - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Barley
Maize
Rapeseed
Sugar
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Sheep meat
Eggs
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%


 555

Table 25.1. Switzerland: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
8 025
5 695
9 727
9 741
9 695
9 745
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
62.80
57.98
62.10
60.49
63.79
62.02
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
12 693
8 853
15 632
14 240
15 931
16 726
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
6 871
5 057
6 599
7 081
6 700
6 018
Support based on commodity output
5 966
3 363
3 176
3 670
3 192
2 666
Market Price Support1
5 939
3 145
2 770
3 274
2 775
2 261
Positive Market Price Support
5 939
3 145
2 770
3 274
2 775
2 261
Negative Market Price Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
27
218
406
396
418
406
Payments based on input use
358
126
150
150
158
141
Based on variable input use
289
67
71
71
73
70
with input constraints
0
14
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
46
53
79
79
86
71
with input constraints
0
0
41
42
47
34
Based on on-farm services
23
6
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
392
564
1 069
1 060
1 094
1 053
Based on Receipts / Income
10
0
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
382
564
1 069
1 060
1 094
1 053
with input constraints
217
540
1 020
1 008
1 044
1 007
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
18
51
1 114
1 111
1 142
1 089
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
774
69
85
68
56
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
774
69
85
68
56
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
58
771
759
790
764
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
58
771
759
790
764
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
137
120
250
245
255
248
Percentage PSE (%)
76.60
66.44
48.65
52.27
49.19
44.57
Producer NPC (coeff.)
4.41
2.44
1.46
1.58
1.47
1.36
Producer NAC (coeff.)
4.27
2.98
1.95
2.10
1.97
1.80
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
431
337
849
836
870
840
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
110
70
409
404
421
401
Inspection and control
9
24
11
11
12
11
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
80
54
90
86
92
91
Marketing and promotion
29
37
67
66
69
66
Cost of public stockholding
66
32
51
49
50
54
Miscellaneous
137
120
221
220
226
217
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
5.41
6.09
11.39
10.54
11.49
12.24
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-9 012
-5 034
-4 551
-4 967
-4 596
-4 088
Transfers to producers from consumers
-6 065
-3 245
-2 789
-3 312
-2 786
-2 269
Other transfers from consumers
-3 788
-1 986
-1 782
-1 703
-1 821
-1 823
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
700
147
9
19
5
4
Excess feed cost
141
50
12
29
6
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-75.00
-57.83
-29.10
-34.93
-28.86
-24.45
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
4.44
2.44
1.41
1.54
1.41
1.32
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
4.00
2.37
1.41
1.54
1.41
1.32
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
8 002
5 541
7 458
7 936
7 575
6 862
Transfers from consumers
9 853
5 231
4 572
5 015
4 607
4 092
Transfers from taxpayers
1 937
2 296
4 668
4 623
4 789
4 593
Budget revenues
-3 788
-1 986
-1 782
-1 703
-1 821
-1 823
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
4.18
1.90
0.95
1.07
0.95
0.85
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
2 063
2 396
4 688
4 662
4 800
4 601
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.08
0.82
0.60
0.63
0.60
0.57
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
127
137
135
136
140
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
1.58
1.64
0.94
0.94
0.91
0.95
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Switzerland are: wheat, maize, barley, rapeseed,
sugar, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




556 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Until the early 1990s, Swiss agriculture was largely isolated from world markets, due to high trade barriers
and strong domestic market regulations. Substantial reforms of agricultural policy were implemented in the
mid-1990s and early 2000s. These were prompted by commitments made under the GATT and later the
WTO. There have been no systematic policy reforms since 2013, and current schemes are expected to
extend until at least 2025.
The reforms implemented between 1993 and 2003 had three main elements:
1. Reduced barriers to imports and greater transparency in border measures, gradual removal of
price guarantees and other market regulations, maintenance of production quotas for milk, and
introduction (in 1998) of new market regulations for sugar.
2. New direct payments less coupled to production, and voluntary ecological direct payments linked
to ecological services (1993-1998).
3. Cross-compliance requirements connecting almost all direct payments to proof of ecological
performance as of 1999.
Between 2004 and 2013, policy reforms were comparatively modest and focussed on deregulation of
agricultural markets. Export subsidies were phased out, and milk quotas were abandoned in 2009 even
though the market remained strongly regulated.
In 2013, a new Agricultural Policy framework for 2014-17 (AP 2014-17) reformed the system of payments
(OECD, 2015[1]). This framework was extended since then and is still in place today. The direct payment
scheme was modified under this reform to improve its efficiency and effectiveness and create links to
specific agricultural practices (OECD, 2017[2]).
Environmental modalities (regulations on pesticide and nutrient surpluses, cross-compliance requirements
and budgetary support to sustainable practices) have been tightened in the context of a new Agricultural
Policy framework (AP22+) preparation. Although the reform process was temporarily suspended, the future
orientation of the agricultural policy, published by the government in 2022, sets new milestones for the
reform in the coming decade, and some first environmental measures started to be implemented.
Table 25.2. Switzerland: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1993
Closed market
High border protection; regulated prices and interventions in domestic agricultural markets
Payments based on output and input use; commodity-specific area and headage payments
1993-1998
Reforms to open up markets
New system of direct
payments
Reduced import barriers; enhanced transparency
Reduction of export subsidies for some agricultural and processed products
Reduction of domestic market regulations except for milk (production quotas); introduction of
sugar production quotas and guaranteed prices
Creation of General Direct Payments, including:
- Complementary Direct Payments based on area (arable and grassland) and other
supplementary payments
- Payments for integrated production
- Payments for farming in difficult conditions
Introduction of Ecological Direct Payments as voluntary schemes based on environmental
services provided by farmers (biodiversity, landscape, animal welfare, etc.), and incentives for
more sustainable use of resources and pollution reduction
1999-2004
Continuation of reforms to
open up markets
Changes in the system of
Further gradual reduction of import barriers
Reform of the General Direct Payments; Complementary Direct Payments replaced by a
general Area Payment not requiring production of particular crops; introduction of a general


 557

Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
direct payments
payment for ruminants
Abolition of payments for integrated production
Introduction of environmental cross-compliance; all direct payments conditional to a proof of
ecological requirements
2005-2013
Abolition of export subsidies
Removal of production quotas
(dairy, sugar)
Further gradual reduction of import barriers
Abolition of export subsidies for primary agricultural products (2010)
Abolition of dairy quotas and related guarantee prices for milk (2009)
Abolition of sugar market regulations and introduction of area payments for sugar-beet to
compensate for related price reductions (2009)
2014-present
Reform of the general direct
payments
Reform of the system of General Direct Payments (2014)
Abolition of general area payments
Reallocation of payments related to specific agricultural practices
Introduction of transition payments to make the reform socially acceptable
Replacement of general headage payments to ruminants with area payments to pastures with
a minimum stocking density
Continuation of environmental cross-compliance conditions within the new system of
payments
Abolition of remaining export subsidies for some processed products (1 January 2019)
New payments to producers of commercial milk and grains to compensate for price
reductions due to the abolition of export subsidies for processed products (2019)
Support to farmers declined from close to 80% of gross farm receipts in the late 1980s but remained high
at 45% in 2022. Potentially most production- and trade-distorting support (mainly market price support)
also declined from around 80% to less than 40% of producer support between 1986 and 2022, while other
payments grew.
Figure 25.4. Switzerland: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Switzerland - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85


558 

Main policy instruments
Policy objectives
Swiss agricultural policy falls under the framework of the Agriculture Act (AgricA) from 1998, which
establishes the principles and instruments for the regulation of the sector. The AgricA aims to ensure that
agriculture is sustainable and innovative. It focuses on: 1) food security for the population; 2) conservation
of natural resources; 3) preserving cultivated landscape; 4) decentralised occupation of the territory; and
5) improving animal welfare.
The key elements of the AgricA have been enshrined in the Swiss Federal Constitution (Art. 104). In 2017
a referendum led to the adoption of a new article on food security (Art. 104a), emphasising the need to
guarantee the supply of food to the population through:
•
safeguarding the basis of agricultural production, especially land
•
adapting food production to local conditions and using natural resources efficiently
•
ensuring that the agriculture and food sector meet the market needs
•
building trade relationships that contribute to the sustainable development of the agriculture and
food sector
•
using food in a way that conserves natural resources.
The Constitution and the AgricA require securing sufficient long-term food supplies for the population,
based on both domestic production and imports and considering the entire value chain. This is achieved
through specific measures developed within four-year budget and programme cycles.
Budgetary support
The current support programmes are defined by the new agricultural budget for the period 2022-25
(AP 2022-25), which follows on the AP 2018-21 that covered the past four years. These plans are an
extension of the policy framework first established in 2014. The budget allocation for AP 2018-21 was 1.7%
lower in nominal terms than for AP 2014-17, whereas the new 2022-25 budget is 0.6% higher, compared
to AP 2018-21.
Budgetary support to agriculture consists of three main elements, including direct payments, production
and marketing expenditures, and support to improve the production base.
Direct payments to farmers target food security and environmental services (landscape, biodiversity,
sustainable use of resources) and animal welfare. These payments are subject to environmental cross-
compliance, with specific “ecological services requirements”.
Production and marketing expenditures mainly support dairy producers via three types of payments: (1) for
milk processing into cheese; (2) for milk production without silage feed; and (3) for milk and dairy product
sales from the farm (introduced in 2019). In addition, area payments apply to oilseeds, protein crops,
cereals (introduced in 2019) and sugar beet. Some expenditures under this heading are for general
services to the sector, including marketing and product promotion.
Policies to improve the production base include direct support to on-farm investments as well as general
support for infrastructure improvement, social aid to farmers, and advisory services. These payments were
first initiated as part of the AP 2014-17 policy framework.
Following the abolition of milk quotas in 2009, the inter-branch organisation for milk, l’Interprofession du
Lait (IP Lait), implemented standard milk delivery contracts for its members. These set different prices and
volumes for milk delivery (contingents A, B and C). These contracts became compulsory for all milk
producers in 2013, including those outside IP Lait. In effect, this replaced the previous production quota


 559

system with another production control mechanism implemented on a private basis. This scheme was
extended in 2021 by the Federal Council (Switzerland’s federal government).
Trade policy instruments
Agro-food imports to Switzerland are largely regulated by tariff rate quotas (TRQs) with relatively low in-
quota tariffs and high out-of-quota tariffs. TRQs cover meat, milk products, potatoes, fruits, vegetables,
bread cereals and wine. Since 1999, an auction system allocates some of the TRQs to traders. A notable
exception to the quota system is feed grains, which are subject to single tariffs. These are regularly
adjusted depending on market conditions to stabilise feed prices for the livestock sector.
Preferential tariff rates apply unilaterally to imports from developing countries under the general system of
preferences. The Swiss Government grants zero tariffs to all products from Least Developed Countries
(LDCs), so agricultural imports from LDCs (according to the official UN definition) are duty- and quota-free
since September 2009.
Export subsidies for primary agricultural products were eliminated by 1 January 2010. The remaining
export subsidies for some processed products were abolished as of 1 January 2019, following the Nairobi
agreement in 2015. To compensate the impacts of that reform, additional payments to producers for
commercial milk (Agriculture Act Art. 40) and grain (Agriculture Act Art. 55) were introduced.
Switzerland’s network of trade agreements consists of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA)
Convention, the Free Trade Agreement with the European Union and some 33 agreements concluded with
43 countries. All were signed within EFTA, with the exception of agreements with the People’s Republic of
China, Japan, the United Kingdom and the Faroe Islands.
Climate change mitigation in agriculture
Switzerland set the goal in 2019 to reach climate neutrality by 2050 and defined specific commitments for
emissions reductions in the agricultural sector. Though not legally binding, the Long-Term Strategy (LTS)
from 2021 targets 40% emission reduction for agriculture compared to 1990 by 2050.
The Climate Strategy for Agriculture of 2011 sets out action areas where specific mitigation objectives
could be set. These are in the livestock sector (breed, herd management, animal feed, animal building),
the crop sector (crop and variety type, management practices), fertiliser management (application rate,
storage and spreading), and energy consumption (building, machinery and renewable energy). AP22+ was
expected to develop actions in these areas but was suspended in 2021 following concerns by parliament
(details below).
The Climate Strategy for Agriculture has set an overall emissions reduction target by 2050 of two-thirds for
the food system as a whole, compared to 1990 levels. As part of the 2030 Sustainable Development
Strategy, a separate target defined in 2021 called for reducing the GHG emissions footprint of each food
consumer (including imported food) by 25% by 2030, based on 2020 levels.
Several measures support climate mitigation in agriculture:
•
A carbon tax on fossil fuels used to heat greenhouses and barns for livestock, as set out by the
2011 version of the CO2 Act. Following a public consultation in 2021, the level of this tax was
stabilised at CHF 120 (USD 126) per tonne CO2 as from 2022. Transportation fuels are not subject
to the carbon tax. Producers can opt out from the tax payment by submitting a long-term
decarbonisation plan for their installations.
•
A requirement for fossil fuel producers and importers to offset part of transport-related CO2
emissions through national emissions reductions projects. Domestic agricultural projects can
contribute to these with investments in anaerobic digesters or fertilisation improvements.


560 

•
New measures were also adopted in 2022-23, such as the new water quality plan setting a fertiliser
reduction target of 20% by 2030 and strengthened contributions to sustainable production systems
through soil fertility improvement measures, higher use of organic fertilisers and longer productive
lifetime for cows to reduce emissions per unit of output (see further below).
Initiatives are also in place to foster R&D, knowledge dissemination and innovation. These fund information
platforms, association initiatives for climate protection in agriculture, or development of sustainability
schemes.
Sustainable Development Goals
The Federal Council adopted in 2021 a 2030 Sustainable Development Strategy (SDS) and a related
action plan containing, among others, a revision of the Climate Strategy for Agriculture. The SDS identifies
three priority themes with specific objectives for 2030: Sustainable consumption and production; Climate,
energy and biodiversity; and Social equity. For the transformation towards sustainable food systems, four
targets were defined as part of the SDS Sustainable Consumption and Production theme:
•
A reduction of one-quarter in food GHG emissions footprint for Swiss consumer by 2030 compared
to 2020 (described earlier).
•
A share of one-third of total population with healthy and sustainable dietary patterns by 2030, in
line with the food pyramid (national dietary recommendations).1
•
A reduction of 50% in food waste per capita by 2030 compared to 2017, and a substantial reduction
in food losses along the supply chain.
•
An increase by one-third by 2030 in the share of farms exceeding the ecological services
requirements in a verifiable manner, compared to 2020.
In the context of the UN Food Systems Summit activities in 2021, Switzerland also set up a National
Pathway for Food Systems Transformation. This was done in co-ordination with stakeholders and is closely
integrated with the SDS. The Food Systems Summit Dialogues helped identify themes such as the
development of a coherent cross-sectoral food systems strategy; the promotion of food systems
transformation through awareness-raising and education; the reflection of the true cost of food in prices
and fairer distribution of added value along the chain of actors; and the promotion of research, innovation,
digitalisation and new technologies. These extra elements are to be addressed in a future revision of the
SDS action plan or other relevant policy instruments.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
Switzerland defined its climate-change adaptation strategy in March 2012, in a framework document from
the Federal Council that describes approaches to be adopted by each sector of the economy. A first set of
areas for action in agriculture had been identified in the 2011 Climate Strategy for Agriculture, and a revised
strategy is expected to be published in the course of 2023 to strengthen these elements and link them to
climate mitigation efforts.
Two successive action plans set out specific adaptation measures for each sector. The first of these
covered 2014-19 and had 63 sectoral and cross-sectoral measures. The second, released in 2020 for
2020-25, has 75 measures, including 46 from the previous plan.2 These documents clarify what actions to
undertake at federal, cantonal and communal levels, and lay out international collaboration channels to
support climate adaptation. Some measures target agriculture specifically, while others have indirect
implications in related domains (water management, biodiversity, human health, animal welfare).
Adaptation measures for agriculture, as defined in the successive adaptation plans, are organised around
the following axes: (1) adapting products, production systems, and production practices; (2) improving


 561

knowledge of adaptation possibilities; and (3) mitigating weather-related risks for production and prices.
Work started with the following action tracks:
•
optimised use of plants and suitable animal breeds, including pest management
•
enhanced use of land and water resources
•
data development for operations adapted to production sites
•
extension of monitoring and early-warning systems
•
analysis of opportunities to support private risk-management
Complementary actions with respect to water, soil, biodiversity, and human health can help agricultural
adaptation. Examples in the domain of water management are determining water needs better, reviewing
water-protection plans and management-planning tools, and developing improved drought-prediction
systems. The current action plan includes soil-protection measures that link to carbon-sequestration
objectives through a mapping of the state of Switzerland’s soils. Some measures related to biodiversity
protection include the restoration of peatlands and creating areas with shade (including on agricultural
land). Measures related to human health include protecting workers from high exposure to extreme heat,
ultraviolet radiation, and other extreme events. For animal health, measures are planned to monitor and
mitigate heat stress, as well as research on the emergence of new pests and diseases.
The Pilot Programme for Adaptation to Climate Change is an illustration of current federal efforts to support
the uptake of these measures by funding specific projects that test adaptation actions. The first phase of
the programme in 2013-17 funded 31 projects across Switzerland in the domains of water management,
prevention of natural disasters, ecosystems and land-use management, urban development, and research.
The second phase in 2018-20 funded 50 projects to analyse dairy-herd stress, ground-water management
and reservoirs for irrigation, and agricultural development planning.
Other federal programmes also indirectly support adaptation efforts in agriculture. The Agri-food Quality
and Sustainability Programme aims to increase the value-added and environmental and socioeconomic
sustainability of agricultural production. The programme funds up to half the costs related to a selected
innovative project. Similarly, the Sustainable Resource Management Programme (provision of Art. 77a
under AgricA) covers up to 80% of the cost of investments in optimising the use of resources such as
water, fertilisers, phytosanitary products, animal feed and drugs, and energy.
Adaptation strategies are also supported through public research activities. Agroscope’s 2022-25 research
programme conducts several activities to develop new plant production and animal husbandry systems,
and and animal varieties better adapted to the changing climate. This includes research on resource-
efficient and site-adapted cultivation methods and production systems for field crops and special crops;
new crop-breeding research based on genomic and phenotypic methods; and research on management
and production practices. The climate adaptation plans also include knowledge-development activities that
focus on regional climate-change scenarios for Switzerland, new hydrological data and scenarios for water
policy, research on hail forecasting, and broader risk assessment at national and regional levels.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
On 22 June 2022, the Federal Council published its report on the future orientation of the agricultural policy.
This report was published in response to requests from the two parliament chambers to examine in more
detail long term food security and sustainability challenges in advance of the AP22+ reform. Taking a broad
perspective encompassing production and consumption, the report proposes a long-term strategy for
Swiss agriculture and food systems around four axes: 1) ensuring food supply resilience; 2) encouraging
climate, environment and animal-friendly food production; 3) strengthening value-added creation; and
4) supporting a healthy and sustainable consumption. The report also provides a foresight for the Swiss


562 

agriculture and food systems by 2050, aiming at identifying the potential synergies and trade-offs between
the different objectives and targets, notably:
•
Supplying half of national food needs from diverse local production.
•
Increasing labour productivity by 50% relative to 2020.
•
Reducing GHG emissions from the agricultural sector by 40%, compared to 1990, and from food
consumption per capita by two-thirds compared to 2020.
•
Improving nutrients cycling to respect sustainability thresholds in water and the atmosphere.
•
Reducing food waste by 75% relative to 2020.
•
Ensuring a healthy and sustainable diet for all the population.
•
Championing innovation and adoption of environmentally friendly technologies.
To reach these objectives in Switzerland, the agricultural policy orientation report considers several lines
of action: i) stronger innovation capacity and know-how; ii) more efficient use of natural resources and
adaptation to local conditions; iii) more transparency and true cost accounting; iv) simplified policy
instruments.
The implementation of that strategy is planned in three steps. First, new water quality measures approved
in April 2022 by the Federal Council have come into force on 1 January 2023 and target the adverse
environmental impacts of fertilisers and pesticides. These measures include:
•
Pesticides with high potential risk have been banned, except when no better alternative exists.
Pesticide applications also must be more distant from rainwater collection spots. Direct payments
schemes were adjusted to support reduction in pesticide use. These steps aim to reduce the risks
associated to the use of pesticides by 50% by 2027, compared to the average level in 2012-15, to
better protect water and ecosystems,
•
The tolerance margin of 10% for measurement of manure application will no longer apply from
2024, meaning fertiliser inputs should remain below 100% of the land nutrient needs to respect
environmental cross-compliance for direct payments. In addition, farmers will have to dedicate
3.5% of their cropland area to the promotion of biodiversity. These new measures, initially aiming
to reduce nitrogen and phosphorus fertiliser losses by 20% by 2030, compared to the average
2014-16 level, and expected to enter into force in January 2023, were postponed to 2024 due to
the Russian aggression against Ukraine.
•
Producers will have the obligation as from 2024 to spread liquid farmyard manure using low-
emission methods. The regulation of storage and spreading of farmyard manure will be added to
the cross-compliance requirements.
•
In addition to new regulatory measures, sectors are also invited to take additional voluntary
measures to reduce fertiliser losses, in co-ordination with the Confederation. Mandatory reporting
on use of fertiliser, animal feed and phytosanitary products was introduced to increase
transparency on current practices and their impact on the environment and incentivize changes in
practices.
Second, the parliament adopted in winter 2022 and spring 2023 some direct payments adjustments
focused on socioeconomic provisions. The new measures include:
•
an improved social security cover for spouses and partners working on the farm
•
new contributions to reduce crop insurance premiums
•
the merging of the networking and landscape quality programmes
•
a restructuring of payments for the diversification of agricultural activities, as well as those limiting
the negative environmental impacts of agricultural production via new buildings, installations,
machinery and technological applications


 563

•
support to regulatory control of plant protection products via laboratory analyses.
Third, a new draft legislation of agricultural policy orientation was requested from the Federal Council by
2027 to embrace a food systems approach and include additional elements of agricultural policy reform.
Beside elements of reform driven by the agricultural policy orientation process, other policy adjustments
were undertaken to address more immediate needs. In February 2022, the parliament extended until 2026
temporary protections of the sugar sector and sugar beet production, through a modification to the AgricA.
Thus, the sector continues to benefit from a tariff protection of CHF 70 (USD 73) per tonne of sugar and a
support of CHF 2 100 (USD 2 200) per hectare of sugar beet, with an extra CHF 200 (USD 209) in the
case of organic farming or integrated production practices.
In May 2022, the Federal Council changed the legislation on “Swissness” labelling (food items entitled to
display the Swiss cross), which also defines the conditions under which exceptions were allowed. The list
of such products will no longer be maintained by the Confederation. As from 1 January 2023, the sector
itself determines and communicates what amount of primary ingredient should be sourced from
Switzerland to earn such labelling.
In November 2022, the amendment of 19 agricultural ordinances was adopted by the Federal Council,
most entering into force in 2023, among which:
•
New support for protein crops intended for human consumption, such as chickpeas and lentils, to
take account of the increased demand for plant-based food proteins and encourage the production
in Switzerland of such alternative food products.
•
New aid for the planting of robust varieties of grapes, stone fruits and pome fruits.
•
Modification of provisions related to summer pastures, with retroactive effect from 1 January 2022,
to secure the long-term exploitation of the mountain pastures. Farmers can now receive full
payments for summer pastures even if the increased presence of wolves forces them to remove
their herds prematurely from mountain pastures.
•
Softening of some provisions planned on water quality due to the international market situation.
The per area payments for security of food supply were reduced less than expected in 2023 and
set at CHF 700 (USD 733) per hectare. Furthermore, the four-year commitment period (2023-26)
for the two direct payment programmes for improving soil fertility was abolished and the
requirement to register for such programmes postponed by one year.
•
New premia to preserve Swiss breeds with “critical” or “threatened” status. This scheme replaces
the separate support for the Franches-Montagnes horse breed, while covering other Swiss breeds
as well.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
The Swiss Federation adopted on 4 March 2022 a first set of sanctions against Russia and started to take
domestic measures to adapt its agriculture and food system to the new international market situation.
The Confederation took measures to ensure supply of main inputs to agriculture, by releasing some of its
strategic reserves of fertiliser and fuel. In December 2021, prior to the war, the Federal Department of
Economic Affairs, Education and Research (EAER) had already decided to release 20% of its strategic
reserve of nitrogen fertilisers through 2022, in response to the supply difficulties in fertiliser markets
triggered by high energy prices. This corresponds to about 8% of the annual national needs. This measure
remained in force for all of 2022 to mitigate the adverse market effects of the war and ensure availability
of nitrogen fertiliser for crop production needs.
In response to concerns over food security, the 3.5% set-aside of cropland for promotion of biodiversity,
initially planned to enter into force in 2023, was postponed to 2024. A response plan was initiated for
preparedness of Swiss emergency food stocks (these stocks are usually directed to international


564 

assistance through the World Food Program). An energy saving information campaign was put in place
and preparatory work was done on a response plan to a potential nuclear accident in Ukraine, including
for its consequences on Swiss agriculture.
In June 2022, labelling rules for sunflower oil and sunflower lecithin were temporarily relaxed due to the
difficulties in these markets triggered by the war. These relaxed rules do not apply to other sunflower
ingredients or substitutes containing or sourced from genetically modified organisms.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
In November 2022, the Joint Committee on Agriculture related to the Agreement between the European
Union and the Swiss Confederation on trade in agricultural products mutually recognised some new
products’ designations of origin and geographical indications. This applied to specific charcuterie and
baked products from Switzerland and to 60 products from the European Union.
In February 2023, the Federal Council approved the negotiation mandate for the opening of discussion to
further develop the 2019 trade agreement between the Swiss Federation and the United Kingdom.
Negotiations are expected to start in 2023, conditional to the mandate approval by the relevant parliament
committees and the Conference of cantonal governments. The United Kingdom is among the ten most
important trade partners for the Swiss Federation.
Low milk production in 2022 created significant tensions in the domestic butter market. In response, the
tariff rate quota was expanded by 6 100 tonnes in 2022, through five successive decisions, to match the
40 000 tonnes domestic demand. For 2023, the TRQ was expanded by 3 000 tonnes.
Similarly, following the 25% decrease in the domestic production of bread cereals to 304 000 tonnes, the
TRQ for these bread cereals was expanded from 40 000 tonnes to 110 000 tonnes in May 2022, and finally
set at 130 000 tonnes one month later.
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
On 8 March 2022, following the aggression of Russia on Ukraine and in response to its consequences on
agricultural commodity prices, the Swiss Confederation decided to reduce border protection measures for
animal feed imports. The decrease in tariff, which entered into force on 15 March 2022, was CHF 3
(USD 3.14) per 100 kg for wheat, barley, rye, triticale, maize grain and kibbled maize. For oats, the tariff
decrease was CHF 1 (USD 1.05) per 100 kg, which set it to zero. For oilseed meals and vegetable oils, no
tariffs were in place recently, as international prices are already higher than domestic ones. These tariffs
were gradually brought back to higher levels after May 2022 as world prices weakened.
On 27 April 2022, the Federal Council adopted sanctions similar to those of the European Union on imports
from Russia, targeting products of economic importance. In that context, import quotas were set on fertiliser
imports (1 710 tonnes for potash and 1 636 tonnes for other synthetic fertilisers compounds). Thanks to
the use of the fertiliser strategic reserves, these restrictions did not have any significant impacts on Swiss
crop production.
Contextual information
Switzerland is a small economy with high GDP per capita, that had experienced low and periodically
negative inflation until the 2022 global inflation surge with unemployment rates below 5% over the past
two decades. GDP growth has been stable at around 2% prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, and it returned
to pre-crisis levels in 2022, after a recovery period in 2021.


 565

The relative importance of agriculture in the Swiss economy is low, accounting for just 0.6% of GDP and
around 2% of employment. The farm structure is dominated by relatively small family farms. Hills and
mountain farming areas (including alpine summer pastures) are used for extensive milk and meat
production, while more concentrated pork and poultry production is located in valleys. Agricultural land
covers 36% of the country area and is composed mostly of grassland, with arable land representing only
10% of total area. Crop production has shifted away from traditional arable crops (grains, oilseeds) towards
an increasing production of fruits and vegetables over time.
Table 25.3. Switzerland: Contextual indicators

Switzerland
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
264
661
0.7%
0.5%
Population (million)
7
9
0.2%
0.2%
Land area (thousand km2)
40
40
0.05%
0.05%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
1 566
1 504
0.05%
0.05%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
180
218
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
36 350
75 951
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
29.2
43.2
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
1.1
0.6
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
4.8
2.2
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
2.7
2.9
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.9
4.8
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
50
41
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
50
59
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
26
27
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.


566 

Figure 25.5. Switzerland: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Switzerland has consistently been a net agro-food importer, with 4.8% of its total imports in 2021 being
agro-food products, compared to 2.9% of its exports.3 Swiss agro-food exports consist mostly of processed
products for final consumption (86% of total agro-food exports). This category also represents half of the
agro-food imports (Figure 25.6).


 567

Figure 25.6. Switzerland: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Total factor productivity (TFP) growth in agriculture has slowed significantly to close to zero between 2011
and 2020. However, both the use of intermediary inputs (-0.19%) and primary factor (-0.34%) decreased.
As a result, overall output has declined over that period.
Swiss agriculture is largely rain-fed. Swiss farmers irrigate only 3.3% of their agricultural land and the share
of agriculture in the country’s water abstraction (8%) is less than one-sixth of the OECD average. In
Switzerland - Figure 6A. Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Switzerland - Figure 6B. Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
7
14
14
2
17
17
86
86
49
49
5
5
20
20
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


568 

addition, the water stress indicator is well below the OECD average. Agriculture’s share of energy use
went down as well and is less than one-third of the OECD average. On the other hand, while nutrient
surpluses have declined moderately, the surplus of nitrogen (59 kg/ha for N) is still twice the OECD
average, which negatively impacts water quality and GHG emissions. Swiss agriculture emissions
amounted to 5.8 MtCO2eq in 2019 (13.3% of national emissions), not counting emissions from energy
consumption in agriculture, forestry and fisheries (0.6 MtCO2, i.e. 1.4%). This places the country above the
OECD average. While the LULUCF sector in Switzerland is a net sink, thanks to forest management
(-2.3 MtCO2 per year since 1990), cropland and grassland also emit together an average 0.7 MtCO2 (1.5%
of the national emissions) due to changes in soil carbon.
Figure 25.7. Switzerland: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Switzerland - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
0.09%
0.09%
1.12%
1.12%
-0.34%
-0.34%
0.35%
0.35%
-0.19%
-0.19%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Switzerland
World
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%


 569

Table 25.4. Switzerland: Productivity and environmental indicators

Switzerland
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.9%
0.1%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
63.0
59.4
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
2.8
3.5
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
0.6
0.6
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
11.3
13.3
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
2.8
3.3
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
..
8.0
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
4.9
3.8
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.

References

OECD (2017), “Reforming agricultural subsidies to support biodiversity in Switzerland: Country
Study”, OECD Environment Policy Papers, No. 8, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/53c0e549-en.
[2]
OECD (2015), OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Switzerland 2015, OECD Review of
Agricultural Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264168039-en.
[1]



Notes

1 This target is an intermediate milestone for a long-term ambition of the whole population adopting a
healthy and sustainable diet by 2050.
2 In 2020, the Swiss Government found that 14 of the 63 measures in the first adaptation plan were fully
completed, 28 were in advanced implementation, 19 were in the initial phase of implementation, and 2
were on hold.
3 Total imports and exports include here gold bars and other precious metals, coin, precious stones and
gems as well as works of art and antiques.


570 

Support to agriculture
Türkiye’s transfers to agricultural producers are near the OECD average at about 16% of gross farm
receipts in 2020-22, a decline from 25% in 2000-02. About 57% of support is market price support (MPS)
generated by tariffs, combined with reductions of exporters’ debts and equity injections to state enterprises.
While this is above the OECD average, the role of MPS has declined since 2000-02. Producer prices were
about 11% above border prices in 2020-22, primarily because of support for beef, poultry, eggs, and
sunflowers. Prices of other commodities are more aligned with border prices. Premium payments to
producers of specific commodities are also provided, and these combine with MPS to cause the share of
support considered most-distorting to be 86% in 2020-22, close to double the OECD average of 44%.
Other forms of support are area-based payments provided as crop insurance, and support to defray the
cost of diesel and fertiliser.
General support to the sector (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) was 4.3% of the value of
agricultural production in 2020-22, above the OECD average but down from 15.4% in 2000-02. However,
2000-02 had unusually high duty-loss payments due to a surge in inflation, and the current level more
closely reflects historical averages. The largest components of the GSSE are for development and
maintenance of infrastructure (mainly irrigation), and marketing and promotion (duty-loss payments and
equity injections). Total support to the sector (Total Support Estimate, TSE) was 1.6% of GDP in 2020-22.
This is less than the 3.9% in 2000-02 – reflecting a faster pace of overall economic growth compared to
the sector – but remains well above the OECD average.
Recent policy changes
State-supported agricultural insurance expanded in 2022 with the introduction of revenue-protection.
Producers affected by natural disasters are eligible for additional support and grants. Revenue-protection
insurance covers 70% of insured farm revenue against yield losses and
price variations.
The Department of Security of Supply was established in 2022 to follow national and international
production trends, and develop measures to secure supply of strategic agricultural products. The Supply
Security Monitoring System will be improved to support supply security in agricultural products.
As of 2022, diesel and fertiliser supports are delivered via a card issued by the Ziraat bank, which may
only be used for the purchase of diesel and fertiliser. This replaces a cash-based system for this per-
hectare payment. Interest-reduced agricultural credits through Ziraat Bank and the Agricultural Credit
Cooperative were also modified. Farmers can get zero-interest credit from Ziraat Bank for traditional
(widespread) crop production up to TRY 200 000 (USD 12 077), but they must use any borrowing above
TRY 100 000 (USD 6 038) only to purchase diesel or fertiliser.
Türkiye eliminated the export subsidy entitlements for agriculture products or groups of products as of the
end of 2022 in accordance with the Nairobi Ministerial Decision on Export Competition.
26 Türkiye


 571

Support levels in most budgetary programmes increased by varying degrees, in the context of rising
consumer price inflation.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Agriculture in Türkiye is affected by climate change, with the sector expected to face increasing
aridity and frequency of droughts. Efforts to implement water pricing for users are helping increase
water-use efficiency, but on-farm awareness, preparedness, and adaptation to drought risks are
key to reduce farming communities’ vulnerability and build agricultural resilience. Targeted training
programmes and extension services can inform farmers about the use of efficient irrigation
techniques and drought-adapted farming practices.
•
Current policies aim to reduce the farm sector’s vulnerability to drought while encouraging the
production of water-intensive crops, which sends contradictory signals to farmers. Moving from
production-linked support for certain commodities to providing sector-wide services that enhance
the sector’s capacity to prepare, prevent, absorb, and reconstruct can help sustainable productivity
growth. This could include more support for research and development (R&D) of drought-resistant
varieties, encouraging the adoption of water-saving crop varieties, and providing education and
training to build on-farm capacities to adopt and implement drought-resilient management.
•
Agricultural policies (including MPS) strongly influence farmers’ production decisions, and state
enterprises are important in the product marketing system for certain commodities. Commodity-
specific support, self-sufficiency targets, and planned agricultural production should be replaced
by policies to improve the competitiveness, efficiency, and sustainability of production as part of a
holistic policy for the food supply-chain. Such reform would be of particular benefit to consumers,
who faced rapidly-increasing food prices in 2022.




572 

Figure 26.1. Türkiye: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Türkiye - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
10%
20%
30%
Türkiye - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Türkiye - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
Türkiye - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
Türkiye - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%


 573

Figure 26.2. Türkiye: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency. The producer price change and the border price change
are not calculated when both negative and positive market price support (MPS) occur at the commodity level for the previous year. Note that
negative MPS estimates for livestock products may arise in cases of aligned product prices if there is positive MPS for feed commodities.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 26.3. Türkiye: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross receipts,
2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
Türkiye - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE change decomposition
0
25
50
75
100
125
Türkiye - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Barley
Maize
Sunflower
Sugar
Milk
Beef and veal
Poultry meat
Sheep meat
Eggs
Cotton
Potatoes
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%


574 

Table 26.1. Türkiye: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
18 343
22 169
58 050
52 251
53 410
68 491
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
55.00
71.38
84.52
79.81
87.87
85.89
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
15 837
22 577
64 562
56 854
62 502
74 329
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
4 304
6 045
10 884
13 995
8 957
9 699
Support based on commodity output
3 419
5 158
7 159
6 501
7 086
7 891
Market Price Support1
3 408
4 836
6 270
5 588
6 165
7 056
Positive Market Price Support
3 412
4 853
6 300
5 624
6 220
7 056
Negative Market Price Support
-3
-16
-30
-36
-55
0
Payments based on output
11
321
890
913
922
835
Payments based on input use
885
426
2 658
6 422
748
803
Based on variable input use
850
302
2 097
5 102
546
642
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
19
116
513
1 273
131
136
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
16
8
48
47
71
26
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
25
1 067
1 072
1 123
1 005
Based on Receipts / Income
0
0
203
210
176
224
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
25
863
862
948
780
with input constraints
0
0
49
54
48
44
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
436
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
436
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
22.73
25.54
16.09
23.07
15.94
13.63
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.23
1.29
1.11
1.12
1.14
1.10
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.29
1.34
1.19
1.30
1.19
1.16
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
333
3 507
2 226
1 076
1 952
3 650
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
67
29
48
64
47
34
Inspection and control
51
67
12
13
11
14
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
22
513
1 369
807
1 408
1 892
Marketing and promotion
95
2 888
796
192
486
1 710
Cost of public stockholding
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
99
11
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
7.39
36.34
20.14
7.14
17.89
27.34
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-3 032
-4 861
-5 071
-4 441
-6 068
-4 705
Transfers to producers from consumers
-3 027
-4 553
-4 594
-4 054
-5 033
-4 694
Other transfers from consumers
-49
-340
-738
-709
-1 494
-11
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
43
33
260
322
459
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-19.70
-21.12
-7.46
-7.81
-9.71
-6.33
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.25
1.27
1.08
1.09
1.12
1.07
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.25
1.27
1.08
1.08
1.11
1.07
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
4 637
9 552
13 110
15 071
10 909
13 349
Transfers from consumers
3 075
4 893
5 332
4 763
6 527
4 705
Transfers from taxpayers
1 611
4 999
8 516
11 017
5 876
8 655
Budget revenues
-49
-340
-738
-709
-1 494
-11
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
4.00
3.91
1.57
2.09
1.33
1.51
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
1 229
4 716
6 840
9 483
4 745
6 293
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.07
1.96
0.79
1.32
0.58
0.71
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
139 552
1 719 647
1 083 416
1 397 071
2 678 455
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
0.00
1.12
10.81
7.02
8.86
16.56
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Türkiye are: wheat, maize, barley, sunflower, sugar,
potatoes, tomatoes, grapes, apples, cotton, tobacco, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




 575

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Before 1980, an import substitution policy was in place in Türkiye and agriculture was tightly controlled to
meet policy objectives, which included maintaining stable grain prices, increasing yields and production and
developing exports. Some agricultural products were taxed while others received subsidies, but the sector
was a net payer to the government budget overall.
From the 1980s until 2000, the sector was a net beneficiary of support, directed towards import-competing
farm products. The main agricultural policy instruments were price support for crop products and input
subsidies. Programmes provided low-cost credit, agricultural chemicals, seeds, irrigation, and fertiliser.
Livestock production was supported mainly through border measures.
State enterprises managed intervention buying, in the form of State Economic Enterprises (SEEs) as
exclusive purchasers of grains, pulses, sugar, tobacco and tea; and Agricultural Sales Cooperative Unions
(ASCUs) responsible for horticultural crops, cotton, oilseeds, nuts, and olive oil. Support prices were
announced after planting, and farmers received payment a year or more after harvest and delivery. These
bodies also maintained stocks, executed exports, issued export licenses and distributed input subsidies.
After 2000, the country embarked on a process of structural reform as a condition for receiving macro-
economic stabilisation assistance from the IMF and World Bank. These reforms were carried out between
2001 and 2008 through the Agricultural Reform Implementation Project (ARIP). ARIP was intended to
improve efficiency in the agri-food sector by removing market distortions, and to contribute to fiscal
consolidation. Under ARIP, Turkish agricultural policy was oriented towards closer alignment with the
European Union’s Common Agricultural Policy.
Reforms after 2001 reduced the State’s role in setting prices, marketing, and trade of agri-food products.
SEEs and producer co-operatives were made independent to varying degrees and at different speeds, and
became more exposed to market conditions. Structural adjustment in agriculture was promoted through
aid to convert land to alternative production, or land consolidation, and with transition support and aid for
rural development. This period also saw a shift away from output and input subsidies towards direct income
support payments, although high border protection for agri-food products remained in place.
The first national Rural Development Strategy for 2007-2013 was adopted in 2006 as the basis of the EU
Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance Rural Development (IPARD-I). Within the framework of IPARD-I
EUR 1.045 billion (USD 1.28 billion) was paid to the beneficiaries. The IPARD-I was implemented in
42 provinces and resulted in
approximately EUR 2.3 billion (USD 2.81 billion) investment in
10 653 projects. The National Rural Development Strategy for 2014-2020 covering the IPARD-II period
was adopted in 2014. Türkiye launched the implementation of IPARD-II (2014-2020) with a budget of
EUR 1.04 billion (USD 1.27 billion).
Since 2010, production-linked payments were re-established for many products. Current agricultural
policies also include import tariffs, fixed purchasing prices, deficiency payments (income support
payments), insurance support, area-based payments and interest concessions. In addition, there is an
emphasis on infrastructure, particularly for irrigation, also connected to rural development objectives.
In accordance with the Nairobi Ministerial Decision on Export Competition, Türkiye eliminated the export
subsidy entitlements for agriculture products or groups of products as of the end of 2022.




576 

Table 26.2. Türkiye: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to
1980s
Closed economy (import substitution
regime)
High tariffs for border protection
Agricultural price controls
Input subsidies
Import controls by the State Economic Enterprises (SEE) which controlled agricultural marketing
and production
Agricultural Sales Co-operatives Unions (ASCU) and agricultural member cooperatives (ASC)
Agricultural Credit Cooperatives
State-owned Agricultural Bank
1980-
2010
Gradual reform to liberalise trade but
with agricultural protection
Agricultural Reform Implementation Project (ARIP) as a precondition of the World Bank and IMF
programmes
Privatisation of some SEEs and restructuring of ASCUs
Price-fixing by government discontinued for some products but remains for others
Gradual reduction of tariffs for some agricultural inputs and outputs
Progressively reduced role for ASCUs and ASC
Price controls continued
Product and input subsidies phased out
Introduction of Direct Income Support
Compensatory payments to cover the cost of switching from crops in excess supply
(e.g. hazelnuts and tobacco) to alternative activities (net imported products)
Introduction of agri-environmental policies and cadastral works
FTAs signed
2010-
present
Open market economy but with some
agricultural protection
Agricultural tariffs continue to be used
Export subsidies (up to the end of 2022)
Deficiency payments differentiated according to 945 agricultural basins throughout the country
Infrastructure investments increased
The PSE has been declining steadily as a percentage of gross farm receipts since the late 1990s, and now
is at historic lows. Exchange rate movements and domestic inflation have affected nominal rates of support,
but the policy situation is stable when expressed as a share of gross farm receipts (Figure 26.4).
Budgetary payments have grown in importance, starting with the move towards decoupled payments in
the early 2000s, and remained significant through successive reforms that changed their basis. Budgetary
support jumped in 2020 due to exceptional spending related to COVID-19, mainly for concessional loans
and interest concessions, but levels have since returned to the historical trend.


 577

Figure 26.4. Türkiye: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
The majority of support comes through market price support, consisting mainly of tariffs on imported
products, though depreciation of the Turkish Lira related to domestic inflation has reduced the prominence
of this form of support. Budgetary support comes through price-stabilising (deficiency) payments and area-
based payments linked to production characteristics. Purchases of inputs and marketing of major
commodities is handled through the state enterprises and collective marketing boards (SEEs and ACSUs),
which have price-setting power. Due to market conditions, there have been no purchases of inputs by SEEs
in 2022. Irrigation infrastructure is the main target of general support to the sector.
Until the end of 2022, export subsidies applied to 14 commodity groups, out of the 19 groups eligible under
Türkiye’s WTO commitments. These included processed fruit and vegetables, poultry meat and eggs.
Export subsidies were granted in the form of reductions of the exporters’ debts to public corporations (for
example, for taxes, and telecommunications or energy costs). Under the Nairobi agreement, these export
subsidies were phased out at the end of 2022. Production quotas apply at the farm level for sugar beet.
The Basin-Based Support Model (Havza Bazlı Destekleme Modeli) targets self-sufficiency in strategic
agricultural products and planned agricultural production. Agricultural areas are divided into 945 basins,
each identified with a set of strategic products that receives support in that basin. Deficiency payments are
set to raise the price of specific commodities to encourage a certain pattern of production according to the
government’s evaluation of environmental sustainability and economic suitability. R&D is targeted to
increase the yield and quality of local varieties. Basin- and product-based fertilisation and chemical
pesticide guides and plant-based water consumption guides are in place.
Türkiye - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40


578 

Some area-based payments directly come in support of specific commodities, as it is the case for instance
of hazelnut plantations. Some other payments are more oriented towards farming practices such as using
certified seeds or cultivating fodder crops. Farmers can also receive area payments for using certified
saplings, organic farming, using good agricultural practices and for the rehabilitation of olive groves.
State-supported agricultural insurance (TARSİM) comes through a public-private partnership where private
insurance companies deliver uniform policies to farmers. The state pays between 50% and 67% of the
total insurance premium on behalf of farmers.
Water management and irrigation
In the context of water management policy, Türkiye applies the EU Water Framework Directive, which calls
for River Basin Management Plans (RBMPs). These have been implemented for the 25 basins in Türkiye
by Basin Management Committees with the support of Water Management Coordination Committee and
Basin Management Central Committee working at national level. Water Management Coordination Boards,
Basin Committees (operating at basin level) and Provincial Water Management Coordination Boards
(operating at local level) develop strategies and plans to ensure inter-sectoral co-ordination and co-
operation, to adopt an Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) approach, to achieve national
targets and to fulfil international commitments.
To take a more participatory and holistic approach to managing water resources, a basin-based
management target has been adopted. This reflects a “planning-implementation-monitoring-supervision”
system. Several regulations have been issued to support this reform, and the legislative infrastructure
continues to be established. In this vein, “River Basin Protection Plans” for 25 river basins have been
completed. Out of 25 river basins, the River Basin Management Plan in 11 basins and the Sectoral Water
Allocation Plan in 7 basins have been completed. All River Basin Management and Sectoral Water
Allocation Plans are expected to be completed by 2028. Studies to determine the effects of climate change
on water resources and the effects of climate change on snowmelt and currents have been completed,
and the preparation process of flood and drought management plans is being carried out.
Sectoral Water Allocation Plans (SWAPs) are being prepared to manage water resources on a basin and
sub-basin basis. These will be followed up annually. These plans are designed to preserve water
resources, to ensure fair and balanced water distribution among the water user sectors, and to maximise
the benefit to be obtained from water use.
Infrastructure investments in irrigation continue to be a major policy focus. Investments support adoption
of advanced technology and modern irrigation systems. This includes pressurised piped irrigation systems
where transmission losses may be reduced by up to 35% for sprinkler irrigation and 65% in drip irrigation
compared to the open flow canal irrigation systems.
Within the framework of the “Rural Development Investments Support Program”, up to 50% grant support
is available for the installation of irrigation systems (drip or sprinkler). Approximately 330 000 producers were
supported by such grants and credit support, and pressurised irrigation systems were installed on a total
area of 1.12 million hectares by the end of 2021. Since 2003, the use of closed system irrigation projects
has been accelerated to reduce loss and leakage. By 2022, 32% of irrigated area used piped irrigation
networks, compared to 6% in 2003.
The “Regulation on Controlling Water Use in Irrigation Systems and Reducing Water Losses”, in place
since 2017, calls for measures be taken to increase irrigation efficiency to 55% by 2024. This regulation
sets out the procedures and principles regarding efficient use of irrigation water in irrigation systems, saving
water, reducing losses and preventing unauthorised use, and reducing irrigation water supply, distribution
and usage costs.


 579

Climate change mitigation
In the food and agriculture sector, the Strategic Plan of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (2019-
2023), the National Climate Change Action Plan (2012-2023) and the Research Master Plan (2021-2025)
of the General Directorate of Agricultural Research and Policies (GDARP) specifically support research
and innovation for net-zero carbon ambitions. Within the scope of the National Climate Change Action Plan
and in accordance with the targets in the title of Agriculture and Food Supply, research is being undertaken
to provide data for the greenhouse gas inventory of Türkiye and to measure and monitor the greenhouse
gases released into the atmosphere by agricultural activities.
Research on greenhouse gas emissions from animal production and fertiliser management is also
undertaken as part of GDARP to determine the greenhouse gas emissions from enteric and fertiliser-based
animal production systems. Studies are continuing for cattle, sheep, goat and chicken production in order
to determine the T-2 model of emission factors (EF) recommended by the IPCC (2019) that reflect national
conditions. Additionally, to provide information and data for Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry
Sector (LULUCF), a pilot research study in 2022 focussed on determining and modelling soil organic
carbon under different land use categories.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
Türkiye adopted the Green Deal Action Plan in 2021 with targets and actions to increase the sustainability
of agriculture. The Action Plan’s “Sustainable Agriculture” and “Tackling Climate Change” headings include
actions such as reductions in the use of pesticides, anti-microbials, and chemical fertilisers; developing
organic production; increasing renewable energy use in agriculture; reducing food loss; and sustainable
water use and reuse of wastewater. Developments for the year 2022 are reflected in the Yearly Report on
the Green Deal Action Plan.1
Presidential Circular No. 2022/8 on the Ecosystem-Based Adaptation Strategy to Climate Change for
Anatolian Steppe Ecosystems was published on 7 July 2022. Implementation of the strategy brings an
integrated approach to climate change in the management of agricultural, pasture, wetland, and forest
areas in agricultural production. The strategy will help the government improve understanding of this
approach in the Anatolian Steppes. Its objectives include:
•
creating resilience in the ecosystems affected and to-be-affected by climate change
•
making the agricultural economy and rural population resilient to climate change
•
integrating ecosystem-based adaptation studies with policy, planning, and decision mechanisms
to support climate-change adaptation strategies
•
developing a governance model in partnership with stakeholders
The 2023-27 Strategy and Action Plan for Combating Agricultural Drought (Türkiye tarimsal kuraklikla
mücadele stratejisi ve eylem plani) was announced in 2022. The action plan is designed to minimise the
effects of drought by increasing public awareness, involving all stakeholders in the process, planning
sustainable agricultural water use, taking necessary measures during periods when drought does not
occur, and implementing an effective combat programme during crisis periods. Priority will go to drought-
combatting activities that complement those to combat other disasters affecting the agricultural sector. The
issue will be handled with a holistic approach in economic, social, and environmental terms.
Actions taken under the plan are carried out based on drought severity according to defined thresholds.
These are: (1) pre-drought processes; (2) risk-assessment and management; and (3) crisis-assessment
and management. Provincial Drought Action Plans will be prepared based on these threshold levels. The
main activities foreseen are:
•
drought risk-prediction and crisis-management


580 

•
ensuring sustainable water supply
o
increasing storage capacity
o
improving infrastructure
o
collecting and reusing wastewater
o
managing groundwater
o
water-conserving land-use techniques
o
integrated water management
•
managing water demand
o
improved transmission systems for irrigation
o
using groundwater effectively
o
incentive programmes
o
accounting for drought in crop and livestock production policies
o
expanding greenhouse production
•
accelerating R&D and increasing extension and training
•
improving institutional capacity
The General Directorate of Agricultural Research and Policies co-ordinates research on climate-friendly
agriculture and the economical and sustainable use of soil and water resources. To set priorities for
adaptation work, a research project is looking at farmers’ and producers’ awareness of changing climatic
conditions and their resilience to climate change. This was initially in the Thrace and Aegean Regions
where agriculture is intense, but has expanded to all regions and continues as a national programme. A
guide using the results of this research will be published to assist farmers in adapting to changing climate
conditions.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
Production planning, insurance and assistance
Production planning is increasingly seen by the government of Türkiye as a tool to address issues such as
climate change, the pandemic process and the increase in food demand. Main priorities are to use natural
resources in an effective, efficient and sustainable manner, to increase production, quality and trade, to
ensure security of supply, to stabilise the income of producers, to protect public health and consumer
interests, to increase the competitiveness of the agriculture, food and forestry sector, and to take necessary
measures against climate change and its impacts.
For this purpose, the Department of Security of Supply was established in 2022 to follow national and
international developments, analyse the adequacy process of production and develop measures for
security of supply in strategic agricultural products. With the Supply Security Monitoring System to be
established within this scope, data collection, analysis, monitoring and decision support services in digital
environment will be improved to support efforts to ensure supply security in agricultural products.
Additional efforts were made in 2022 by the Ministry to advance the digital transformation of programme
delivery. The “Tarim Cebimde” mobile application was deployed, and producers have been provided with
access to the Farmer Registration System (ÇKS) applications and product notifications via the
e-government gate as of October 2022.
The scope of agricultural insurance was expanded in 2022 with the introduction of revenue protection
insurance. Producers affected by natural disasters are eligible for additional support and grants. Revenue
Protection Insurance covers 70% of insured farmer revenue against yield losses and
price variations. In


 581

2022, 3 million insurance policies were issued and TRY 4.8 billion (USD 289 million) of state insurance
premium support was provided.2 Revenue protection insurance was first piloted in the three districts of
Konya in 2021-22. As of October 2022 it is available in all districts of Konya. It will be available to all
producers across Türkiye as of October 2023.
The national action plan on Prevention, Reduction and Monitoring of Food Loss and Waste, established in
2020, continues to advance in its implementation, with 70% of planned actions completed and
881 000 pledges made by consumers to reduce food waste. Five guidelines were published on logistics,
food service sector, food retail sector, composting and consumers. As raising awareness activities are still
ongoing, focus on children is continuing with the help of FAO’s “Do Good Save Food” educational materials
translated to Turkish.
Domestic consumer price inflation in Türkiye reached 80% in 2022, and agricultural policies have adjusted
in some ways for this. For example, announced purchase prices for sugar beet, considered a strategic
commodity, were increased by 245% to TRY 1 450 (USD 88) per tonne.
The amount of support to be paid to farmers registered in the Farmer Registration System (ÇKS) and
located in areas where planting is prohibited due to “potato wart” disease has been increased to TRY 1 250
(USD 75) per ha from TRY 1 100 (USD 124 at 2021 exchange rates) previously. Farmers are eligible for
the payment if they grow alternative crops or leave fields fallow in areas where the disease is present.
Delivery of diesel and fertiliser supports as of 2022 are now delivered via a card issued by the Ziraat bank
that may only be used for the purchase of diesel and fertiliser. This replaces the previous cash-based
system for this per-hectare payment. Interest-reduced agricultural credits through Ziraat Bank and
Agricultural Credit Cooperative have also been modified. Farmers can get zero-interest credit loans from
the Ziraat Bank for traditional (widespread) crop production up to TRY 200 000 (USD 12 077), but if a
farmer borrows more than TRY 100 000 (USD 6 038) they must use the additional amount only for the
purchase of diesel or fertiliser.
Water management and irrigation
A pilot project was established for the use of solar power for irrigation in the Samsat district of the Adiyaman
province. A solar power plant was constructed to power the pumped irrigation infrastructure in that district.
This is in accordance with Türkiye’s strategy of “Reducing Foreign Dependence on Energy and Increasing
the Ratio of Renewable Energy Sources in Energy Distribution”. Also, irrigation unions and agricultural
producers have been given the opportunity to use loans with an upper limit of TRY 7.5 million
(USD 453 000) for solar energy investments with an interest rate discount of up to 100%.
Investigating the Use of Marginal Water in Agricultural Irrigation and Determining its Contribution to the
Circular Economy (MARSUDE) was launched in five different provinces in 2022. This programme has the
aim of contributing to the use of low-quality water in irrigation by investigating the possibilities and
conditions of using reclaimed water in agriculture.
Rural development
Externally funded rural development projects in rural disadvantaged areas were accelerated and support
to small family enterprises and income generating activities was increased. Grants and support were
provided through the Programme for Supporting Rural Development Investments (KKYDP), the European
Union Rural Development Programme (IPARD), the Project for Support and On-Site Development of
Forest Villages (ORKÖY), and Expert Hands in Rural Development Projects.
Support for economic investments targeting agriculture within the scope of rural development support and
rural economic infrastructure investments was increased in 2022. For support for “Economic Investments
in Agriculture”, the upper limits of the eligible project were increased from TRY 5 million (USD 564 000 at


582 

2021 exchange rate) to TRY 7 million (USD 423 000) for new applications. The amounts have been
increased from TRY 3.5 million (USD 395 000 at 2021 exchange rate) to TRY 5 million (USD 302 000) for
applications that complete existing projects and from TRY 3 million (USD 338 000 at 2021 exchange rate)
to TRY 4 million (USD 241 000) for applications related to capacity, technology renewal or modernisation.
The upper limit of support for rural economic infrastructure investments has been increased from
TRY 300 000 (USD 34 000 at 2021 exchange rates) to TRY 500 000 (USD 30 193), excluding VAT, for
applications for machinery and equipment purchases.
In addition, the “Implementation Principles of the Rural Development Investment Support Program for the
2022-2023 Application Period” were amended to include small family businesses engaged in animal
production. Enterprises with 5 to 50 cattle or 50 to 300 sheep or goats will be eligible for 50% grant support
for the purchase of feed preparation machines, manure scrapers, milking machines, milk cooling tanks,
animal scratch brushes, drinkers, air conditioning and ventilation systems, and electricity generation
systems up to 5 kW for transhumance and nomads.
The Financial Framework Partnership Agreement with the European Union, which constitutes the legal
infrastructure of support within the scope of the third period of the instrument for pre-accession assistance
covering the years 2021-27 (IPA III), entered into force on 14 December 2022. Part of this is the instrument
for pre-accession assistance for rural development (IPARD). The implementation of the IPARD III period
began in 2023. The EU IPARD funds allocated to develop the capacity for compliance and implementation
of the EU acquis in Türkiye and create the capacities for economic and social cohesion cover five
components: transition period support and institutional structuring, cross-border co-operation, regional
development, human resources development and rural development.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
In accordance with the Nairobi Ministerial Decision on Export Competition, Türkiye eliminated the export
subsidy entitlements for agriculture products or groups of products as of the end of 2022.
The average rate of customs duties applied in 2022 for basic agricultural products outside the Customs
Union Common External Tariff was 58%.3
In 2022, a revised free trade agreement (FTA) with Montenegro and amendment of the FTA with Morocco
came into force. The ratification processes of the FTA with Ukraine, and the United Arab Emirates; and
revised FTAs with Georgia and Malaysia are continuing. The Preferential Trade Agreement (PTA) with
Pakistan has entered into force on 1 May 2023 and the PTA with Uzbekistan (signed in 2022) on 1 July
2023. An Additional Protocol to extend the scope of the current concessions under the PTA with Azerbaijan
was signed on 14 April 2023.  FTA negotiations are actively ongoing with three countries: Japan, Thailand,
and Indonesia.
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
In July 2022, Türkiye, the UN, Russia, and Ukraine signed an agreement in Istanbul to resume grain
exports from three Ukrainian Black Sea ports, which were paused after the Russian invasion of Ukraine in
February 2022. A Joint Coordination Center with officials from the three countries and the UN was set up
in Istanbul to oversee the shipments.
The Decision on the “Principles to be Applied in the Import of Agricultural Products from Ukraine” (Decision
Number 5251) was published on 3 March 2022. This introduces exceptions to official controls in the import
or transit of agricultural products in order to ensure food supply security and to avoid problems in accessing
food products. The regulations introduced by the decision are as follows:
•
Official certificates and documents, which are required to be submitted to the Ministry of Agriculture
and Forestry within the scope of the Law No. 5996 on Veterinary Services, Plant Health, Food and


 583

Feed, in the import or transit trade of agricultural products loaded from Ukraine, will not be required
under certain circumstances.
•
The frequency of official controls by the Ministry will be determined based on risk analysis.
•
The Ministry’s General Directorate of Food and Control is authorised to make decisions in terms of
special situations that may arise.
The export of some agricultural and food products was temporarily banned or limited in certain cases due
to the war to ensure domestic supplies. Since February 2022, Türkiye has applied an export ban to more
than a dozen agricultural products, including vegetable oils, meat, pulses, and some dairy products. On
26 June 2022, the ban on butter exports was replaced with a monthly quota, and on 7 July the ban on olive
oil exports was removed. Export controls of most vegetable oils were lifted in August 2022.
Duty rate adjustments first put in place in response to the COVID-19 pandemic have been continued to
ensure food supply security and prevent price fluctuations. Pursuant to the decision published in the Official
Gazette on 31 December 2022, duty rates of 0% apply until 30 April 2023 for wheat, barley, oat, rye,
sorghum and corn and until 30 June 2023 for chickpeas, lentils and dry beans. These duty rates had been
45% for wheat, 35% for barley, 25% for maize, 130% for oats, rye and sorghum and 19.3% for chickpeas,
lentil and dry beans. As of 1 May 2023, customs duties for wheat, corn, barley, rye, sorghum and oats
were increased to 130%. Until 31 May 2023, the duty rate was reduced from 10% to 0% in the import of
crude sunflower seed oil and from 5% to 0% in the import of sunflower seeds. As of 1 June 2023 customs
duties for these products were increased to 36% and 27% respectively.
Contextual information
Türkiye has the 11th largest economy in the world as measured by GDP in PPP. Per capita GDP has tripled
since 2000 and is above average for the countries included in this report. Türkiye has a large agriculture
sector that employed 17% of the country's working population and accounted for 5.5% of GDP in 2021.
Türkiye is a net exporter of agro-food products, which accounted for 10.8% of all exports (Table 26.3).




584 

Table 26.3. Türkiye: Contextual indicators

Türkiye
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
609
2 581
1.5%
2.1%
Population (million)
64
84
1.5%
1.6%
Land area (thousand km2)
770
770
0.9%
0.9%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
40 479
37 762
1.3%
1.3%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
83
110
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
9 476
30 672
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
14.9
30.4
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
10.0
5.5
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
36.0
17.2
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
13.3
10.8
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
5.9
7.5
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
57
58
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
43
42
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
59
52
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
The economy has recovered fast from the COVID-19 pandemic. However, macroeconomic policies and
high commodity prices have contributed to a surge in inflation, which is now above 70% (and higher for
many agricultural commodities) (Figure 26.5). Rising food prices triggered by the pandemic and
subsequently Russia’s war against Ukraine contributed significantly to overall inflation. The labour market
is performing well and GDP growth was strong at around 6% in 2022.


 585

Figure 26.5. Türkiye: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Türkiye is a significant agricultural exporter of nuts, dried fruits, and some fresh vegetables; main export
destinations include the European Union, Iraq, the Russian Federation and the United States. Türkiye is a
major producer of wheat, sugar beets, milk, poultry, cotton, tomatoes and other fruits and vegetables, and
is the top producer in the world for apricots and hazelnuts as well as the largest global exporter of quinces
and raisins. Agricultural trade has been steadily increasing and Türkiye is a net exporter. Most imports are
products destined for further processing, while most exports are products for consumption (Figure 26.6).


586 

Figure 26.6. Türkiye: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural growth has been predominantly based on total factor productivity (TFP) growth and increased
use of inputs (Figure 26.7). Improved productivity may be connected to increased irrigated area, opening
more land to intensive production.
Türkiye - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Türkiye - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
20
20
26
26
8
52
52
38
38
11
11
34
34
10
10
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 587

Figure 26.7. Türkiye: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Agriculture uses about 85% of the freshwater abstracted by all sectors. Water stress is increasing and
above the OECD average (Table 26.4). Average precipitation is expected to decline because of climate
change, increasing stress on the hydrological system. Nitrogen and phosphorus balances have also been
increasing, and phosphorus balance is well above the OECD average due to intensive livestock production.
Agriculture represents 4.5% of energy use, below its share of GDP (5.5%), but it accounts for a relatively
high share of national GHG emissions (14%).
Table 26.4. Türkiye: Productivity and environmental indicators

Türkiye
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.9%
1.6%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
27.8
37.9
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
8.0
9.2
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
5.0
4.5
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
14.2
14.0
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
8.0
11.7
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
75.4
84.7
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
18.6
26.1
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.
Türkiye - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
1.57%
1.57%
1.12%
1.12%
-0.20%
-0.20%
0.35%
0.35%
1.25%
1.25%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Türkiye
World
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%


588 



Notes

1 https://ticaret.gov.tr/data/643ffd6a13b8767b208ca8e4/YMEP%202022%20Faaliyet%20Raporu.pdf.
2 2022 TRY/USD exchange rate was 16.56, up from 8.86 in 2021. This should be borne in mind when
looking at year-on-year changes.
3 The Customs Union with Türkiye has been in force since 1995 and is based on the 1963 Ankara
Agreement and its Additional Protocol (1970) https://trade.ec.europa.eu/access-to-markets/en/content/eu-
turkiye-customs-union.


 589

Support to agriculture
Support to agricultural producers changed drastically in 2022 due to the large-scale military aggression of
Russia against Ukraine. Ukraine entered a period of martial law on 24 February 2022, under which much
state support for agriculture was diverted to security and defence. As a result, nearly all traditional support
programmes were suspended in 2022, although some measures were introduced to sustain agricultural
production during warfare. New measures included tax breaks, simplified regulatory procedures, and
temporary financial support in the form of subsidies.
Support to agricultural producers since 2011, measured by the Producer Support Estimate (PSE), had
hovered close to zero, with an average value of -0.4% of gross farm receipts during 2020-22. PSE is mostly
driven by Market Price Support (MPS), which was negative for much of the past two decades with average
producer prices below international reference levels. Due to tariff protection, domestic prices for sugar and
meat products are above international reference levels, while oats, sunflower, and milk are implicitly taxed.
Budgetary support to producers, mainly in the form of tax benefits and input support for short-term loans
and fixed-capital formation, represents less than 1% of gross farm receipts. MPS and payments for the
unconstrained use of variable inputs, which are Ukraine’s most production- and trade-distorting measures,
account for 85.2% of producer transfers.
Support for general services (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) averaged 0.6% of the value of
agricultural production in 2020-22, which is low compared to other countries covered in this report and
down from a 1.3% average in 2000-02. Most of this goes to inspection and control services, and agricultural
schools. Total support to the sector as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) fell from 0.4% in
2000-02 to 0.1% in 2020-22.
Recent policy changes
In accordance with the Presidential Decree in February 2022, Ukraine is under martial law due to the
large-scale military aggression of Russia. Martial law has affected all aspects of life, including the
functioning of the agricultural sector. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine (CMU) approved measures to
ensure the country’s food security by monitoring the state of food safety, ensuring uninterrupted production
of agricultural and food products, providing food products for long-term storage to the population of
territorial communities in active combat regions, forming a strategic storage network of raw materials and
food resources, creating opportunities for food self-sufficiency, meeting needs for imported components,
ensuring the fulfilment of domestic and export demand, and imposing export restrictions.
At the same time, CMU diverted UAH 4.4 billion (USD 136 million) of the state budget for 2022 from
agricultural support to security and defence whilst introducing some temporary tax breaks for enterprises
in the combat zone or in temporarily occupied territory that were exempted from paying environmental and
land taxes. In addition, the value-added tax (VAT) for fuel was reduced from 20% to 7% for all uses; and
27 Ukraine


590 

agricultural producers were exempted from paying VAT on goods destroyed in the war and those used for
the country’s defence.
Simplified regulatory requirements for producers and exporters were introduced to reduce the bureaucratic
burden on business and state authorities, and support the uninterrupted production of agricultural products.
Phytosanitary requirements for export and the state registration process for pesticides and agrochemicals
were eased and the list of agrochemicals that can be imported, produced, traded, and used without
registration was expanded.
The Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food (MAPF) began exercising functions and powers for forming and
implementing state policy for organic production, distribution, and labelling of organic products; safety and
individual quality indicators of food products; quarantine and plant protection; and veterinary medicine.
Under martial law, Ukrainian producers of organic products are permitted to switch from EU standards to
Ukrainian production standards without an additional transition period.
Assessment and recommendations
•
As one of the world’s leading producers and exporters of agricultural commodities, sustaining and
rebuilding Ukraine’s agricultural sector is essential for supporting the country’s economic recovery.
The sector faces challenges on multiple fronts, including:
o
economic stressors as costs of production have risen and traditional support programmes have
been suspended
o
disruptions in production and value chains due to temporary occupation of agricultural land,
mining and contamination of land by explosives, and a decrease in farm labour
o
disturbances in trade from the closure of ports and the destruction of critical infrastructure
Temporary support measures and longer-term efforts toward recovery should address each of
these to restore the sector and build the foundations for future growth.
•
Aid from international organisations, partner-country governments and the private sector has
largely focused on direct damage to Ukraine’s agricultural sector and land resources, estimated at
more than USD 8.7 billion as of April 2023, by demining farmlands, providing seeds, and investing
in the construction and repair of production facilities. However, the indirect toll of the war on
Ukrainian agriculture is estimated at nearly four times the direct costs, at USD 34.2 billion. Aid to
offset both direct and indirect costs could ensure the continuity of production and position the sector
for more-rapid recovery.
•
The suspension of nearly all producer-support programmes is likely to generate immediate and
long-term consequences for the structure and sustainability of the sector. As funding to restore
producer support becomes available, an opportunity exists to reform policy instruments for a more
sustainable agricultural sector that is resilient and adaptable in the face of shocks, including those
due to climate change.
•
There is evidence that efforts to protect international trade, such as the Black Sea Grain Initiative
and the suspension of trade barriers by key trading partners, have been effective, though the
volume of exports from Ukraine continues to fall. Effort should continue to reduce physical and
institutional barriers to trade, not only as a temporary measure but also to ensure recovery over
the medium to long term.


 591

Figure 27.1. Ukraine: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Ukraine - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
-0.5%
-0.25%
0%
0.25%
0.5%
Ukraine - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Ukraine - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
Ukraine - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.25%
0.5%
0.75%
1%
1.25%
1.5%
Ukraine - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.3%
0.4%
0.5%


592 

Figure 27.2. Ukraine: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.


Ukraine - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Oats
Rye
Sunflower
Sugar
Milk
Pig meat
Eggs
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%


 593

Table 27.1. Ukraine: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
9 619
39 530
34 579
50 143
33 867
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
86.77
82.62
84.74
85.70
77.42
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
8 841
25 734
24 112
30 786
22 304
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
36
-109
490
57
-875
Support based on commodity output
-432
-418
184
-271
-1 168
Market Price Support1
-548
-418
184
-271
-1 168
Positive Market Price Support
389
425
359
500
416
Negative Market Price Support
-937
-843
-175
-771
-1 584
Payments based on output
116
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
203
132
135
150
110
Based on variable input use
169
65
39
48
109
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
31
66
95
102
2
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
2
0
0
1
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
265
177
172
178
183
Based on Receipts / Income
265
150
160
158
133
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
27
12
20
50
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
0
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
0.37
-0.40
1.41
0.11
-2.56
Producer NPC (coeff.)
0.95
0.99
1.01
0.99
0.97
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.00
1.00
1.01
1.00
0.98
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
121
251
224
268
262
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
51
78
71
75
88
Inspection and control
26
159
141
177
160
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
36
3
2
5
2
Marketing and promotion
1
0
0
0
0
Cost of public stockholding
1
1
3
0
0
Miscellaneous
7
9
7
10
12
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
76.19
..
31.32
82.40
..
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
397
397
-192
279
1 105
Transfers to producers from consumers
490
411
-174
291
1 116
Other transfers from consumers
-38
-13
-17
-8
-13
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
-55
-1
-1
-4
1
Percentage CSE (%)
4.47
1.73
-0.80
0.91
4.95
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
0.95
0.98
1.01
0.99
0.95
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
0.96
0.98
1.01
0.99
0.95
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
157
142
714
325
-613
Transfers from consumers
-452
-398
191
-283
-1 103
Transfers from taxpayers
647
553
540
616
502
Budget revenues
-38
-13
-17
-8
-13
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.41
0.06
0.46
0.16
-0.48
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
705
560
530
596
554
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.83
0.35
0.34
0.30
0.44
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
1 766
1 569
1 962
..
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
5.38
28.86
26.96
27.29
32.34
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Ukraine are: wheat, maize, rye, barley, oats,
sunflower, sugar, potatoes, milk, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




594 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Prior to the 1990s, central planning regulated all sectors of Ukraine’s economy, including agriculture, as
part of the Soviet Union. The state administered prices and state enterprises controlled the production and
marketing of agricultural inputs and outputs as well as the processing and distribution of food. The first
reforms initiating a transition towards a market-based economy began at the end of the 1980s. A limited
right to private production was established for land leased from collective farms or individuals, enabling
the establishment of private family farms (von Cramon-Taubadel et al., 2008[1]).
An economic crisis in the early 1990s triggered a significant economic contraction and inflation that
impacted the agricultural sector and resulted in substantial reductions in agricultural output and
productivity. Consequently, several trade and price liberalisation policy reforms were reversed in the mid-
1990s. Renewed reforms in agribusiness privatisation and collective farm restructuring intensified only
after macroeconomic stabilisation in the 2000s (OECD/The World Bank, 2004[2]). While prior to the 1990s,
the state owned all land,1 today about three-quarters of agricultural land is private property
(StateGeoCadastre, 2017[3]).2
In 2005, the State Agrarian Fund was established as a state-owned public joint stock company
(reorganised in 2013). Its initial mandate was to regulate grain prices through intervention purchases, to
store grain in state-owned silos and sell it to bakeries to guarantee bread prices, and to provide loans to
grain producers. The fund progressively became involved in other activities, such as state purchases and
sales of a broad range of agricultural and food products; forward contracts; flour processing and
wholesaling; and sales of fuel and mineral fertilisers to producers (OECD, 2015[4]). In 2020, a new law “On
State Support of Agriculture of Ukraine”, did not mention the activities of the Agrarian Fund, implying that
the Agrarian Fund may be liquidated in the future. The government budget has not allocated funds to the
State Agrarian Fund since 2016, resulting in fewer state interventions in agricultural markets.
Two key events helped shape agricultural policies in Ukraine leading up to 2022. First, in 2008, Ukraine
became a member of the WTO, setting its agricultural bound tariffs at an average of 10.8%, expanding its
export opportunities, and contributing to changes in the system of state support for agriculture. Second, in
2014, the European Union and Ukraine signed the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA)
as part of their Association Agreement. The DCFTA entered into force in September 2017 and involves
tariff reductions and duty-free import quotas to facilitate trade between Ukraine and the European Union,
including in agricultural and food products.
From 1999 to 2016, the state provided significant support through VAT accumulation, based on an
agriculture-specific VAT regime (AgVAT). Under this regime, farmers were able to retain the VAT received
on their sales of primary and processed products, and to use those funds to cover the VAT on purchased
inputs and for other production purposes, at their discretion. From 2014 to 2016, this mechanism provided
90% of total state support. In 2017, a development subsidy partially replaced this source of support, before
the support was phased out altogether in 2018. Other notable domestic policy measures included input
subsidies, tax concessions, price controls, import tariffs, non-tariff trade regulation, minimum purchase
prices, direct state purchases, and preferential loans.
A moratorium banning the sale of agricultural land was put in place in 2002, although leasing for cultivation
was permitted. The moratorium was extended annually through 2019 but was not formally extended into
2020. From July 2021, a new law came into force that lifts the ban on the sale of agricultural land and
grants individual citizens the right to purchase up to 100 hectares of privately owned land, although a ban
continues on the sale of state-owned land.3 From January 2024, larger purchases of up to 10 000 hectares
will be permitted for Ukrainian citizens and Ukrainian legal entities.


 595

Table 27.2. Ukraine: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
Prior to 1990s
Planned economy
Planned agricultural production, state administered prices
State controlled value chain and agricultural trade, including marketing
of agricultural inputs and outputs
1990-2000
Transition economy: gradual reforms towards market
economy
Interrupted by deep economic crisis in the early
1990s
Increased import tariffs for agricultural and processed food products
Land reform to allow private ownership
Gradual dismantling of centralised marketing schemes
Reversal of reforms during economic crisis
2000-2022
Renewed reforms towards an open economy
Reduction of agricultural tariffs following WTO accession
Export taxes and quotas for main exported products, successively
eliminated or replaced by MoUs
State Agrarian Fund (price controls, production controls, marketing,
loans, etc.) with market interventions through minimum reference prices
and state food purchases successively reduced
Sugar production quotas until 2018
Various subsidies for inputs, interest support and tax concessions
2022-present
Entered period of martial law due to large-scale
military aggression of the Russian Federation
Reallocation of agricultural support funds to security and defense
Suspension of traditional support programs
Introduction of temporary measures applicable during period of martial
law, including tax breaks, food security measures, and simplified
regulatory requirements
Due to the negative MPS only partly offset by transfers to producers through tax concessions and other
measures, support to agricultural producers was negative for most of the 1990s. The level fluctuated over
the last decade but has generally been closer to zero (Figure 27.4). With little budgetary support to general
services or consumers, total support to the sector remained small for most of the past 25 years.
Figure 27.3. Ukraine: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1995 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Ukraine - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20


596 

Main policy instruments
The Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food (MAPF) is the main executive body in Ukraine in charge of the
development of agriculture. Between September 2019 and January 2021, MAPF was integrated into the
Ministry of Economic Development, Trade and Agriculture (MEDTA). At the beginning of 2021, MAPF was
restored. A resolution adopted by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine (CMU) in February 2021 defines the
functions of MAPF, including the formation and implementation of state policy in a range of areas, including
agriculture, fisheries, food security, rural development, and land management.
The law, “On State Support of Agriculture in Ukraine”, adopted in 2004, defines key policy priorities and
formulated agricultural support measures. This is complemented by the annual law, “On the State Budget
of Ukraine”, which sets the budget for agricultural subsidies.
The law, “On Agricultural Cooperation”, entered into force in November 2020, regulating issues related to
the creation, management, and dissolution of agricultural co-operatives. It eliminates a distinction between
production and service co-operatives and defines co-operative education as a priority task of agricultural
co-operatives.4
In 2020, the ratification of the law, “On Amendments to Certain Legislative Acts of Ukraine Concerning the
Conditions of Turnover of Agricultural Lands”, created the legislative framework for the introduction of
market turnover of agricultural land. The law:
•
Lifts a ban on the sale of agricultural land for private ownership.
•
Grants the right to purchase of land exclusively to Ukrainian citizens in the amount of no more than
100 hectares per person from 1 July 2021 to 1 January 2024.
•
Permits legal entities whose founders or final beneficiaries are Ukrainians to acquire the right of
ownership, such entities cannot have businesses registered abroad or in offshore companies.
•
Bans the sale of land to foreigners, who can obtain the right to purchase land only after a national
referendum.
•
Prohibits the sale of agricultural land of state and communal ownership.
Agricultural producers are eligible for a Single Tax5 set as a percentage of normative agricultural land
values, which was established on 1 July 1995 and adjusted since then in line with the general consumer
price index.6 The Single Tax originally replaced 12 taxes for which agricultural enterprises were liable as
business entities. The scope of this tax has narrowed and at present the Single Tax replaces three taxes
– the profit tax, the land tax for land used in agricultural production and a special water use fee. Agricultural
producers are now liable for the other nine taxes that were previously included in the Single Tax. The
Single Tax regime provides tax savings to agricultural producers of around UAH 4.3 billion
(USD 133 million) annually.
In addition to the Single Tax regime, the general budget programme, “On Financial Support of Agricultural
Producers”, provides measures targeted to specific activities, including partial compensation for the costs
of agricultural machinery and equipment and interest rate subsidies on bank loans. For livestock producers,
these also include interest rate support for loans funding livestock husbandry and breeding; partial
reimbursement of costs related to the construction and reconstruction of animal farms and buildings; per-
head payments for cows to agricultural enterprises and for young cattle to rural households; and partial
compensation to agricultural producers purchasing breeding animals, semen and embryos. In turn, on the
crop side, support is provided in the form of reimbursements for different types of on-farm investments and
debt repayments.
Ukraine has been a member of the WTO since May 2008. The country charges import tariffs on most
agricultural products, with applied most-favoured-nation (MFN) tariffs for agricultural products averaging
9.1%, well above the average for non-agricultural products of 3.7% (WTO, 2022[5]). While most imports
face ad valorem tariffs, Ukraine maintains a global tariff-rate quota for raw cane sugar. This quota was only


 597

used in 2011 and 2021, as there was an excess sugar supply on the Ukrainian market in other years.
Export duties are applied to some oilseeds, live animals, and raw hides, but have gradually decreased
following Ukraine’s accession to the WTO.
The Association Agreement with the European Union, ratified by Ukraine in 2014, increasingly influences
the country’s policies. On 27 June 2014, the European Union and Ukraine signed the Deep and
Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA), which applied provisionally from 1 January 2016 and entered
into force on 1 September 2017. Under the agreement, trade liberalisation between the European Union
and Ukraine is to be implemented over a transition period of seven to ten years. The European Union
agreed to open tariff rate quotas (TRQs) for duty-free imports for Ukraine’s principal agro-food products,
such as grain, meat and milk products, and sugar, and to grant free access for others. Ukraine, in turn,
committed to reduce import duties for a number of goods from the European Union. About 40% of
agriculture-related import duties were reduced to zero immediately after the agreement entered into force.
During an ensuing transition period, the share of exports liberalised is schedule to increase to 96%. For
some remaining agri-food tariff lines – covering selected products in product categories such as dairy and
eggs, sugar, miscellaneous edible products, animal oils and fats, and feeding stuff for animals – Ukraine
maintains TRQs with zero in-quota tariffs. Since 1 January 2016, Ukraine applies three TRQs with zero in-
quota tariffs for imports from the European Union of pig meat, poultry meat and poultry meat preparations,
and sugar. Both the European Union and Ukraine committed to eliminate export subsidies for mutually
traded agricultural goods.
The DCFTA incorporates fundamental WTO rules on non-tariff barriers, such as prohibition of import and
export restrictions, and disciplines on state trading. However, Ukraine’s difficulty complying with EU food
safety, veterinary and phytosanitary requirements has created a barrier for trade integration. The DCFTA
contains provisions for technical regulations, standards and conformity assessments to harmonise with
those of the European Union, as well as for technical co-operation in the field of regulations, standards
and related issues between Ukraine and the European Union. In line with these provisions, the
“Comprehensive Strategy of Implementing Legislation on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures” was
approved in 2016 and provides a process for harmonisation of Ukraine’s SPS legislation with EU
requirements. As of 2021, 64% of Ukraine’s obligations under the Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
section of the agreement have been fulfilled.7
Other free trade agreements (FTAs) in which Ukraine is engaged include the FTA with the European Free
Trade Association (EFTA), in force since June 2012; the multilateral FTA with the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS), in force since August 2012; bilateral agreements with all CIS members; and the
Canada-Ukraine FTA, in force since August 2017.8 FTAs with Israel and the United Kingdom entered into
force in January 2021. In February 2022, Ukraine and Türkiye signed a new FTA (see below).
In July 2019, the CMU approved the “Strategy for the Development of Exports of Agricultural and Food
Products for the period up to 2026.” It focuses on product competitiveness, an expanded range of export
products, Ukrainian food brands, and supporting information and analysis on agro-food exports.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
Despite the challenges associated with operating under martial law, Ukraine enacted several measures in
2022 to support agricultural climate-change adaptation. A resolution to improve state support for
agricultural water users directed funds to support a subsidy up to 25% of the cost of irrigation systems put
into operation. The measure aims to enhance efficiency, increase the area of reclaimed land, and
contribute to increased food security.
The Land Protection Programme was adopted in January 2022 to ensure the sustainability of land use and
contribute to the creation of ecologically safe living conditions. In place through 2032, the programme
seeks to optimise the structure of the agricultural landscape, reduce ploughed land area, increase the


598 

productivity of agricultural land, reduce the threat to land resources from degradation processes, and
preserve natural wetlands.
Several adaptation actions were incorporated into Ukraine’s second Nationally Determined Contribution
(NDC) submitted under the Paris Agreement. These include:
•
introduction of minimised tillage techniques and a ban on stubble burning in fields
•
support for land-protection activities and the restoration of windbreaks
•
harmonisation with EU legislation of domestic regulations on the distribution and use of pesticides
and agrochemicals
•
introduction of best agricultural practices for zones vulnerable to nitrate pollution
•
support for returning and restoring degraded land, with purchase by the state or payments for
decommissioning
•
support for the use of manure at all stages, including production, processing, storage,
transportation, and application, and its utilisation in biogas production
•
support for the development of organic agriculture and the observance of crop rotations
An agreement on the participation of Ukraine in the EU LIFE environmental and climate action programme
was ratified in September 2022, ensuring Ukraine’s participation as an associate member and its
contribution to the implementation of joint projects.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
The year 2022 marked a significant departure from standard agricultural policies and support mechanisms
due to the Russian war of aggression. Virtually all traditional support programmes were suspended, while
new temporary measures were introduced during the period of martial law.
Changes in Agricultural Support Measures
The majority of subsidy and grant programmes that operated in 2021 were suspended starting in 2022.
Among the suspended programmes were per-hectare payments for producers of buckwheat; per-hectare
payments for crop losses due to emergencies and natural disasters; subsidies for cow herd expansion and
for goats and sheep; financial support for horticulture, viticulture, and hop growing; state support for potato
growers; a subsidy for beekeeping; and partial compensation for agricultural machinery and equipment.
New input subsidies were created to support small agricultural producers in wartime conditions, including
a subsidy per unit of arable land for producers with up to 120 hectares in cultivation and a subsidy for
keeping cows for producers with 3 to 100 animals. Grant programmes were introduced for the construction
of greenhouses and horticultural gardens, both of which tie the receipt of aid to the creation of jobs.
Although the MAPF approved grant spending of UAH 383 million (USD 11.8 million) in 2022, only
UAH 54 million (USD 1.7 million) was transferred to recipients. The remainder of the promised funds will
be transferred to recipients from the general fund of the state budget for 2023.
Some measures were introduced to allow farmers to carry out consistent field operations during wartime.
Critical workers identified by agricultural and food enterprises as necessary to carry out spring and summer
field work were granted a deferment of up to six months from being enlisted for military service; operating
agricultural machinery without registration was allowed while under martial law; and the validity of permits
to work with pesticides and agrochemicals was extended. Ukrainian farmers were not obligated to repay
loans received under state support for livestock breeding or elevator construction if the assets were
destroyed as a result of military aggression.
Several forms of financial support were developed or expanded in 2022. A fund to support the partial
guarantee of loans was created to provide guarantees for credit obligations of farmers for up to 10 years


 599

covering 50% of the outstanding amount of their principal debt to the financial institutions with which the
fund entered into a co-operative agreement. Another resolution established the provision of state support
for agricultural products insurance covering up to 60% of the payments made for insurance of agricultural
products. To support agricultural commodity producers during the sowing period, the existing programme
“Affordable Loans 5-7-9%” was expanded to include medium and large-sized enterprises, the maximum
loan amount was increased, and a 0% annual interest rate was established.
Changes to the legal framework
Several temporary changes in land markets under martial law were introduced, including a law simplifying
the procedure to acquire rights to use agricultural land during wartime, a resolution on maintaining the
State Land Cadastre, changes in tenant rights on leased land, and special rules for use and disposal of
land plots of entities that are of importance to the national economy. A law was also introduced to restore
the registration system of agricultural land plot lease rights that existed before the introduction of martial
law.
Additional laws were adopted that influence land reform. These include a new law stipulating that land
auctions be conducted in a state-owned electronic trading system, a resolution approving the procedure
for notarisation of data on buyers of land, and a law strengthening the protection of property and corporate
rights with anti-raiding measures to prevent illegal seizure.
In terms of agri-environmental measures, the new law, “On Organizations of Water Users and Stimulation
of Hydrotechnical Land Reclamation” creates a legal basis for the formation and operation of water-user
organisations, transfers to them infrastructure management functions, and establishes a legal mechanism
for making investments in reclamation infrastructure.9 A resolution defines rules governing the
development of land management projects, including the removal and transfer of fertile soils and the
improvement of agricultural lands.
New laws were also introduced to simplify agricultural machinery registration; change the certification
process for seeds, particularly those that are exported; and to improve phytosanitary measures.
The Ministry of Economy of Ukraine, along with MAPF, continues to translate European Union directives
into national legislation as part of the implementation of the Association Agreement. This resulted in a
number of changes in domestic agricultural policy, including legislation governing the production and sale
of baby food; protection of the geographical indications for agricultural products; simplification of the
procedure for registering plant varieties and for certifying seeds and planting materials; and state
registration of livestock facilities according to European Union standards.
Consumer support measures
Under martial law, the CMU obligated state bodies to ensure price controls for a basket of goods including
wheat flour, pasta, bread, buckwheat groats, pork, beef, poultry, milk, chicken eggs, sunflower oil,
granulated sugar, white cabbage, onion, beetroot, carrot, and potatoes. From January 2022 to April 2022,
state regulation established a maximum trade markup of 10%. This was a temporary measure that was
partially lifted via a subsequent resolution, “Weakening of State Regulation of Product Prices”, which
abolished state regulation of prices for some goods (namely buckwheat, granulated sugar, domestically
produced pasta, and butter), although a requirement for sellers to declare any price increase exceeding
5% remained in place. The cost of natural gas was also limited for producers of flour and bread, milk,
chicken, and sunflower oil through April 2022. The government set the maximum level of surcharge on the
price of Ukrainian-produced natural gas (excluding rent payments) at no more than 24% for food producers.
The resolution of March 2022, “Some Issues of Providing the Citizens with Long-Term Food Products and
Sanitary and Hygienic Products under Martial Law”, provided products to residents in regions with active
hostilities free of charge. Products covered include flour; cereals; pasta; sunflower oil; canned meat, fish,


600 

and legumes; sugar; milk or its substitutes; bakery and confectionery products; tea; and coffee. The
resolution established the rate of each product per person for one month.
In 2022, the government temporarily changed food labelling requirements under martial law. As a result of
forced changes in recipes due to the limited availability of raw materials, a difference between the actual
content of a food product and the mandatory information of the labelling of the product was allowed, with
the caveat that the consumer be informed in any possible way about the presence of allergens. Imported
food products and fodder could be sold with product information in a foreign language for a portion of the
year, though any goods with foreign language labels that were imported from March to December 2022
may remain in circulation until the expiration date.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
Financial state support for agricultural entities is carried out via the Entrepreneurship Development Fund
(EDF), a non-profit institution that directs loans to micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs). In
particular, state support is provided to prevent the outbreak of epidemics, including the COVID-19
pandemic, as well as to prevent and overcome their consequences. This programme features a reduction
of loan interest rates for enterprises impacted by quarantine, with reduced loan interest rates of 5%, 7%,
and 9% annually and partial loan guarantees for some businesses.10 In March 2022, the programme was
modified to better support agricultural commodity producers while sowing during the period of martial law
by providing investment loans for the purchase of agricultural machinery, seeds, fertilisers, fuels and
lubricants.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
At the outset of the war, the National Bank of Ukraine imposed restrictions on the purchase of foreign
currency and cross-border transfers for the import of goods. However, a resolution by the CMU permitted
the Bank to pay for goods on a list of critical imports. The list was updated 16 times as the restrictions were
gradually phased out and eventually cancelled in July 2022. Another resolution simplified the clearance of
certain goods through customs, allowing for a deferment of customs payments for meat and dairy products,
fish, vegetables, oil, coffee, tea, sugar, and cocoa.
The law, “On the Customs Tariff of Ukraine”, entered into force on 1 January 2023. The law allows for a
re-classification of import goods according to the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System
of 2022 and the corresponding version of the European Union’s Combined Nomenclature. This does not
affect the rates of import duties applied to specific HS codes.
At present, Ukraine places a tariff and quota on only one agricultural commodity, raw cane sugar. In 2021,
the quota was set at 260 000 tonnes with a 2% tariff. In 2022, the Ministry of Economy began accepting
applications for raw cane sugar importers for a volume of 267 800 tonnes.11 Export duties are applied to
only a few products, including some oil seeds, live animals, and raw hides. The rates have been
significantly reduced as part of the implementation of the WTO commitments framework.
On 3 February 2022, prior to the invasion by Russia, Ukraine and Türkiye signed an FTA, enabling an
increase in trade with Türkiye from USD 7.5 billion to USD 10 billion in five years. Türkiye is a major trading
partner with Ukraine, accounting for 4.49% of Ukraine’s total imports (7th largest partner) and 4.95% of its
exports (4th largest partner) annually (World Bank, 2023[6]). The FTA specifies a tariff schedule with
negotiated TRQs and duties for a number of important exports from Ukraine to Türkiye (e.g. live cattle,
dried peas, soft wheat, corn, and crude sunflower oil) and imports to Ukraine from Türkiye (e.g. tomatoes,
cucumbers, grapes, apricots, and other fruits and vegetables). At present, the ratification process of the
FTA is continuing.
Ukraine ratified an agreement on the abolition of import duties and tariff quotas in bilateral trade with the
United Kingdom, beginning 19 June 2022 and lasting for at least 12 months. The agreement is expected


 601

to increase exports of Ukrainian agricultural products, including flour, dairy products, poultry, and tomato
paste, to the United Kingdom.
The government of Canada cancelled import duties and quantitative restrictions on Ukrainian products for
the year as part of the FTA between Ukraine and Canada. In April 2023, Canada and the Ukraine agreed
to expand the FTA to further liberalise trade, eliminating tariffs on exports from the Ukraine to Canada,
even if components are obtained from other countries (The New Voice of Ukraine, 2023[7]).
Annually since 2011, MAPF signs a Memorandum of Understanding with grain market participants to
ensure food security, avoid the application of export restrictions, ensure the projected grain export regime,
and stabilise the grain market in Ukraine. The document is one of the key factors in maintaining a balance
between domestic grain consumption and export opportunities, as well as stability and predictability in food
markets. It typically sets a maximum volume of wheat exports, which was 25.3 million tonnes in the
2021-22 marketing year. In the 2022-23 marketing year, because of Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine, the Memorandum was not signed.
The government of Ukraine prohibited the export of some goods and applied licensing to the export of
others for all or part of the year. Export prohibitions applied to oats; millet; buckwheat; sugar; salt; rye; live
cattle; and meat and offal from cattle, frozen in brine, dried, or smoked. Goods subject to licensing were
those considered socially important, including wheat, corn, meat of domestic chickens, eggs of domestic
chickens, and sunflower oil. Subsequent resolutions cancelled the ban on exports for beef, cancelled
export licensing for wheat, and replaced the ban with export licensing for fertilisers, buckwheat and oats.
In 2022, the European Council adopted a regulation allowing for temporary trade liberalisation and other
trade concessions with regard to certain Ukrainian products. The decision applies for a period of one year
and suspends tariffs, anti-dumping duties on imports originating from Ukraine, and the application of
common rules for imports originating in Ukraine. Ukrainian exporters do not use in full European Union
import tariff rate quotas for animal products and for beef, pork, and lamb TRQs have never been used at
all. At present, Ukraine is working to certifying domestic production capacity for exports to the European
Union. As of early 2023, six poultry plants received permission from the European Union veterinary
services for the trade of poultry products and 45 dairy processing enterprises were allowed to export milk
products to the European Union.
A resolution introduced in 2015 to abolish zero import duty rates for imports of goods from Russia was
extended through the end of 2023. A Ukrainian resolution bans completely the export of goods to Russia,
until such time as the war of aggression ends.
During the period of martial law, new rules have been applied for state veterinary and sanitary control.
State control over compliance with legislation on food products, feed, animal by-products, veterinary
medicine, and animal welfare is carried out at all checkpoints on the state border of Ukraine and customs
control zones. A comprehensive list sets out grounds for physical inspection and laboratory tests for
imported goods and the procedure for import and transport of animals. Imported feed additives are
permitted even if they are not registered in Ukraine if they are registered in the European Union and
intended for livestock production.
Ukraine withdrew from the Agreement on the Common Agrarian Market with the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) effective 8 June 2022. The CIS facilitates free exchange and sharing of
agricultural commodities, food processing technologies, and services for the agro-industrial sector, among
a number of former members of the Soviet Union, including Russia.12


602 

Contextual information
Ukraine has a large area of fertile arable land resulting in a widespread presence of agriculture in the
economy and high production relative to the size of the population. Although agriculture’s relative
importance in the economy has declined over time, the agricultural and food industry accounted for 20%
of the country’s GDP, 18% of total employment, and more than 40% of the value of total exports prior to
the war (Table 27.3).
The fall in Ukraine’s GDP in 2022 is estimated to be more than 30% according to the Ministry of Economy,
reaching its lowest level since Ukraine gained independence. The direct damage from the war as of the
beginning of December 2022 is estimated to be at least USD 135.7 billion. The labour market also suffered
significantly in 2022: the National Bank of Ukraine estimates the unemployment rate at 30%, while 77% of
working Ukrainians state a decrease in income compared to 2021. Nearly half are uncertain about whether
they will receive income in the future. According to the Pension Fund, nominal wages in Ukraine decreased
by 5% during the year and real income decreased by 21%. The rate of inflation in Ukraine was 20.2% in
2022, far outpacing the OECD average of 8.2%.
In 2022, Ukraine was able to sow and harvest only 75% of its agricultural land and total agricultural
production fell by 28.3% compared to the level in 2021, with a 32.3% decrease in crop production and an
11.1% decrease in livestock production, as estimated by the State Statistics Service and the Ministry of
Agrarian Policy and food of Ukraine. Production declines were particularly pronounced for wheat, maize,
and sunflower seeds. Corporate agricultural enterprises suffered greater production losses than rural
households. Rural households are often subsistence-oriented but accounted for 37% of Ukraine’s crop
production and 53% of livestock production in 2018 (Nivievskyi, Iavorskyi and Donchenko, 2021[8]).
Table 27.3. Ukraine: Contextual indicators

Ukraine
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
210
588
0.5%
0.5%
Population (million)
49
44
1.1%
0.8%
Land area (thousand km2)
579
579
0.7%
0.7%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
41 406
41 311
1.4%
1.4%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
84
75
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
4 260
14 220
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
44.1
33.9
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
14.0
10.6
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
22.4
14.7
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
10.1
40.6
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
6.1
9.5
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
59
82
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
41
18
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
79
80
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.


 603

Figure 27.4. Ukraine: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2021

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
Ukraine has been, and remains even during wartime, among the world’s leading exporters of agricultural
commodities, in particular grain products (wheat, barley, maize) and vegetable oils (rapeseed and
sunflower oil). Exports of agro-food products have grown steadily since 2015, reaching a high of over
USD 25 billion in 2021 (Figure 27.5). Most exports are primary and processed products used by industry,
whereas two-thirds of imports are used for final consumption. Russia’s strategy against Ukraine involves
blocking ports and disrupting Ukrainian food supply chains. However, international efforts, such as the
Initiative on the Safe Transportation of Grain and Foodstuffs from Ukrainian ports (also known as the Black
Sea Grain Initiative), an agreement between Russia, Ukraine, Türkiye and the United Nations (UN), helped
to sustain international trade. According to the State Customs Service of Ukraine, agricultural exports
totalled USD 23.4 billion in 2022, which represents a 15.5% reduction relative to 2021, though this
represents an increase relative to the level in 2020 and before. The volume of trade with the European
Union saw a three-fold increase due to the establishment of safe export corridors.


604 

Figure 27.5. Ukraine: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Growth in total factor productivity in Ukraine has increased from negative levels in the decade from 1993-
2002, to a positive level that exceeded the global average for the period 2011-20, at 3% for the
(Figure 27.6). Intermediate inputs and the use of primary factors shrank over the same period. Although
agriculture has declined in importance for Ukraine’s economy, the share of the sector in national GHG
emissions has increased, from 8.7% in 1993-2002 to 13.1% in 2011-2020 (Table 27.4). The average
Ukraine - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Ukraine - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
34
34
17
17
53
53
17
17
9
9
43
43
4
4
23
23
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 605

nitrogen balance fell over the same period and remains below the OECD-wide average. The phosphorus
balance is negative, which may pose challenges in terms of sustaining soil fertility in the long run.
Figure 27.6. Ukraine: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 27.4. Ukraine: Productivity and environmental indicators

Ukraine
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
-1.3%
3.0%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
23.9
18.8
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
2.6
-2.5
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
2.1
3.5
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
8.7
13.1
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
5.8
5.2
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
30.0
41.3
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
..
..
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


Ukraine - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
3.02%
3.02%
1.12%
1.12%
-0.58%
-0.58%
0.35%
0.35%
-1.06%
-1.06%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Ukraine
World
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%


606 

References

Nivievskyi, O., P. Iavorskyi and O. Donchenko (2021), Assessing the role of small farmers and
households in agriculture and the rural economy and measures to support their sustainable
development, Kyiv School of Economics (KSE).
[8]
OECD (2015), Sector competitiveness strategy for Ukraine - Phase III. Review of Agricultural
Investment Policies of Ukraine, OECD Eurasia Competitiveness Programme,
https://www.oecd.org/eurasia/competitiveness-programme/eastern-
partners/Agricultural_Investment_Policies_Ukraine_ENG.pdf (accessed on 20 March 2023).
[4]
OECD/The World Bank (2004), Achieving Ukraine’s Agricultural Potential: Stimulating
Agricultural Growth and Improving Rural Life, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264055841-en.
[2]
StateGeoCadastre (2017), Review of the State of Land Relations in Ukraine,
https://land.gov.ua/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Land-Review-Monthly_3_final-1.pdf
(accessed on 20 March 2023).
[3]
The New Voice of Ukraine (2023), Ukraine, Canada agree to expand bilateral free trade deal,
https://english.nv.ua/business/ukraine-canada-agree-to-expand-bilateral-free-trade-deal-
news-50317202.html (accessed on 31 May 2023).
[7]
USAID (2023), LandLinks: Ukraine, https://www.land-links.org/country-profile/ukraine/ (accessed
on 31 May 2023).
[9]
von Cramon-Taubadel, S. et al. (2008), “Ukraine”, in Anderson, K. and J. Swinnen (eds.),
Distortions to agricultural incentives in Europe’s transition economies, World Bank,
Washington, D.C.
[1]
World Bank (2023), WITS: World Integrated Trade Solution,
https://wits.worldbank.org/CountryProfile/en/Country/UKR/Year/LTST/TradeFlow/EXPIMP/Par
tner/by-country (accessed on 24 April 2023).
[6]
WTO (2022), World Tariff Profiles 2022, WTO ITC UNCTAD,
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/publications_e/world_tariff_profiles21_e.htm (accessed on
29 March 2023).
[5]







 607

Notes

1 Article 3 of the Land Code of the Ukrainian SSR, https://zakon.rada.gov.ua/laws/show/2874%D0%B0-
07/ed19920101#Text.
2 More recent estimates suggest that the share of private property in agricultural land is even higher, at
80%: Mykola Solsky (People’s Deputy, Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada Committee on Agrarian and Land
Policy), “It’s all about the land”, 2 April 2020, https://www.epravda.com/ua/columns/2020/04/2/658911/.
3 Collective and state-owned farms were privatised starting in the late 1990s. At present, approximately
90% of land is privately owned (USAID, 2023[9]).
4 The activities of co-operatives are defined broadly such that the legal framework does not constrain their
activities, except in the case of co-operatives operating for profit, which are limited in terms of the
magnitude of transactions permitted with non-members.
5 Termed the “Fixed Agricultural Tax” before 2015.
6 The monetary valuation of land plots can take one of two types, normative and expert, both of which are
defined by the Law of Ukraine, “On Land Valuation.” The normative land value is based on rent income for
an area of one square meter, indexed to take into account the prior year’s inflation.
7 According to the “Report on implementation of the Association Agreement between Ukraine and the
European Union 2021”. In 2021 and 2022, several regulations were adopted relevant to the use of feed
additives, veterinary medicine, and the transit of goods between the European Union and Ukraine.
8 Other members and associate members of the CIS are Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan.
9 Law No. 2079-IX of 17 February 2022.
10 The offer of loans with interest rates of 5%, 7%, and 9% depends on the purpose of financing, annual
income from business activities, and the number of jobs created. Lower rates are offered to MSMEs with
annual income below UAH 50 million (USD 1.5 million) and for those that create at least two jobs during
the reporting quarter.
11 The quota increased from 260 000 tonnes in 2021.
12 The CIS member states are Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia,
Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.


608 

Support to agriculture
The United Kingdom left the European Union (EU) on 31 January 2020. As a part of its transition from the
EU Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), CAP-related support measures continued during 2022 while new
domestic agricultural policy measures were phased in.
The Producer Support Estimate (PSE) was around 19% of gross farm receipts in 2020-22, well below the
30% measured for the European Union in 2000-02. While the largest item in the PSE is decoupled
payments (46%), Market Price Support (MPS) makes up a significant share as well (35%), in particular for
livestock products such as beef and poultry, which are subject to tariffs and tariff-rate quotas. Almost half
of farm support comes through payments decoupled from current production, while 10% relates to
payments based on input use.
Support for general services (General Services Support Estimate, GSSE) was 2.6% of the value of
agricultural production in 2020-22, below the OECD average. Expenditure on agricultural knowledge and
innovation systems accounts for slightly over half of GSSE and has declined in recent years. Expenditures
on inspection and control services account for one-third of GSSE, while expenditures on marketing and
promotion of farm products account for 10%. The Total Support Estimate (TSE) for agriculture represented
0.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) on average in 2020-22, about half the OECD average.
Recent policy changes
Agricultural policy in the United Kingdom is devolved to the governments of Scotland, Wales, and Northern
Ireland. The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) has responsibility for England’s
agricultural policy. Defra also sets some standards and regulations at national level (e.g. animal health and
welfare, veterinary services, and plant health), and represents the United Kingdom in international
negotiations.
England introduced several improvements to its three main environmental land management schemes,
which continue to be piloted and rolled out as part of the transition out from previous schemes under the
EU CAP. New standards were introduced under the Sustainable Farming Incentive scheme in 2022 to pay
farmers for environmental improvements in arable and horticultural soils, grassland soils, and moorlands.
Improvements were introduced to the way the Countryside Stewardship scheme operates, including
simplified processes and fairer and more proportionate inspections. Twenty-two projects covering over
40 000 hectares were awarded funding under the Landscape Recovery scheme, aiming to restore nearly
700 km of rivers and to protect and provide habitat for at least 263 species.
Several new grants were made available under the Farming Investment Fund, including small grants for
equipment to improve farm productivity, slurry management and animal welfare and large grants to
improve water management and enhance farm productivity and added value. Slurry Infrastructure Grants
were established to help livestock farmers upgrade or expand slurry storage capacity for better water
quality and reduced ammonia emissions. Pilots were launched to test different approaches to support new
28 United Kingdom


 609

entrants to farming to provide more opportunities for new entrants to access land and finance, and establish
successful and innovative businesses.
The CAP schemes continued in Scotland in 2022. The Scottish government published its Vision for Scottish
Agriculture in March 2022 and held public consultations on the powers to be included in a proposed new
Agriculture Bill to replace the CAP. In November 2022, the Scottish Government outlined their pathway
and timeline for the future agricultural support framework to be phased in from 2025.
The Welsh government continued direct payments to farmers over the last three years at the same levels
received under the Basic Payment Scheme (BPS). The Agriculture (Wales) Bill was introduced to the
Welsh Parliament in 2022 and sets Sustainable Land Management as the overarching framework for future
support to agriculture. The Sustainable Farming Scheme will be the main delivery mechanism for farm
support as of 2025. The Farming Connect programme, launched in April 2023, will support knowledge
transfer and encourage improved environmental performance until March 2025, when farmers transition
away from BPS support.
CAP payments have also continued in Northern Ireland during the transition period. Northern Ireland’s
Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA) published the Future Agricultural Policy
Decisions for Northern Ireland in March 2022, including 54 decisions on future agricultural support. Some
of the key decisions include continued provision of income support through a Farm Sustainability Payment,
a Beef Sustainability Package, a Farming with Nature Package providing payments for habitat creation
and biodiversity restoration, and Farming for Carbon measures to encourage low-emission practices. The
Climate Change Act (Northern Ireland) 2022 sets a target of net-zero GHG emissions by 2050 for Northern
Ireland, and interim targets including a 48% reduction in net GHG emissions by 2030, but no specific target
for agricultural emissions.
The United Kingdom concluded several Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) in 2022-23, providing enhanced
market access for a range of agricultural and food products. In addition to new FTAs with Australia and
New Zealand, the United Kingdom concluded negotiations to join the Comprehensive and Progressive
Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), providing tariff-free access or preferential tariffs for
agricultural and food exports across the 11 countries in the trade bloc.
Assessment and recommendations
•
The United Kingdom and its devolved governments’ strategies and planning documents provide a
basis for supporting climate change adaptation. Moving beyond planning to policy implementation
will be essential to strengthen adaptation and resilience in the agricultural sector. New
programmes, including England’s Environmental Land Management schemes; Scotland’s Farming
for a Better Climate programme, Farm Advisory Service and Agri-Environment Climate Scheme;
and various grant schemes to encourage sustainable farming practices in Wales and Northern
Ireland could contribute to progress towards enhanced climate adaptation. These initiatives will
need to be carefully monitored to ensure the additionality and permanence of environmental
improvements over the long run.
•
Investments in R&D and innovation are essential for building farmers’ capacities to adapt to climate
change and reduce GHG emissions. The Farming Innovation Programme supports the
development of new technologies and collaborative research projects to increase productivity and
sustainability. Research efforts should also be directed at facilitating long-term transformative
change and the emergence of new and diverse income sources as complements to revenue from
traditional farming systems. Examples include renewable energy generation and the development
of market-based mechanisms to encourage emissions reductions, carbon sequestration, and
biodiversity conservation.


610 

•
MPS remains high for some commodities, in particular beef, poultry, and sugar. These policies can
contribute to higher food prices and discourage farmers from changing production in response to
climate and environmental concerns. Phasing out these price distortions would advance progress
on several policy objectives, including improving soil health and water quality, and supporting
climate change adaptation.
•
Agricultural policies continue to evolve at varying paces across the governments of England,
Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. However, the transition from CAP measures to new
domestic schemes is creating short-term complexity for the sector. As CAP payments are phased
out, new domestic policy measures have undergone pilot testing and fine-tuning prior to a larger-
scale rollout. Much of the short-term policy challenge revolves around scaling up these schemes
and ensuring sufficient incentives for farmers to adopt sustainable production practices at scale,
while maintaining flexibility and predictability for farmers over the long-term. Some transitional
assistance or extended social safety nets might be required to facilitate the process of structural
adjustment.
•
Agriculture needs to achieve ambitious emissions reductions to contribute meaningfully to the
United Kingdom’s target of reaching net-zero emissions by 2050. A stronger policy response will
be needed to tackle agricultural GHG emissions, particularly methane emissions from livestock,
which represent 61% of the United Kingdom’s agricultural GHG emissions. Expanding the United
Kingdom’s Emissions Trading Scheme to include agriculture could encourage deeper cuts in
emissions while opening opportunities for farmers to earn additional revenues from afforestation
and soil carbon sequestration. Technologies such as remote sensing and earth observation could
strengthen monitoring, reporting and verification of land-use changes such as afforestation and
peatland restoration. Ultimately, a combination of policy instruments including abatement
subsidies, emissions pricing, standards, regulations, and demand-side measures may be required
to create sufficient incentives for the adoption of sustainable farming practices and changes in land
use.




 611

Figure 28.1. United Kingdom: Development of support to agriculture







Note: Data for the UK not available individually for 1986-88 and 2000-02, when the UK was part of the European Economic Community (EEC12)
and the European Union (EU15), respectively.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
United Kingdom - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
EEC12 (1986-88)
EU15 (2000-02)
UK (2020-22)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
United Kingdom - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
EEC12 (1986-88)
EU15 (2000-02)
UK (2020-22)
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
United Kingdom - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
EEC12 (1986-88)
EU15 (2000-02)
UK (2020-22)
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
United Kingdom - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
EEC12 (1986-88)
EU15 (2000-02)
UK (2020-22)
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
United Kingdom - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
EEC12 (1986-88)
EU15 (2000-02)
UK (2020-22)
0%
1%
2%
3%


612 

Figure 28.2. United Kingdom: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency. The producer price change and the border price change
are not calculated when both negative and positive market price support (MPS) occur at the commodity level for the previous year. Note that
negative MPS estimates for livestock products may arise in cases of aligned product prices if there is positive MPS for feed commodities.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 28.3. United Kingdom: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross
farm receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
United Kingdom - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
PSE change decomposition
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
United Kingdom - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Wheat
Rapeseed
Sugar
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Eggs
-4%
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
22%
24%
26%
28%
3…


 613

Table 28.1. United Kingdom: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
..
35 916
30 883
37 485
39 379
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
..
73.51
71.17
72.81
76.54
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
..
39 473
34 996
41 672
41 751
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
..
8 028
6 789
10 511
6 784
Support based on commodity output
..
2 787
1 517
4 809
2 037
Market Price Support1
..
2 787
1 517
4 809
2 037
Positive Market Price Support
..
2 802
1 517
4 830
2 059
Negative Market Price Support
..
-14
0
-21
-23
Payments based on output
..
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
..
785
771
844
741
Based on variable input use
..
602
612
641
554
with input constraints
..
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
..
172
153
187
175
with input constraints
..
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
..
11
6
16
12
with input constraints
..
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
..
714
646
662
835
Based on Receipts / Income
..
0
0
0
0
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
..
714
646
662
835
with input constraints
..
499
594
552
350
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
..
7
0
17
4
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
..
3 532
3 602
3 947
3 047
With variable payment rates
..
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
..
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
..
3 532
3 602
3 947
3 047
with commodity exceptions
..
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
..
175
180
225
121
Based on long-term resource retirement
..
99
68
162
67
Based on a specific non-commodity output
..
74
112
63
47
Based on other non-commodity criteria
..
2
0
0
7
Miscellaneous payments
..
27
72
9
0
Percentage PSE (%)
..
19.33
18.78
24.34
15.37
Producer NPC (coeff.)
..
1.08
1.05
1.15
1.06
Producer NAC (coeff.)
..
1.24
1.23
1.32
1.18
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
..
920
984
878
900
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
..
471
559
459
395
Inspection and control
..
312
274
282
380
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
..
45
43
43
48
Marketing and promotion
..
93
108
94
76
Cost of public stockholding
..
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
..
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
..
10.37
12.62
7.71
11.70
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
..
-3 391
-1 578
-5 820
-2 777
Transfers to producers from consumers
..
-2 844
-1 506
-4 938
-2 089
Other transfers from consumers
..
-616
-95
-1 008
-743
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
..
10
24
2
3
Excess feed cost
..
59
0
124
52
Percentage CSE (%)
..
-8.44
-4.51
-13.97
-6.65
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
..
1.09
1.05
1.17
1.07
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
..
1.09
1.05
1.16
1.07
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
..
8 958
7 796
11 391
7 687
Transfers from consumers
..
3 460
1 601
5 946
2 832
Transfers from taxpayers
..
6 114
6 290
6 454
5 598
Budget revenues
..
-616
-95
-1 008
-743
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
..
0.30
0.29
0.36
0.25
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
..
6 171
6 280
6 582
5 651
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
..
0.21
0.23
0.21
0.18
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
..
261
256
257
269
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
..
0.77
0.78
0.73
0.81
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost.
MPS commodities for the United Kingdom are: wheat, barley, oats, rapeseed, sugar, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
The method for estimating MPS changes between 2020 and 2021. Market Price Differentials (MPD) for the United Kingdom are assumed equal to those of
the European Union for the years until 2020, while they are calculated from UK domestic and reference prices from 2021.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en.




614 

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
The United Kingdom joined the European Economic Community in 1973, and for several decades its
agricultural policies were shaped by reforms to the European Union’s Common Agricultural Policy (CAP).
The 2009 CAP Health Check allowed Member States to adopt a selection of measures under their Pillar 2
funding. Subsequently, elective measures were also allowed under Pillar 1 of the CAP 2014-20. The United
Kingdom nations’ choices of elective measures were broadly aligned in this context, while specific
payments were sometimes chosen, such as the redistributive payment in Wales and voluntary coupled
support in Scotland. The United Kingdom opted to transfer 10.8% of its broad-based direct payments
envelope to targeted longer-term expenditure under Pillar 2.
On 31 January 2020, the United Kingdom left the European Union. The CAP defined support to agriculture
in the United Kingdom until the transition out of the European Union in 2020. In 2020 there were extensive
negotiations with the European Union over future trade and co-operation relations, the preparation and
adoption of laws to govern agriculture in the United Kingdom after the withdrawal from the European Union,
and bilateral trade liberalisation negotiations with third countries.
In 2021 new agricultural support systems were introduced in England and the devolved governments of
Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. While the overall policy framework over the transition period is
similar across the four countries, their proposed timing and approaches to implementing the new policies
vary substantially.
The three devolved governments and England are at various stages of development and implementation
of their agricultural transition plans. Alongside the phasing out of the CAP measures, the devolved
governments are taking a co-development approach with the sector and stakeholders to design and deliver
their new domestic policy instruments.
Table 28.2. United Kingdom: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Broader framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1973-2020
European Union’s Common Agricultural
Policy (CAP)
Coupled support phase (pre-1992)
MacSharry Reform (1992-1999)
Agenda 2000 CAP Reform (2000-2002)
Fischler Reform (2003-2008)
Health Check (2009-2013)
2013 reform (2013-2020)
Since 2020
Transition to new agricultural support system
Phasing out of CAP-style direct payments:
• Agriculture Act 2020 (England)
• Agriculture (Retained EU Law and Data) (Scotland) Act 2020
• Agriculture (Wales) Bill 2022
• 54 policy decisions on Future Agricultural Policy for Northern Ireland
New payments for farmers to provide environmental public goods
The PSE remained stable at around 19% from 2017 to 2020 before increasing sharply to 24% in 2021 and
then contracting to 15% in 2022 (Figure 28.4). These fluctuations were mainly driven by changes in market
price support (MPS) for livestock products, in particular beef and poultry which are subject to tariffs and
tariff-rate quotas.


 615

Figure 28.4. United Kingdom: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 2017 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Agriculture is a devolved policy area under the Devolution Settlements for England, Scotland, Wales, and
Northern Ireland. Following the United Kingdom’s departure from the European Union, Ministers of the UK
Government, Scottish Government, Welsh Government and the Department of Agriculture, Environment
and Rural Affairs in Northern Ireland agreed to develop a non-legislative framework for UK collaboration
and co-operation on agricultural support. This builds upon commitments already developed between the
parties to work together at a UK level. However, since agricultural policy is devolved, each nation retains
the powers to create and implement specific countrywide legislation in relation to agriculture.
In 2019, the United Kingdom became the first major economy to legislate a binding target to reach net-
zero emissions by 2050. Since then, it has progressively increased the ambition of its Nationally
Determined Contribution (NDC), aiming to reduce GHG emissions to 68% below 1990 levels by 2030. In
2021, the Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener set out a pathway to reach the net-zero target, including
sector-by-sector goals (GOV.UK, 2021[1]). Within this, emissions in the agriculture, forestry, and other land
use (AFOLU) sector may need to fall by 17-30% by 2030 and 24-40% by 2035. The Sixth Carbon Budget
(2033-37) models a balanced net zero pathway for agricultural emissions to fall from 54.6 MtCO2eq in 2018
to 39 MtCO2eq by 2035 and 35 MtCO2eq by 2050 (Climate Change Committee, 2020[2]). Across the United
Kingdom, responsibility to reduce GHG emissions in agriculture is devolved, with each country free to
develop its own strategy to reach the target. Scotland and Wales both released separate Net Zero
Strategies that detail how they will contribute to the UK’s Net Zero target.
United Kingdom - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30


616 

England
Three environmental land management (ELM) schemes target improved outcomes relating to biodiversity,
water quality, climate change adaptation and mitigation, air quality, natural flood management, coastal
erosion risk mitigation, animal health and welfare, as well as access and heritage. ELM schemes are co-
designed and developed with farmers, land managers and other key stakeholders through tests and trials.
•
The Countryside Stewardship scheme is currently Defra’s primary agri-environment scheme, with
over 30 000 participating farmers and land managers. Countryside Stewardship is made up of eight
grants to achieve specific environmental benefits such as increasing biodiversity, improving
habitat, expanding woodland areas, improving water quality, air quality and natural flood
management. These include: Capital Grants; Higher Tier Capital Grants; Protection and
Infrastructure grants; Woodland Management Plan grants; Woodland Tree Health grants;
Implementation Plan and Feasibility Study grants; Higher Tier grants; Mid Tier and Wildlife Offers;
and the Facilitation Fund. There are plans for expanding and refining the scope of the scheme, so
that it pays for a wider range of targeted, specific actions at the right level of ambition to contribute
to the environment and climate goals.
•
The Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot was launched in 2021. Participants in the pilot can select
Sustainable Farming Incentive standards to apply to eligible land and are paid according to the
level of ambition chosen for each standard. The standards are a set of land management actions
that help farmers to create greener landscapes and improve biodiversity, promote cleaner air and
water, and guard against environmental risks such as climate change and flooding. More than
800 farmers are implementing the pilot scheme, providing feedback and insights that have helped
to influence the scheme’s design and implementation. This includes feedback on the application
system, simplifying guidance, making standards less prescriptive, communicating all mandatory
requirements for land management actions, developing a template soil management plan, and
providing payments on a more regular (quarterly) basis.
•
The Landscape Recovery scheme provides funding for long-term, large-scale projects that help
farmers and land managers to produce environmental and climate goods on their land. Defra
awards agreements through competitive application rounds focused on the delivery of specific
environmental outcomes. A first competitive round was held from February to May 2022, and
further rounds are planned in 2023 and 2024.
Support for R&D is a key focus of the new domestic agricultural policy. The Farming Innovation Programme
has a budget of GBP 270 million (USD 333 million) and provides farmers in England with funding to
develop new, innovative methods and technologies. Since October 2021, Defra has committed over
GBP 100 million (USD 123 million) to a series of competitive grants to fund collaborative research projects,
stimulate agricultural and horticultural R&D, and develop transformative solutions. The Future Farming
Resilience Fund, launched in 2021, helps farmers to navigate changes during the agricultural transition
period. The Farming Investment Fund was launched in November 2021 and provides support for farmers
to improve productivity and enhance the environment, via two key strands:
•
The Farming Equipment and Technology Fund, which provides grants of up to GBP 25 000
(USD 31 000) for the adoption of sustainable technologies and practices, such as equipment to
reduce soil compaction, minimum tillage, fostering regenerative farming, supporting animal health
and welfare, and improved slurry application.
•
The Farming Transformation Fund provides grants of up to GBP 500 000 (USD 616 000) based on
a set of themes including Water Management, Improving Farm Productivity, Adding Value, slurry
storage and improving calf housing. These grants are targeted at more complex higher-value
investments with the potential to bring transformational improvements to business performance
and the environment.


 617

Scotland
The Agriculture (Retained EU Law and data) (Scotland) Act 2020 enables the continuation of CAP
schemes beyond 2021, and allows Scotland to maintain policy stability until 2025. However, the powers of
the 2020 Act only enable limited simplifications and improvements to the operation of CAP legislation and
preclude substantive changes until a new Scottish Agriculture Bill is passed. A new Scottish Agriculture
Bill is expected to be introduced in 2023 to replace the CAP with a legal framework to support the future
Scottish vision for agriculture.
The Scottish Government continues to deliver on the Update to the Climate Change Plan 2018-2032,
published in 2020, which sets out a series of policies and proposals for agriculture to contribute to reaching
net-zero emissions by 2045. It commits to a co-development approach, working with stakeholders and
farmer-led groups to secure increased uptake of low emission farming measures through new schemes
and approaches, the development of environmental conditionality and enhanced advisory support. A key
underlying principle is that farmers should continue to receive regular and reliable income support,
conditional on the delivery of emissions reductions and biodiversity improvements. The plan sets out a
broad range of policies and actions for reducing agricultural emissions, including: the development of new
agricultural support measures; providing advice and guidance for farmers who wish to retire; developing
peer to peer knowledge transfer initiatives; supporting the dissemination of information and advice on
climate change mitigation measures; strengthening policies on nitrogen use; reviewing the storage and
application of silage, slurry and liquid digestate; exploring feed additive methane inhibitors and other
methods for livestock GHG emissions reduction; exploring options for land use change to multi-faceted
land use including forestry, peatland restoration and management and biomass production; supporting the
integration of small woodlands; and increasing peatland restoration and management.
Wales
The Basic Payment Scheme (BPS) has continued in Wales and will remain in place until at least the end
of 2023, providing stability and certainty to farmers following the United Kingdom’s transition out of the
European Union. Following a series of consultations on the future of agricultural support in Wales among
farmers, rural communities and environmental groups, the Welsh Government proposed the development
of a new Sustainable Farming Scheme in 2025 to provide income support to farmers in return for delivering
sustainable land management outcomes, such as water quality, biodiversity, and animal health.
The Agriculture (Wales) Bill was introduced to the Welsh Parliament (the Senedd) in 2022 and sets out the
most important policy changes the agricultural sector has seen in decades, with the main goal of reducing
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the food system. The bill sets Sustainable Land Management
(SLM) as the overarching framework for future support to agriculture and provides the basis for future
support schemes. The four SLM objectives included in the draft bill are:
•
To produce food and other goods in a sustainable manner.
•
To mitigate and adapt to climate change.
•
To maintain and enhance the resilience of ecosystems and the benefits they provide.
•
To conserve and enhance the countryside and cultural resources and promote public access to
and engagement with them, and to sustain the Welsh language and promote and facilitate its use.
The Welsh Government’s Environment (Wales) Act 2016 was updated in March 2021 setting a target of
net zero emissions by 2050. The Act requires a system of 5-year carbon budgets and interim targets, which
help to provide long-term predictability and ensure that regular progress is made towards the net zero
target. Under Section 39 of the Act, Welsh Ministers must prepare and publish a report setting out their
proposals for each budgetary period. The Net Zero Wales Carbon Budget 2 (2021-25) sets out an
ambitious vision for mitigation action through a series of practices to reduce emissions from soils (e.g. leys
and cover crops), livestock (e.g. diets, health, and breeding), and waste and manure management. In


618 

addition, measures have been introduced to release about 10% of agricultural land by 2050 to support tree
planting across Wales. The farming sector is a major driving force to achieve these goals with the National
Farmers’ Union of Wales (NFU Cymru) pledging to reach net zero emissions by 2040.
Northern Ireland
Pillar 1 of the EU CAP provided approximately EUR 327 million (USD 344 million) per annum of direct
support to Northern Ireland farmers, all of which was paid out as decoupled support on a per hectare basis.
Further measures were delivered under Pillar 2 of the CAP for the Northern Ireland Rural Development
Programme. CAP payments have continued during the transition period following the United Kingdom’s
exit from the European Union, through a series of measures including the Basic Payment Scheme,
Greening Payment, Young Farmers’ Payment, and Regional Reserve. The budget for CAP Pillar 1 direct
payments to farmers in Northern Ireland has been set at GBP 293.3 million (USD 362 million) per annum.
The Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA) launched the Future Agricultural
Policy Framework Portfolio for Northern Ireland on 24 August 2021. The framework sets out the direction
of future agricultural policy through four key targets: increased productivity, environmental sustainability,
improved resilience, and supply chain functionality. DAERA launched the Consultation on Future
Agricultural Policy Proposals for Northern Ireland on 21 December 2021. Based on these consultations
the Minister has announced 54 decisions that will contribute to the design of new domestic agricultural
policies, as well as targeted support measures.
The Climate Change Act (Northern Ireland) 2022 sets a target of net zero GHG emissions by 2050 for
Northern Ireland, along with interim targets including a 48% reduction in net emissions by 2030. Section 23
of the Act requires DAERA to make regulations that set carbon budgets, with the first three carbon budgets
for Northern Ireland (2023-2027, 2028-2032 and 2033-2037) due by December 2023. DAERA is required
to produce 5-year climate action plans to set out the policies that Northern Ireland will implement to meet
the corresponding carbon budget, as well as how the emissions reduction targets will be achieved.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
England
The third Climate Change Risk Assessment, published in 2022, identified 61 risks and opportunities from
climate change to the United Kingdom, including “risks and opportunities to agricultural productivity from
extreme events and changing climatic conditions”. The government is developing its response to all
61 risks and opportunities for the third National Adaptation Plan (NAP3), to be published in 2023 and
implemented over the next five years.
Defra has developed a range of measures to improve resilience and adaptation to climate change across
the agricultural sector. The three environmental land management schemes provide support for land
management practices such as actions to improve soil health and water resources, increase tree planting
on farms, and restore coastal habitats to support flood and coastal erosion risk management. Defra also
provides support for agricultural innovation through the Farming Innovation Programme, and Defra and
Natural England have expanded the Catchment Sensitive Farming Initiative to support farmers in
strengthening flood risk management and resilience.
The Farming and Countryside Programme (FCP) has set a target to increase the amount of water stored
by the agriculture and horticulture sectors by 66% by 2050 to support food production and protect the
environment. The programme offers grants to support on-farm reservoirs and investments in precise
irrigation application equipment. It intends to support climate change adaptation by reducing peak flow
demand and pressure on local water supplies during summer drought periods, and contributes to statutory
Environment Act targets to reduce per capita use of public water supply in England by 20% by 2037-38.


 619

Scotland
Scotland published an update to its 2018-32 Climate Change Plan in December 2020, setting out six
outcomes and a series of proposals for agriculture to help reach net-zero emissions by 2045. Some of the
outcomes in the Climate Change Plan also contribute to climate change adaptation, such as the
development of more productive and sustainable farming practices; information dissemination and
knowledge transfer initiatives; support for precision farming and nitrogen-efficient crop varieties and
fertiliser practices; measures to improve emissions intensities in livestock production; measures to reduce
emissions from the use and storage of manure and slurry; and promoting carbon sequestration through
increased planting of trees and hedgerows, and peatland restoration.
The Climate Ready Scotland: Second Scottish Climate Change Adaptation Programme 2019-2024 sets
out policies and proposals for climate change adaptation in agriculture. Several programmes and initiatives
help Scottish farmers adapt to a changing climate:
•
The Farming for a Better Climate provides practical advice and support to help farmers move
towards a sustainable, profitable, low-carbon future, adapting to a changing climate and securing
farm viability for future generations.
•
The Farm Advisory Service provides a one-stop-shop for farmers and land managers to obtain
high-quality advice and information on climate change adaptation and mitigation. The service offers
practical guides on farm practices that can help adapt to a changing climate, such as identifying
and relieving soil compaction, using cover crops to prevent soil loss, water management and
nutrient planning and use.
•
The Agri-Environment Climate Scheme and the National Test Programme provide payments for
land management and sustainable production practices that contribute to climate change
adaptation and mitigation.
Various research programmes have been implemented to support climate change adaptation in Scotland’s
agricultural sector. This includes the development of a free desktop app that provides climate change risk
assessments for crop pests and diseases, field trials and modelling of indigenous crop pathogens to inform
integrated pest management, spring barley yield maps to assess the potential for new areas to be exploited
under climate change, and soil risk maps to identify areas vulnerable to erosion, compaction, leaching,
and runoff.
Wales
The report “Prosperity for All: A Climate Conscious Wales” sets out the Welsh government’s national plan
for climate change adaptation. Actions being taken include tackling land management practices that
increase flood risk, promoting good soils and active nutrient management to increase the resilience of soils
and water, engaging in research on the risks to ecosystems and agriculture businesses from climate
change, and assessing future crop viabilities.
The Welsh Government also provides a range of programmes and support measures to encourage climate
change adaptation in the agricultural sector:
•
Grant schemes for the horticulture sector contribute towards new equipment that can improve
productivity and encourage the adoption of viable alternative species and varieties of plants and
trees in the face of climate change.
•
A new Organic Conversion Scheme supports farmers as they transition their land away from the
use of synthetic fertilisers and pesticides.
•
The Growing for the Environment grant scheme encourages the cultivation of crops and pastures
that provide an environmental benefit, such as mixed leys, cover crops, and protein crops.


620 

•
The Control of Agricultural Pollution Regulations aim to reduce the impacts of pesticides, fertilisers,
and manure on water quality, ecosystems, and soils.
•
The Red Meat Development Programme and the Dairy Improvement Programme support
sustainable practices to improve livestock health and productivity.
•
The Capability, Suitability and Climate Programme assessed a range of climate scenarios and the
potential for a range of cropping options and undertook research to assess how grass growth might
respond under future climate scenarios.
The Welsh government introduced the Agriculture Bill in the Senedd in September 2022, establishing
Sustainable Land Management as the framework for all future agricultural support. A package of support
worth over GBP 227 million (USD 280 million) will support farmers, foresters, land managers and food
businesses during the transitional period to the introduction of the Sustainable Farming Scheme. This
transitional support will encourage the adoption of low-carbon farming measures, land use change for
wider environmental goals, and sustainable food and farming supply chains. Investments in infrastructure
to enhance on-farm nutrient management will continue to be a priority, as will supporting small capital
works providing environmental improvements, such as new or restored hedgerows. From 2025 onwards,
the Sustainable Farming Scheme will support climate change resilience through measures such as
agroforestry, the creation and management of woodland, an enhanced biosecurity and animal disease
surveillance system, and the development of an Animal Health Improvement Cycle.
Northern Ireland
The Climate Change Act (Northern Ireland) 2022 received royal assent in June 2022 and commits Northern
Ireland to net-zero GHG emissions by 2050 while requiring Climate Action Plans to be developed and
published every five years by DAERA. A first Climate Action Plan for 2023-27 is currently being developed.
In March 2022, the DAERA Minister announced 54 policy decisions in relation to future agricultural policy
in Northern Ireland. The Farming for Carbon measure includes several programmes to encourage climate
change adaptation and mitigation, including low carbon emission farming practices, improvements in land
use policy, and encouraging carbon farming. For example, the Beef Sustainability Package encourages
farmers to improve productivity while reducing emissions, and a Ruminant Genetics Programme
encourages the breeding of more environmentally efficient cattle. Applied research and knowledge transfer
initiatives will promote the use of urease-inhibitor fertilisers and the optimal timing of fertiliser and slurry
applications. Peatland rewetting is being progressed through the Northern Ireland Peatland Strategy, and
the Northern Ireland Green Growth Strategy is helping to develop biomethane and hydrogen production
from agricultural waste. The launch of a national Soil Nutrient Health Scheme will support large-scale soil
sampling across approximately 700 000 fields during 2023-26, providing farmers with information to
optimise the application of crop nutrients to their soils and increase soil carbon sequestration.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
England
Under the Sustainable Farming Incentive scheme, England launched several new standards in 2022 to
pay farmers for environmental improvements relating to arable and horticultural soils, improved grassland
soils, and the moorlands. In addition, six new sustainable farming standards will be introduced in 2023
including: the hedgerow standard, the integrated pest management standard, the nutrient management
standard, the arable and horticultural land standard, the improved grassland standard and the low input
grassland standard.
Improvements have been introduced to the way the Countryside Stewardship scheme operates, including
simplifying processes and making inspections fairer and more proportionate. Currently efforts are focused


 621

on streamlining the application process, allowing farmers to manage their agreements more flexibly,
improving access to high quality advice, and allowing for more frequent quarterly payments. The scheme
will continue the offer currently available through the England Woodland Creation Offer once that scheme
has closed. Tenants will benefit from improved access to the scheme and expanded access to higher tier
options and agreements. Countryside Stewardship Plus will also be introduced, providing an extra
incentive for land managers to collaborate across local areas to deliver bigger and better results.
Furthermore, the Environmental Stewardship and Countryside Stewardship agreement holders will be
extended up to five years beyond their current end date, providing greater flexibility for agreement holders
to leave an existing agreement early if they are offered a place on another environmental scheme and to
help ensure a smooth transition to new schemes.
Under the Landscape Recovery scheme, 22 projects were awarded development funding covering over
40 000 hectares. These projects aim to restore nearly 700 km of rivers and to protect and provide habitat
for at least 263 species including water vole, otter, pine marten, lapwing, great crested newt, European eel
and marsh fritillary. The Landscape Recovery scheme will be opened for further applications in 2023 and
2024, primarily focused on projects of at least 500 hectares targeting net zero, protected sites and habitat
creation. This includes landscape-scale projects for creating and enhancing woodland, peatland, nature
reserves and protected sites such as ancient woodlands, wetlands, and salt marshes.
Several new grants are now available under the Farming Transformation Fund (a strand of the Farming
Investment Fund):
•
Water Management grants are offered towards the costs of construction of on-farm water storage
reservoirs filled by either peak flow surface water abstraction, borehole or rainwater harvested from
buildings, and other on-farm water infrastructure (e.g. irrigation pumps, water metering equipment,
software and sensors).
•
Improving Farm Productivity grants were launched in January 2022 and encourage the use and
adoption of innovative technologies such as robotic and automation equipment, on-farm renewable
energy production, LED wavelength-controlled lighting, and the more efficient use of livestock
slurries and digestate through acidification.
•
Adding Value grants were launched in June 2022 and are designed to support farmers to process
and add value to primary agricultural products. Support is provided for the purchase of equipment
and machinery, constructing or improving buildings, and innovative technologies for adding value
and processing.
The Slurry Infrastructure Grants were launched in December 2022 and help pig, beef and dairy farmers
improve or expand slurry storage capacity to six months. The grant aims to help farmers improve the use
of organic nutrients, leading to better water quality and reduced air pollution and GHG emissions.
In November 2022 Defra launched pilots to test different approaches to support new entrants to farming to
provide more opportunities for new entrants to access land and finance, and establish successful and
innovative businesses. These pilots have now finished and are being evaluated to inform next steps on a
new entrant support scheme to be announced in the autumn of 2023.
Animal health and welfare is an increasingly important priority. The Animals (Penalty Notices) Act 2022
gives ministers powers to introduce penalty notices for a wide range of animal health and welfare offences
in England, and more limited offences in Wales. In addition, Defra launched the Animal Health and Welfare
Pathway in partnership with the livestock sector, academics, charities, and experts. Financial assistance
to deliver improvements to animal health and welfare was expanded in 2023 with the launch of capital
grants ranging between GBP 1 000–GBP 25 000 (USD 1 200–USD 31 000) to co-finance equipment and
infrastructure to improve animal health and welfare in the pig, cattle, sheep, and poultry sectors. Funding
is also provided for a vet-led team to carry out a yearly on-farm review of animal health and welfare, carry
out diagnostic testing, review biosecurity and the use of medicines, and provide advisory services.


622 

Scotland
The CAP schemes continued in Scotland in 2022, facilitated by the Agriculture (Retained EU Law and
Data) (Scotland) Act 2020 which enables the continuation of CAP schemes until 2025. The Scottish
Government published its Vision for Scottish Agriculture on 2 March 2022. From August to
December 2022, a public consultation was held on the powers to be included in a proposed new Scottish
Agriculture Bill to replace the CAP.
In November 2022, the Scottish Government outlined their pathway and timeline for the future of
agricultural support in Scotland. According to this pathway, a new Scottish Agriculture Bill with a legal
framework to replace the rolled over CAP, and the modernisation of agricultural tenancies, will be
introduced in the autumn of 2023. The Future Support Framework is to be phased in from 2025 and will
enable conditional payments under four tiers:
•
Tier 1: a Base Level Direct Payment to provide income support to farmers, which could be made
conditional on meeting climate, biodiversity, and business efficiency outcomes.
•
Tier 2: an Enhanced Level Direct Payment, which offers additional measures to deliver outcomes
relating to efficiencies, reducing GHG emissions and nature restoration.
•
Tier 3: an Elective Payment, focused on targeted measures including nature restoration, support
for species or habitats, support for organic production, and innovation and supply chain support.
•
Tier 4: Complementary Support, to enable the delivery of continuous professional development,
advisory services, support for tree planting, woodland management, supply chain support,
peatland restoration and management, the agricultural transformation fund, support for areas of
natural constraint, and voluntary coupled support for the beef and sheep sectors.
The landscape policies and practices are expected to further evolve in response to climate change with
increasing support to woodlands, the restoration of peatlands, and land for growing biomass.
Wales
In July 2022, the Welsh Government published proposals for the Sustainable Farming Scheme (SFS), the
main delivery mechanism for future farm support to be introduced in 2025. The proposals include actions
to target reduced fertiliser and input use, benchmarking to improve business performance, and other
measures to strengthen farmers’ resilience. The Sustainable Land Management Framework was set out
in September 2022 as the overarching framework for future support for agriculture. Consultations and
engagement with stakeholders have taken place regarding the new schemes, and the second phase of
co-design is currently being analysed.
Ahead of the introduction of the SFS in 2025, the Welsh Government is continuing direct payments to
farmers at the same level as received over the last three years, confirming a budget of GBP 238 million
(USD 293 million) for the Basic Payment Scheme (BPS) in 2023 and an indicative budget of
GBP 238 million (USD 293 million) for BPS 2024. From January 2022, two-year extensions (to
December 2023) have been offered to Glastir Advanced, Commons and Organic contracts, representing
a budget commitment of GBP 66.8 million (USD 82.3 million) over two years. The Welsh Government has
developed proposals to deliver support during the period up to the introduction of the SFS, with funding
delivered to farmers, land managers and associated rural sectors across the following themes:
•
Farm scale land management: providing support for on-farm sustainable land management
actions.
•
On-farm environmental improvements: includes nutrient management, enhancing fuel and feed
efficiency, embedding circular economy approaches and encouraging the use of renewable
energy.


 623

•
On-farm efficiency and diversification: including supporting investments in new technology and
equipment and enabling opportunities for agricultural diversification.
•
Landscape-scale land management: delivering nature-based solutions at a landscape scale,
through a multi-sectoral collaborative approach.
•
Woodland and forestry: supporting 43 000 hectares of woodland creation by 2030 and supporting
the creation of a timber-based industrial strategy.
•
Food and farming supply chains: strengthening the Welsh food and drink industry and improving
its reputation for environmentally and socially responsible supply chains.
The next Farming Connect programme began on 1 April 2023 and will continue through to March 2025.
The programme helps to disseminate knowledge transfer activities and events to encourage improved
environmental performance and the transition of farming businesses away from BPS support.
Northern Ireland
Following the launch of the Future Agricultural Policy Framework Portfolio for Northern Ireland in
August 2021, a Consultation on Future Agricultural Policy Proposals for Northern Ireland ran from
21 December 2021 to 15 February 2022. DAERA published the Future Agricultural Policy Decisions for
Northern Ireland in March 2022, and the Minister announced 54 policy decisions on future agricultural
support. Decisions that are central to this future policy include:
•
A Farm Sustainability Payment, which provides income support through area-based payments for
plots larger than 5 hectares, with progressive capping of payments above GBP 60 000
(USD 74 000) per farm business.
•
A Beef Sustainability Package with two parts: a suckler cow measure and a beef carbon reduction
measure. Both measures provide headage payments and are aimed at increasing productivity,
improving the efficiency of resource use, and driving down GHG emissions.
•
A Farming with Nature Package, providing payments for habitat creation and restoration and
biodiversity improvements to land managers with 3 hectares or more of eligible agricultural land
(including land under conacre agreements and common land).
•
Farming for Carbon measures which encourage low emission farming practices, such as: a
Ruminant Genetics Programme to encourage more efficient cattle breeds, the use of urease
inhibitor fertilisers, the optimal timing of fertiliser and slurry applications and the establishment of
grassland swards with legumes and herbs to reduce fertiliser nitrogen use, peatland rewetting and
sustainable management under the Northern Ireland Peatland strategy, and biomethane and
hydrogen production from agricultural waste developed through the Green Growth Strategy.
•
Investments in agricultural knowledge and innovation systems, and the development of supply
chains. A Generational Renewal programme will encourage longer term planning for farm
businesses, and DAERA will invest in the initiation of an industry-led Ruminant Genetics
Programme.
Implementation of the Soil Nutrient Health Scheme continued with the opening of the application period for
the second of four zones. The publication of soil nutrient results and training on their interpretation and use
for Zone 1 applicants commenced in February 2023.
Domestic policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
In response to the rising cost of fertilisers, the government is monitoring the security and stability of fertiliser
and other supply chains and collaborating closely across government and devolved administrations as well
as with industry. In May 2022 Defra hosted Fertiliser Industry Taskforce meetings with key industry figures
including the National Farmers Union (NFU), the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board (AHDB)


624 

and the Agricultural Industries Confederation (AIC), and devolved administrations, and continues to
collaborate with industry on fertiliser price transparency.
In 2022 the Basic Payment Scheme payments were made in two instalments to support farmers by giving
them greater liquidity. Other actions taken include changes to guidance on farmers using manures,
increased grants for farmers and growers, and boosting R&D expenditure. AHDB published guidance,
advice, and webinar recordings to help farmers cope with high fertiliser prices. AHDB also published
reports commissioned by Defra, modelling the potential impact on arable and grassland yields of fertiliser
price rises. Additionally, Defra is working with food retailers and producers to tackle high food price inflation
(e.g. by maintaining “value range” food items, price matching and price freezing measures). Furthermore,
the government is providing GBP 26 billion (USD 32 billion) in cost of living support payments to over
8 million households across the United Kingdom for 2023-24.
The Energy Bills Discount Scheme runs from 1 April 2023 to 31 March 2024, replacing the Energy Bill
Relief Scheme which expired at the end of March 2023. This has three parts: a baseline discount for eligible
business customers in Great Britain and Northern Ireland; a higher level of support for Energy and Trade
Intensive Industries – including some food production and manufacturing businesses; and a Heat Network
discount for heat networks with domestic end customers.
In March 2022, the Scottish Government established a Short Life Food Security and Supply Taskforce
bringing together government and industry. The purpose of the Taskforce was to monitor and respond to
any potential disruption to food security and supply resulting from the impact of the ongoing conflict in
Ukraine. The Taskforce reported in June 2022 and delivered a series of recommendations to strengthen
overall food security in Scotland. The recommendations covered business and supply chain support, future
national food security structures, and reserved issues to be raised with the UK Government. All of the
recommendations have since been delivered including the establishment of the new Food Security Unit
within the Scottish Government. The Food Security Unit is currently focused on developing an evidence-
based system to monitor risks or threats to the supply chain to help mitigate future shocks and impacts on
food security.
Wales launched the Small Grants – Efficiency scheme in May 2022, providing grants of between
GBP 1 000–GBP 12 000 (USD 1 200–USD 14 800) to support capital investments in new equipment and
technology to increase technical performance, on-farm production efficiencies and resource efficiencies.
Officials have engaged closely with the UK Agriculture Market Monitoring Group (UKAMMG) to monitor
farm input costs, co-operating through the mechanism of the Provisional Common Framework for
Agricultural Support. The Welsh Government has also provided advice to farmers using an online resource
hub on the best application of fertiliser and fuel efficiency.
In Northern Ireland, a scheme worth up to GBP 1.6 million (USD 2 million) has been put in place to support
pig producers who have been financially impacted by rising input costs. To assist farmers with cash flow,
DAERA accelerated the issuance of direct payments worth GBP 293 million (USD 361 million), providing
them starting 1 September 2022, six weeks earlier than previous years. In addition, the Rising Costs
Industry Taskforce was established in April 2022. Led by the College of Agriculture, Food and Rural
Enterprises with cross-industry representation, the taskforce provides advice and practical support to
farmers on ways to manage rising costs, such as using fertilisers effectively.
Furthermore, the priority rating of 43 items eligible for grant aid through DAERA’s Farm Business
Improvement Scheme (Capital) – Tier 1, Tranche 4 was increased to reflect their potential to assist in
addressing the issues of higher feed, fuel and fertiliser costs as a result of the war in Ukraine. The items
fall under several categories including precision farming, grassland management, energy efficiency, silage
quality, feed efficiency, sward renovation or reseeding, and reduced feed costs.


 625

Trade policy developments in 2022-23
The Australia-United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement was signed on 17 December 2021. Following
ratification by the UK Parliament and Royal assent on 23 March 2023, the agreement entered into force
on 31 May 2023. The agreement provides enhanced market access for UK agricultural and food exports.
It will also ease the movement of skilled workers between Australia and the United Kingdom, and
establishes enhanced technical collaboration on biosecurity, animal welfare and antimicrobial resistance.
The New Zealand-United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement was signed on 28 February 2022 and entered
into force on 31 May 2023. The agreement removes customs duties for a range of food products, such as
wine, honey, onions, kiwifruit, and a range of dairy products. Dairy and horticultural products will be 100%
tariff free within seven years of the agreement’s entry into force. Trade in other products, such as beef and
sheep meat, will be liberalised over a longer time frame of 10 years and 15 years respectively.
On 31 March 2023, the United Kingdom concluded negotiations to join the Comprehensive and
Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), a free trade agreement (FTA) including
11 members: Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore,
and Viet Nam. CPTPP membership will improve trade opportunities with all countries in the bloc, including
those with whom the United Kingdom has an existing bilateral trade deal. The negotiation outcome will be
set out in a Protocol of Accession that is now undergoing legal review. This document and the market
access schedules will be published at signature. The agreement provides the United Kingdom with tariff-
free access for goods exports (including agricultural and food products) in several markets, as well as
access to preferential tariffs for several protected products in certain CPTPP members. This includes
increased cheese quotas in Canada, staged tariff liberalisation on dairy exports to Chile, access to tariff
preferences for dairy and cereals exports to Japan, reduced tariffs for chocolate, sugar confectionery and
whisky exports to Malaysia, access to preferential tariffs for dairy, chocolate and sugar confectionery, beef,
pork and poultry in Mexico, staged tariff liberalisation on beef and poultry exports to Peru, and the
elimination of tariffs on chocolate and pork exports to Viet Nam.
Under the Australia and New Zealand FTAs and the CPTPP tariff liberalisation for sensitive goods will be
phased in over time. The United Kingdom’s most sensitive products such as beef and sheep meat will be
subject to measures including tariff rate quotas (TRQs) and product specific safeguards. These measures
will limit the volume of duty-free imports permitted and in the case of beef and sheep meat will be in place
for 15 years. An additional general bilateral safeguard mechanism will also be in place for all products,
providing a temporary safety net for domestic producers if they face serious injury, or the threat of serious
injury, from increased imports as a direct consequence of the FTAs. This protection will last for a product’s
tariff liberalisation period plus five years to allow domestic producers time for readjustment.
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
In May 2022, an agreement in the form of an exchange of letters was reached between the United Kingdom
and Ukraine, allowing for a temporary elimination of all customs duties on goods for a period of 12 months.
The agreement was expected to increase exports of Ukrainian agricultural products to the United Kingdom,
including flour, dairy products, poultry, and tomato paste. It was implemented by amending the Political,
Free Trade and Strategic Partnership Agreement between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and Ukraine. In March 2023, in parallel to the signature of the UK-Ukraine Digital Trade
Agreement, the United Kingdom pledged to extend the removal of tariffs on all Ukrainian products until
March 2024.


626 

Contextual information
Agriculture accounts for a relatively small share of the United Kingdom’s economy, representing less than
1% of GDP and total employment, which is significantly less than the OECD average. The share of
livestock in total agricultural production is 60%, and the share of crop production is 40% (Table 28.3).
Table 28.3. United Kingdom: Contextual indicators

United Kingdom
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
1 563
3 352
3.9%
2.7%
Population (million)
59
67
1.4%
1.3%
Land area (thousand km2)
242
242
0.3%
0.3%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
16 964
17 259
0.6%
0.6%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
242
277
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
26 542
49 765
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
20.0
18.1
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
0.9
0.8
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
1.5
0.9
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
5.2
6.2
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
7.8
9.4
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
41
40
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
59
60
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
35
35
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Real GDP growth has remained steady over the past two decades, ranging between 1.4% and 3.5%, with
the exception of the recession following the global financial crisis in 2008-09, and significant contraction
linked to the COVID-19 pandemic which started in 2020 (Figure 28.5). The easing of health measures and
high level of pent-up consumer demand resulted in a sharp rebound with real GDP growth reaching 7.5%
in 2021 and remaining strong at 4.4% in 2022.
The unemployment rate was steady at around 5% in the early 2000s, and increased to more than 8% in
the aftermath of the global financial crisis. Unemployment has been declining steadily since 2011 and
reached a low point of 3.7% in 2022. In contrast, inflation rose to a multi-decade high of 8% in 2022, driven
by rising energy and food prices, supply chain bottlenecks, and strong consumer demand.


 627

Figure 28.5. United Kingdom: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
The United Kingdom is a net importer of agricultural and food products (Figure 28.6). Over the last two
decades, the share of agro-food exports in total exports has increased to 6%, while agro-food imports now
account for more than 9% of total imports. The composition of agro-food trade in 2020 shows that the
majority (74%) of exports are processed goods for consumption, while 14% of goods exported are
processed for industry. In terms of imports, the majority (55%) are processed goods for consumption,
followed by primary goods for consumption which account for 21% of imports.


628 

Figure 28.6. United Kingdom: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural output growth averaged 0.8% per year between 2011-20, less than half of the global average
(Figure 28.7). Total factor productivity (TFP) growth has been close to zero over the past decade, and
production growth was entirely driven by increased use of both primary factors and intermediate inputs.
Environmental indicators point to improvements over the past two decades (Table 28.4). The nitrogen
balance fell by around 20%, the phosphorous balance declined by about 40%, and the share of agriculture
United Kingdom - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
20
40
60
80
United Kingdom - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
13
13
14
14
7
10
10
74
74
55
55
5
5
21
21
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


 629

in water abstractions (14%) is significantly below the OECD average (50%). However, the sector’s share
of total energy use and of GHG emissions grew over the same period and the nitrogen balance remains
more than twice the OECD average. Agricultural GHG emissions have not fallen as quickly as other sectors
(in particular energy), and now equate to about 10% of total GHG emissions in the United Kingdom, slightly
below the OECD average.
Figure 28.7. United Kingdom: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 28.4. United Kingdom: Productivity and environmental indicators

United Kingdom
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
0.4%
0.1%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
107.0
86.1
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
10.0
5.8
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
0.8
1.1
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
6.5
10.0
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
0.8
0.4
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
..
14.2
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
6.2
4.3
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


United Kingdom - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
0.06%
0.06%
1.12%
1.12%
0.26%
0.26%
0.35%
0.35%
0.48%
0.48%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
United Kingdom
World
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%
2.5%


630 

References

Climate Change Committee (2020), The Sixth Carbon Budget: Agriculture and land use, land
use change and forestry, https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Sector-
summary-Agriculture-land-use-land-use-change-forestry.pdf.
[2]
GOV.UK (2021), Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/net-zero-strategy.
[1]




 631

Support to agriculture
Support to agricultural producers in the United States declined in 2022 as temporary payment programmes
connected to the COVID-19 pandemic wound down. Support has been below the OECD average for many
years, and producer support averaged 9% of gross receipts in 2020-22, well below the 20% of the mid-
1980s and early 2000s. Policy reforms beginning in the 1980s progressively reduced the level of support
and the prominence of price-based supports in the policy mix. The share of potentially most-distorting
transfers was 15% in 2020-22, also below the OECD average and well below peak values. Prices received
by farmers in 2020-22 were on average only 1% higher than in world markets, compared to 11% in 2000-
02. This gap is mainly due to market price support (MPS) from border protections (including tariff rate
quotas) for sugar. Producer prices of most commodities align with border prices, and the value of budgetary
transfers directed at specific commodities is usually less than 10% of their gross farm receipts.
While MPS has declined, budgetary support has increased, covering mainly risk-management, crop
insurance, and more recently, emergency compensation payments. The counter-cyclical nature of
budgetary support links it to market price developments such that periods of high commodity prices (as in
2012-13) see lower levels of support. Domestic commodity prices have risen again in recent years,
lowering overall support despite additional spending on disaster-relief programmes related to drought and
other exceptional events.
US domestic food-assistance programmes that support consumers account for nearly half of total U.S.
support to agriculture. Expenditures for general services (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE)
equalled 2.6% of the value of production in 2020-22, below the OECD average of 3.4%, with the largest
component (30%) related to institutional infrastructure for crop insurance. Agricultural knowledge transfer
and marketing and promotion are the next largest components. Total support to agriculture was 0.5% of
Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
Recent policy changes
Two temporary programmes were launched in 2022 to compensate for losses incurred from natural
disasters in 2020 and 2021. The Emergency Livestock Relief Program (ELRP) Phase One provided
additional early relief payments to ranchers because of increases in feed costs in 2021. The Emergency
Relief Program (ERP) covered losses due to qualifying natural disasters in 2020 and 2021.
The Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities initiative launched in 2022, providing USD 3.1 billion for
141 pilot projects to help producers implement climate-smart production practices, verify greenhouse-gas
(GHG) reduction benefits, and expand markets for resulting climate-smart commodities.
Various US Department of Agriculture (USDA) conservation programmes – including the Environmental
Quality Incentives Program (EQIP), Regional Conservation Partnership Program (RCPP), Conservation
Stewardship Program (CSP), Agricultural Conservation Easement Program (ACEP), and the Conservation
Technical Assistance (CTA) Program – received substantial funding infusions with the passage of the
29 United States


632 

Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), which provided approximately USD 20 billion in new spending over ten years,
designated to support adoption of specific practices with climate benefits in these programmes.
Additional measures were launched in 2022 to improve equity for underserved communities, including
investments in Equity Conservation Cooperative Agreements, funding outreach and assistance
programmes with money appropriated in the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (P.L. 117-2), and the
release of the USDA Equity Action Plan.1
The Consolidated Appropriations Act (CAA) 2023 was signed into law in December 2022. It authorises
funding for new ad hoc disaster-assistance and a programme to facilitate voluntary environmental markets,
allowing more private funding for public-private partnerships to address specific climate or environmental
priorities, and reauthorising the Pesticide Registration Improvement Act.
Assessment and recommendations
•
Climate-change adaptation policies are well-developed and comprehensive. They cover a
spectrum of activities, including forecasting, preparedness, recovery, and changes in practices.
Climate change adaptation is being integrated into research and development efforts, and activities
are underway to translate that information for farmers and ranchers who need to deal with weather
emergencies and a changing climate. Prioritisation of climate adaptation should continue to ensure
mainstreaming of climate risk and adaptation in all USDA programmes.
•
USDA Climate Hubs are good examples of how decision-making and information tools can be
tailored to the needs of the sector according to region and natural hazard. The hubs can integrate
consideration of climate change impacts into farm programmes by raising stakeholders’ awareness
and providing analytical support.
•
Several layers of risk-management programming are available to farmers – some general and
some for specific commodities. Longstanding federal crop insurance exists alongside temporary
disaster programmes that were deployed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, value-chain
disruptions, and drought. While risk-management is an important component of climate-adaptation
policy and resilience, too-strong an emphasis on protecting farmers from revenue declines (the
absorption capacity) can slow long-term adaptation and transformation of production practices.
More attention should thus go to ensuring subsidy rates and other relevant programme parameters
do not create a guaranteed return or income stream on the producer’s premium, and that insurance
and disaster programmes provide appropriate incentives for preparedness and long-term
adaptation.
•
Policies to improve services to historically underserved or vulnerable communities and improve
equity in programme delivery have continued to expand since their introduction. Focussing on the
needs of underserved or vulnerable communities can increase the resilience and diversity of the
farming community and improve environmental justice. These efforts should be mainstreamed into
agricultural policy by systematically evaluating and improving the way all agricultural programmes
affect equity and diversity in the farm sector.
•
Sugar is the only US commodity in the Producer Support Estimate (PSE) that receives MPS. At
about 43% of revenue, the amount is significant. Current in-quota tariff allocation of raw sugar to
trading partners is based on a 1975-81 reference period. This allocation should be revised and
gradually increased to provide improved opportunities for countries in development to trade with
the United States.
•
Increased funding to conservation programmes provided under the IRA is an important step in
orienting support towards environmental objectives, including for climate-change mitigation and
adaptation. Given the high demand for participation in these programmes, future farm bills should
maintain this funding level after the end of IRA spending. The increased funding should pay careful


 633

attention to ensuring environmental additionality, where actions by producers are relevant to local
environmental concerns and deliver verifiable improvements. Reallocating spending currently
directed at commodity programmes is a budget-neutral way to do this.
•
While aggregate environmental performance (measured by nitrogen and phosphorus balances) is
in line with the OECD average, local hotspots of pollution remain problematic despite federal and
state programmes to encourage best management practices. Solutions will require a willingness
to experiment with new options and co-ordination between regions when the sources and impacts
of pollution emissions cross political boundaries.




634 

Figure 29.1. United States: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
United States - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
United States - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
United States - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
1
1.025
1.05
1.075
1.1
1.125
United States - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
United States - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
0%
0.25%
0.5%
0.75%
1%
1.25%


 635

Figure 29.2. United States: Drivers of the change in PSE, 2021 to 2022

Note: % change of nominal Producer Support Estimate expressed in national currency.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Figure 29.3. United States: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
%
United States - Figure 2. Drivers of the change in PSE, 2020 to 2022
PSE
Price Gap
Quantity
Budgetary Payments
Producer Price
Border price
Exchange Rate
Border Price in USD
Border price change decomposition
Change in producer price
PSE change decomposition
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
United States - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Alfalfa
Wheat
Barley
Maize
Sorghum
Rice
Soybeans
Sugar
Milk
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Sheep meat
Eggs
Wool
Cotton
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
55%


636 

Table 29.1. United States: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

1986-88
2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
143 469
193 454
455 239
377 555
459 266
528 897
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
78.31
73.64
79.97
77.38
80.68
81.84
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
124 148
164 683
365 421
299 891
361 338
435 033
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
34 253
43 724
44 089
38 369
53 011
40 887
Support based on commodity output
14 031
19 648
4 919
8 537
3 670
2 549
Market Price Support1
10 922
12 467
2 207
1 947
2 214
2 462
Positive Market Price Support
11 008
12 467
2 207
1 947
2 214
2 462
Negative Market Price Support
-86
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on output
3 108
7 181
2 712
6 591
1 457
87
Payments based on input use
7 061
7 572
10 066
9 137
9 526
11 535
Based on variable input use
3 697
3 091
2 265
1 783
1 894
3 117
with input constraints
739
168
712
643
483
1 011
Based on fixed capital formation
1 233
361
2 038
2 056
1 950
2 109
with input constraints
1 233
358
1 910
2 038
1 855
1 838
Based on on-farm services
2 131
4 120
5 763
5 299
5 683
6 309
with input constraints
349
677
1 811
1 687
1 811
1 936
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
12 231
5 655
22 492
16 154
28 902
22 421
Based on Receipts / Income
912
2 055
2 729
2 327
3 087
2 773
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
11 319
3 600
19 763
13 827
25 815
19 648
with input constraints
2 565
1 570
19 738
13 773
25 806
19 636
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
1 010
2
2 703
324
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
338
8 789
3 707
2 623
6 295
2 204
With variable payment rates
0
3 969
3 707
2 623
6 295
2 204
with commodity exceptions
0
3 969
3 707
2 623
6 295
2 204
With fixed payment rates
338
4 819
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
4 819
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
592
2 061
1 895
1 915
1 915
1 854
Based on long-term resource retirement
592
2 050
1 881
1 909
1 892
1 842
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
11
14
7
23
12
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
20.54
19.46
8.87
9.27
10.39
7.21
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.11
1.11
1.01
1.02
1.01
1.01
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.26
1.24
1.10
1.10
1.12
1.08
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
3 108
6 164
11 644
9 536
11 823
13 573
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
1 129
1 805
2 888
2 726
2 924
3 013
Inspection and control
372
685
1 321
1 271
1 300
1 391
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
13
461
3 587
2 296
3 463
5 002
Marketing and promotion
495
957
2 026
1 586
2 231
2 260
Cost of public stockholding
0
107
2
1
2
4
Miscellaneous
1 100
2 149
1 821
1 656
1 903
1 903
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
6.55
8.89
9.56
9.44
9.07
10.12
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-1 647
5 191
61 404
48 832
60 980
74 400
Transfers to producers from consumers
-10 379
-12 173
-2 207
-1 946
-2 213
-2 462
Other transfers from consumers
-1 651
-2 061
-2 508
-2 328
-2 376
-2 821
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
10 089
19 425
66 119
53 106
65 570
79 682
Excess feed cost
294
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage CSE (%)
-1.44
3.57
20.52
19.79
20.62
20.94
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.11
1.09
1.01
1.01
1.01
1.01
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.01
0.97
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.83
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
47 450
69 314
121 852
101 011
130 404
134 142
Transfers from consumers
12 030
14 234
4 715
4 274
4 589
5 282
Transfers from taxpayers
37 071
57 141
119 645
99 065
128 190
131 681
Budget revenues
-1 651
-2 061
-2 508
-2 328
-2 376
-2 821
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
0.97
0.65
0.52
0.48
0.56
0.53
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
36 528
56 847
119 645
99 065
128 190
131 680
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
0.75
0.54
0.51
0.47
0.55
0.52
GDP deflator (1986-88=100)
100
139
210
199
208
222
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for the United States are: wheat, maize, barley,
sorghum, alfalfa, cotton, rice, soybean, sugar, milk, beef and veal, sheep meat, wool, pig meat, poultry and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




 637

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
The US Congress passes legislation that sets national agriculture, nutrition, conservation, and forestry
policy, commonly referred to as the “Farm Bill”. The Farm Bill is an omnibus bill that is renewed on a regular
basis, about every five years. Since 1933, the United States has passed 18 farm bills, the most recent
being the Agricultural Improvement Act of 2018.
Historically, the commodity support component of Farm Bills focused on stabilising and boosting farm
income to aid economic recovery and development during the Depression and post-war eras through price
and income support for a specified set of commodities, including but not limited to corn, soybeans, wheat,
cotton, rice, peanuts, dairy, and sugar (OECD, 2011[1]). Over time, Farm Bills expanded in scope: the
1973 Farm Bill first included a nutrition title while subsequent farm bills added titles on policy areas such
as agricultural trade, farm credit, rural development and crop insurance. The 1985 Farm Bill added
conservation provisions; the 1990 Farm Bill, organic agriculture; the 1996 Farm Bill, agricultural research;
the 2002 Farm Bill, bioenergy; and the 2008 Farm Bill, horticulture and local food systems (Congressional
Research Service, 2019[2]).
Agricultural policy reform in the United States has been characterised by a significant shift towards less
production- and trade-distorting forms of support. Commodity programmes originally supported farm
incomes through a combination of taxpayer-funded production payments and supply management in the
form of acreage limits and commodity storage programmes. The Food Security Act of 1985 introduced
changes that moved farmers towards more market orientation by reducing price supports in favour of direct
payments, introducing greater planting flexibility and giving more attention to export opportunities for US
farm products (OECD, 2011[1]).
Reforms continued with subsequent Farm Bills. The 1996 Farm Bill2 re-designed income support
programmes by replacing target prices, price-based deficiency payments and acreage controls with
historically based direct payments independent of current production. A series of ad hoc emergency top-
up payments supplemented the historically based payments implemented under the 1996 Farm Bill to
provide additional assistance in the face of low commodity prices. These ad hoc payments were
institutionalised under the 2002 Farm Bill3 as counter-cyclical payments linked to the historically based
direct payments, and continued under the 2008 Farm Bill4 (OECD, 2011[1]). The 2014 Farm Bill ended
these direct and counter-cyclical payments but continued direct income support based on historical
production with programmes triggering payments based on either reference prices or revenue
benchmarks. It also ended the dairy price support programme, replacing it with a premium-based milk-to-
feed margin protection programme. The 2018 Farm Bill continued these programmes with only small
adjustments (Table 29.2).
The largest of the farm programmes in the Farm Bill, the Federal Crop Insurance Programme (FCIP), was
established in the 1930s to cover yield losses from most natural causes.5 The programme’s current form
was authorised by the Federal Crop Insurance Act of 1980 and modified by subsequent Farm Bills and
other legislation. The 1980 Act introduced federal premium subsidies and brought in private insurance
companies (Approved Insurance Providers, or AIPs) to deliver crop insurance policies. The catastrophic
(CAT) coverage level was created in 1994, under which 100% of the premium is subsidised and producers
pay a fee for coverage of yield loss greater than 50% at 55% of the base commodity price.6 The Agricultural
Risk Protection Act of 2000 expanded the geographic availability of insurance, increased premium subsidy
levels, and removed restrictions on livestock insurance products.


638 

Table 29.2. United States: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1980
Federal Crop Insurance Act of 19801
Introduced federal premium subsidies for crop insurance (30% at the 65% coverage level)
Created a public-private partnership with private insurance companies (Approved
Insurance Providers), which became responsible for delivering crop insurance policies
1985
Food Security Act of 1985
Established marketing loans for cotton and rice, removing market price support element of
cotton and rice commodity loans
Set up the Export Enhancement Programme and the Dairy Export Incentive Programme.
Established the Conservation Reserve Programme (CRP)
Established conservation cross-compliance requirements (highly erodible land and wetland
conservation provisions)
1990
Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and
Trade Act of 1990
Introduced 15% “normal flex acres” and 10% “optional flex acres”
Extended marketing loan provisions to oilseeds in 1991, and to wheat and feed grains in
1993
Allowed oilseeds and alternative crops to be planted on land in a 0/85-92 programme
without loss of payments.
1994
Federal Crop Insurance Reform and
Department of Agriculture
Reorganization Act of 19941
Catastrophic (CAT) crop insurance coverage level created
Increased premium subsidies for higher coverage levels (buy-up coverage)

1996
Federal Agriculture Improvement and
Reform Act of 1996
Replaced crop deficiency payments and target prices with fixed direct payments decoupled
from current prices and production levels to be reduced over time
Eliminated most planting restrictions
Extended marketing loan provisions to most other covered crops and created alternative
direct Loan Deficiency Payments (LDP)
Phased-out the dairy support price (although interim legislation modified this provision)
Consolidated cost share and technical assistance programmes for crop and livestock
producers into the Environmental Quality Incentives Programme (EQIP)
Extended CRP authorisation and capped enrolment
Lifted conservation cross-compliance requirements for crop insurance participation
2000
Agricultural Risk Protection Act of 20001
Expanded the geographic availability of crop insurance, increased premium subsidy levels,
and removed restrictions on development of livestock insurance products
2002
Farm Security and Rural Investment Act
of 2002
Annually decreasing Production Flexibility Contract payments replaced by fixed Direct
Payments programme
Created the Counter-Cyclical Payments programme triggering supplemental direct income
support payments when prices fell below targets
Added soybeans and peanuts as covered commodities under the fixed Direct Payment and
Counter-Cyclical Payments programme
Increased payments for environmental conservation and protection
Eliminated peanut price support quota system, buying out peanut quota rights
2008
Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of
2008
Retained Direct Payment, Counter-Cyclical Payment and Marketing Assistance Loan
programmes
Created the Average Crop Revenue Election (ACRE) as a revenue-based alternative to the
Counter-Cyclical Payment programme
Changed the dairy price support programme basis from milk price to prices of dairy
products
Increased marketing assistance loan rates and Counter-Cyclical Payment programme
target prices for a number of programme crops and sugar
Introduced a permanent disaster assistance programme (Supplemental Agricultural
Disaster Assistance) to end the need for ad hoc programmes
Significantly increased funding for domestic food assistance programmes
Ended the Export Enhancement Programme


 639

Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
2014
Agricultural Act of 2014
Repealed Direct Payment, Counter-Cyclical Payment, and ACRE programmes; created the
Price Loss Coverage (PLC) and Agriculture Risk Coverage (ARC), which used the historical
payment base established for the repealed programmes
Added new crop insurance options: Supplemental Coverage Option (SCO), Stacked
Income Protection Plan (STAX) for upland cotton; Expanded the Noninsured Crop
Assistance Programme (NAP) to allow for higher premium-based coverage
Re-established conservation cross-compliance requirement to receive crop insurance
premium subsidies
Expanded programmes for specialty crops, organic farmers, bioenergy, rural development,
and beginning farmers and ranchers, continuing orientation to technical assistance,
research, and development loans.
2018
Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018
Continued 2014 Farm Bill programmes with only minor changes, with some additions to
programmes for specialty crops, organic farmers, local and regional markets, and
beginning, military veteran and minority farmers.
1. Crop insurance legislation.
Source: Congressional Research Service (2018[3]); OECD (2011[1]; 2014[4]; 2019[5]); USDA ERS (2020[6]).
Average producer support has declined as the importance of emergency payments (related to COVID-19,
drought, and supply chain issues) reduced in 2022. Support now approaches historical lows and the overall
pattern and level of support is stable. In 2022, most budgetary support was based on payments that require
production and were based on either area planted or animal numbers, including the Federal Crop
Insurance Program and certain disaster programmes. Sugar is the only commodity with MPS (Figure 29.4).
Figure 29.4. United States: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
United States - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25


640 

Main policy instruments
The Agricultural Improvement Act of 2018 (the 2018 Farm Bill) provides the basic legislation governing
farm programmes for 2019 to 2023. The twelve titles of the 2018 Farm Bill authorise policies for commodity
programmes, conservation on agricultural land, agricultural trade promotion and international food aid,
nutrition programmes, farm credit, rural development, agricultural research, forestry on private lands,
energy, horticulture and organic agriculture, and crop insurance. Initial projections were that around 76%
of budgetary spending under the 2018 Farm Bill would be for programmes in the Nutrition title – primarily
the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Programme (SNAP) – with farm programmes accounting for less
than 25% of projected budgetary outlays. Of the farm programmes, crop insurance was projected to
account for 9% of total expenditures, and Commodities and Conservation for 7% each. The remaining titles
together accounted for 1% of projected spending.
The primary crop commodity programmes under the 2018 Farm Bill include programmes that make
payments to producers with historical base acres7 of programme crops (wheat, feed grains, rice, oilseeds,
peanuts, pulses and seed cotton) when prices fall below minimums set out in the legislation or when crop
revenue is low relative to recent levels. Producers are not required to produce the covered commodity to
receive payments on their historical base. Price Loss Coverage (PLC), a counter-cyclical price programme,
makes a payment when market prices for covered crops fall below effective reference prices.8 Agriculture
Risk Coverage (ARC), a revenue-based programme, makes a payment when actual revenue at the county
level falls below rolling average benchmark revenues. For both programmes, payments are made on 85%
of base acres. Participating producers were required to choose between the PLC and ARC programmes9
on a commodity-by-commodity basis for 2019 and 2020, then annually for each year for 2021-23.
The crop insurance programme offers coverage options for both yield and revenue losses. Traditional crop
insurance offers subsidised crop insurance to producers who purchase a policy to protect against losses
in yield, crop revenue, or whole farm revenue. In addition, the Supplementary Coverage Option (SCO) and
Stacked Income Protection Plan (STAX) offer area-based insurance coverage, SCO in combination with
traditional crop insurance policies and STAX for upland cotton producers.
Marketing assistance loans are available for wheat, feed grains, upland cotton, rice, oilseeds, pulses, wool,
mohair and honey. These loans provide cash flow at harvest when prices are typically lower, allowing
farmers to delay sales until market conditions improve. These are non-recourse loans that can be repaid
at market prices when those fall below the loan rate, although market prices for most commodities have
been above loan rates in recent years.
For dairy producers, the Dairy Margin Coverage (DMC) programme, insures a producer-elected margin-
level between a nationally defined milk price and feed costs for a premium, with payments made on
enrolled historical milk production. Producers may participate in both DMC and dairy livestock insurance
programmes. Under the Milk Donation Reimbursement Programme (MDP) fluid milk producers with pre-
approved plans may be reimbursed for costs incurred in donating fluid beverage milk to low-income groups.
Sugar is supported by a tariff rate quota (TRQ), together with provisions for non-recourse loans (which are
not eligible for the repayment provisions discussed above) and marketing allotments. TRQs are in place
for dairy, beef and some other products. However, US agricultural tariffs are generally low, at 4.5% on
average in 2021.
Federal agri-environmental programmes focus on land retirement, easements restricting land use options
and measures to encourage crop and livestock producers to adopt practices that reduce environmental
pressures on working land (cropland and grazing land in production). Working land programmes include
the Environmental Quality Incentives Programme (EQIP) and the Conservation Stewardship Programme
(CSP). Land retirement and easement programmes include the Agricultural Conservation Easement
Programme (ACEP) and the Conservation Reserve Programme (CRP). The Regional Conservation
Partnership Programme offers options for regional or watershed-based conservation efforts that may


 641

combine both land retirement, easements, and working lands programmes. Production of ethanol and
other biofuels is supported mainly in the form of mandated blending for fuel use, and loan and grant
programmes. Eligibility for most federal commodity programme payments, including crop insurance
premium subsidies, is subject to recipients having established an individual farm-based conservation plan
to protect highly erodible cropland and wetlands.
Other farm programmes include direct and guaranteed loans (including microloans) for farmland purchase
and for operating credit, designed to assist producers who face difficulty obtaining credit in the private
market, particularly beginning, military veteran and socially disadvantaged farmers. Farm Bill programmes
also support public agricultural research and technical assistance, including programmes targeted to
specialty crops; organic production; pest and disease prevention; the promotion of sustainable farming
practices; and standing disaster programmes for livestock, forage, and trees, bushes and vines to help
producers cope with production, financial and physical losses related to or caused by natural disasters.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
The US Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement set an economy-wide target
of reducing GHG emissions 50-52% below 2005 levels by 2030, covering all sectors (United States,
2020[7]). The NDC does not contain sector-specific targets but acknowledges that agriculture and land use
will likely contribute to meeting overall GHG emissions targets. The NDC states that the United States will
support scaling up climate-smart agricultural practices such as cover crops, reforestation, rotational
grazing, and nutrient-management. The US is also party to the Global Methane Pledge, which commits
countries to reducing methane emissions at least 30% from 2020 levels by 2030. While it focuses on fossil
methane, the pledge covers all sources, including agricultural emissions.
Several programmes with broad conservation objectives offer climate-mitigation benefits, including CRP,
CSP, EQIP, CTA, RCPP, and ACEP. These received substantial new funding in 2022 with the passage of
the IRA.
USDA climate-adaptation efforts operate within US-government climate-change adaptation frameworks
and statutory authorities. These include:
•
climate-change risk-assessment undertaken through the US Global Change Research
Programme’s Fourth National Climate Assessment released in 2018, which includes specific
attention on “Reducing Risks through Adaptation Actions”
•
the US’ 7th National Communication to the UNFCCC of October 2021 and the related Adaptation
Communication of November 2021
•
Executive Order (EO) 14008 of 27 January 2021, “Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad”
•
EO 14057 of 8 December 2021, “Catalyzing Clean Energy Industries and Jobs Through Federal
Sustainability”
•
The Global Climate Change Prevention Act of 1990 (Title XXIV of the Food, Agriculture,
Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 P.L. 101–624)
In response to the EO titled “Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad”, the USDA revised its Policy
Statement on Climate Adaptation in May 2021 to provide direction on the development of a USDA-wide
Climate Change Adaptation Plan and development of Adaptation Plans by relevant USDA Mission Areas,
agencies, and staff offices. The policy statement was followed by an Action Plan for Climate Adaptation
and Resilience in October 2021. The plan highlighted climate vulnerabilities facing the sector and
overarching adaptation actions to address these vulnerabilities, including:
•
building resilience across landscapes with investments in soil and forest health
•
increasing outreach and education to promote adoption and application of climate-smart adaptation
strategies


642 

•
broadening access to and availability of climate data at regional and local scales for USDA Mission
Areas, producers, land managers, and other stakeholders
•
increasing support for research and development of climate-smart practices and technologies to
inform the USDA and help producers and land-managers adapt to a changing climate
•
leveraging USDA Climate Hubs as a framework to support USDA Mission Areas in delivering
adaptation science, technology, and tools
Agency-level action plans were developed by 16 sub-entities of the USDA to identify climate-change
impacts and vulnerabilities to each entity’s mission, and prioritise actions to address these vulnerabilities
and integrate climate-adaptation into their planning, programmes, operations, and management. Common
themes in these plans are: increasing climate-literacy among employees; contingency-planning to maintain
critical operations during extreme weather; addressing vulnerabilities of historically underserved farmers
and ranchers; and making use of the USDA Climate Hubs.10
Efforts to assist farmers in buffering the impact from a shock in the short term
Weather-forecasting and increasing situational awareness are key short-term aids for farmers. Forecasting
the availability of inputs such as water and forage can help farmers adapt their operations to a range of
expected conditions. The US offers several platforms to provide farmers with information on weather and
climate-related events:
•
The USDA World Agricultural Outlook Board (WAOB) Meteorology Unit offers daily weather
highlights and weekly weather and crop bulletins, supporting real-time intelligence for domestic and
global crop conditions in the context of the monthly World Agricultural Supply and Demand
Estimates (WASDE) report.
•
The US Drought Monitor reports various indicators related to drought and provides forecasts and
outlook products (for the coming month, upcoming season, and climate outlook for temperature
and rainfall for the coming year). Time-series data, tables, graphs, and Geographic Information
System (GIS) data are available for public download.
•
Grass-Cast provides seasonal forecast maps of how much grass is projected to grow through the
Spring and Summer months on rangelands throughout the western US to inform livestock-
management and stocking decisions. Grass-Cast takes historical grassland production data,
historical weather data, and possible scenarios for future rainfall to estimate how rangeland grass
production in the current year will compare to average historical conditions.
•
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) National Water and Climate Center (NWCC)
produces and disseminates accurate and reliable water-supply forecasts and other climate data.
NWCC supports various data-collection efforts related to snow, soil, and water conditions, including
the Snow Survey and Water Supply Forecasting (SSWWF) Program, the Soil Climate Analysis
Network (SCAN) Pilot Program, and the Tribal Soil Climate Analysis Network (Tribal SCAN). All
data collected by NWCC are publicly available through the Water and Climate Information System
(WCIS). Reports produced by the group include monthly snowpack, precipitation, reservoir, and
streamflow data; hourly and daily SCAN soil condition reports for over 200 stations across the
country; and water supply forecasts by river basin for 12 western states.
•
The Wildfire Outlook – the National Interagency Fire Center’s Predictive Services group produces
a monthly National Significant Wildland Fire Potential Outlook, 7-day fire-potential outlook reports,
and geographic area outlooks.
•
The USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) monitors the spread of pests,
diseases, and invasive species, including by incorporating modeling to inform surveillance,
developing early-warning systems, and identifying options for pest and disease control. Predictive


 643

models to prepare for pest and disease incursions, and other changes driven by climate change
are developed in collaboration with international partners.
Several policies in place help farmers prepare for extreme weather events before they occur:
•
Hurricane Preparation and Recovery Commodity Guides are produced by the USDA Southeast
Climate Hub in conjunction with state extension services. These provide detailed instructions on
activities to undertake before and after a hurricane to minimise damage and ensure that operations
resume as soon as possible in the wake of a storm. The guides also include information on relevant
resources available from the USDA, including agencies offering support in the wake of disasters.
•
Weather Ready Farms is a state-level agricultural education programme from the University of
Nebraska Extension. Participants complete a self-assessment, attend educational programmes
and events to learn how to implement new practices on the farm, undertake projects to improve
their farm’s resilience, have their projects verified, and receive a “Weather Ready” designation. A
public online resource book, Resilient Agriculture: Weather Ready Farms, was produced based on
this model and published in 2022.
Several programmes support recovery by providing funding in the wake of adverse events. Crop insurance
is a major element, but several disaster-assistance programmes either help producers recover from
damages not covered by crop insurance or help producers who might be unable to obtain crop insurance
coverage. Outside of these “standing” programmes, other ad hoc disaster policies respond to issues as
they arise:
•
The Federal Crop Insurance Program (FCIP) is a longstanding programme that indemnifies
producers against losses in yield, crop revenue, margin, and whole-farm revenue due to adverse
events including drought, excess moisture, damaging freezes, hail, wind, disease, and price
fluctuations. FCIP offers coverage for more than 100 commodities, and the government subsidises
a portion of policy premium costs (the level of support varies based on the level of coverage).
•
The Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP) is a flagship conservation programme in
place since 1996 that helps farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners integrate conservation into
working lands. EQIP provides financial assistance to prevent and repair excessive soil erosion.
Assistance is also available for emergency animal mortality disposal from natural disasters and
other causes.
•
The Livestock Forage Disaster Program (LFP) provides compensation to eligible livestock
producers who suffered grazing losses due to drought or fire on land that is native or improved
pastureland with permanent vegetative cover or planted specifically for grazing.
•
The Livestock Indemnity Program (LIP) provides benefits to livestock producers for livestock deaths
in excess of normal mortality, caused by adverse weather or by attacks by animals reintroduced
into the wild by the federal government.
•
Emergency Assistance for Livestock, Honeybees, and Farm-Raised Fish (ELAP) compensates
eligible producers for losses due to disease, adverse weather, or conditions (such as blizzards and
wildfires) not covered by LFP or LIP.
•
The Emergency Loan Program provides loans to help producers recover from production and
physical losses due to drought, flooding, other natural disasters, or quarantine by animal-
quarantine laws or laws imposed by the Secretary under the Plant Protection Act.
•
The Disaster Set-Aside Program allows producers who are unable to make scheduled payments
on their direct loans from the Farm Service Agency (FSA) as a direct result of a disaster to postpone
one full year’s payment to the end of the loan. Assistance is available in counties or contiguous
counties designated as emergencies by the President, Secretary, or FSA Administrator.


644 

•
The Emergency Conservation Program (ECP) helps farmers and ranchers repair damage to
farmlands caused by natural disasters and helps put in place water-conservation methods during
severe drought.
•
The Emergency Forest Restoration Program (EFRP) helps owners of non-industrial private forests
restore forest health damaged by natural disasters.
•
The Noninsured Disaster Assistance Program (NAP) provides financial assistance to producers of
non-insurable crops to protect against natural disasters that result in lower yields or crop losses,
or prevent crop planting.
•
The Tree Assistance Program (TAP) provides financial assistance to qualifying orchardists and
nursery tree-growers to replant or rehabilitate eligible trees, bushes, and vines damaged by natural
disasters.
•
The Emergency Watershed Protection Program (EWP) helps communities recover from natural
disasters such as floods, wildfires, earthquakes, windstorms, and other natural disasters. It funds
activities that provide protection from flooding or soil erosion, reduce threats to life and property,
or restore hydraulic capacity to the natural environment.
Efforts to support adaptation in the medium term
Medium-term measures include extension and outreach efforts, development of decision-support tools and
information platforms, development of case studies, support for the adoption of climate-smart agricultural
practices (including investments in soil health), and ensuring that programme design and delivery reflects
evolving climate conditions.
Extension and outreach programmes train farmers to manage risk, adopt new technologies, and raise
awareness of strategies to adapt to climate change. This is especially important for historically underserved
producers:
•
USDA Climate Hubs host workshops and technical demonstrations to promote the adoption and
application of climate-smart strategies. “Climate Conversations” with natural-resources
professionals (including NRCS and partner staff) focus on the basics of climate change and topics
including drought, irrigation, and wildfire. The Climate Hubs also offer numerous communication
resources, including “Translating Climate Science into Action” videos for outreach and education.
•
Risk Management Education and Training programmes support historically underserved producers
to understand how to manage risk in the face of volatile weather.
•
The NRCS conducts conservation outreach and engagement to help farmers implement practices
to adapt to a changing climate. This includes increasing technical and financial assistance for
communities disproportionately vulnerable to the effects of climate change. NRCS programmes
offer special provisions for historically underserved applicants, including through the Wetland
Reserve Enhancement Partnership, which earmarked USD 17 million for partnerships with
historically underserved communities in 2022. Additionally, the NRCS has moved to better serve
limited-English-proficiency customers through activities such as translation of critical contract and
other programme documents.
Decision-support tools and information platforms help farmers prepare for changing climate conditions.
This includes help assessing risks and potential effects of climate change, and developing responses to
them:
•
The Adaptation Workbook details a structured process to consider the potential effects of climate
change and design land-management and natural-resource-conservation actions that help prepare
for changing conditions. The process is flexible, to accommodate a variety of geographic locations,
ownership types, ecosystems and land uses, management goals, and project sizes. The Workbook
contains a five-step process that asks users to define goals and objectives, assess climate impacts


 645

and vulnerabilities, evaluate objectives considering climate impacts, identify adaptation
approaches and tactics for implementation, and monitor the effectiveness of implemented actions.
•
A series of ten Adaptation Case Studies was developed using the Adaptation Workbook framework
and options outlined in Adaptation Resources for Agriculture, published by the Midwest, Northeast,
and Northern Forests Climate Hubs. These case studies provide a flexible, structured, and self-
guided process to identify and assess climate-change impacts, challenges, opportunities, and
farm-level adaptation tactics to improve responses to extreme and uncertain conditions. Case
studies cover a variety of commodity production systems across nine states and territories.
•
AgroClimate is a decision-support tool that uses Applied Climate Information System (ACIS)
database sub-infrastructure to help producers in the southeastern US make real-time decisions
and place meteorological conditions in historical context. The tool helps producers obtain data on
trends in winter chill units and bloom dates specific to their location, which can inform longer-term
planning decisions, like changing varietals in replanted areas to reflect current and anticipated
climate conditions.
•
NRCS Information Platforms, Databases, and Decision Support Tools provide georeferenced soil,
vegetation, and weather data and information needed to understand climate-change impacts and
develop responses. These include the National Soils Information System (NASIS), Ecosystem
Dynamics Interpretive Tool (EDIT), and Plant List of Acceptable Nomenclature, Taxonomy and
Synonyms (PLANTS). NRCS also collaborates in the production of models and decision-support
tools such as the Conservation Effects Assessment Program (CEAP) and the CarbOn
Management Evaluation Tool (COMET). CEAP quantifies trends in conservation practices and
outcomes to inform conservation programme development, while COMET assesses farm-level
greenhouse-gas emissions and estimates emissions under alternative management scenarios.
•
An atlas of state- and county-level Climate Quick Reference Guides was developed using 2022
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) State Summaries, RMA data analysed
through the Southwest Climate Hub’s AgRisk Viewer, and other published data. These guides allow
producers to access hyper-local information on likely future conditions to inform their investments
and business decisions.
•
APHIS pest suitability maps describe changes in pest prevalence in a changing climate (with
several maps completed and the remainder scheduled for completion by FY 2023). These maps
will guide pest survey efforts and increase the efficient use of resources for surveys by eliminating
the need to survey areas for high-risk pests if suitable environmental conditions do not exist there.
Several measures support adoption of climate-smart agricultural practices by providing technical and
financial assistance, collecting data on soil health, and supporting crop diversification:
•
NRCS Conservation Programmes help producers, soil- and water-conservation districts, and other
partners protect and conserve natural resources on private lands. This is part of the Farm Bill,
delivered through the Environmental Quality Incentives Programme (EQIP) and the Conservation
Stewardship Programme (CSP), among others.
•
On-Farm Conservation Innovation Trials provide incentive payments to producers to offset the risk
of implementing innovative approaches, practices, and systems on working lands. The Soil Health
Demonstration (SHD) component focuses conservation practices and systems that improve soil
health. SHD awardees follow consistent soil health assessment protocols to evaluate the impacts
of practice and system implementation. Data collected from these projects provide the initial data
for a national soil health database.
•
The Whole Farm Revenue Protection (WFRP) and Micro Farm policies are insurance products that
support diversified farm operations to help producers adapt to a changing climate. WFRP offers
revenue insurance up to USD 17 million of allowable revenue. Micro Farm is based on WFRP but


646 

limited to producers with less than USD 350 000 in allowable revenue. The product is tailored to
very small farms that are typically highly diversified.
Ensuring programme design considers the changing climate is important for maintaining intended
programme benefits and informing needed reforms. Federal Crop Insurance Program (FCIP) parameters
are updated so that policy design reflects climate data with respect to changes in risk, yields, practices,
and other parameters. Programmes are reviewed for continued relevance under changing climate needs.
Conservation practice planning and standards are reviewed and updated to use the best available science.
Efforts to support transformations that create a fundamentally new system in the long term
Activities related to long-term change in the US agricultural sector focus on interdisciplinary research to
increase awareness of likely future conditions, and develop tools, technologies and management
strategies to respond to them. To ensure the usefulness and accessibility of climate-smart agricultural
innovation, several programmes connect with or involve producers:
•
USDA Research & Development activities form the basis for validating existing climate-adaptation
options and identifying and developing new ones while ensuring that actions are regionally relevant
and economically viable. Research related to climate adaptation cuts across many programme
areas within the USDA Agricultural Research Service (ARS). The Economic Research Service
(ERS) is a federal statistical agency that provides economic information and analysis on a range
of topics related to the agriculture sector, including understanding and assessing the effects of and
adaptation to climate change. The National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA), the USDA’s
primary external research, education, and extension funding agency, funds climate-change-related
activities through a combination of capacity funds and competitive grants (see below). The National
Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) supports climate-change research through scientifically
designed surveys that help with estimates of agricultural production, supply, price, and other
variables. NASS also conducts operational remote-sensing yield estimation and disaster-
monitoring of extreme weather events.
•
The Agriculture and Food Research Initiative (AFRI) Program under the National Institute of Food
and Agriculture (NIFA) disseminates scientific advances to producers through education and
extension to facilitate adaptation to climate change. NIFA invests in sustainable agricultural
research projects, including projects that support adaptation.
•
USDA Climate Hubs develop and deliver science-based, region-specific information and
technologies to agricultural and natural-resource managers. This enables climate-informed
decision-making and assistance to implement those decisions. Working with federal, state, tribal,
university, extension, and private partners, the Hubs listen and learn to identify regionally-
appropriate, and climate-adapted ways to address current and future climate risks.
•
The Long-Term Agroecosystem Research Network (LTAR) comprises 18 research sites dedicated
to addressing national and local agricultural priorities and advancing the sustainable intensification
of US agriculture. The research sites include croplands, grazing lands and integrated systems, and
span a variety of geographies and climates. LTAR co-ordinates research sites, collects and
manages long-term data, and develops new management techniques, technologies and
agricultural-innovation partnerships.
•
The NRCS multi-disciplinary climate-change technical team evaluates climate-related
requirements for the agency’s planning and delivery processes, to establish climate-change
technical expertise and strategies to evaluate and determine requirements and guidance for
conservation planning, implementation, research, demonstration, and assessment. This includes
developing climate-smart research and demonstration strategies that identify knowledge gaps and
on-farm research needs to guide investments, including through the RCPP and Conservation
Innovation Grants (CIG) programme.


 647

•
Agriculture Innovation Mission for Climate (AIM for Climate) is a joint, five-year initiative (2021-25)
by the US and United Arab Emirates (UAE) to increase and accelerate investment in and support
for agriculture- and food-system innovation for climate action, including adaptation.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
Two temporary disaster assistance programmes funded through the Extending Government Funding and
Delivering Emergency Assistance Act of 2021 were launched in 2022 to help offset the costs of natural
disaster impacts incurred in 2020 and 2021.11 The Emergency Livestock Relief Program (ELRP) Phase
One provides additional early relief payments to ranchers for increases in supplemental feed costs in 2021.
Ranchers who have approved applications through the 2021 Livestock Forage Disaster Program (LFP) for
forage losses due to severe drought or wildfire in 2021 received an amount equal to their eligible LFP
payment, multiplied by the applicable ELRP payment percentage.12
The second programme, the Emergency Relief Program (ERP), was launched in May 2022 and provides
assistance to commodity and specialty crop producers to cover losses to crops, trees, bushes, and vines
due to a qualifying natural disaster event13 in calendar years 2020 and 2021. All crops for which crop
insurance or Non-insured Crop Disaster Assistance Program (NAP) coverage is available are eligible,
except for crops intended for grazing. Payments for ERP are based on a producer’s individual coverage
level under crop insurance or NAP. All producers who receive ERP Phase One payments are required to
purchase crop insurance or NAP for the next two available crop years. A second phase of ERP was
announced on 9 January 2023.
Several provisions in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023 (signed into law December 2022)
authorised temporary assistance for affected producers. These include:
•
USD 3.74 billion in assistance to producers for losses of revenue, quality or production of crops
(including milk, on-farm stored commodities, crops prevented from planting in 2022, and harvested
adulterated wine grapes), trees, bushes, and vines as a consequence of droughts, wildfires,
hurricanes, floods, derechos, excessive heat, tornadoes, winter storms, freeze, including a polar
vortex, smoke exposure, and excessive moisture occurring in calendar year 2022. Of this amount,
the Act requires that a portion of up to USD 494.5 million be designated for livestock producers.
•
Up to USD 100 million for pandemic-related assistance payments to cotton merchandisers.
•
Up to USD 250 million for domestic rice producers who planted a crop in 2022.
•
USD 5 million for testing of soil, water, or agricultural products for per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS), assisting producers affected by PFAS contamination with costs related to
mitigate the impacts to their operations, and indemnifying producers for the value of unmarketable
crops, livestock, and other agricultural products related to PFAS contamination.14
The existing Emergency Assistance for Livestock, Honey Bees, and Farm-raised Fish Program (ELAP)
was further revised in 2022 to cover the costs of transporting livestock to feed when the livestock are
intended for grazing. Producers were eligible for assistance for feed or livestock transportation costs
incurred for additional mileage above normal on or after 1 January 2021. The rule also amended the
definition for “eligible drought” to allow counties with lower severity to qualify.15
Resources and environmental measures
Climate
The Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) was signed into law in August 2022. The IRA is not agriculture-specific,
but includes approximately USD 20 billion in new spending over the next ten years designated for existing
USDA conservation programmes to support practices with climate benefits, including enhancements to
improve soil carbon, reduce nitrogen losses, or sequester carbon dioxide, methane, or nitrous oxide. This


648 

includes USD 8.45 billion in new funding for EQIP, USD 4.95 billion for RCPP, USD 3.25 billion for CSP,
USD 1.4 billion to ACEP, and USD 1 billion for the Conservation Technical Assistance Program.16
A new Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities initiative was launched in 2022. This programme
provided up to USD 3.1 billion in funding for 141 pilot projects to create or expand markets for agricultural
commodities produced with climate-smart farming practices. The first pool of 70 selected projects will
receive USD 2.8 billion through the Commodity Credit Corporation for pilot projects that:
•
provide technical and financial assistance to producers to implement climate-smart production
practices on a voluntary basis on working lands
•
pilot innovative and cost-effective methods for quantification, monitoring, reporting and verification
of greenhouse gas benefits
•
develop markets and promote the resulting climate-smart commodities.
Approved pilot projects will last one to five years. Large-scale projects from USD 5 million to
USD 100 million were targeted in a first applicant pool. This awarded funds to 71 projects, totalling
USD 325 million. A second pool for smaller projects requesting from USD 250 000 to USD 4 999 999 in
funding targets small or underserved producers. This pool invests in measuring, monitoring, reporting and
verification activities developed at minority-serving institutions. The projects are expected to involve more
than 60 000 farmers and encompass more than 25 million acres of working lands, resulting in an estimated
60 million mtCO2-eq sequestered over the lives of the projects.
The Consolidated Appropriations Act (CAA) 2023 contains several provisions related to climate and
agriculture. It establishes a voluntary Greenhouse Gas Technical Assistance Provider and Third-Party
Verifier Program. This allows for the creation of a voluntary programme to register covered entities
(e.g. technical assistance providers or third-party verifiers) if doing so will facilitate the participation of
farmers, ranchers, and private forest landowners in voluntary environmental credit markets. CAA also
included a provision allowing USDA to accept and use private funding for public-private partnerships for
the purposes of addressing climate change, sequestering carbon, improving wildlife habitat, protecting
sources of drinking water, and addressing other natural resource priorities. The provision also authorises
the Department to match private donations, subject to funding availability.
Conservation and environmental programmes
In January, NRCS announced several changes to existing programmes in 2022 focused on providing new
opportunities for climate smart agriculture, including:
•
Expanding the five-year Conservation Incentive Contract option through the EQIP nationwide in
2022.17
•
Investing USD 38 million in a new targeted Cover Crop initiative through EQIP in 11 states, to
encourage more widespread adoption of cover crops for climate change mitigation in states with
demonstrated demand for additional support for the practice.18
•
Updating CSP rules to allow producers to re-enrol in the programme following an unfunded
application to renew an existing contract.
Temporary flexibilities were introduced into certain conservation programmes. These included allowing
producers in the final year of a CRP contract to voluntarily terminate their contract at the end of the primary
nesting season for FY 2022 without having to repay rental payments.19 This can allow producers to plant
a crop on that land for the 2022-23 crop year, or to open it for haying or grazing. In addition, producers
with cover cropping in their existing EQIP or CSP contracts are allowed to either modify their cover crop
plans to shift to a conservation crop rotation or to delay their planting of the cover crop by one year without
requiring that the current contract be terminated.


 649

The Bioproduct Pilot Program (BPP) – authorised under the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act of
2021 – is a competitive grant programme seeking to advance the development of cost-competitive
bioproducts with environmental benefits compared to incumbent products. The programme funds projects
that will study the benefits of using materials derived from covered agricultural commodities for production
of construction materials (such as for roads, bridges or buildings) or consumer products. The programme
will fund grants of USD 2 million to USD 5 million, with USD 5 million in total funding available in FY 2022
and an additional USD 5 million available in FY 2023.
Water
The IRA includes USD 4 billion in grants for FY 2022-26 to help mitigate the impact of drought in western
States. These grants are to be administered by the Department of the Interior through the US Bureau of
Reclamation.
Crop insurance and risk management
In June 2022, the Federal Crop Insurance Corporation amended its regulations to enhance production
reporting terminology and assist producers with production reporting requirements. The new rules provide
alternative reporting options to producers who are unable to provide disinterested third-party verifiable
records to support their production report. The revision is intended to make it easier for specialty crop
producers and others who sell through direct marketing channels to obtain insurance. The new rules also
clarify the good farming practice appeal deadline and clarify and correct portions of the policy.
In July 2022, USDA’s Risk Management Agency announced that it would expand the availability of
insurance for double cropping in order to reduce the economic risk of raising two crops on the same land
in one year, making it easier for US farmers to help stabilise food prices and support food security. Under
the initiative, RMA is making insurance coverage available for certain double-cropping rotations of
soybeans or grain sorghum following another crop in more than 1 500 counties where double cropping is
viable for crop year 2023.
Crop inputs
In September 2022, the new Fertilizer Production Expansion Program (FPEP) was announced to increase
domestic fertiliser availability in response to rising prices. FPEP will provide grants to help eligible
applicants increase or expand the manufacturing and processing of fertiliser and nutrient alternatives in
the United States and its territories. The programme made available USD 500 million in funds through the
CCC for 5-year grants varying from USD 1 to USD 100 million dollars. Funds can be used for, inter alia,
expansion of manufacturing and processing of fertilisers and alternative nutrients, building new facilities,
modernising existing facilities, increasing fertiliser use efficiency, purchasing new equipment, and installing
climate-smart equipment to reduce GHG emissions.
In December 2022, the Pesticide Registration Improvement Act (PRIA) was reauthorised as part of the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023. Among other provisions, this version of PRIA requires
manufacturers to include bilingual labels or a link to a translation on products within three to eight years
(depending on the use classification and relative toxicity of the pesticide), increases pesticide registration
and maintenance fees, and extends the deadline for the EPA to conclude its initial registration review of
each covered pesticide to October 2026.
Processors and supply chains
Building on activities announced in 2021 such as the Food Supply Chain Guaranteed Loan Program
(FSCGLP) and the Meat and Poultry Inspection Readiness Grants (MPIRG), several new programmes
were launched in 2022 under the umbrella of the USDA Meat and Poultry Supply Chain initiative, including:


650 

•
In February, the USDA Rural Development (RD) Rural Business-Cooperative Service (RBCS)
opened applications for the Meat and Poultry Processing Expansion Program (MPPEP), which will
provide USD 150 million in grants of up to USD 25 million to eligible meat and poultry processors
to assist them in expanding their capacity.
•
In March, the USDA Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS) launched the Meat and Poultry
Processing Capacity Technical Assistance Program (MPPTA), developed to support participants
in the other programmes under the meat and poultry supply chain initiative by helping them to
access needed technical assistance to expand and diversify processing capacity. Technical
assistance offered through the initiative will focus on federal grant application management,
business development and financial planning, meat and poultry processing technical and
operational support, and supply chain development.
•
In May, RBCS opened applications for the Meat and Poultry Intermediary Lending Program
(MPILP), which will provide up to USD 125 million in grants of up to USD 15 million to qualified
intermediate lenders to facilitate financing for the start-up, expansion, and operation of entities
engaged in primary processing or further processing of meat and poultry.
•
In May, the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) announced a USD 25 million
investment in workforce training programmes, including through the new Meat and Poultry
Processing - Agricultural Workforce Training grant programme.
In June 2022, the “Food Systems Transformation” framework was launched. The goals of the framework
include:
•
Building a more resilient food supply chain that provides more and better market options for
consumers and producers while reducing carbon pollution.
•
Creating a fairer food system that combats market dominance and helps producers and consumers
gain more power in the marketplace by creating new, more and better local market options.
•
Making nutritious food more accessible and affordable for consumers.
•
Emphasising equity.
USDA has included a variety of existing and proposed programmes under this initiative, spanning all stages
of the supply chain – production, processing, aggregation, distribution, and consumers. This includes
supporting investments in independent meat and poultry processing projects, financial assistance for
supply chain infrastructure, workforce development and funding to create regional food business centres.
The Regional Food Business Centers programme was launched in September 2022 with up to
USD 400 million in funding from the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021. It will expand and strengthen
regional food systems networks and partnerships; increase food and farm business and finance acumen
as well as market awareness and access; increase the number of new food and farm businesses and
viability of existing businesses; and increase the revenue of food and farm businesses served. These
Regional Food Centers will be launched through co-operative agreements with partners in the region,
providing co-ordination, technical assistance and capacity-building for small and mid-sized producers,
processors, and distributors to create new and rejuvenate current linkages throughout the supply chain. At
least six centers are anticipated (including at least one in each of three high priority areas) through grant
awards ranging from USD 15 to USD 50 million.
A new rule, Requirements for Additional Traceability Records for Certain Foods went into effect in
January 2023. This rule establishes additional recordkeeping requirements for certain participants in
supply chains of designated foods for traceability purposes. The requirements will help to identify recipients
of food to prevent or mitigate foodborne illness outbreaks and address threats of health consequences
resulting from foods being adulterated or misbranded.


 651

Finance and farm credit
In March 2022, the USDA Farm Service Agency finalised changes to its Farm Loan Programs (FLP)
regulations. FLP regulations were amended to:
•
allow additional flexibility for loan applicants to meet the required farming experience
•
provide higher guarantee rates for lenders providing credit to beginning farmers and socially
disadvantaged farmers
•
provide additional programme benefits for veterans
•
provide equitable relief to certain borrowers
•
allow borrowers who have received debt restructuring with a write down to receive Emergency
loans (EM)
•
cover more issues under the agricultural Certified Mediation Program
•
change conditions for loan servicing relating to accepting cash payments and establishing a fee for
dishonoured checks.
The result of these changes will increase loan limits or improve the various loan programmes to relieve
some restrictions to participation or otherwise encourage participation. The new rules also revised the
means through which FSA will establish the maximum interest rates in response to the discontinuing
publication of the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) interest rates.
In October 2022, disbursement began of USD 3.1 billion in funding to provide relief for distressed
borrowers with certain Farm Service Agency (FSA) direct or guaranteed loans and to expedite assistance
for those whose agricultural operations are at financial risk. As a first step toward implementing this relief,
in late 2022, USDA provided nearly USD 800 million in assistance to distressed borrowers, including
crediting nearly USD 600 million to the accounts of delinquent borrowers to make their loans current, and
making over USD 200 million in payments to resolve the remaining debts for borrowers whose farms have
already been foreclosed upon, such that they would no longer face debt collection or garnishment.
Assistance for an additional set of borrowers with more complicated circumstances was made available
on a case-by-case basis.
Organic agriculture
The Origin of Livestock (OOL) final rule for organic dairy animals was published in April 2022. The rule
specifies that organic milk and milk products must be sourced from animals that have been under
continuous organic management from the last third of gestation onward. However, transitioning herds fall
under an exception to the rule. This rule also clarifies that a nonorganic dairy may transition to organic
production on a one-time basis, with all animals ending their transition at the same time after a 12-month
period of organic management. After the transition, the operation cannot transition additional animals or
source transitioned animals. After transitioning, operations may only add animals that have been
organically managed from the last third of gestation. The rule entered into effect on 6 June 2022, and all
operations were required to comply with its provisions by 5 April 2023.
In August 2022, a new Organic Transition Initiative was launched. This USD 300 million multi-agency effort
offers support for farmers transitioning to organic production, including increased technical assistance,
market development, and financial support. Programmes were launched under the umbrella of this
initiative:
•
The Transition to Organic Partnership Program (TOPP), which will provide technical assistance
and wrap-around support for farmers transitioning to organic. The programme will provide up to
USD 100 million over five years in co-operative agreements with non-profit organisations.


652 

•
The Transitional and Organic Grower Assistance Program (TOGA), which will support the
participation of transitioning and certified organic producers’ participation in crop insurance by
covering a portion of their insurance premium. The programme will provide up to USD 25 million
through the Risk Management Agency.
Additionally, USD 75 million will be provided through NRCS to offer financial and technical assistance to
producers who implement a new Organic Management conservation practice standard, and
USD 100 million will be made available through an AMS initiative to improve supply chains in pinpointed
organic markets. This is also part of the “Food Systems Transformation” framework.
Equity
In January 2022, USDA announced that it was investing USD 50 million in partnerships to expand
conservation assistance access under its new Equity Conservation Cooperative Agreements initiative. The
effort will fund two-year projects targeting expanded conservation technical assistance for beginning,
socially disadvantaged, low-income, or military veteran farmers.
The American Rescue Plan Technical Assistance Investment (ARPTAI) Competitive Grant Program was
launched in March 2022 to provide technical assistance and other programmes to ensure improved
understanding of USDA programmes and services. Using a minimum of USD 25 million in funding
authorised under Section 1006 of the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, ARPTAI will fund co-operator
organisations that collaborate with USDA on the delivery of targeted technical assistance and related
activities to achieve future outcomes of improved equitable participation of farmers, ranchers and forest
landowners in USDA programmes and services. Grants ranging from USD 500 000 to USD 3.5 million will
be available through ARPTAI.
In April 2022, USDA released the department’s Equity Action Plan, outlining actions that USDA will take to
advance programme equity by improving access to programmes and services for underserved
stakeholders and communities.20 Actions outlined in the plan include:
•
partner with trusted technical assistance providers
•
reduce barriers to USDA programmes and improve support to underserved farmers, ranchers and
landowners
•
expand equitable access to USDA nutrition assistance programmes
•
increase USDA infrastructure investments that benefit underserved communities
•
advance equity in federal procurement
•
uphold Federal Trust and Treaty Responsibilities to Indian Tribes
•
maintain an unwavering commitment to civil rights.
Several USDA programmes will be included as part of the Biden Administration’s Justice40 Initiative, which
sets a goal to have 40% of the overall benefits of certain federal investments related to climate and the
environment flow to disadvantaged, marginalised, or underserved populations.21 This includes farm safety
net programmes such as ARC, DMC, and PLC; conservation programmes such as ACEP, CREP, CRP,
CSP and EQIP; research and knowledge generation programmes such as the Bioproduct Research
Program and the USDA Climate Hubs; and outreach and education programmes such as conservation
technical assistance, risk management education, and extension programmes benefitting underserved
communities.22 For each programme included in the initiative, agencies should establish a method to
calculate benefits accruing to disadvantaged communities, develop a plan to maximise benefits to said
groups, and consider programme modifications to the extent consistent with statutory and constitutional
requirements to maximise benefits to disadvantaged communities.
Two new initiatives targeting underserved communities will be funded under the American Rescue Plan
Act (ARPA). The first of these, “From Learning to Leading: Cultivating the Next Generation of Diverse Food


 653

and Agriculture Professionals” programme is intended to enable minority-serving educational institutions
to educate and create career development opportunities for the next generation of scholars. Up to
USD 250 million will be made available through the programme in the form of grants, with awards ranging
from USD 500 000 to USD 20 million. The second programme, the “Increasing Land, Capital, and Market
Access Program” will help underserved producers by increasing their access to land, capital and markets.
The programme will fund projects through co-operative agreements and grants that focus on strengthening
land access and at least one related area of concern. Up to USD 300 million will be made available through
the programme, with awards ranging from USD 250 000 to USD 40 million.
Nutrition
The first phase of the “Healthy Meals Incentives Initiative” was launched in September 2022. The initiative
targets improving the nutritional quality of school meals through food systems transformation, school food
authority recognition and technical assistance, the generation and sharing of innovative ideas and tested
practices, and grants. The first phase of the initiative includes providing grants of up to USD 150 000 to
small or rural school meal programmes to help them meet or exceed school nutrition standards,
establishing an awards programme to recognise school districts that are excelling in their meal quality, and
supporting schools in bringing best practices into their lunchrooms. Subsequently in November, FNS
launched phase 2 of the initiative – the “School Food System Transformation Challenge”, which will
distribute USD 50 million in grant opportunities through up to four co-operative agreements, which will
support collaboration with the food industry to develop nutritious, appetising school meals for students.
On 27 September 2022, the Biden-Harris National Strategy on Hunger, Nutrition and Health was released
– in conjunction with the White House Conference on Hunger, Nutrition and Health – to achieve the
Administration’s goal of “ending hunger and increasing healthy eating and physical activity by 2030 so
fewer Americans experience diet-related diseases, while reducing related health disparities.” The strategy
consists of five pillars: 1) improve food access and affordability; 2) integrate nutrition and health;
3) empower all consumers to make and have access to healthy choices; 4) support physical activity for all;
and 5) enhance nutrition and food security research. In line with the strategy, a new programme providing
assistance for school children during the summer months when schools are closed was authorised as part
of the CAA (see next section).
In December 2022, USDA unveiled a new Agricultural Science Center of Excellence for Nutrition and Diet
for Better Health (ASCEND for Better Health). This new virtual centre will bring together scientists, partner
organisations, and communities to accelerate research on diet-related chronic disease, including cancer.
Domestic food assistance
Various policy measures were put in place in 2022 in response to reduced availability of infant formula
resulting from recalls and the temporary closure of one of the country’s largest formula manufacturing
facilities. Some of these measures are described in the section “Trade policy developments” below. These
measures included:
•
Signing into Law the “Access to Baby Formula Act of 2022” in May, which authorises USDA to take
certain actions (including allowing administrative or programme flexibilities, where applicable) to
address emergencies, disasters, and supply chain disruptions affecting participants of the Special
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC).
•
The President’s invoking of the Defense Production Act, requiring suppliers to direct needed
resources to infant formula manufacturers before any other customer who may have ordered that
good.
•
USDA offering WIC agencies programme flexibilities by allowing them to request waivers of certain
WIC regulations:


654 

•
USDA covering the additional costs of alternate formulas for state WIC agencies that contract with
certain manufacturers through 28 February 2023, with the affected formula manufacturer covering
the cost difference for states that contract with that manufacturer through 28 February 2023.
In February 2022, FNS finalised a rule establishing transitional standards for milk, whole grains, and
sodium content in USDA school meals programmes beginning in the 2022-23 school year. Pandemic relief
legislation had offered temporary flexibility from the nutritional standards established in 2012. As the
pandemic flexibilities were set to expire in June 2022, the rule created a transition period which allowed
some continued flexibility for schools as they recover from the pandemic. For example, the transitional rule
requires that at least 80% of the weekly grains offered be whole grain-rich (i.e. contain at least 50% whole
grains) rather than 100% as required by the 2012 standards. In early 2023, USDA released a proposed
rule to update school meal nutrition standards that are similar to the transitional standards set forth in
February 2022.
The Keep Kids Fed Act of 2022 extended flexibilities first introduced in 2020 under the Families First
Coronavirus Response Act in response to disruptions caused by the pandemic. Among other provisions,
the Act extended meal programme administrative and paperwork flexibilities through the 2022-23 school
year, extended flexibilities for summer meals in 2022 (such as allowing meal delivery and grab-and-go
options), and increased reimbursement rates for the 2022-23 school year by 15 cents per breakfast and
40 cents per lunch to help offset higher food costs and operating expenses related to the COVID-19
pandemic.
On 30 June 2022, USDA made available USD 943 million in funding from the Commodity Credit
Corporation (CCC) for the purchase of domestically-grown foods for school meal programmes. The funds
were distributed by state agencies to schools across the country to assist them in purchasing domestically
grown-foods for school meal programmes, in response to challenges faced by child nutrition programme
operators in 2022, such as elevated costs of food and supply chain disruptions.
Then in September 2022, USDA announced nearly USD 2 billion in additional funding from the CCC for
both emergency food providers and school meal programmes for purchasing domestically-grown foods.
Of the total announcement, USD 943 million was slated to procure USDA Foods for use by emergency
food providers such as food banks (a portion of the assistance would also support incidental costs incurred
by local agencies for food storage and transformation), USD 471.5 million was directed toward the Local
Food Purchase Assistance Cooperative Agreement Program in November, and an investment of
USD 471.5 million was made for the third round of Supply Chain Assistance funds to states to support the
purchase of domestically-grown foods for school meal programmes.
Also in September, FNS published new regulations for the Summer Food Service Program (SFSP), which
clarified, simplified, and streamlined programme administration. The new regulations include making
permanent operational flexibilities that are demonstrated to work well in the SFSP while decreasing
paperwork burdens; giving sponsors the ability to focus their programme oversight and technical
assistance on sites that need it most; easing redundant requirements for high performing, experienced
programme operators through a streamlined application process; providing local control of meal service
times and allowing children to take one non-perishable item offsite to eat later; ending confusion around
important standards and requirements by clarifying performance standards, programme definitions, and
other programme requirements; and codifying FNS’ statutory waiver authority for all child nutrition
programmes including the National School Lunch Program, School Breakfast Program, Child and Adult
Care Food Program and SFSP.
One provision of the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (ARPA) (P.L. 117-2) allocated USD 390 million
through FY 2024 to carry out outreach, innovation and programme modernisation efforts to increase
participation and redemption of benefits in WIC. Through this authorisation, USDA’s Food and Nutrition
Service launched three major grant programmes in 2022 to facilitate WIC modernisation, which focused


 655

on innovation and outreach, improving the WIC experience through technology, and improving the WIC
shopping experience. Through October 2022, nearly USD 53 million in grants had been awarded.
In December 2022, a permanent Summer Electronic Benefits Transfer programme was authorised as part
of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023 (P.L. 117-328). This programme will provide benefits of
USD 40 per month per child for eligible families on an electronic benefits transfer (EBT) card, which works
like a debit card, allowing families who receive school meal benefits during the schoolyear to receive
assistance for retail food purchases during the summer months. The authorisation of this permanent
Summer EBT programme resolves a longstanding gap in programming by ensuring that low-income
children have enough to eat during the summer months when school is not in session and school meals
are unavailable.
CAA also codified certain temporary pandemic-era food delivery model flexibilities for summer feeding
programmes, permanently allowing summer meal providers to use alternative delivery models such as
“grab-and-go” meal availability. The Act also directs USDA to work with appropriate agencies to investigate
and take steps to prevent EBT fraud carried out through card skimming or cloning.
Domestic policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
New programmes were launched in 2022 under the umbrella of the 2021 Pandemic Assistance for
Producers initiative. Programmes under this initiative were intended to help impacted producers prevent,
prepare for, and respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. Among the programmes developed or launched
under this initiative in 2022 were:
•
The Pandemic Cover Crop Program (PCCP) was initially authorised in 2021 to provide crop
insurance premium support to eligible producers for eligible insured acres on a spring crop
insurance policy on which the producer planted a qualifying cover crop during the 2021 crop year.
In February 2022, RMA announced that PCCP would be made available in 2022 as well, with
coverage for the 2022 crop year extended to also cover eligible producers for eligible Whole Farm
Revenue Protection (WFRP) acres.
•
The Food Safety Certification for Specialty Crops Program (FSCSC) will provide
USD 200 million to assist specialty crop operations that incurred eligible on-farm food safety
programme expenses to obtain or renew a food safety certification in 2022 or 2023.
•
The Commodity Container Assistance Program (CCAP) helps offset expenses of eligible
agricultural companies and co-operatives incurred at certain ports with logistical issues caused by
the COVID-19 pandemic (the Port of Oakland and the Northwest Seaport Alliance, NWSA, which
is the operating partnership between the Ports of Seattle and Tacoma). CCAP helps to support
improved use of empty containers and the prepositioning and temporary storage of filled containers
near export terminals.
The Ocean Shipping Reform Act of 2022 was signed into law on 16 June 2022. Amongst its provisions,
the act prohibits ocean carriers from unreasonably refusing cargo space when available or resorting to
other unfair or unjustly discriminatory methods. The act was drafted partially in response to supply chain
issues experienced during the pandemic, when ocean carriers left US products (including agricultural
goods) behind at US ports and returned to Asia with empty containers, exacerbating supply issues and
resulting in losses of agricultural goods that were not shipped.
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
In January 2022, the government of India agreed to allow imports of US pig meat and pig meat products
into India for the first time after agreement on an export certificate to allow the importation of US pig meat
and pig meat products. The agreement was reached subsequent to the November 2021 US-India Trade
Policy Forum, which also saw the two partners agree on market access facilitation measures for mangoes,


656 

pomegranates, and pomegranate arils from India, and cherries and alfalfa hay for animal feed from the
United States.
In March 2022, the United States and the United Kingdom reached a new agreement to allow historically-
based volumes of UK steel and aluminium to enter the US market without the application of Section 232
tariffs. As a result of the deal, the United Kingdom agreed that from 1 June 2022, the country would
suspend retaliatory tariffs that had been applied to certain US exports to the United Kingdom, including on
distilled spirits, various agriculture products, and consumer goods.
In December 2022, amendments were agreed for the beef safeguard trigger level under the US-Japan
Trade Agreement (USJTA) detailed in the 2 June 2022 Protocol Amending the Trade Agreement between
Japan and the United States of America. These amendments entered into force on 1 January 2023,
replacing the existing beef safeguard trigger level with a new criteria-based mechanism.
In January 2022, a panel ruled in favour of the United States in proceedings brought against Canada under
the terms of the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA), agreeing that Canada breached its
USMCA commitments by reserving most of the in-quota quantity in its dairy tariff-rate quotas (TRQs) for
the exclusive use of Canadian processors. Canada published final changes in the dairy TRQ allocation on
16 May 2022. Subsequently, the United States requested new dispute settlement consultations, most
recently on 20 December 2022, regarding several additional aspects of Canada’s measures, including the
failure to fully allocate the annual dairy TRQ, which the United States views as inconsistent with Canada’s
obligations under the USMCA.
To address temporary shortages of baby formula, the “Formula Act of 2022” was signed into law in July,
which provided temporary duty-free treatment for certain infant formula products imported through
31 December 2022. In parallel, “Operation Fly Formula” was a co-ordinated effort between the Department
of Health and Human Services, USDA, the General Services Administration, and the Department of
Defense, which contracted commercial aircraft to speed up the import of infant formulas to the United
States.
Trade policy responses to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine
Policy responses related to the Russian Federation’s unprovoked and unjustified war against Ukraine were
largely directed toward addressing the global food security implications of the invasion. In April 2022 USDA
announced that it would draw down the full balance of the Bill Emerson Humanitarian Trust (BEHT)
– roughly USD 282 million – to procure US food commodities to bolster existing emergency food
operations in six countries facing severe food insecurity exacerbated by the war.23 An additional
USD 388 million in funds from the Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) were also provided to cover freight
transportation, shipping and handling, and other associated costs. The BEHT is a special authority that
enables USAID’s Bureau for Humanitarian Assistance (BHA) to respond to unanticipated food crises
abroad when other resources are not available. BEHT provides emergency food assistance when funds
available for emergency needs under title II of the Food for Peace Act for a fiscal year are insufficient to
meet emergency needs during the fiscal year. This is the first time since 2014 that the US Government
has used this emergency funding authority.
A bilateral initiative, the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between USDA and the Ukrainian Ministry
of Agrarian Policy and Food, entered into force on 10 August 2022 to enhance co-ordination between the
US and Ukrainian agriculture and food sectors and build a strategic partnership to address food security.
The MOU will be in place for three years, and specifically seeks co-operation in the areas of productivity
data and expertise, shared expertise and guidance on new technologies, and enhanced co-operation on
bilateral trade and post-conflict capacity building. To date, technical assistance and other initiatives have
been launched in the areas of animal health, biosecurity, sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) capacity
building, agricultural and trade policy, wildfire control, water management, and preventing illegal
deforestation.


 657

Contextual information
The United States is the world’s second largest economy by GDP in PPPs and the third largest country by
land area and population. US GDP per capita is among the highest in the world, more than three times the
average of the countries included in this report (Table 29.3). Primary agriculture accounts for a small part
of the economy – around 1% of GDP and 1.5% of employment – but agro-food accounts for almost 12%
of total exports. The US agricultural sector benefits from a large domestic consumer market, as well as
abundant arable and pasture land and diverse climatic conditions that support the production of a wide
range of commodities. Crops represent 62% of the value of total agricultural production. Key industries
include grains (maize and wheat), oilseeds (soybeans), cotton, cattle, dairy, poultry and fruits and
vegetables.
Table 29.3. United States: Contextual indicators

United States
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
10 251
23 315
25.6%
19.0%
Population (million)
282
332
6.6%
6.3%
Land area (thousand km2)
9 162
9 147
11.2%
11.1%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
414 399
405 810
13.8%
13.9%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
31
36
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
36 300
70 181
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
9.4
9.5
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
1.2
1.0
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
1.8
1.5
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
7.8
11.8
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
3.5
6.0
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
56
62
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
44
38
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
42
39
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Real GDP growth returned to the long-term average of around 2% in 2022 as the economy moves past
the dip-and-spike effect of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and 2021. However, higher food, energy and
housing costs have kept inflation at record highs (Figure 29.5). The labour market has recovered nearly all
the jobs lost since the onset of disruptions caused by COVID-19 pandemic, and the current unemployment
rate is at historical lows.


658 

Figure 29.5. United States: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.
The United States is the world’s second largest agricultural trader, after the European Union. Both US
agricultural exports and imports have been growing steadily since 2000 and net trade is nearly balanced
(Figure 29.6). Exports of high-value products such as dairy products, meats, fruit, and vegetables have
been growing, driven by demand in emerging markets, though the majority of exports are still destined for
further processing. Import demand on the other hand is concentrated on products for final consumption.


 659

Figure 29.6. United States: Agro-food trade


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Growth in output has been driven by increases in the use of both primary factors and inputs (Figure 29.7).
Total factor productivity (TFP) growth, which averaged 1.5% between 1991 and 2000, has been close to
zero over the period 2011-20. Most environmental indicators are at or slightly below OECD averages.
Nitrogen balances have been gradually improving, while phosphorus balance is slightly worsening
(Table 29.4). Agriculture’s share in energy use and in total GHG emissions are increasing. Water stress in
United States - Figure 6A.
Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
50
100
150
200
United States - Figure 6B.
Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
17
17
14
14
41
41
11
11
32
32
51
51
10
10
24
24
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


660 

the United States is above the OECD average. While the water stress indicator has declined between 2000
and 2020, there are regional hotspots of water stress. In particular, the southwest United States region is
facing drier and warmer conditions, groundwater depletion, as well as competition for water demand from
rapid population growth (OECD, 2017[8]).
Figure 29.7. United States: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 29.4. United States: Productivity and environmental indicators

United States
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
1.5%
0.0%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
34.4
30.5
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
2.8
3.5
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
0.9
1.4
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
7.6
9.9
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
5.3
5.6
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
39.7
45.6
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
19.5
15.6
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


United States - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
-0.04%
-0.04%
1.12%
1.12%
1.03%
1.03%
0.35%
0.35%
0.52%
0.52%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
United States
World
-0.5%
0%
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%
2.5%


 661

References

Congressional Research Service (2019), What is the Farm Bill?, CRS Report RS22131,
Congressional Research Service, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/RS/RS22131.
[2]
Congressional Research Service (2018), Federal Crop Insurance: Program Overview for the
115th Congress, CRS Report R45193, Congressional Research Service,
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R45193/4.
[3]
OECD (2019), “United States”, in Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2019, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/189dd9b6-en.
[5]
OECD (2017), Water Risk Hotspots for Agriculture, OECD Studies on Water, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264279551-en.
[8]
OECD (2014), “United States”, in Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2014: OECD
Countries, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/agr_pol-2014-19-en.
[4]
OECD (2011), Evaluation of Agricultural Policy Reforms in the United States, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264096721-en.
[1]
United States (2020), The United States of America Nationally Determined Contribution--
Reducing Greenhouse Gases in the United States: A 2030 Emissions Target, UNFCCC,
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/United%20States%20of%20A
merica%20First/United%20States%20NDC%20April%2021%202021%20Final.pdf (accessed
on 10 February 2022).
[7]
USDA ERS (2020), Farm & Commodity Policy: Overview, https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/farm-
economy/farm-commodity-policy/.
[6]




Notes

1 The term “underserved communities” refers to populations sharing a particular characteristic, as well as
geographic communities, that have been systematically denied a full opportunity to participate in aspects
of economic, social, and civic life (see note 20 for more details)
2 Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (P.L. 104-127).
3 Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (P.L. 107-171).
4 Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 (P.L. 110-246).
5 Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938 (7 U.S.C. 1281).



662 


6 Federal Crop Insurance Reform and Department of Agriculture Reorganization Act of 1994. The Food,
Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 (“2008 Farm Bill”) continued the 100% premium subsidy for CAT
but increased CAT fees from USD 50 to USD 300/crop/county.
7 Base acres are a farm’s crop-specific historical acreage of wheat, feed grains, seed cotton, rice, oilseeds,
pulse crops or peanuts eligible to participate in the ARC and PLC commodity programmes. Base acres are
not linked to current plantings.
8 The effective reference price is the lesser of 115% of the reference price specified in the law or an amount
equal to the greater of the reference price or 85% of the average prices from the 5 preceding years,
excluding the highest and lowest price. This method of calculating the payment rates allows the effective
reference price to be greater than the statutory reference price if historic average prices are greater than
the statutory reference price.
9 For ARC-IC, all base acres had to be enrolled in ARC-IC.
10 Ranching is the practice of raising herds of animals on large tracts of land. Ranchers commonly raise
grazing animals such as cattle and sheep.
11 https://www.fsa.usda.gov/programs-and-services/emergency-relief/index.
12 Drought ratings range from D0 (moderately dry) to D4 (exceptional drought). D2 is considered a severe
drought where crop or pasture losses are likely LFP covers losses due to droughts classified as D2 or D3,
https://droughtmonitor.unl.edu/About/AbouttheData/DroughtClassification.aspx.
13 Qualifying natural disaster events include wildfires, hurricanes, floods, derechos, excessive heat, winter
storms, freeze (including a polar vortex), smoke exposure, excessive moisture, qualifying drought, and
related conditions.
14 PFAS are widely used, long lasting chemicals. They are commonly found in cleaning products, water-
resistant fabrics, grease-resistant paper, non-stick cookware and personal care products.
15 The new rule includes counties with drought rated as D2 intensity (see note 13) for at least eight
consecutive weeks or rated as D3 or D4 – consistent with the availability of drought assistance under the
Livestock Forage Program (LFP). Previously, a drought rating of at least D3 was required to qualify as
“eligible drought”.
16 https://www.farmers.gov/inflation-reduction-investments.
17 The 2021 pilot phase of this programme was available only in four states.
18 Arkansas, California, Colorado, Georgia, Iowa, Michigan, Mississippi, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South
Carolina, and South Dakota
19 The Federal fiscal year (FY) runs from 1 October through 30 September of the following year.
20 OMB memorandum M-21-20, Promoting Public Trust in the Federal Government through Effective
Implementation of the American Rescue Plan Act and Stewardship of the Taxpayer Resources, references
Executive Order 13985, “Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the
Federal Government” (20 January 2021), which includes a definition of “underserved communities” in



 663


Section 2. The term “underserved communities” refers to populations sharing a particular characteristic,
as well as geographic communities, that have been systematically denied a full opportunity to participate
in aspects of economic, social, and civic life, as exemplified by the list in the preceding definition of “equity.”
The term “equity” means the consistent and systematic fair, just, and impartial treatment of all individuals,
including individuals who belong to underserved communities that have been denied such treatment, such
as Black, Latino, and Indigenous and Native American persons, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders
and other persons of colour; members of religious minorities; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and
queer (LGBTQ+) persons; persons with disabilities; persons who live in rural areas; and persons otherwise
adversely affected by persistent poverty or inequality.
21 Justice40 is a whole-of-government initiative stemming from 2021’s Executive Order 14008 on Tackling
the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad. Investments covered by the initiative include investments on
climate change, clean energy and energy efficiency, clean transit, affordable and sustainable housing,
training and workforce development, remediation and reduction of legacy pollution, and the development
of critical clean water and wastewater infrastructure. Disadvantaged populations are often
disproportionately
affected
by
these
issues.
For
more
information
on
Justice40,
see
https://www.whitehouse.gov/environmentaljustice/justice40/.
22 For the full list, see https://www.usda.gov/sites/default/files/documents/usda-justice-40-
programmes.pdf.
23 Biden Administration Announces Hundreds of Millions of Dollars in Global Food Aid to Respond to
Putin’s Unprovoked Invasion of Ukraine | USDA.


664 

Support to agriculture
Viet Nam’s Producer Support Estimate (PSE) has been negative since 2014 and has hovered near -10%
of gross farm receipts since 2018, and an average -10.5% in 2020-22. The PSE is largely driven by
negative Market Price Support (MPS), which implies taxation of producers. Producers of some import-
competing commodities, such as maize, sugar cane, and beef and veal, benefit from tariff protection and
hence have positive MPS. However, major export commodities, such as poultry, tea, and natural rubber,
are implicitly taxed. Farmgate prices were an average 10% below international reference values.
Budgetary transfers to producers are relatively small and dominated by payments based on variable input
use, primarily to cover the cost of exempting farmers from paying an irrigation service fee. The government
supports the production of rice by guaranteeing an average level of profit for rice growers equivalent to
30%, executed by the purchase of rice for the national strategic reserve, by prescribing price brackets, and
by providing funding to maintain at least 3.5 million hectares of land in paddy. All support to farmers comes
in the form of the most production- and trade-distorting measures.1
Support for general services for agriculture (General Service Support Estimate, GSSE) remained constant
at 2.2% of the value of production, dominated by allocations to hydrological infrastructure, particularly for
irrigation, and to infrastructure development in rural communes, including roads and small irrigation
schemes.
Recent policy changes
The government issued several resolutions, decrees and decisions that lay out plans and targets for the
next five to ten years and vision statements for the next 25 to 30 years under the umbrella of the ten-year
Socio-Economic Development Strategy (SEDS) for 2021-30. These include the National Sustainable
Agriculture and Rural Development Strategy for 2021-30, Vision to 2050, which sets targets for average
levels of growth in agricultural value added, labour productivity, and export value. In addition, the National
Green Growth Action Plan for 2021-30 delineates tasks and activities to develop a sustainable and low-
emissions agricultural sector that is adaptable in the face of climate change.
Viet Nam continues to set ambitious objectives for climate-change mitigation in agriculture and has begun
developing mechanisms to advance adaptation within the sector. A decree at the beginning of 2022
strengthened the country’s mitigation target, aiming to reduce greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions
– including from energy use in agriculture – at least 14% (129.8 MtCO2eq) compared to the business-as-
usual scenario for 2030 in Viet Nam’s updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) submitted in
2020 under the Paris Agreement. With respect to adaptation, a national strategy was approved to transform
agricultural production towards smart adaptation, and indicators were defined to monitor and evaluate
progress toward climate-change adaptation objectives.
The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) of six Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) countries – Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Singapore, Thailand, and Viet Nam – and four
30 Viet Nam


 665

partner countries with which ASEAN has Free Trade Agreements (FTA) – the People’s Republic of China
(hereafter “China”), Japan, Australia, and New Zealand – came into force on 1 January 2022. Preliminary
evidence suggests that the agreement has already benefitted Viet Nam: foreign trade value for Viet Nam
was up about 12% on the year in the first 11 months of 2022, with China the largest importer of Vietnamese
agricultural, forestry, and fishery products.2
Assessment and recommendations
•
Viet Nam has established and strengthened commitments to climate-change mitigation and
adaptation as defined by national strategy and planning documents. With respect to adaptation,
actions planned and undertaken span infrastructure and technological, behavioural and cultural,
and social and institutional activities. These include improvements in water-resource infrastructure,
breeding new varieties of rice resilient to saltwater intrusion, and developing legal and governance
frameworks to support green growth. These actions build resilience in the medium to long term.
The establishment of indicators to monitor and evaluate adaptation activities is a laudable and
necessary step towards achieving the stated objectives. Continued efforts should document the
implementation of adaptation activities and demonstrate their impact.
•
Although Viet Nam seeks to advance sustainable growth in agricultural productivity, it is unclear if
and by how much proposed activities will reduce the substantial environmental degradation caused
by current production systems. The National Green Growth Action Plan calls to expand the irrigated
land base, which will add to already significant water and energy use and could exacerbate GHG
emissions, nutrient surpluses and water-quality deterioration, depending on what crops are grown.
Attention should be paid to how planning and strategic visions developed at the national level help
or hinder the country’s ability to achieve its mitigation and adaptation targets, and the long-term
sustainability of the agricultural sector.
•
Although the country has made progress reforming state-owned enterprises (SOE), these continue
to benefit from preferential access to credit and land, and influence the export of key commodities.
Consequently, producers of these commodities are implicitly taxed, receiving commodity prices
below international reference levels. Efforts should be made to phase out preferential treatment of
SOEs to encourage competition and ensure equal access by private firms to productive resources.
•
Viet Nam’s integration into the global economy via FTAs such as the RCEP marks an important
step towards expanding and diversifying export markets. Domestic producers face challenges to
accessing foreign markets, for example arising from more stringent requirements for food hygiene,
safety and technical standards. Though plans have been made to improve the quality and safety
of agricultural products, efforts should now advance their implementation. In addition, domestic
producers will face increased competition from imports. To address this, increased investments
should be pursued to help domestic producers become more competitive, such as expenditures
on infrastructure and training.


666 

Figure 30.1. Viet Nam: Development of support to agriculture







Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Viet Nam - Figure 1A. Development of support to agriculture
Producer Support
Estimate relative to
gross farm receipts
(%PSE)
2000-02
2020-22
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
Viet Nam - Figure 1B. Development of support to agriculture
Share of potentially
most distorting transfers
in aggregated gross
producer transfers
2000-02
2020-22
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Viet Nam - Figure 1C. Development of support to agriculture
Ratio of producer to
border price (Producer
NPC)
2000-02
2020-22
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
Viet Nam - Figure 1D. Development of support to agriculture
General Services
Support Estimate
relative to agricultural
value of production
2000-02
2020-22
0%
1%
2%
3%
Viet Nam - Figure 1E. Development of support to agriculture
Total Support Estimate
relative to GDP (%TSE)
2000-02
2020-22
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%


 667

Figure 30.2. Viet Nam: Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm
receipts, 2020-22

Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.


Viet Nam - Figure 3. Commodity-specific transfers as a percentage of commodity gross farm receipts, 2020-22
Commodities with non-zero transfers
MPS
Payments based on output
Other SCT
Maize
Rice
Cashew nuts
Sugar
Beef and veal
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Eggs
Peppers
Coffee
Tea
Rubber
-100%
-90%
-80%
-70%
-60%
-50%
-40%
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%


668 

Table 30.1. Viet Nam: Estimates of support to agriculture
Million USD

2000-02
2020-22
2020
2021
2022p
Total value of production (at farm gate)
9 013
46 526
44 705
46 985
47 886
of which: share of MPS commodities (%)
77.02
73.22
68.92
74.21
76.54
Total value of consumption (at farm gate)
7 808
46 283
43 163
49 295
46 391
Producer Support Estimate (PSE)
591
-4 945
-4 377
-5 356
-5 102
Support based on commodity output
470
-5 400
-4 881
-5 751
-5 569
Market Price Support1
470
-5 400
-4 881
-5 751
-5 569
Positive Market Price Support
959
1 289
1 707
1 456
703
Negative Market Price Support
-489
-6 689
-6 588
-7 206
-6 272
Payments based on output
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on input use
101
453
502
393
465
Based on variable input use
101
453
502
393
465
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on fixed capital formation
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Based on on-farm services
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on current A/An/R/I, production required
0
2
2
2
2
Based on Receipts / Income
0
2
2
2
2
Based on Area planted / Animal numbers
0
0
0
0
0
with input constraints
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production required
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I, production not required
0
0
0
0
0
With variable payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
With fixed payment rates
0
0
0
0
0
with commodity exceptions
0
0
0
0
0
Payments based on non-commodity criteria
21
0
0
0
0
Based on long-term resource retirement
21
0
0
0
0
Based on a specific non-commodity output
0
0
0
0
0
Based on other non-commodity criteria
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous payments
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage PSE (%)
6.35
-10.52
-9.68
-11.30
-10.55
Producer NPC (coeff.)
1.06
0.90
0.91
0.90
0.90
Producer NAC (coeff.)
1.07
0.90
0.91
0.90
0.90
General Services Support Estimate (GSSE)
201
1 023
1 025
980
1 065
Agricultural knowledge and innovation system
23
138
147
133
134
Inspection and control
0
0
0
0
0
Development and maintenance of infrastructure
173
870
864
831
915
Marketing and promotion
0
0
0
0
0
Cost of public stockholding
5
15
14
16
16
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
Percentage GSSE (% of TSE)
25.74
..
..
..
..
Consumer Support Estimate (CSE)
-694
2 570
1 313
2 632
3 765
Transfers to producers from consumers
-694
3 929
3 571
4 288
3 926
Other transfers from consumers
-22
-1 626
-2 683
-2 052
-142
Transfers to consumers from taxpayers
0
0
0
0
0
Excess feed cost
22
267
425
397
-20
Percentage CSE (%)
-8.77
5.56
3.04
5.34
8.12
Consumer NPC (coeff.)
1.10
0.95
0.98
0.96
0.92
Consumer NAC (coeff.)
1.10
0.95
0.97
0.95
0.92
Total Support Estimate (TSE)
793
-3 922
-3 352
-4 376
-4 037
Transfers from consumers
716
-2 303
-888
-2 236
-3 784
Transfers from taxpayers
98
7
219
-88
-111
Budget revenues
-22
-1 626
-2 683
-2 052
-142
Percentage TSE (% of GDP)
2.41
-1.05
-0.97
-1.18
-0.99
Total Budgetary Support Estimate (TBSE)
323
1 478
1 528
1 375
1 532
Percentage TBSE (% of GDP)
1.00
0.40
0.44
0.37
0.38
GDP deflator (2000-02=100)
100
516
509
523
..
Exchange rate (national currency per USD)
15 000.33
23 191.54
23 236.30
22 935.62
23 402.71
.. Not available
Note: p: provisional. NPC: Nominal Protection Coefficient. NAC: Nominal Assistance Coefficient.
A/An/R/I: Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
1.   Market Price Support (MPS) is net of producer levies and excess feed cost. MPS commodities for Viet Nam are: rice, rubber, coffee, maize, cashew
nuts, sugar, pepper, tea, beef and veal, pig meat, poultry  and eggs.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-pcse-data-en




 669

Description of policy developments
Overview of policy trends
Following its declaration of independence in 1945 and ensuing reunification into the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam in 1975, the Communist Party of Viet Nam initially structured the country according to the Soviet
model, which was grounded in central planning and self-reliance. Within this context, agriculture’s primary
role was to support the development of heavy industry by providing food at low prices and achieving food
self-sufficiency (OECD, 2015[1]). Production was organised around co-operatives and state farms, with
SOEs providing inputs and controlling output markets. By the mid-1980s, food shortages and famine were
pervasive, as was inflation.
A long series of reforms embedded within the economy-wide program known as Doi Moi or “Renovation”
progressively liberalised Viet Nam’s economy and its agricultural sector starting in 1986 (OECD, 2015[1]).
The paradigm evolved toward a “law-ruled socialist market economy,” in which the development of
agriculture, forestry, and fisheries became a priority for stabilising the economy. The model for agricultural
management shifted from co-operatives to farm households, with farmland redistributed in the form of land-
use rights, and farm households given the ability to make their own production decisions provided they
met certain production quotas. By 1992, prices for most goods and services were determined by markets,
though regulation remained for certain commodities, such as fertiliser, sugar, and rice.
From 1993-2000, Viet Nam underwent a period of expansion, in which the country increasingly opened to
trade and integrated into the global economy. Reforms introduced more market-oriented policies with the
aim of expanding food production for export. A number of these reforms aimed to improve investment and
technological innovation, including the 1993 Land Law, the establishment of a national extension service,
and credit access for rural households. The Price Stabilisation Fund (PSF) was established to regulate the
prices of certain commodities, including urea, paddy and rice, coffee, and sugarcane.
During this period, Viet Nam entered into bilateral and regional trade agreements and partnerships to
expand market opportunities, including its accession to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) in 1995 and its admission to the Asia Pacific Economic Community (APEC) in 1998. Most
importantly, the country relaxed restrictions on the export of rice as well as internal barriers to trade
between the south and the north. The country saw strong and steady growth throughout the 1990s, in
terms of real GDP (7.4% per year) and agricultural output (6% per year), with the relaxation of production
quotas, price controls, collectivised agriculture, restrictions on trade and investment, and bans on private
enterprises (OECD, 2015[1]; World Bank, 2016[2]). The budgetary expenditure for agriculture quadrupled
during this period, with several large-scale projects implemented, such as the Building Canals for All Rice
Fields programme (Phan, 2014[3]; Ellis et al., 2010[4]).
From 2000-08, the policy framework aimed to stimulate agricultural and rural modernisation and
industrialisation by improving yields, quality, and the value of production. Further international integration,
including accession to the WTO in 2007, locked in previous reforms. The remaining few quantitative
restrictions on agricultural imports and exports were progressively withdrawn but it was not until the late
2000s that private sector involvement in rice export was encouraged. Prior to this point, the right to export
was limited to national and provincial SOEs.
Since 2008, two major resolutions have guided and reoriented agricultural policy development in Viet Nam.
The first, the “Tam Nong Resolution”, emphasises the advancement of agriculture, rural development, and
farmer livelihoods based on a socialist market economy. Alongside this, a resolution to ensure national
food security was issued in response to sharp increases in food prices from 2007-09. The resolution sought
to ensure national food security by guaranteeing adequate food supplies, particularly for rice. It set specific
targets to preserve land in the production of rice and to ensure a farm-gate price such that growers are
guaranteed a certain profit margin above production costs. In March 2021, this resolution was updated


670 

through 2030 to stabilise 3.5 million hectares of land in rice production and to ensure an average profit of
35% above production costs.
Table 30.2. Viet Nam: Agricultural policy trends
Period
Framework
Changes in agricultural policies
1976-1986

Reunification: Socialist centrally
planned system
Centrally planned economy, including the agricultural sector
Agricultural production organised into co-operatives that also administered land
Upstream and downstream sectors reorganised as state-owned enterprises
1986-1993
Renovation (Doi Moi): Launch of
reforms to transition Viet Nam to
a socialist-oriented market
economy

Farm households replace co-operatives as focus of agricultural and rural development
Role of co-operatives reduced: farmers allowed to make production decisions; co-operatives
limited to trading and providing services (e.g. irrigation)
Economy opened to trade
Reduced government control over prices, although prices regulated for some products
(including fertiliser, sugar and rice)
1993-2000
Expansion: Further reforms to
expand food production and
exports

Land Law 1993; land use rights extended to 20 years (annual crops) and 50 years (perennial
crops)
Land use tax replaces production quota and agricultural output tax
Rural households allowed to borrow loans from commercial institutions
Price Stabilisation Fund for essential commodities
Restrictions on rice exports relaxed
Increased budgetary expenditure for agriculture
2000-2008
Consolidation: Policies to
promote agricultural and rural
modernisation and
industrialisation

Policies to encourage production of primary and processed commodities, quality improvement,
domestic and international trade, and increase investments from various sources in physical
and social infrastructure
Regional and bilateral trade agreements
WTO accession
2008-
present
Reorientation: Shift in emphasis
from extensive development of
agriculture based on quantity to
one focused on quality and
efficiency improvements

Agricultural policy guided by two major resolutions:
- Resolution No. 26/2008/NQ-TW on agriculture, farmers and rural areas (Tam Nong)
- Resolution No. 63/2009/NQ-CP to ensure national food security
Implemented through the master plan for agricultural development (2012) and the agricultural
restructuring project (2013)
Source: OECD (2015[1]).
Over the past 20 years, the overall level of support provided to Viet Nam’s agricultural sector fluctuated at
low or negative levels, largely driven by changes in MPS (Figure 30.3). Since 2014, PSE has remained
negative, dropping to around -10% in 2018 and remaining at that level since. Total support to agriculture
(TSE) has also been negative over the same period, as budgetary transfers to producers and expenditure
on general services do not compensate for overall negative MPS.


 671

Figure 30.3. Viet Nam: Level and PSE composition by support categories, 2000 to 2022

Notes: A/An/R/I:Area planted/Animal numbers/Receipts/Income.
Payments not requiring production include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production not required) and Payment based on non-
commodity criteria. Other payments include Payments based on non-current A/An/R/I (production required) and Miscellaneous payments.
Source: OECD (2023), “Producer and Consumer Support Estimates”, OECD Agriculture statistics (database), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr-
pcse-data-en.
Main policy instruments
Two of the most important policies governing agriculture are the Master Plan for Agricultural Production
Development and the Plan on Restructuring Agriculture in the 2021-2025 Period.3 Both of these decisions
contain general objectives to sustainably develop agriculture and rural areas; increase value-added,
efficiency, and competitiveness; and improve the life of farmers, contribute to poverty reduction, protect
the environment and ecology, and ensure national security.
Domestic price support is the main form of support for Vietnamese producers, particularly in the form of
border protection for import-competing commodities such as beef, veal, and sugarcane. In recent years,
tariffs for some goods have increased, although they remain within the bounds established by the WTO.
State-owned enterprises (SOEs) have declined in importance through reform and privatisation efforts,
though they continue to play a role in the production, wholesale, and international trade of export
commodities such as rice, rubber, coffee, and tea, for which the MPS is negative.4 SOEs continue to be
afforded privileges in terms of access to capital, natural resources, land, and human resources, which
allows them to continue to exert market power, discouraging entry and suppressing farmgate prices
(OECD, 2022[5]). Key SOEs that continue to operate in the agricultural sector include the Vietnam Rubber
Group (VRG), the Vietnam Southern Food Corporation (Vinafood II), the Vietnam National Coffee
Corporation (Vinacafe), and the Vietnam National Tea Corporation (Vinatea).5
There are two main policy instruments used to ensure that rice farmers earn 30% profit above production
costs. First, when prices are too low, the government provides concessional loans to rice purchasing
enterprises for the temporary storage of rice during harvest. Second, the government considers the profit
Viet Nam - Figure 4. Level and PSE composition by support categories, 1986 to 2022
Percentage of gross farm receipts
Other payments
Payments not requiring production
Payments based on current A/An/R/I
Payments based on input use
Payments based on output
Market price support
Percentage PSE
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20


672 

objective when it determines the annual volume and price of rice that it purchases each year to maintain
its national reserve stockpile, managed by the General Department of State Reserves (GDRS) under the
Ministry of Finance.
Payments to producers are relatively small and are mainly expenditures to offset the irrigation service fee
(ISF) exemption. This exemption from paying a fee to assist with the costs of managing, maintaining, and
protecting irrigation works above the “canal gate” has been in place since 2009. In June 2017, the Law on
Irrigation was issued, providing for the reintroduction of an ISF for all users. In 2022, funding for the
irrigation fee exemption increased by 26.5% at both the central and local government levels, relative to
expenditures in 2021.6
Other support based on input use includes central and local government support to provide plant genetic
and animal breeding material to farmers at subsidised rates to encourage diversification, improve the
quality of production, and support farmers in response to natural disasters and disease outbreaks. Support
for producers is also provided through the Socio-economic Development Programme for Ethnic Minorities
and Mountainous Areas (known as Programme 135). The programme includes subsidies for agricultural
inputs and services such as extension, which represent around 13% of total expenditures under the
measure.
Funding for local rice grower support programmes is available at the provincial level to help achieve the
paddy land target of 3.5 million hectares. At least 50% of this funding is to be used to support the adoption
of new rice varieties, new technologies in rice production, and to promote value chain linkages for the
production and sale of rice. Remaining funds are to be used for activities such as periodic soil analyses to
guide restoration measures, improvements in land quality, and investments in agricultural and rural
infrastructure, including irrigation systems.
Since 2003, most farming households and organisations benefit from a reduction in the land use tax or are
exempt from paying it. The exemptions and reductions were initially provided for a seven-year period but
have been extended twice and are currently valid until 31 December 2025.
Expenditures on irrigation systems dominate general services for the agricultural sector. In 2020, the
government approved the Hydraulic Work Strategy through 2030, Vision toward 2045. The strategy
establishes water supply targets for agricultural production and aquaculture and sets other objectives, such
as ensuring the supply of water for double-cropping paddy rice fields and ensuring that 85% of the total
area is under irrigation. Other targets in the irrigation strategy are improving drainage and environmental
protection, preventing and combating natural disasters, and responding to climate change. Targets in the
strategy will be achieved through a combination of investments in irrigation infrastructure, improved
planning and management of irrigation laws, and technical solutions.
Expenditures on other general services include investments in infrastructure, agricultural knowledge and
innovation systems, inspection and control, marketing and promotion, and public stockholding. In 2020,
the government approved the Research and Development Programme for Plant and Livestock Varieties
Serving Agricultural Restructuring for the Period 2021-30. The programme aims to improve research
capacity and the development of agricultural plant and livestock varieties to support the modernisation of
the agricultural sector, adaptation to climate change, and the restructuring of agricultural production to
improve competitiveness, increase value-added, and promote sustainable development. Total investment
in the programme, including private funding, is VND 103 050 billion (USD 4.4 billion) over the lifespan of
the project.
Private ownership of land is not permitted in Viet Nam. Rather, all land is owned and administered by the
state on behalf of the people. Law allows ownership of a Land Use Right (LUR), under which title holders
may conduct real estate transactions, including buying, selling, bequeathing, and leasing land, as well as
using land as collateral for mortgages with financial institutions. There are different types of LURs with
differing restrictions, limiting the duration of the right,7 the choice of crops, the process for converting paddy


 673

land from rice to another crop, and land transfers and exchanges. Agricultural land use plans and support
policies favour rice production.
The government regulates exporters of rice to promote stockholding of rice that can be supplied to the
market to balance exports and domestic consumption, stabilise domestic rice prices, and fulfil international
commitments in the event of natural disasters or crop failures. To obtain a certificate to export rice from
Ministry of Industry and Trade (MOIT), companies must have at least one storage and one milling facility
that meet national standards and regulations (either owned or leased) and maintain rice reserves
equivalent to 5% of the volume shipped in the preceding six months.8 Exporters of organic rice are
exempted from the need to obtain a certificate and from the storage and milling conditions.
Following Viet Nam’s accession to the WTO in 2007, the simple average most favoured nation (MFN)-
applied tariff on agricultural imports decreased from around 25% in the mid-2000s to 17.1% in 2021. This
is slightly lower than the simple average bound tariff on agricultural products of 18.8% (WTO, 2022[6]).
Applied tariffs are much lower on imports originating from countries or regions with which Viet Nam signed
free trade agreements. For example, the simple average preferential tariff on agricultural imports is just
2.3% from ASEAN members and China, and 4.5% from Australia and New Zealand.
Viet Nam implements trade liberalisation through multilateral, regional, and bilateral trade agreements. It
is a member of the WTO, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation (APEC). The country supports trade liberalisation between ASEAN members and
their major trading partners in the region, including China, Japan, India, Korea, Australia, and New Zealand.
Outside of ASEAN, Viet Nam has negotiated bilateral free trade agreements with Chile, Cuba, the Eurasian
Economic Union, Japan, and Korea. Agreements with the European Union and the United Kingdom came
into effect in 2020. Viet Nam, along with ten other countries, signed the Comprehensive and Progressive
Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) on 8 March 2018. The agreement was ratified by the
Vietnamese National Assembly on 12 November 2018, and entered into force on 14 January 2019. In
2022, the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) came into force for Viet Nam and
12 other countries, including ASEAN members and partner countries.9
Viet Nam signed and ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change in 2016. In its updated Nationally
Determined Contribution (NDC), submitted in July 2020, the country committed to reducing 2030 business-
as-usual (BAU) greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of 927.9 MtCO2eq by 9% using domestic resources
and up to 27% with international support. This goal represented a less stringent mitigation target than that
set in the first NDC. However, in 2022, Viet Nam issued a decree on Mitigation of Greenhouse Gas
Emissions and Protection of the Ozone Layer, under which the country strengthened its commitment to
mitigation by pledging a 14% reduction from the 2030 BAU. Additionally, Viet Nam signed the Global
Methane Pledge and committed to achieving net-zero carbon emissions by 2050 at the COP 26.
These national-level targets have been translated into sector-specific goals for implementation via the
National Action Plan on Green Growth for 2021-30, the Action Plan to Reduce Methane Emissions by
2030, and the Scheme on Tasks and Solutions to Implement the Results of COP26. Notably, the latter
sets the objective to reduce GHG emissions from agriculture, which accounts for almost one-third of the
country’s total emissions, by 43% relative to the 2030 BAU.
Climate change adaptation policies in agriculture
Viet Nam has invested since 2008 in building a legal and planning structure to support climate-change
adaptation through the development of strategies, plans, resolutions, and laws. Benchmarks include the
National Target Program on Response to Climate Change (2008), the National Strategy on Climate
Change (2011), the National Environmental Protection Law (2014), the National Adaptation Plan in
Agriculture (NAP-Ag, 2016), and the National Adaptation Plan (2019-2020).10 The Ministry of Natural
Resources and Environment (MONRE) oversees activities related to climate change. Within MONRE, the


674 

Department of Meteorology, Hydrology and Climate Change (DMHCC) co-ordinates climate-change
activities, responses, and strategies. Other ministries are involved in planning and implementation of
climate-change initiatives, including the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD), which
leads the development of policies specific to agriculture and development.
The 2016 NAP-Ag set out entry points to mainstream climate-change adaptation priorities for the
agricultural sector. As part of these, a climate-change vulnerability assessment was carried out for crops,
livestock, and aquaculture together with a stocktaking of adaptation measures and Climate-Smart
Agriculture (CSA) practices in use. Several pilot projects were carried out, including a salinity monitoring
and early-warning system for the Mekong River Delta, a mapping project for landslide disaster risk, rapid
capacity assessments of MARD officials and stakeholders in the sector, guidelines for prioritising climate-
responsive investments, and training programmes for national and provincial officials on the valuation of
climate-change impacts.
Viet Nam prioritised long-term sustainable development as the focus of agriculture policy. The goals of the
National Strategy on Green Growth for 2021-30, Vision to 2050 are to:
•
promote economic restructuring and innovation
•
achieve economic prosperity, environmental sustainability, and social justice
•
move towards a green, carbon-neutral economy to contribute to global climate-change mitigation
•
develop modern, clean, organic, and sustainable agriculture
•
raise the quality, added value, and competitiveness of agricultural production through adjustments
and shifts in the composition of livestock, crops, forestry, and aquaculture production.11
The National Green Growth Action Plan for 2021-30 covers 18 subjects and 134 specific tasks and
activities organised into 57 groups. The plan seeks to grow agricultural value added 2.5-3% per year while
promoting efficient use of natural resources. Among the specific targets for 2030 for agriculture are:12
•
irrigate at least 30% of dry crop area using advanced water-saving irrigation methods
•
convert 300 000 hectares (approximately 4%) of rice land to more environmentally friendly and
profitable crops13
•
increase organic cropland to 2% of total crop area and organic livestock products to 2-3% of total
production.
The National Strategy on Climate Change to 2050 emphasises transforming the structure of crops and
livestock towards smart adaptation to climate change; developing sustainable agriculture, forestry, and
fishery value chains; and the complete relocation of at least 70% of households in areas at high risk of
natural disasters, flash floods, and landslides.
According to the most recent national communication submitted to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2019, action plans at ministerial and local levels are being
developed for vulnerable sectors in parallel with national-level programmes. Within the realm of water
resources, climate-change adaptation measures have been implemented via Mekong River Delta water
planning and supply projects and the Red River Delta programme on water management and climate
change adaptation, in addition to city scale climate change programmes for Ho Chi Minh City, Hanoi, and
Can Tho.
In 2019, MARD implemented 21 of 54 tasks in the climate change action plan, with total funding of
VND 47.18 billion (USD 2.0 million), compared to the VND 402 billion (USD 17.2 million) required for full
implementation. The tasks focused on governance (e.g. revising and improving legal frameworks to
support green agriculture), technologies (e.g. enhanced use of modern technical solutions), and planning
(e.g. accounting for climate-change impacts when using land, water, and other natural resources). The


 675

sector has also developed and adopted new rice varieties suitable for inundation conditions and that
support intensified production. These include acid- and salt-tolerant varieties currently under development.
The decision, “Approval of the Set of Indicators for Climate Change Adaptation Assessment in Agriculture
and Rural Development”, establishes 44 indicators and 54 sub-indicators for monitoring and evaluating
climate-change adaptation activities in the sector.
Domestic policy developments in 2022-23
The government has issued numerous resolutions, decrees, and decisions establishing priorities, plans,
and targets that apply to the next 5-10 years, as well as vision statements that look forward by 25-30 years.
Policy developments in 2022 that carry implications for the agricultural sector include the Sustainable
Agriculture and Rural Development Strategy for 2021-30, the National Target Programme for New Rural
Construction, and the National Strategy for Development of the Digital Economy. These programmes
specify high-level goals, such as achieving growth objectives in agricultural labour productivity, advancing
the competitiveness of craft village products, and increasing the percentage of enterprises using digital
platforms. Additional strategies specific to the agricultural sector include plans to reduce the use of
fertilisers, increase the training of agricultural workers, and promote the sustainable development of
macadamia nut production.
A May 2022 decision implements a 2018 decree that provides for agricultural insurance and agricultural
insurance assistance to encourage enterprises to sell insurance and to enable producers of agricultural
products to insure against production risks. The new decision expands substantially the types of producers
eligible. Prior to 2022, assistance in the form of subsidies to offset agricultural insurance premiums were
limited to producers of rice, buffaloes, and cows. In 2022, eligibility was expanded to include producers of
rubber, pepper, cashew, coffee trees, and pigs. In addition, coverage was expanded to cover risks from a
significantly larger set of disease outbreaks relevant to rice production.
MARD issued a plan to ensure food safety and the quality of agriculture, forestry and fisheries products.
The plan specifies a series of indicators to achieve, including an additional 2% of production and trading
establishments ranked as having a relatively low risk of contamination, a decrease in the proportion of food
samples that exceed allowable levels for a suite of contaminants by 10% relative to their level in 2021, and
enhanced provision of training courses for central, provincial, and sub-provincial staff. To achieve these
objectives, the plan delineates a series of tasks, including the review and revision of policies, standards
and technical regulations and dissemination of information on food safety.
The prime minister approved the project Promoting Application of Information Technology to Collection of
Information about and Forecasting of State Agricultural Product Markets. The objective of the project is to
provide timely information to support regulation and trade, and to enhance the competitiveness, value-
added, and sustainable development of Vietnamese agricultural products. The project includes numerous
tasks to support analysis and forecasting, including building and operating an in-depth data warehouse;
developing human resources via professional training; and developing uniform regulations and guidance
on procedures at different levels (central to local government).
In 2022, two measures were adopted that seek to restructure and improve the operational efficiency and
competitiveness of SOEs. The decision, Restructuring State-Owned Enterprises, Focusing on State-
Owned Economic Groups and Corporations in the 2021-2025 Period, sets the objective of restructuring
SOEs by 2025 (VNA, 2022[7]). The Resolution, On the Continuation to Innovate, Improve Operational
Efficiency and Mobilise Resources of SOEs, Focusing on Economic Groups and Corporations, recognises
the relatively low efficiency of SOEs and defines targets to accelerate reforms (OECD, 2023[8]).
In early 2022, the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment issued the Decree on Mitigation of
Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Protection of the Ozone Layer, which redefines the minimum level of
GHG mitigation to be achieved by 2030 as 129.8 MtCO2eq (including energy use in agriculture), which


676 

represents a reduction of 14% from the level of emissions in the business-as-usual (BAU) scenario. A
number of national strategies and action plans were issued in 2022 that target climate change mitigation
and that support national goals to reduce GHG emissions from agriculture by 43% from the BAU scenario
and to reduce total methane emissions by 30% in 2030 relative to 2020 levels. An updated list of GHG
emission coefficients relevant to agriculture was issued in October 2022.14
Trade policy developments in 2022-23
After ratification by six ASEAN countries (Brunei, Cambodia, Singapore, Thailand, Laos, and Viet Nam)
and four partner countries (China, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand) the Regional Comprehensive
Economic Partnership (RCEP) entered into force on 1 January 2022 for these 10 countries. The RCEP
entered into force with a slight delay for Korea on 1 February 2022, Malaysia on 18 March 2022, and
Indonesia on 2 January 2023. RCEP is the largest free trade agreement in the world, covering around 30%
of the global population and GDP. Seven of the signatories, including Viet Nam, are intersection economies
also belonging to the 11-member Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific
Partnership (CPTPP).
Contextual information
Viet Nam is a mid-sized country in terms of land area, but its population of over 97 million makes it the 15th
most populous country in the world (Table 30.3). Almost two-thirds of the population live in rural areas.
Since the reforms of Doi Moi in the mid-1980s, the country has seen strong and steady growth in GDP, on
the order of 5-7% annually from 2000-19 (Figure 30.4). With the impact of COVID-19, real GDP growth
slowed to under 3% in 2020, marking the first time that annual growth fell below 5% in more than two
decades. Real GDP growth has not recovered, remaining relatively low, at 2.6%, in 2021.
Although the relative importance of agriculture in the economy has declined over time, agriculture
continues to contribute 12.6% to Viet Nam’s GDP and employs 29% of the labour force. The agricultural
sector in Viet Nam has undergone significant structural changes in recent decades, reflecting a shift away
from staple foods to export commodities, such as rubber and cashew nuts, and to livestock production,
particularly pig meat, in response to increased domestic demand. Nevertheless, crops dominate the
agricultural landscape, accounting for 63% of total agricultural production in 2021 (Table 30.3). Rice alone
plays a dominant role, accounting for around 26% of the value of agricultural production.




 677

Table 30.3. Viet Nam: Contextual indicators

Viet Nam
International comparison

2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Economic context


Share in total of all countries
GDP (billion USD in PPPs)
202
1 138
0.5%
0.9%
Population (million)
79
97
1.8%
1.9%
Land area (thousand km2)
310
313
0.4%
0.4%
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha)
8 780
12 360
0.3%
0.4%



All countries1
Population density (inhabitants/km2)
252
311
52
64
GDP per capita (USD in PPPs)
2 553
11 676
9 350
23 401
Trade as % of GDP
49.5
90.1
12.3
15.6
Agriculture in the economy


All countries1
Agriculture in GDP (%)
22.7
12.6
2.9
3.9
Agriculture share in employment (%)
65.3
29.0
-
-
Agro-food exports (% of total exports)
16.9
6.4
6.2
7.9
Agro-food imports (% of total imports)
6.1
9.6
5.5
7.2
Characteristics of the agricultural sector


All countries1
Crop in total agricultural production (%)
74
63
-
-
Livestock in total agricultural production (%)
26
37
-
-
Share of arable land in AA (%)
71
55
32
34
Notes: *or closest available year.
1. Average of all countries covered in this report. Agro-food trade includes natural rubber.
Sources: OECD statistical databases; UN Comtrade; World Bank, WDI and national data.
Figure 30.4. Viet Nam: Main economic indicators, 2000 to 2022

Sources: OECD statistical databases; World Bank, WDI; and ILO estimates and projections.


678 

With the progressive liberalisation of trade, the value of imports and exports has increased by eight-fold
since the early 2000s (Figure 30.5). Imports, in particular, saw a sizable jump from 2020 to 2021, from
USD 22.4 billion to USD 31.6 billion. The value of exports has also steadily increased, reaching
USD 21.3 billion in 2021. Viet Nam is now one of the world’s largest exporters of a range of agricultural
commodities, including rice, coffee, tea, cashew nuts, coffee, black pepper, natural rubber and cassava.
However, exports often sell at a discount compared with the same commodities from other leading
exporters due to quality differences. Nearly two-thirds of Viet Nam’s agro-food exports are delivered as
primary (34%) or processed (31%) goods for household consumption (Figure 30.5). Just over two-thirds
of agro-food imports are used as primary (42%) or processed (25%) inputs to production, rather than for
household consumption. Key imports into production include livestock feedstuffs, such as oil cake and
maize, and raw commodities for further processing and export, like cotton and cashew nuts. The remaining
one-third are products to meet food demand from domestic consumers, including for higher-value foods
and beverages.
Figure 30.5. Viet Nam: Agro-food trade

Viet Nam - Figure 6A. Agro-food trade
Agro-food trade, 2000-2021 (Billion USD)
Exports
Imports
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35


 679


Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding. Agro-food trade includes natural rubber.
Source: UN Comtrade Database.
Agricultural production increased by just over 3% on average from 2011-20 (Figure 30.6). This was largely
driven by growth in total factor productivity, which outpaced the world average during the same period.
Greater use of primary factors and intermediate inputs likewise contributed to Viet Nam’s relatively high
level of growth in agricultural output.
However, agricultural production gains have been accompanied by significant pressure on natural
resources. The nitrogen and phosphorous balances for Viet Nam exceed the OECD average by a factor
of 3.5 and 10.9, respectively (Table 30.1). The share of agriculture in total greenhouse gas emissions is
three times greater than the OECD-wide average (though agriculture accounts for a larger share in the
economy), and the use of energy and water inputs is also relatively high. The resulting environmental
degradation, taken together with the impact of climate change, poses a risk to agricultural production and
the capacity of the sector to maintain productivity and output growth moving forward.
Viet Nam - Figure 6B. Agro-food trade
Composition of agro-food trade, 2021 (Percentage)
14
14
25
25
21
21
42
42
31
31
16
16
34
34
17
17
Primary for consumption
Processed for consumption
Primary for industry
Processed for industry
Exports
Imports
0
20
40
60
80
100


680 

Figure 30.6. Viet Nam: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20

Note: Primary factors comprise labour, land and capital (livestock and machinery). Intermediate input comprises materials (feed and fertiliser).
Source: USDA Economic Research Service Agricultural Productivity database.
Table 30.4. Viet Nam: Productivity and environmental indicators

Viet Nam
International comparison

1993-2002
2011-2020
1993-2002
2011-2020



World
TFP annual growth rate (%)
2.5%
1.8%
1.7%
1.1%


OECD average
Environmental indicators
2000*
2021*
2000*
2021*
Nitrogen balance, kg/ha
165.6
105.6
32.2
30.4
Phosphorus balance, kg/ha
29.9
33.0
3.3
3.0
Agriculture share of total energy use (%)
1.7
4.9
1.7
2.0
Agriculture share of GHG emissions (%)
47.9
31.6
8.6
10.5
Share of irrigated land in AA (%)
..
..
-
-
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%)
94.0
95.0
46.6
49.7
Water stress indicator
..
..
8.3
7.4
Notes: * or closest available year.
Sources: USDA Economic Research Service, Agricultural Productivity database; OECD statistical databases; FAO database and national data.


Viet Nam - Figure 7. Composition of agricultural output growth, 20
11-20
Annual growth rate
1.82%
1.82%
1.12%
1.12%
0.34%
0.34%
0.35%
0.35%
0.85%
0.85%
0.46%
0.46%
Total Factor Productivity
Primary factor growth
Intermediate input growth
Output growth
Viet Nam
World
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%


 681

References

Ellis, K. et al. (2010), Assessing the Economic Impact of Competition: Findings from Vietnam,
Overseas Development Institute, London, https://odi.org/en/publications/assessing-the-
economic-impact-of-competition-findings-from-vietnam/ (accessed on 29 March 2023).
[4]
Hai, L. (2012), The Rice Situation in Viet Nam, Asian Development Bank,
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/project-documents//43430-012-reg-tacr-04.pdf
(accessed on 14 June 2023).
[9]
OECD (2023), OECD Review of the Corporate Governance of State-Owned Enterprises in Viet
Nam: Recent and ongoing reforms, https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/63110c39-
en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/63110c39-en (accessed on 23 May 2023).
[8]
OECD (2022), OECD Review of the Corporate Governance of State-Owned Enterprises in Viet
Nam, Corporate Governance, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/a22345d0-en.
[5]
OECD (2015), Agricultural Policies in Viet Nam 2015, OECD Food and Agricultural Reviews,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264235151-en.
[1]
Phan, S. (2014), “A Qualitative Review of Vietnam’s 2006-2010 Economic Plan and the
Performance of the Agriculture Sector”, Asian Journal of Agriculture and Development,
Vol. 11/1, pp. 39-63, https://doi.org/10.37801/ajad2014.11.1.3.
[3]
VNA (2022), “Vietnam needs drastic SOE restructuring: experts”, Vietnam+,
https://en.vietnamplus.vn/vietnam-needs-drastic-soe-restructuring-
experts/223799.vnp?utm_source=link.gov.vn#source=link.gov.vn (accessed on
23 May 2023).
[7]
World Bank (2016), Transforming Vietnamese Agriculture: Gaining More from Less. Vietnam
Development Report., World Bank, Washington, DC.
[2]
WTO (2022), World Tariff Profiles 2022, WTO ITC UNCTAD,
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/publications_e/world_tariff_profiles21_e.htm (accessed on
29 March 2023).
[6]



Notes

1 The objective of ensuring an average profit of 30% is specified in Resolution No. 63/NQ-CP. Both
maximum and minimum prices may be prescribed to support the objective (Hai, 2012[9]).
2 https://www.ciie.org/zbh/en/news/exhibition/focus/20230130/36147.html.



682 


3 These are, respectively, Decision No. 124/QD-TTg of 2 February 2012 and Decision No. 255/QD-TTg of
25 February 2021. The latter replaced the Agricultural Restructuring Scheme towards Value-added and
Sustainable Development, Decision No. 899/QD-TTg of 10 June 2013.
4 Producers of these commodities are implicitly taxed in that they receive prices lower than world prices
for their outputs. One explanation for the lower prices of these commodities is that SOEs benefit from
advantages in access to capital, natural resources, land, and human resources, allowing them to exert
significant market power that deters private sector entry and suppresses the farmgate prices of these
exported commodities below international reference prices (OECD, 2015[1]).
5 The VRG, one of the top ten largest listed companies across all sectors, controls 40% of the land in
rubber plantations nationally and 85% of total export production (state ownership ratio 97%). Vinafood II is
the country’s largest exporter of rice, with the capacity to process 3 million tonnes per year, and is an
exporter also of cassava, maize, beans, cashew nuts, and coffee (state ownership ratio 51%). Vinacafe
accounts for 20-25% of coffee bean exports, as well as exports of peppers and cashew nuts, and imports
of fertilisers for coffee production (state ownership ratio 100%). Vinatea (converted to Vietnam Tea
Corporation Joint Stock Company by decision of the Prime Minister) owns 4 300 hectares of land in tea
production (the largest concentrated area in the country) and produces up to 10 000 tonnes of dry tea per
year, with exports to 15 countries. State ownership ratios from OECD (2022[5]).
6 The Law on Irrigation is Law No. 08/2017/QH14. In 2022, expenditures on the ISF were VND 4.18 trillion
(USD 176 million) from the central government and VND 4.72 trillion (USD 201 million) from the local
government, compared with VND 3.30 million (USD 144 million) and VND 3.73 million (USD 163 million)
in 2021.
7 For example, foreigners may retain a LUR for 50 years, while locals may hold one indefinitely.
8 Export restrictions for rice provide a policy rationale for negative MPS values until 2017. After that point,
formal export restrictions no longer legally apply, but some restrictions remain in terms of maintaining rice
reserves. The ongoing presence and role of SOEs in the trade of rice and other export commodities is the
most likely explanation for negative MPS values since 2017.
9 The RCEP countries are Australia, Brunei, Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Laos, Malaysia,
Myanmar, New Zealand, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Viet Nam.
10 https://reliefweb.int/report/viet-nam/viet-nam-integrating-agriculture-national-adaptation-plans-nap-ag-
programme.
11 https://en.baochinhphu.vn/national-green-growth-strategy-for-2021-2030-vision-towards-2050-
11142515.htm.
12 https://vccinews.com/news/48753/toward-green-responsible-agriculture.html.
13 According to the Viet Nam General Statistics Office, planted area to rice in 2021 was 7 238 900 ha. The
target thus represents a conversion of 4.1% of the current land in rice.
14 Decision No. 2626/QD-BTNMT dated 10/10/2022, Announcement of List of Emission Coefficients for
GHG Inventory specifies the updated emissions factors for agriculture, forestry and land in Appendix III.


 683

Annex A. Sources and Definitions of Contextual
Indicators
Table: Contextual indicators
Gross Domestic Product – GDP (USD billion in PPP): OECD National Accounts Statistics (database),
Gross domestic product, USD, current prices, current PPPs. World Bank, World Development Indicators
(WDI database) for Emerging Economies not available in the OECD database.
Population (million): OECD National Accounts Statistics (database), Population and employment by main
activity. Calculation based on Eurostat database for the European Union. United Nations, World Population
Prospects: 2022, Population, for Emerging Economies not available in the OECD database.
Land area (thousands km2): FAOSTAT Land Use (database), Land area (1 000 ha) recalculated to
thousands km2. Land area excludes water areas.
Agricultural area (AA) (thousand ha): FAOSTAT Land Use (database), Agricultural area (1 000 ha).
Population density (inhabitants/km2): OECD Regional and Cities (database), Regional demography,
Population density and regional area. United Nations, World Population Prospects 2022, Population
density, for economies not available in OECD database. Calculation based on the Eurostat population and
area databases for the European Union.
GDP per capita (USD in PPP): OECD National Accounts Statistics (database), Gross domestic product
(expenditure approach), per head, USD, current prices, current PPPs. World Bank, World Development
Indicators (WDI database) for Emerging Economies not available in OECD database.
Trade as % of GDP: Calculation based on UN COMTRADE (database) for trade data, customs data, and
GDP (local currency) indicator. Average trade calculated as (exports+imports)/2. The European Union
aggregate does not account for intra-EU trade.
Agriculture share in GDP (%): OECD National Accounts Statistics (database), “National Accounts at a
Glance”, Gross value added, Agriculture, forestry and fishing, percentage of total activity. Eurostat
database for the European Union. World Bank, World Development Indicators (WDI database) for
Emerging Economies not available in OECD database.
Agriculture share in employment (%): Calculation based on OECD Labour Force Statistics (database),
Employment by activities and status (ALFS), as a share of employment in agriculture, hunting, forestry and
fishing in all activities (ISIC rev.3, A-B and A-X; ISIC rev.4, A and A-U). Calculation based on Eurostat,
share of employed persons, aged 15 years and over, in agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing in total
NACE activities (Statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community), for the EU
Member States. World Bank, World Development Indicators (WDI database), Employment in agriculture,
hunting, forestry and fishing as a share of total employment; Data from the International Labour
Organization, Employment in agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing as a share of total employment
(based on ILO modelled estimates) and national data for Emerging Economies not available in OECD or
in other international database. The ILO modelled estimates series provides both nationally reported labour
statistics observations and imputed data produced through a series of econometric models for countries


684 

with missing data. Estimates for countries with limited labour market information have a high degree of
uncertainty and are being regularly updated and revised by the ILO especially when a better source in
terms of accuracy and international comparability has become available.
Agro-food exports in total exports (%): Calculation based on UN COMTRADE (database). Agro-food
definition does not include fish and fish products. Agro-food codes in H0: 01, 02, 04 to 24 (excluding 1504,
1603, 1604 and 1605), 3301, 3501 to 3505, 4101 to 4103, 4301, 5001 to 5003, 5101 to 5103, 5201 to
5203, 5301, 5302, 290543/44, 380910, 382360.
Agro-food imports in total imports (%): Calculation based on UN COMTRADE (database). Agro-food
definition does not include fish and fish products.
Crop in total agricultural production (%): National data, share of value of total crop production (including
horticulture) in total agricultural production.
Livestock in total agricultural production (%): National data, share of value of total livestock production
in total agricultural production.
Share of arable land in AA (%): Calculation based on FAOSTAT Land Use (database), arable land as a
share of agricultural area.
Table: Productivity and environmental indicators
TFP annual growth (%): Agricultural Total Factor Productivity indices of the USDA Economic Research
Service use primarily FAO data supplemented by national data. Agricultural TFP indices are estimates by
country and for groups of countries aggregated by geographic region and income class. The presented
growth rates are sensitive to the choice of the time period. Reported values have changed relative to
previous releases following the International Agricultural Productivity database update that includes
revisions of historical estimates to reflect newly available data and modifications to the estimation
procedures. More information can be found in the section “Figure: Composition of agricultural output
growth, 2011-20”.
USDA, Economic Research Service (2022), International Agricultural Productivity database,
https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/international-agricultural-productivity/ (accessed January 2023).
Nitrogen balance (Kg/ha): Balance (surplus or deficit) expressed as kg nitrogen per hectare of total
agricultural land calculated at the national level. OECD aggregate for nitrogen balance is calculated as the
ratio between the total surplus and the total agricultural land area in the OECD area. European Union as
a single area is calculated as the Gross Nitrogen Balance in the EU area over the utilised agricultural area
of the EU.
OECD
(2023),
Agri-environmental
indicators
(database),
http://www.oecd.org/tad/sustainable-
agriculture/agri-environmentalindicators.htm.
Phosphorus balance (Kg/ha): Balance (surplus or deficit) expressed as kg phosphorus per hectare of
total agricultural land calculated at the national level. OECD aggregate for phosphorus balance is
calculated as the ratio between the total surplus and the total agricultural land area in the OECD area.
European Union as a single area is calculated as the Gross Phosphorous Balance in the EU area over the
utilised agricultural area of the EU.
OECD
(2023),
Agri-environmental
indicators
(database),
http://www.oecd.org/tad/sustainable-
agriculture/agri-environmentalindicators.htm.
Agriculture share of total energy use (%): Share of agricultural consumption in total final consumption
(TFC).


 685

International Energy Agency (2022), IEA World Energy Statistics and Balances (database),
https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00512-en,
and
OECD
Agri-environmental
indicators
(database),
http://www.oecd.org/tad/sustainable-agriculture/agri-environmentalindicators.htm,
Agriculture share in total GHG emissions (%): Greenhouse gas emissions by source, excluding land
use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF). European Union as a single area is calculated from
UNFCCC data as Agriculture greenhouse gas emissions in the EU area over the total GHG emissions in
EU area.
UNFCCC Greenhouse Gas Inventory Database (2022), https://unfccc.int, and OECD Agri-environmental
indicators (database), http://www.oecd.org/tad/sustainable-agriculture/agri-environmentalindicators.htm
Share of irrigated area in Agricultural Area (AA) (%): Share of irrigated area in total agricultural area.
OECD (2023), Agri-environmental indicators (database), http://www.oecd.org/tad/sustainable-
agriculture/agri-environmentalindicators.htm and FAOSTAT database for Emerging Economies not
available in OECD database.
Share of agriculture in water abstractions (%): Share of agriculture in total freshwater abstractions.
European Union as a single area is calculated as the total abstractions for agriculture in the EU area over
the total freshwater abstractions in the EU area.
OECD
(2022),
Agri-environmental
indicators
(database),
http://www.oecd.org/tad/sustainable-
agriculture/agri-environmentalindicators.htm.
Water stress indicator: The indicator refers to the intensity of use of fresh water resources. It is expressed
as gross abstraction of freshwater as percentage of total available renewable freshwater resources.
European Union is treated as a single area.
OECD (2022), "Water: Freshwater abstractions", OECD Environment Statistics (database),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/data-00602-en.
Figure: Main macro-economic indicators, 2000 to 2022
Real GDP growth (%): OECD Country Statistical Profiles, real GDP growth. OECD Economic Outlook:
Statistics and Projections (database) as a benchmark for the latest year. World Bank, World Development
Indicators (WDI database) for Emerging Economies not available in OECD database. Eurostat database
for the European Union for 2019, 2020 and 2021.
Inflation rate (%): OECD National Accounts Statistics (database), Prices and Purchasing Power Parities,
Annual average rate of change in Harmonized Indices of Consumer Prices (HICPs). World Bank, World
Development Indicators (WDI database) for Emerging Economies not available in OECD National
Accounts Statistics.
Unemployment rate (%): OECD Economic Outlook: Statistics and Projections (database), Labour market
statistics. Eurostat database for the European Union. International Labour Organization (ILO),
Unemployment rate by sex and age (estimates and projections) for Emerging Economies not available in
OECD database.
Figure: Agro-food trade
Agro-food exports (USD billion), 2000 to 2021: UN COMTRADE (database). Agro-food definition does
not include fish and fish products.
Agro-food imports (USD billion), 2000 to 2021: UN COMTRADE (database). Agro-food definition does
not include fish and fish products.


686 

Composition of agro-food trade, 2021: UN COMTRADE (database). Agro-food definition in HS
classification (see above) combined with the Classification by Broad Economic Categories (BEC) to
generate breakdowns into type of commodities (Primary or Industrial commodities) and type of destination
(Consumption or Industry).
Figure: Composition of agricultural output growth, 2011-20
TFP annual growth (%): Agricultural Total Factor Productivity indices of the USDA Economic Research
Service use primarily FAO data supplemented by national data. Input growth is the weighted-average
growth in quality-adjusted land, labour, capital and materials (synthetic NPK fertilisers, and animal feed),
where weights are input (factor) cost shares. Special breakdown created to dissociate primary factors
(land, labour and capital) from intermediate input: materials (feed and fertiliser) growth. Output growth
corresponds to gross agricultural output for each country.
Agricultural TFP indices are estimates by country and for groups of countries aggregated by geographic
region and income class. The European Union single area is recalculated from individual countries data
and weights. The presented growth rates are sensitive to the choice of the time period.
The full documentation is available at: https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/international-agricultural-
productivity/update-and-revision-history/.
USDA, Economic Research Service (2022), International Agricultural Productivity database,
https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/international-agricultural-productivity/ (accessed January 2023).
Indicators used to calculate selected ratio and percentage indicators
GDP (local currency): OECD National Accounts Statistics (database), Gross domestic product, local
currency, current prices. OECD Economic Outlook: Statistics and Projections (database) as a benchmark
for the latest year. Calculation based on Eurostat database for the European Union. World Bank, World
Development Indicators (WDI database) for Emerging Economies not available in the OECD database.
Agriculture Gross Value Added (local currency) (AgGVA): Calculation based on Agriculture share in
GDP (%) and GDP (local currency) indicators.
Deflator: OECD Economic Outlook: Statistics and Projections (database), Gross domestic product, market
prices, deflator. Eurostat database for the European Union. World Bank, World Development Indicators
(WDI database) for Emerging Economies not available in the OECD database.
Exchange rate: OECD National Accounts Statistics (database), Prices and Purchasing Power Parities,
Nominal Exchange Rate. Eurostat database for the European Union and EU Member States. World Bank,
World Development Indicators (WDI database) and national data for Emerging Economies not available in
the OECD database.



Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2023
ADAPTING AGRICULTURE TO CLIMATE CHANGE
This annual report monitors and evaluates agricultural policies in 54 countries, including the 38 OECD countries,
the five non‑OECD EU Member States, and 11 emerging economies. It finds that support to agriculture
has reached record levels amidst subsequent crises, although the increase in support has been less than
the sector’s growth. After COVID‑19, governments have taken significant action to limit the impacts of the war
in Ukraine on the farming sector and markets.
This year’s report focuses on policies for climate‑change adaptation and identifies close to 600 adaptation
measures adopted by governments, but notes that more action is required to advance the implementation,
monitoring and assessment of adaptation measures. The report also finds that most of the support
for the sector comes in forms that reduce rather than enhance the sector’s capacity to adjust to future crises,
including climate change. In line with the 2022 OECD Agriculture Ministerial Declaration, the report identifies key
actions to focus policy efforts on improving agriculture and the food system’s resilience to successive shocks
while also enhancing the sector’s environmental performance and productivity.
9HSTCQE*icgced+
PRINT ISBN 978-92-64-82624-3
PDF ISBN 978-92-64-31532-7