The author discusses the complex ways in which a multiplicity of conflict-
ing laws relevant to marriage and divorce have affected Malaysian women, both
Muslim and non-Muslim. Further, it examines efforts to standardize statute and
practice in these areas from the 1970s to the present. It focuses in particular on
multiple marriage statutes in effect until 1970 for Chinese and Hindu Malays
and on the Law Reform Act 1976 that attempted to regulate customary mar-
riage practices for non-Muslims. It also examines the codification of Islamic
family law in the 1980s as a way of clarifying the legal rights of Muslim women,
focusing on the Kelantan Island Family Law Enactment 1983. It also describes
political action by women in Malaysia to raise public awareness about domestic
violence, to amend the Penal Code on matters of violence against women, and
to establish a training program for police in rape investigation.
Wmen in Malaysia have been striving to improve their
legal status and, in the past decade, have done much to bring
about developments of considerable importance affecting their
rights in family and financial matters. A major achievement was
the amendments to the Penal Code, which, it is hoped, will pro-
vide better protection from violence. The process has been slow,
but the results are encouraging.
Marriage and Divorce
Until the 1970s a multiplicity of laws relating to marriage and
divorce existed in Malaysia. Muslims were, and still are, subject to
Islamic law, which is within the legislative authority of the states
and is therefore regulated by the state and administered by state
Shari'a courts. For non-Muslims there were then in force five stat-
utes on marriage, an additional statute for the registration of
marriage, and three for the dissolution of marriage, as well as the
customary laws of the Chinese and Hindus and the natives of
Sabah and Sarawak.
Law & Society Review, Volume 28, Number 3 (1994)


562
Women & the Law in Malaysia
The need for reform was articulated as early as 1966 in the
case of Be: Ding Do Ca (1966:223-24) by Thompson, L.P.:1
[T] he whole question of personal law in this country, particu-
larly as regards questions of marriage, divorce and succession,
calls for the attention of the legislature. As regards persons pro-
fessing Islam the position is tolerably clear. But as regards per-
sons of Chinese race the law the courts are administering is
probably different from any law that exists or ever has existed
in China.... The same sort of position may well arise in rela-
tion to persons professing the Hindu religion by reason of the
enactment in India of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. The ques-
tions involved are questions which go to the very root of the law
relating to the family, which, after all, is the basis of society at
least in its present form, and the existence of a civilised society
demands that these questions be settled beyond doubt by legis-
lation which will clearly express the modern mores of the classes
of persons concerned and put the rights of individuals beyond
the chances of litigation.
The decision in the Ding Do Ca case created controversy and
uncertainty among Chinese Christian women. The case involved
a Chinese Christian who had solemnized his first marriage ac-
cording to the Christian Marriage Ordinance and then con-
tracted another marriage according to Chinese custom. On his
death, the validity of the second marriage and consequently the
legitimacy of the children of that marriage and their right to in-
herit had to be determined by the court. The federal court (as it
was then) held that since the ordinance did not have a provision
expressly stating that a marriage solemnized according to it was
monogamous, since the personal law of the Chinese was the cus-
tomary law of their race, and since Chinese custom permitted a
plurality of wives, the deceased was entitled to marry polyg-
amously and his second marriage was valid. This ruling meant
that solemnizing a marriage in church was no guarantee that a
woman would not have to share her husband with other wives.
The Young Women's Christian Association began advising its
members to solemnize their marriage according to the Civil Mar-
riage Ordinance (which expressly provided for monogamous
marriage) in addition to the church ceremony.
Divorce was another aspect of Chinese customary law that was
unsatisfactory from a woman's point of view. While a man could
unilaterally divorce his wife, a woman could obtain a divorce only
if her husband consented to it. In Mary Ng v. Ooi Gim Teong
(1972) a wife applied for maintenance for herself and her son.
The husband alleged that he had divorced his wife and she was
therefore not entitled to maintenance. Azmi, J., said:
1 "L.P," stands for Lord President (the head of the judicial system in Malaysia).
https://doi.org/10.2307/3054075 Published online by Cambridge University Press


Mehnm Siraj
563
In dismissing this application, I have not overlooked the possi-
ble effect of my decision on the position and status of Chinese
women in this country who have gone through marriage ac-
cording to their personal law. As learned counsel for the appli-
cants has forcefully put it, allowing a Chinese man in this mod-
ern
age
to
divorce
his
wife
for
either
talkativeness
or
disobedience would amount to giving thousands of Chinese
husbands a gun in their hands. This may be so; and if the Chi-
nese customary law on marriage and divorce is no longer popu-
lar and considered obsolete, it is for the legislature to make
inroads into them, as has already been done in China. (P. 20)
In 1971 a Royal Commission was appointed to study the ex-
isting laws and to propose amendments to reform and unify the
marriage and divorce laws applicable to non-Muslims throughout
Malaysia. The commission drafted the Law Reform (Marriage
and Divorce) Bill, which was presented to Parliament in 1972. It
was not until 1976 that the bill became law and not until 1982
that the law came into force.
The Law Reform (Marriage and Divorce) Act 1976 (LRA) re-
pealed all statutes on marriage and divorce." The act does not
prohibit customary marriages but attempts to regulate them by
requiring compliance with its provisions. There are two provi-
sions that have altered the characteristics of customary marriages
significantly. The more important one abolishes polygamy (sec.
5). (Polygamous marriages solemnized after the act came into
force are void [sec. 6] and constitute the offense of bigamy under
the Penal Code [sec. 7].) The other imposes a minimum age of
18 for marriage, although a girl above the age of 16 can obtain
permission to marry from the chief minister (sec. 10).
Marriages can be solemnized either in the registry in a civil
ceremony (sees. 14-20 would have to be complied with) or in a
temple or other place of worship (including a church) according
to religious or customary rites (sec. 24). If the priest or other
official conducting the religious ceremony has been appointed
an assistant registrar of marriage, he will register the marriage at
the end of the ceremony (sec. 25 [1]). If the priest or official has
not been so appointed, the parties have to undergo a civil mar-
riage at the registry before the religious ceremony. This provi-
sion was considered necessary to ensure that all customary mar-
riages are registered and that the parties thereto have the
capacity to marry as prescribed by the act. Customs and traditions
are thus maintained, and at the same time much-needed meas-
ures to improve the position of women are introduced.
When the act first came into force, there was some confusion
about the application of its provisions, which could be attributed
to the compleXity of the act and the incomprehensibility of both
2 The Registration of Marriage Ordinance was not repealed but ceases to have any
effect or application in view of the provisions for registration in the LRA and the legisla-
tion relating to Muslim marriages.
https://doi.org/10.2307/3054075 Published online by Cambridge University Press


564
Women & the Law in Malaysia
its original text in English and its poor translation in Bahasa Ma-
laysia to a large portion of the population living in the rubber
estates and other rural areas, as well as the Hindu priests who
were solemnizing the marriages. Campaigns were needed to in-
form the public of the effects of the new law. Legal literacy pro-
grams were carried out by women's associations, political parties,
and social interest groups. The Association of Women Lawyers
and the University Women's Association not only gave talks and
organized seminars and workshops on the new law but also pre-
pared in four languages (Malay, Chinese, Tamil, and English)
simple pamphlets explaining what rights women have under the
new law and how they can enforce those rights. The media
played their part, though discussions were only in the women's
pages of the newspapers, in women's magazines, and in the wo-
men's programs on radio and television. It was as if the law had
no effect on men.
The LRA makes the registration of all marriages compulsory
(sec. 27) whether the marriage is solemnized in Malaysia (sec.
25) or overseas at a Malaysian embassy, high commission, or con-
sulate (sec. 26). All persons domiciled in Malaysia who are resi-
dent overseas are subject to the act (sec. 3[1]) and consequently
must register their marriage under the act even if it is solemnized
according to the law of their country of residence (sec. 31; sec. 35
renders nonregistration of foreign marriages an offense). Regis-
tration or the failure to register, however, does not affect the va-
lidity of the marriage (sec. 34).
A new feature of the act is the conciliation procedure, which
is a mandatory precondition to the presentation of a petition for
divorce. Conciliatory bodies had to be established before the act
could be brought into force. The lack of specific rules to govern
their establishment and functioning not only caused delay in the
implementation of the act but also remains a major criticism of
the conciliation procedure. The bodies set up by religious and
other groups have members who are appointed on an ad hoc
basis and who are not trained counselors, nor are they required
to take an oath of confidentiality. Members of the community,
therefore, are reluctant to refer their matrimonial difficulties to
these bodies. Many are of the view that by nature Malaysians are
not willing to discuss their personal problems with strangers, so
requiring them to appear before a conciliatory body would not
achieve reconciliation. Besides, it is argued, when the parties
reach the stage of seeking a divorce, it is too late to reconcile
them. The Bar Council has proposed that the conciliatory proce-
dures be repealed.
The Islamic Family Law was also under review during the
1970s. Each state had its own Administration of Muslim Law En-
actment that regulated all matters under Islamic law, from
mosques and offenses against the precepts of the religion to fam-
https://doi.org/10.2307/3054075 Published online by Cambridge University Press


Mehrun Siraj
565
ily law. A model Islamic Family Law Act was drafted to separate
family law from other matters, to introduce measures to resolve
existing problems, and to bring about uniformity in the state
laws. The last objective proved to be impossible, for the rulers of
the states would not agree to a uniform law. Eventually, each.
state passed an enactment based on the model but with modifica-
tions that were deemed necessary by each state's Religious Affairs
Department. The first three state enactments were passed in
1983 (Kelantan Enactment No.1 of 1983, Malacca Enactment
No.8 of 1983, and Negri Sembilan Enactment No.7 of 1983). In
1984, Parliament passed Act 303, which applies only to Muslims
in the Federal Territory." Most of the state enactments have pro-
visions that are similar or that differ in insignificant ways. Some
enactments, in that they differ on the measures introduced to
control polygamy, facilitate circumvention of the law, thereby re-
ducing the impact of the controls introduced. Efforts are now
being made to rectify this.
The new enactment codified the Shari'a, an exercise that suc-
ceeded in demystifying the law. The Family Law provisions in the
Administration of Muslim Law Enactments had merely set out
the court's jurisdiction and provided that hukum syarak (Islamic
law) would apply in those matters. The hukum syarak had to be
determined from the various sources of Islamic law." Because this
was generally within the exclusive knowledge of those trained in
the Shari'a, most people, especially women, were ignorant of
their legal rights. In the new enactments, the rights of all parties
are spelled out, raising the general level of legal literacy and
making it easier for lawyers trained in the common law to advise
parties and to represent them in the Shari'a courts. Some of the
kadis, or Shari'a judges, however, were contemptuous of lawyers
who were not familiar with the primary sources of Islamic law.
Initially, they insisted on applying the "pure" Shari'a, ignoring
the statutory provisions that were introduced as solutions to ex-
isting problems-for example, the controls on polygamy. This
situation has been improved somewhat by the introduction of
two courses at the International Islamic University, one for kadis
and the other for lawyers. The two groups now have greater mu-
tual understanding and respect.
The Kelantan Islamic Family Law Enactment 1983
In 1988 I received a Research and Development Grant from
the Malaysian government to study the implementation of the
enactment of the Islamic Family Law in Kelantan, which came
3 The Federal Territory is made up of Kuala Lumpur in Peninsular Malaysia as well
as Labuan in Sabah in East Malaysia.
4 The primary sources are the Quran and the hadith. Where there is no clear rule,
Ijma and Qiyas are resorted to.
https://doi.org/10.2307/3054075 Published online by Cambridge University Press


566
Women & the Law in Malaysia
into force on 1January 1984, and, specifically, to determine (1)
how far the new provisions had been implemented; (2) the effect
of the new provisions on women; (3) the continuing problems
and weaknesses in the system; and (4) possible solutions for rec-
ommendation to the proper authorities. The fieldwork in Kelan-
tan covered the following: file searches in the Shari'a courts of
eight of the nine districts in Kelantan for all family law matters
for the period 1984 to 1988; interviews with Shari'ajudges, kadis,
and a woman welfare officer; observations of cases being tried in
court, counseling and hakam (arbitration) sessions, and the sol-
emnization of a marriage; and visits to villages to interview
headmen, imams, and villagers-the last to determine their level
of legal literacy and to ascertain the difficulties that they encoun-
tered in attempting to obtain relief in the courts.
I encountered difficulties in carrying out the study. The first
was in relation to the file search. The kadis recorded evidence
and set out their decisions in their own handwriting in the jawi
(Arabic) script, which was not always legible. Deciphering the
records was time consuming. The second difficulty was in under-
standing the Kelantanese dialect. An interpreter had to be used
in some of the interviews, because some of the kampung resi-
dents did not speak "standard" Malay. Fortunately, two Ke-
lantanese agreed to be research assistants in the project.
Four issues that have the greatest effect on the status of wo-
men-polygamy, talaq (divorce effected unilaterally by men), di-
vorce initiated by women, and harta sepencarian (matrimonial
property)-were covered in my report. Those parts of the report
are summarized here. A fifth issue is access to lawyers.
Control of Polygamy
Section 19 of the enactment requires a married man to ob-
tain the court's permission in writing before he takes another
wife. Upon receiving an application, the court sends for the pro-
spective wife and her wali (a guardian for marriage) to find out
whether they know that the groom-to-be has a wife or wives. If the
woman and her wali both consent to the marriage and if the
court is satisfied that the man is able to support another family,
the marriage will be solemnized. Unfortunately, the court appar-
ently concludes that any man who declares that his ability to sup-
port existing and future dependents is in fact able to do so. Ap-
plicants earning as little as 300 ringgit (about U.S. $100) a month
were granted permission to marry again. The purpose of section
19 is to ensure that men who marry polygamously are in a posi-
tion to carry out their responsibilities. The men should, at the
very least, prove that they are financially able to provide decent
support for their existing wives and children. By not placing im-
portance on the man's income and his ability to support a family,
https://doi.org/10.2307/3054075 Published online by Cambridge University Press


Mehrun Siraj
567
the courts are not protecting the interests of the existing wives
and children.
Another defect in the provision is its failure to require the
courts to inform the wife or wives of the husband's intention to
marry again." The kadis were all of the opinion that the present
procedure is satisfactory, for the Shari'a does not require the
wife's permission and the enactment does not prescribe seeking
her views as a precondition to granting permission. Furthermore,
most men indicate on their application forms that their wives
agree to the proposed marriage, and the kadis state that they are
satisfied with this declaration, even though it is unsupported by
any other evidence.
Control of Talaq
Section 35 requires a man who wishes to divorce his wife by
talaq to apply to the court for permission to do so. He must set
out his reasons for desiring the divorce, as well as the amounts of
the payments that he will make for naJkah edah, mutaah, and mas-
kahioin;" as well as harta sepencarian [matrimonial property].
This procedure ensures that the wife obtains her entitlements
should the conciliatory procedures fail and the divorce be
granted. The procedure was introduced to reduce the high di-
vorce rate. The requisite application to the court means, at the
very least, that the talaq is not pronounced impulsively. It pro-
vides time for reconsideration. Furthermore, the average man's
fear and suspicion of the court deters him from making the ap-
plication unless he is determined to dissolve the marriage. When
an application is made, the parties are counseled by the kadi,
who attempts to reconcile them. Together, these procedures
have succeeded in reducing the divorce rate.
Divorce on Application by the Wife
Section 35 provides that a wife who wishes to obtain a divorce
may apply to the court in the same manner as a husband who
wishes to pronounce the talaq. If the husband agrees to the di-
vorce, it is registered immediately. If he refuses, then conciliation
must follow. If the husband persists in refusing even when the
conciliation committee feels that a divorce should be granted,
the case is referred to a hakam appointed by the court. The court
5
In December 1992 the chief kadi of Kelantan issued a directive to all kadis and
Shari'a judges to inform wives of their husbands' application for permission to take an-
other wife. So the current practice is to inform wives.
6
Najkah edah is maintenance during the period of edah, which is for three men-
strual cycles after the pronouncement of the talaq or for three months for those not
menstruating; mutaah is a consolatory gift for a woman divorced without just cause; mas-
kahwin is the dower payable to a women at the time of the marriage. Payment may be
deferred and if still owing at the time of the divorce, it must be settled.
https://doi.org/10.2307/3054075 Published online by Cambridge University Press


568
Women Be the Law in Malaysia
can confer on the hakam the authority to pronounce the talaq.
This procedure was introduced as the solution to cases in which
the marriage has broken down but the husband refuses to di-
vorce his wife, who is unable to prove grounds for either a takliq
divorce or e fasakb divorce.' It had not been implemented at the
time of the study, however. The kadis and the hakam appeared
to be reluctant to pronounce the talaq on behalf of the husband.
They usually succeeded in persuading the wife to accept a kholo
divorce. For a kholo divorce, the husband pronounces the talaq
but the wife has to compensate him for doing so. Although the
sums required are seldom more than 500 ringgit, it is neverthe-
less a financial burden and perhaps even an impossibility for wo-
men who have no income. A woman who is unable to raise the
required amount may never get a divorce unless this new provi-
sion is implemented.
Harta Sepencarian
Harta sepencarian is property acquired jointly by spouses
during a marriage and divided between them in the event of a
divorce. The right to such property is believed to be rooted in
adat, or Malay custom, but has been received into Islamic law
and
is
now
administered
by
the
Shari'a
courts.
"[jjuris-
prudentially harta sepencarian rests upon legal recognition of the
part played by a divorced spouse in the acquisition of the rele-
vant property" (Ibrahim 1987:198). In most earlier cases, the wo-
men had either worked on the land or had contributed finan-
cially to its purchase. The decision in the case of Boto v. faafar
(1985) extended women's rights to such properties by holding
that by providing comfort and companionship to her husband,
the wife had given him the peace of mind to carry on his fishing
business, thereby contributing to the purchase of his assets, in-
cluding his boats and nets and other business equipment. She
was, therefore, entitled to share the property. Tun Salleh Abbas,
who decided the case, expressed the view that Malays were mov-
ing from agriculture to business, so harta sepencarian had to
change to include business assets. In Tengku Anun Zaharah v. Dato
Dr. Hussein (1983), it was acknowledged that the wife had neither
contributed financially nor helped with the business. The court
held that the moral support she gave her husband and the title
Dato, which he
received by marrying into a royal
family,
amounted to contribution that entitled her to a share in his
property.
7 A takliq divorce is available to a woman in the even t of a breach of any of the
conditions that the husband agreed to at the time of the marriage and set out in the surat
takliq, which he must attest; a fasakh divorce is in the nature of a decree made by the
Shari'a court upon the establishment (or proof) of one of the many grounds for divorce.
https://doi.org/10.2307/3054075 Published online by Cambridge University Press


Mehnm Siraj
569
Protecting Women's Rights Generally
As I comment in the report, women are not always able to
present their case in court, particularly if it involves proving the
husband's income, as in maintenance claims, or proving the
right to property, as in harta sepencarian disputes. In these in-
stances, the assistance of a lawyer is required. The majority of
women, however, are unable to afford legal services and have to
depend on the Legal Aid Bureau. The bureau is in Kota Bharu
and is not easily accessible to residents of remote villages. Fur-
thermore, there are only two lawyers attached to the bureau to
serve the whole state. Delays in the disposition of cases are inevi-
table, although attempts are made to hear all cases handled by
each officer on the same day.
Income Tax
The Income Tax Act 1967- has undergone many changes in
its application to women. According to the original provision, the
income of married women had to be aggregated with that of
their husband and could not be assessed separately. An amend-
ment in 1975 (Act A273) enabled women to opt for separate as-
sessment of income derived from employment only. Another
amendment in 1978 (Act A429) allowed assessment in her name
if her income was derived from the exercise of a profession. The
right to separate assessment, however, was subject to the proviso
that the wife was not employed in a business controlled by her
husband. There was no separate assessment for women engaged
in business or a nonregistrable profession. This provision was re-
garded as unfair and discriminatory, hence an amendment to ca-
ter to the increasing number of businesswomen. The group that
lobbied for change was the Association of Women for Women, or
WOW. The group prepared a memorandum setting out the
changes sought, which the National Council of Women's Or-
ganisations presented to treasury officials during a prebudget di-
alogue. With persistent reminders from the WOW president, the
treasury officials, one of whom was a women herself, incorpo-
rated most of the suggested changes. Today there is separate as-
sessment for all women for all income derived from whatever
source. But this achievement does not signal the end of efforts in
this area. On the contrary, it should encourage attempts to se-
cure separate taxation for women, which would mean separate
files, separate returns, and separate responsibilities.
https://doi.org/10.2307/3054075 Published online by Cambridge University Press


570
Women Be the Law in Malaysia
Violence against Women
In March 1985 five nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)
formed a Joint Action Group GAG) and organized a workshop
and exhibition on domestic violence, rape, prostitution, sexual
harassment, and the portrayal of women in the media." Ajoint
memorandum was submitted to the government seeking reform
of the relevant laws. Forty-two associations met in June 1985 and
resolved to (1) work toward amendments to the Penal Code and
the Evidence Act; (2) set up rape crisis centers at the accident
and emergency units of hospitals; (3) press for a training pro-
gram in rape investigation for police personnel; and (4) pass a
Domestic Violence Act. There was much activity in 1986 and
early 1987 in terms of raising public awareness, lobbying police
and government officials, and drafting laws.
In May 1987, Citizens against Rape (CAR) was formed after
the brutal rape and murder of a nine-year-old schoolgirl. CAR
held demonstrations, exhibitions, and sought signatures for a pe-
tition calling for better protection from violence. In 1988 the
Consumers Association of Penang published a book entitled Rape
in Malaysia, which dealt with victims, rapists, myths, and realities.
The deputy minister in the Prime Minister's Department who
was responsible for the Women's Affairs Department led a dele-
gation of women in a discussion with the attorney general on the
proposed amendments to the Penal Code and the Evidence Act
relating to rape and other sexual offenses. During the course of
the discussion, it was suggested that section 312 of the Penal
Code, which prohibits abortion except to save the life of the wo-
man, be amended to allow abortion for a woman who has been
raped. The attorney general gave the impression that the section
would never be amended, so it came as a shock to most people
when it was amended in Act A727, effective on 4 May 1989.
Section 312 still prohibits abortion but provides an exception
for a medical practitioner registered under the Medical Act 1971,
who may cause a miscarriage if believing that the risk to the life
or mental or physical health of the woman is greater than the
risk of the abortion. Antiabortion activists claim that this excep-
tion is tantamount to making abortion available on demand, for
there is no requirement that a second medical opinion be ob-
tained, nor is there a limitation on the period during which it
can be performed. In response, the deputy minister for the Wo-
men's Affairs Department explained in Parliament that doctors
are subject to and guided by the Medical Code of Conduct,
which is a sufficient safeguard. Many doctors had, in fact, been
conducting abortions even before the amendment and usually
8 The NGOs in this case are the University Women's Association, the Women's Aid
Organisation, the Selangor Consumers Association, the Association of Women Lawyers,
and the Malaysia Trade Union Congress (Women's Committee).
https://doi.org/10.2307/3054075 Published online by Cambridge University Press


Mehrun Siraj
571
for an exorbitant fee. Legalizing abortion has made it available at
government hospitals and clinics, so lower-income women have
access to clinically performed abortions instead of resorting to
quacks and risking their lives.
The changes to the sections on rape include (1) increasing
the age for statutory rape to 16 years but providing that the law
would not apply where the parties were lawfully married (be-
cause Muslims can still marry below that age); (2) considering
threats of death or injury to third parties duress that vitiates con-
sent, where previously when victims consented for fear that their
children might be injured, the act was not considered rape; (3)
adding a mandatory minimum sentence of 5 years' imprison-
ment and a maximum of 20 years. The proposal that marital rape
be made an offense was not accepted, but it was agreed that the
act would be accounted rape if the spouses were living apart be-
cause of a decree ofjudicial separation or an injunction or if they
were divorced but the divorce had not become absolute.
Although there was much jubilation when the amendments
were finally passed, it is realized that the laws by themselves are
not going to provide better protection. The police must improve
their investigative techniques. The available data show a decline
in the police success rate: In 1981 there were 368 reports of rape;
211 persons were detained in connection with 198 cases. In 1986
there were 586 reports; 146 persons were detained in III cases.
Of the 12 victims who died, 10 were less than 12 years 01d.9
Another area in need of improvement is the handling of the
victim both by the police when taking the report and by the doc-
tors when examining her. Victims are treated so badly that there
is a reluctance to report cases, and the figures presented to Par-
liament represent only the tip of the iceberg. With the setting up
of rape crisis centers, the situation is improving, but more needs
to be done.
One advance has been made: the Evidence Act 1950 was
amended by Act A729 to delete section 155(d), which provided
that on a charge of rape the accused can adduce evidence of the
victim's immoral character or sexual history.
Domestic Violence
InJanuary 1989 a Campaign Kit on Violence against Women
was prepared by the All Women's Action Society of Malaysia
(AWAM). In May 1989 a workshop on confronting domestic vio-
lence, organized jointly by the Association of Women Lawyers
and the Royal Malaysian Police, was held. Participants, including
representative of the police force and women's organizations,
9
From the speech in Parliament of Democratic Action Party opposition M.P., Dr.
Tan Seng Giau (Malaysia 1989:vol. 3, no. 14, p. 52).
https://doi.org/10.2307/3054075 Published online by Cambridge University Press


572
Women Be the Law in Malaysia
lawyers, and social workers, discussed a draft Domestic Violence
Act. NGOs and government agencies formed a national commit-
tee to consider the draft. There is hope of success, because the
government has for the first time included a separate chapter on
women in development in the Sixth Malaysia Plan for 1991-95,
where it is stated:
Women's NGOs will also be encouraged to provide counselling
and other support services, particularly in cases of domestic vio-
lence and violence against women. The welfare of women will
be further safeguarded through the establishment of crisis cen-
tres and shelters for battered women, the provision of subsi-
dized legal aid as well as the establishment of other interven-
tion centres for women in distress. This is crucial towards
enabling women to regain their sense of self-worth and facilitat-
ing their re-entry into productive activities. (Malaysia 1991:426
, 37)
https://doi.org/10.2307/3054075 Published online by Cambridge University Press


Islam and Civilisational Renewal
THE RULE OF LAW AND  
LEGAL PLURALISM IN MALAYSIA
Constance Chevallier-Govers*
Abstract: In Malaysia, Islam is the religion of the state, although other religions 
may be practised in peace and harmony. Having inherited the English common 
law tradition at its independence in 1957, Malaysia is neither a secular state 
nor an Islamic theocracy. As a matter of fact, the Malaysian Constitution has 
brought Islamic law under the legislative powers of the federal States. Historical 
developments have thus led to the existence of two sets of law: common law and 
sharīʿah law. Legal pluralism in Malaysia applies foremost to personal status, but 
also to some aspects of criminal law. The sharīʿah as well as legal pluralism seem 
to question the rule of law in Malaysia. This two-fold aspect of the rule of law will 
be analysed in this article. The formal definition of the ‘rule of law’ implies the 
respect for the hierarchical principle and the Constitution’s supremacy. It will be 
explained to what extent legal pluralism in Malaysia is challenging the supremacy 
of the Constitution. Nevertheless, the hierarchical principle is not a goal in itself, 
and the material definition of the ‘rule of law’ will also be discussed. The second 
part of this article will focus on potential human rights issues that are implied by 
the notion of legal pluralism and by sharīʿah law in Malaysia.
Introduction
In Malaysia, two sets of law coexist: common law and sharīʿah law. The Malaysian 
legal pluralism is rooted in colonial legacies: the coexistence of different normative 
or legal orders and a dual system of courts are the result of the country’s colonial 
experience.1 Prior to British rule, Islamic law was of great importance.2 The earliest 
record of Islamic law in what is now Malaysia is to be found on the Terengganu 
stone inscription, which dates back to 1303 CE. It mentions the punishments for 
certain offences, following the various provisions given in the Qur’ān and the 
Sunnah.3 In pre-colonial Malaysia, the Sultans in each of their respective States 
were not only the heads of the religion of Islam but also the political leaders in their 
respective realms. In this sense they were ‘Islamic states’ with courts staffed with 
qāḍīs (Islamic judges) and enforcing the sharīʿah. Under the treaties made by the 
*	 Constance Chevallier-Govers is Associate Professor of Public Law at the University of Grenoble.


THE RULE OF LAW AND LEGAL PLURALISM IN MALAYSIA
91
ICR 2.1  Produced and distributed by Pluto Journals  ICR.plutojournals.org
Malay Sultans with the British, the Sultans agreed to receive British Residents or 
Advisers and to follow their ‘advice’ in all matters of administration – except in 
matters pertaining to Islamic religion and Malay custom (adat). Also upon British 
‘advice’, the Malay Sultans set up civil courts, which were chaired by British judges. 
In the absence of legislation applicable to the matter, those judges tended to refer to 
the law prevalent in England. In this way, the English law of torts and the English 
rules of equity were introduced into the Malay states.
As a constitutional state, the contemporary Federation of Malaysia – comprising 
13 states and three federal territories – is formally endorsing the principles of 
a democratic constitutional state – namely democracy, checks and balances, 
rights and liberties and the rule of law.4 The Constitution adopted in 1957 used 
the Western liberal constitutional model – especially the British Westminster 
model of parliamentary democracy – but it took into account the existence of 
collective identities within Malaysian society. Besides a bill of rights, containing 
an enumeration of the classical individual rights and liberties (Articles 5 to 13), the 
Malaysian Constitution also accepts group-specific rights and foresees the possibility 
for positive action policies for Malays.
According to Article 3 of the Constitution, Islam is the official religion of the 
Federation, although other religions may be practised in peace and harmony 
anywhere in the country. In this way, Malaysia is neither a secular nor an Islamic 
state.5 In the Che Omar ruling of 1988, the Federal Court has asserted that the 
sharīʿah was not the supreme law of the land.6 Furthermore, the Constitution 
accommodates legal pluralism regarding family and personal matters and, to a 
certain extent, regarding criminal law. Malaysia inherited the English common 
law tradition at its independence. However, the Constitution has brought Islamic 
law under the legislative powers of the States. As a matter of fact, the historical 
developments in Malaysia have led to the existence of two sets of law, which 
are recognised by the Constitution: one for non-Muslims and one for Muslims. 
Non-Muslims (Malaysian and foreign) are subject only to secular law and secular 
courts. Muslims (both Malaysian and foreign), on the other hand, are subject to 
both secular law and sharīʿah law. In this manner, Muslim Malaysians are thus 
subject to two sets of laws. Sharīʿah law in Malaysia is under the jurisdiction of 13 
separate states with their own interpretations. The organisation and procedure of the 
Islamic courts are a power attributed to the 13 State legislators.7 Legal pluralism in 
Malaysia will be apprehended only through the prism of sharīʿah law. Indigenous 
customary law (adat) will not be mentioned, even if it constitutes one aspect of 
legal pluralism in Malaysia.
The sharīʿah as well as legal pluralism question the rule of law in Malaysia.8 In 
the following study, two definitions of the rule of law will be discussed.9 Forged 
in the late nineteenth century within German legal doctrine, the rule of law in the 


92
Constance Chevallier-Govers
Islam and Civilisational Renewal
twentieth century has seen appreciable inflections. The totalitarian challenge led 
beyond the purely formal definition, based on the idea of hierarchy, in favour of a 
substantial emphasis in order to guarantee legal certainty and fundamental rights. 
The formal definition refers to the hierarchical principle, according to which all 
inferior law should conform to the superior law. The material definition takes into 
account the content of the law and implies that the law should not only conform to 
the superior law but it should also conform to human rights.
The Formal Definition of the Rule of Law
In Malaysia, Islamic law is subject to the supremacy of the Constitution and the 
federal law. Article 4 of the Constitution declares that the Constitution is the 
supreme law of the land, such that incompatible legislation is void.10 Article 75 of 
the Constitution stipulates that in case of conflict between the federal law and state 
law, federal law shall be applicable. The supremacy of the Constitution means that 
native law, received law and religious legal practice are subject to the constitutional-
ity test. Two issues are related to the hierarchical principle, namely the distribution 
of legislative power between States and Federal legislatures and the distribution of 
jurisdiction between sharīʿah and civil courts.
Distribution of legislative power between state and federal legislatures
The constitutional framework of distribution of power between State and Federal 
legislatures seems to be quite clear: sharīʿah law is under the responsibility of 
the States (1). There are nevertheless some discrepancies between the Federal 
Constitution and States sharīʿah Laws (2). Judicial review should be a remedy but 
it is more notional than real (3).
(1) Constitutional framework: Article 74 of the Constitution regulates the distribution 
of legislative powers between the Federation and the States and refers to the lists of 
the Ninth Schedule.11 This Ninth Schedule of the Federal Constitution sets out the 
Federal and States lists containing subjects on which the Federal (List I) and States 
(List II) government can legislate. In addition, there is a concurrent list of subjects 
(List II) on which both the Federation and the States can legislate.
The State List (List II) enumerates 13 areas for which State Assemblies have 
exclusive power.12 The first paragraph foresees that except with respect to the Federal 
Territories of Kuala Lumpur and Labuan, this is the jurisdiction of the States:
•	 Islamic Law and personal and family law of persons professing the religion 
of Islam come under State competences including Islamic law relating to 
succession, marriage, adoption, divorce;


THE RULE OF LAW AND LEGAL PLURALISM IN MALAYSIA
93
ICR 2.1  Produced and distributed by Pluto Journals  ICR.plutojournals.org
•	 creation and punishment of offences by persons professing the religion 
of Islam against the precepts of that religion, except in regards to matters 
included in the Federal list;
•	 organisation and procedure of sharīʿah courts, which shall have jurisdiction 
only over a person professing the religion of Islam and in respect only of 
any of the matters included in this paragraph, but shall not have jurisdiction 
in respect to offences except in so far as conferred by federal law; control of 
propagating doctrines and beliefs among Muslims.
The term ‘Islamic law’ in Schedule 9 List II, Paragraph 1 does not refer to Islamic 
law in its entirety but only to such areas of Islamic law as are explicitly enumerated 
in that paragraph.13 As Islamic law is administered by the respective States, there is 
thus a lack of uniformity in the administration of Islamic law in Malaysia.14
(2) Discrepancies between the Federal Constitution and criminal sharīʿah laws of 
the States: Individual States can create sharīʿah criminal offences, provided four 
conditions are met: it is an act against the precepts of Islam and it is not already a 
criminal offence according to federal law. It can only apply to a person professing 
the religion of Islam, and the punishment is limited according to the 1965 Act, often 
referred to as the ‘3/5/6 formula’ (3 years jail, a fine of 5,000 Malaysian Ringgit 
(RM), 6 strikes with the rotan stick).
The Malaysian States have, nevertheless, adopted criminal offences enactments 
which are to some extent unconstitutional because of overlapping federal powers.15 
Some of the offences appear to overlap with offences already existing in the 
Penal Code and other federal laws. Liwāt (the homosexual version of sodomy), 
for example, overlaps with “sexual intercourse against the order of nature” and 
“outrages on decency” (sections 377A and 377D of the Penal Code, respectively). 
Muncikari (procuring) and “indecent acts in a public place” overlaps with “outrages 
on decency” (section 377D of the Penal Code which includes “procures or attempts 
to procure”) and “gambling” with “gaming in a common gaming house” and 
“gaming in public” (sections 6 and 7, respectively, of the Common Gaming Houses 
Act 1953 (Act 289)).
Sharīʿah law differentiates two kinds of offences: ḥudūd and taʿzīr.16 Ḥudūd 
crimes, which are considered the most serious ones, are those which are punishable 
by a pre-established punishment found in the Qur’ān. These crimes are found by an 
exact reference in the Qur’ān to a specific act and a specific punishment for that act. 
Taʿzīr crimes are less serious than the ḥudūd and are not found in the Qur’ān so the 
Islamic judges are free to determine an appropriate punishment. In Kelantan and 
Terengganu, on top of these Criminal Offences Enactments they have adopted ḥudūd 
laws: the Kelantan Shariah Criminal Code Enactment of 1993 and the Terengganu 


94
Constance Chevallier-Govers
Islam and Civilisational Renewal
Sharīʿah Criminal Offence Enactment (ḥudūd and qiṣāṣ) of 2002. These strict 
ḥudūd laws adopted by Kelantan and Terengganu States are not implemented. But 
if they were, they would be in breach with federal law in so far as the punishments 
foreseen in these laws are more than the ‘3/5/6 formula’ imposed by the Sharīʿah 
Courts Act of 1965. For example, the punishment for sodomy, illicit sex between 
unmarried persons (zinā) or apostasy is death.
Article 75 of the Federal Constitution clearly provides that “If any State law is 
inconsistent with a federal law, the federal law shall prevail and the State law shall, 
to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.” It should be the responsibility of the 
courts to declare some provisions of these laws void.
(3) Lack of judicial review: The Federal Court has the power to review federal and 
state legislation on the ground of unconstitutionality. In Article 4(1), the Federal 
Constitution declares itself to be the supreme law of the federation. According to 
Article 128(1),17 the Federal Court is conferred the exclusive jurisdiction to settle 
disputes “on any question” between the States or between the Federation and any 
States, and also, more specifically, on the question as to whether a law passed 
by parliament or the legislature of a State is invalid on the ground that it makes 
provisions with respect to a matter regarding which parliament or the legislature 
of a State has not power to make laws.
Article 128(2) also gives the Federal Court a referral jurisdiction. In any 
proceedings before another court, if a question arises as to the effect of any provisions 
of the Constitution, the Federal Court shall determine that question and remit the 
case back to the Court to be disposed of in accordance with such determination. 
The Yang di-Pertuan Agong, Malaysia’s paramount ruler and Head of State,18 may 
also refer to the Federal Court for its position on any question as to the effect of any 
provision of this Constitution which has arisen or appears to him likely to arise.19 
The courts have the constitutional duty to enforce compliance and observance by 
the State and the Federal Governments of all the supremacy of the Constitution by 
virtue of the power conferred by Articles 4(3) and 4(4). But as they renounce this 
power, judicial review seems to be “more notional than real”.20
One can identify two causes for the judges’ reluctance to exercise judicial 
review. The first explanation can be found in the British tradition of parliamentary 
supremacy. Judges seem to be steeped in the British tradition of parliamentary 
supremacy which has no legal basis in so far as Malaysia has a written constitution 
unlike in the United Kingdom.21 For example, in the case of Loh Kooi Choon v. 
Government of Malaysia [1977] 2 MLJ 187, it was stated by the court that “the 
question of whether the impugned Act is harsh and unjust is a question of policy to be 
debated and decided by Parliament and therefore not fit for judicial determination”. 
In a way, the rule by law has ruined the rule of law.


THE RULE OF LAW AND LEGAL PLURALISM IN MALAYSIA
95
ICR 2.1  Produced and distributed by Pluto Journals  ICR.plutojournals.org
The second explanation to the judges’ reluctance is the lack of independence of 
the judiciary resulting from the 1988 crisis. Before 1988, there had been a growing 
freedom of the judiciary, and a short period of judicial renaissance. Following 
a string of judicial rulings against the Government in the 1987–88 period, the 
Government moved to strip the judiciary of its power of judicial review. Former 
Prime Minister Tun Dr Mahathir Mohamad, during his term in office, eventually 
sacked Chief Justice Salleh Abas and two other Supreme Court judges. Ever since 
the attack on the judiciary in 1988, the judiciary has repeatedly failed to uphold the 
rule of law and to rule with the independence of all powers, notably the executive.
Distribution of jurisdiction between sharīʿah and civil courts
The sharīʿah court system pre-dates the civil court system. Indeed, there was a 
court system prior to the British intervention, which was a system of one set of 
courts, the qāḍī courts. Today, Malaysia has a dual court system comprising the 
civil courts and the sharīʿah courts.22 The latter have jurisdiction to apply sharīʿah 
law to Muslims and civil courts have jurisdiction to apply civil law to Muslims and 
non-Muslims (1). The Constitution was amended in 1988 to clarify the distribution 
of jurisdiction (2) but it has not solved all the problems raised by the existence of a 
dual court system (3). Some ways ahead are suggested to avoid tussle situations (4).
(1) Constitutional framework: Originally the Constitution referred only to the 
composition of civil courts in Article 121. Though sharīʿah courts were mentioned 
in Schedule 9 of article 74 which prescribes that the States are responsible for 
the “organisation and procedure of sharīʿah courts, which shall have jurisdiction 
only over persons professing the religion of Islam and in respect only of any of 
the matters included in this paragraph, but shall not have jurisdiction in respect of 
offences except in so far as conferred by federal law”.
Secular courts used to be in a position of more authority until the 1988 amendment 
to the Constitution which redefined the relationship between secular courts and 
sharīʿah courts. The amendment 121(1A) provided that the High Courts were 
to “have no jurisdiction in respect of any matter within the jurisdiction of the 
sharīʿah courts”.23 It was a very simple amendment. It merely says that where the 
sharīʿah courts have jurisdiction over a matter, the common law courts do not have 
jurisdiction over it. The aim of this change was to prevent litigants from appealing 
sharīʿah court decisions to the High Court.24 However, different interpretations of 
this amendment emerged.25
(2) Different interpretations of the 1988 Amendment: Two different interpretations 
of Article 121(1A) resulting from the 1988 amendment can be identified: the parallel 


96
Constance Chevallier-Govers
Islam and Civilisational Renewal
and the hierarchical interpretations. According to the parallel interpretation, sharīʿah 
courts and civil courts form two separate courts systems. Salbiah Ahmad asserts that
State Shariah courts are not courts inferior to the federal courts as the term ‘inferior court’ 
is understood in terms of appeal and judicial review by superior courts over inferior courts. 
The State Shariah courts are in a separate hierarchy to that of the federal civil courts. 
There is no right of appeal from the State Shariah courts to the federal civil courts. There 
is no power of judicial review by the federal high court over the State Shariah court.26
This interpretation is commonly adopted and reflects the state of the case law 
today. On any issue that is connected to Islamic law whether it is within or outside 
the jurisdiction of the sharīʿah courts, the civil courts are extremely reluctant to 
pronounce a judgment even if issues of jurisdiction, constitutionality and human 
rights are involved. In doing so they are subordinating human rights in Article 5 to 13 
to the power of the States to legislate on Islam under 9th Schedule. The implication 
of such an interpretation is that Schedule 9 to Article 74 and Article 121(1A) are 
given priority over Article 4 asserting the supremacy of the Constitution and over 
Articles 5 to 13 on fundamental rights.
According to the hierarchical interpretation, sharīʿah courts, as State courts, are 
submitted to civil courts, as federal courts. Some authors, like Rasamani Kandiah, 
consider that
the amendment does not purport to oust the jurisdiction of the High Court to review 
decisions of the Shariah Courts. It merely says, in effect, that the ordinary courts cannot 
exercise the Shariah court’s jurisdiction a position which, it should be noted, applies to any 
inferior jurisdiction: it is indeed a cardinal principle of judicial review that the court cannot 
substitute its decision for that of the inferior jurisdiction whose decision is reviewed. It 
does not therefore seem possible that the Shariah courts, by this small amendment, 
have been converted into a totally separate legal system […]. As things stand the civil 
courts exercise the power of judicial review and this is of course part of the judicial power. 
Nothing in clause 1A attempts to interfere with this proposition.27
This is also the opinion of Mohammad Hashim Kamali, according to whom
Article 121 was to address problems arising out of conflicting jurisdiction and not to 
create a new jurisdiction or introduce any basic changes in the status of the civil courts 
as of general jurisdiction in the country. Sharīʿah courts are not integrated into federal 
legal system but belong to State jurisdiction.28
The implication of this interpretation is that Article 4, asserting the supremacy of 
the Constitution, and Articles 5 to 13 on fundamental rights are given priority over 
Schedule 9 to Article 74 and over Article 121(1A).


THE RULE OF LAW AND LEGAL PLURALISM IN MALAYSIA
97
ICR 2.1  Produced and distributed by Pluto Journals  ICR.plutojournals.org
In the Malaysian Constitution, there is no provision on the basic structure of 
provisions which cannot be modified because they are more important than the 
other ones. For example, in France the provision which prescribes that France 
is a republic is part of the basic structure, as in Germany, and the provisions on 
federalism and human rights cannot be amended. Such provisions on basic structure 
are lacking and all the provisions of the Malaysia Constitution are considered to 
be of the same importance.
(3) Remaining issues regarding the distribution of jurisdiction between sharīʿah and 
civil courts: When the subject matter falls within the jurisdiction of the sharīʿah 
court but one of the parties is a non-Muslim, which court is to hear the case? Civil 
courts have no jurisdiction over sharīʿah law, but sharīʿah courts, in turn, have 
no jurisdiction over non-Muslims. Indeed according to Schedule 9 list 2, “Shariah 
courts shall have jurisdiction only over persons professing the religion of Islam”.
Many cases raise the question of the effects of conversion to Islam on civil 
marriages. According to sharīʿah law, a Muslim cannot marry a non-Muslim.29 
Marriages between non-Muslims in Malaysia are registered under the civil law 
known as the Law Reform (Marriage and Divorce) Act 1976 (Act 164) (known as 
‘LRA’). Section 3 of the LRA provides that the Act shall not apply to “a Muslim” 
or to “any person who is married under Islamic law”. The exception to this rule 
lies in section 3(3) which provides that the court may still grant a decree of divorce 
under section 51 “where one party to the marriage has subsequently converted to 
Islam and such decree shall be valid and binding against the party to the marriage of 
who has converted to Islam”. Nevertheless, section 51 does not allow the converted 
spouse to file for a divorce in front of the civil court. According to Islamic law, the 
marriage is terminated three months after the conversion if the other spouse does 
not also convert to Islam. The converted spouse is thus free to marry according to 
Islamic law. Most often it is the man who converts to Islam leaving his wife without 
any ancillary relief or maintenance. Sometimes the converted spouse even files 
for a divorce in the sharīʿah court resulting in two divorce settlements, one from 
the sharīʿah court and one from the civil court.30 The Federal Court has recently 
asserted that the converted husband could still seek divorce in the sharīʿah court 
albeit the rulings made by the sharīʿah court would not bind the civil court.31 A draft 
amendment of section 51 of the LRA is being discussed in the federal parliament 
to make sure that the converting spouse has fulfilled all his obligations under the 
civil law before converting to Islam (ancillary relief, maintenance of the spouse 
and children, custody of the children).32
When one of the spouses converts to Islam, it happens that he or she tries to 
unilaterally convert his children. A few cases have raised the question whether only 
one of the parents could convert children under the age of 18. The Administration 


98
Constance Chevallier-Govers
Islam and Civilisational Renewal
of Islamic Law (Federal Territories) Act 1993 gives the right to a converted parent 
to convert his or her children from a civil marriage without the knowledge and 
consent of the other parent. The Federal Court was recently seized and ruled that 
any parent has a right to convert the child of marriage to Islam. It held that the word 
“parent” in Article 12(4) of the Federal Constitution which states that the religion 
of a person under the age of 18 shall be decided by his parent or guardian, means 
a single parent.33
Concerning apostasy, an issue has emerged as to determining which court should 
have jurisdiction to authorise a Muslim to conversion away from Islam.34 Every 
Malaysian has an identity card which contains his personal information and for 
Muslims their religion is also mentioned. The National Registration Administration 
(NRD) is responsible for issuing these cards. In 2007, the Supreme Court held – in 
the Lina Joy case35 – that the NRD policy of requiring a certificate of apostasy from 
the sharīʿah court was lawful. The question whether Lina Joy was a Muslim or not 
was a decision exclusively for the Islamic courts. Thus a Muslim who wishes to 
declare apostasy must first get the sharīʿah court to confirm that he or she has left 
the religion of Islam. Until the act of renunciation is validated by the sharīʿah court, 
a Muslim is deemed to be a person of the Muslim faith. The problem is that sharīʿah 
courts do not easily hand out these certificates because in some States apostasy is a 
criminal offence and where it is not a criminal offence there is no provision giving 
them this power. Apostasy is therefore practically impossible. This ruling raises 
also two other questions. Why should the sharīʿah court be competent concerning 
the faith of a non-Muslim? Finally, professing is a matter of inner feeling. It is not 
something that can be decided by a court either sharīʿah or civil. This goes far 
beyond the problem of distribution of jurisdiction.
(4) Possible remedies to solve conflict of jurisdiction: Without any constitutional 
amendment it should be possible to invoke the advisory jurisdiction of the Federal 
Court under Articles 128 and 130 of the Constitution to address conflicts of 
jurisdiction.36 However, these provisions are very seldom used. Some academics 
have therefore suggested introducing more important changes in the constitutional 
framework in order to solve these problems of distribution of jurisdiction between 
sharīʿah and civil courts.
The first solution would be to unify the civil and the sharīʿah courts at all levels 
which also would mean federalising the sharīʿah courts. Persons qualified in civil 
law as well as persons qualified in Islamic law would be appointed judges of the 
same court at all levels. Islamic law cases, civil or criminal, would be heard by 
judges qualified in Islamic law. Non-Islamic law cases would be heard by judges 
qualified in civil law. If, in a case there would be issues involving both laws, two 
judges would sit, one from each discipline. The judge with Islamic law qualification 


THE RULE OF LAW AND LEGAL PLURALISM IN MALAYSIA
99
ICR 2.1  Produced and distributed by Pluto Journals  ICR.plutojournals.org
would decide issues of Islamic law. The judge with civil law qualification would 
decide the other issues. The final judgment of the court would be given by both of 
them, jointly.37 This would require a constitutional amendment and it would be a 
very sensitive issue. Even if the question of jurisdiction would be thus settled, it 
would not address the question of conflicting laws.
Another proposition is to create a body responsible in cases of conflict of 
jurisdiction. There should be a mechanism put in place where a distribution body 
manned by judges familiar with both civil and sharīʿah laws adjudicate on this 
matter.38 This distribution body would have as its only power the allocation of 
difficult cases.
The sharīʿah as well as legal pluralism question the formal definition of the rule 
of law by challenging the Constitution’s supremacy. In a democracy it is important 
that this hierarchical principle be respected but it is not a goal in itself. Another 
major aspect is that the law respects some fundamental values, called human rights.
Material Definition of the Rule of Law
The material definition of the rule of law is a definition according to the content of 
the law which has to conform to human rights. Some human rights are protected 
by the Malaysian Constitution (Articles 5 to 13)39 and in this way the material and 
formal definitions of rule of law converge. Nevertheless one also has to confront 
Malaysia’s legal pluralism to international standards of human rights and to analyse 
potential collisions between sharīʿah law in Malaysia and human rights.
Malaysia is not party to the main United Nations Conventions on human rights 
such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). The 
only binding obligations of Malaysia are regarding two international treaties: the 
Convention on Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) of 1979 
ratified with reservations in 199540 and Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) 
of 1989 ratified with reservations by Malaysia in 1995.41 In order to promote and 
protect human rights in Malaysia, the Government has established an independent 
Commission on Human Rights under the Human Rights Commission of Malaysia Act 
1999.42 Section 2 of this Act defines ‘human rights’ as referring to the “fundamental 
liberties as enshrined in Part II of the Federal Constitution”. Furthermore, section 
4(4) of the Act provides that regard shall be had to the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights 1948 (UDHR) to the extent that is not inconsistent with the Federal 
Constitution.43 This means that whatever rights and liberties not mentioned in Part 
II but referred to in the UDHR must be considered provided that there is no conflict 
with the Constitution.
Legal pluralism and sharīʿah in Malaysia raise many issues concerning human 
rights. Actually it is not itself legal pluralism which is concerned but more specifically 


100
Constance Chevallier-Govers
Islam and Civilisational Renewal
sharīʿah law applied in Malaysia. This study will focus on potential breaches to 
freedom of religion and to women’s rights resulting from the implementation of 
sharīʿah law.
Freedom of religion
Article 11 of the Constitution provides for freedom of religion: “Every person has 
the right to profess and practice his religion and, subject to Clause (4), to propagate 
it”44. Clause 4 empowers the State legislatures to enact anti-propagation laws to 
regulate the propagation of other religions amongst the Muslims. Hence there is a 
constitutionally backed prohibition to proselytise among the Muslims.
Three threats to freedom of religion can be identified: apostasy (1), interreligious 
marriages (2) and special status of Malays (3).
(1) Apostasy: Some States have created penal offences to punish apostasy. Kelantan 
and Terengganu have adopted ḥudūd laws punishing by death apostates. These 
laws are not yet implemented. Some other States like Malacca, Perak and Sabah 
have also criminalised apostasy by imposing fines not exceeding RM 3,000 and/
or imprisonment of not more than two years. The penal punishment of apostasy 
raises difficult constitutional issues. It is a breach to Article 11 of the Constitution 
on freedom of religion, which should be interpreted as broad enough to permit 
change of faith. Article 11 does not explicitly forbid apostasy.45
The right to convert away from one’s religion is alluded to in Article 18 of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 1948. It declares that “Everyone 
has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes 
freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom […].” The UDHR has been 
given partial recognition by section 4(4) of Malaysia’s Human Rights Commission 
Act 1999 but only to the extent that is not inconsistent with the Federal Constitution. 
The UDHR is a declaration adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations 
without binding effect but most of its content has been integrated within the two 
International Covenants of 1966. Article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights 1966 (ICCPR) does not mention explicitly the right to change 
religion; it only mentions the right to adopt one’s religion.46 Nevertheless according 
to United Nations Human Rights Committee, this should be interpreted as including 
the right to change religion.47 Malaysia is not party to the ICCPR. So except by 
admitting that the UDHR is binding as an international customary law, no provision 
of international human right law is applicable to Malaysia and the only reference 
is therefore the Malaysian Constitution.
Some States do not criminalise apostasy but impose a forced rehabilitation to 
the apostate. This is an interference with personal liberty guaranteed by Article 
5(1) of the Constitution. A murtad (apostate) may also claim that the rehabilitation 


THE RULE OF LAW AND LEGAL PLURALISM IN MALAYSIA
101
ICR 2.1  Produced and distributed by Pluto Journals  ICR.plutojournals.org
law violates his or her right of freedom of speech provided for by Article 10 of 
the Constitution but also Article 12(3) which says that no person shall be forced 
to receive instruction or take part in any ceremony or act of worship of a religion 
other than his own.
(2) Interreligious marriage: The fact that, according to sharīʿah law implemented 
in Malaysia, Muslims cannot marry non-Muslims results in a ban of interreligious 
marriage for Muslims. This can be analysed as a violation of freedom of religion 
as guaranteed by Article 11 of the Constitution. It is also a breach to Article 10 of 
the Constitution on freedom of speech and association. Finally, it encroaches an 
internationally recognised right to marry and to found a family cited in Article 23 
of the ICCPR. This specific right is not mentioned in the Malaysian Constitution 
and Malaysia is not party to the ICCPR. This right to marry is also guaranteed by 
Article 16 of the UDHR.
(3) Constitutional status of the Malays: The status of Malays is determined by 
the Constitution.48 Article 160 defines a ‘Malay’ as a person who is a Malaysian 
citizen, born to a Malaysian citizen, who professes to be a Muslim, habitually speaks 
the Malay language, adheres to Malay customs, and is domiciled in Malaysia or 
Singapore.49 Malays can theoretically convert out of Islam, but in practice this is 
very difficult, as shown above.50 The question remains whether a Malay apostate 
would lose his or her identity or lose the ‘status’ of being a ‘Malay’. It seems, until 
now this issue has never been taken to the court.51 Here we have two conflicting 
constitutional provisions: Article 11 on freedom of religion and Article 160 on 
Malay identity. It is in these kinds of cases that a provision on the basic structure 
would be of great help.
Women’s rights according to sharīʿah law as implemented in Malaysia
Article 8 of the Constitution states that, “all persons are equal before the law and 
entitled to the equal protection of the law”. It did not first identify gender as a ground 
for discrimination. On 1 August 2001, Article 8(2) was amended to include the word 
‘gender’. Clause 5 of Article 8 provides that constitutional provisions concerning 
equality before the law and non-discrimination on grounds of religion, gender, race, 
etc. explicitly exclude their application to the legislation concerning personal laws. 
This is an important limit to the non-discrimination principle. Malaysia has ratified 
the CEDAW in 1995 but with reservations.52 Malaysia’s accession to CEDAW is 
ultimately subject to the understanding that its provisions do not conflict with the 
provisions of the sharīʿah law and the Constitution. Concerning discrimination 
towards women, Malaysia is therefore submitted to the review by the Committee 
created by the CEDAW. It is mainly regarding marriage that Muslim women suffer 


102
Constance Chevallier-Govers
Islam and Civilisational Renewal
injustices under sharīʿah law implemented in Malaysia (1) but there are also some 
other issues to be mentioned concerning States’ criminal enactments (2).
(1) Status of Muslim women regarding marriage: Muslim family law falls under the 
legislative power of the Malaysian States. This construction entails that there are 
many different versions of Islamic law enactments in the different member States. 
The Islamic Family Law Act (IFLA) of 1984 adopted by the Federal Parliament 
for the Federal Territories was designed to serve as a model for the other Malaysian 
States.53 However, family law in some States deviates from the federal model in 
several important respects. Here we shall not put the emphasis on the discrepancies 
between the IFLA and States’ sharīʿah laws in family matters but only take the IFLA 
as reference illustrating the trends of Islamic family law in Malaysia.
According to the IFLA and all the Family States laws, Muslim women do not 
benefit from equal rights to enter into marriage as the approval of the wālī (the 
woman’s guardian for marriage) is needed, even if the consent of the wife is now 
required. Section 13 of IFLA states that a marriage shall not be recognised or 
registered under this Act unless both parties freely consent to the marriage and 
either the wālī or in the absence of wālī the sharīʿah judge has also consented.54 
Furthermore women do not have equal right to dissolve marriage. Ṭalāq, which is 
the unilateral repudiation of women, is still implemented in Malaysia.55 The IFLA 
seeks to limit arbitrary unilateral repudiation (ṭalāq) by requiring the husband to 
apply to the court for permission to pronounce the ṭalāq in court. Extra-judicial 
ṭalāq is subject to punishment by fine and/or imprisonment. So by paying a fine a 
man can unilaterally repudiate his wife. But even a judicial ṭalāq is discriminatory 
towards Muslim women as they cannot unilaterally end marriage and can obtain 
a divorce only on limited grounds (not receiving maintenance, being abused, and 
cruelty). Muslim women do not have equal rights regarding guardianship: the father 
is the only legal guardian but the mother can have custody. A woman (but not a man) 
can lose custody on several grounds, including ‘immorality’. Finally, polygamy 
is only permitted for Muslim men. According to Section 23 of IFLA, the right to 
practise polygamy may only be exercised with the court’s permission and if four 
conditions are met: such marriage is just and necessary, the husband has financial 
means to support more than one wife, he is to treat the co-wives equally and not 
to cause harm to the existing wife, and finally the consent of the existing wife is 
needed. This practice is still discriminatory towards women as such right is not 
recognised for them.
All these issues concerning the status of Muslim women regarding marriage 
have been pointed out by the CEDAW Committee in its 2006 Report.56 A new bill 
amending the IFLA has been finalised and awaits submission to Parliament.


THE RULE OF LAW AND LEGAL PLURALISM IN MALAYSIA
103
ICR 2.1  Produced and distributed by Pluto Journals  ICR.plutojournals.org
(2) Issues concerning women in the States’ sharīʿah criminal offences enactments: 
In the sharīʿah criminal offences enactments of the States there is no distinction 
between zinā (illicit sex between unmarried persons) and rape. For example, while 
the Criminal Offences Enactment of Kelantan57 addresses the subject of zinā it 
does not mention rape at all. Zinā has been given a broad definition consisting 
of sexual intercourse between a man and a woman who are not married. In case 
of zinā, pregnancy or delivery of a baby by an unmarried woman shall constitute 
evidence on which to find her guilty of zinā. This constitutes discrimination towards 
women in so far as if a woman is raped and gets subsequently pregnant, she will 
be guilty of zinā.
Some offences are addressed only to women, which is discriminatory. For 
example, according to section 48 of Terengganu Criminal Offences Enactment,58 
it is an offence for a virgin woman to abscond from the custody of her parents or 
legal guardian. Or according to section 35, “any woman who in any public place 
exposes any part of her body that arouses passion” is liable for a fine of RM 1,000 
or a jail term of up to six months.
The non-governmental organisation Sisters in Islam has analysed Kartika’s caning 
sentence59 as a further discrimination towards Muslim women compared to other 
women who cannot be caned as civil law does not prescribe caning for women but 
only for men under 50 years old.60 Whipping of women under sharīʿah criminal 
offences legislation contradicts civil law where women are not punishable by caning 
under section 289 of the Criminal Procedure Code. Moreover caning could be 
considered as a form of cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment prohibited by 
ICCPR. Nevertheless Malaysia is not part either of this treaty or of the United 
Nations Convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment 
or punishment of 1984 and there is no provision in the Constitution on the prohibition 
of torture or cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment.
The constitutional provisions on human rights are in some ways incomplete. 
Concerning the discrimination against women, clause 5 of Article 8 authorises 
discrimination regarding personal law, which means regarding all issues important 
to women. The Constitution lacks some fundamental rights, like the ban of torture 
or cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment. As Malaysia is not submitted to the 
major legally binding instruments on human rights, sharīʿah law is therefore not 
confronted by international human right standards.
Conclusions and Recommendations
The dual legal system in Malaysia is a very interesting way of enabling a multicultural 
society to peacefully coexist. However there are some faults in the system such 
as a lack of effective means to guarantee the Constitution’s supremacy. If such 


104
Constance Chevallier-Govers
Islam and Civilisational Renewal
mechanisms were installed, the Malaysian legal system could be seen to some 
extent as a model of pluralism. Malaysia is an original example of hybridising and 
syncretism. The issues on the compliance to human rights are more intrinsically 
related to sharīʿah law than to legal pluralism in itself. Some Muslim countries such 
as Morocco have managed to reform their Islamic family law to make it compliant 
to international human right standards, which should also be possible in Malaysia.
Some suggestions on the functioning of legal pluralism and the sharīʿah are 
proposed as tracks of reflection:
•	 The creation of a distribution body to allocate sensitive cases either to sharīʿah 
or to civil courts. There should be a mechanism put in place with a distribution 
body manned by judges familiar with both civil and sharīʿah laws.61 This 
distribution body would have as its only power the allocation of difficult 
cases. In the case of a tie, the chief Justice would allocate the case either to 
civil or to sharīʿah courts.
•	 The insertion of a basic structure provision in the Constitution. Articles 5 to 
13 of the Constitution protecting human rights should be declared as being 
part of the basic structure of the Constitution. Thereby other articles of the 
Constitution would have to be interpreted in accordance with the latter.
•	 Joining the ICCPR. Malaysia should join the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights (ICCPR), most probably with reservations concerning 
sharīʿah law. But at least a dialogue would emerge between Malaysia and the 
United Nations Human Rights Committee at the occasion of the periodical 
review.
•	 The adoption of a federal law on apostasy, taking as model Negeri Sembilan’s 
enactment. On the basis of Article 76 of the Constitution, allowing the Federal 
Parliament to make laws with respect to any matter enumerated in the State 
List for the purpose of promoting uniformity of the States’ laws, the Federal 
Parliament should pass a law on apostasy. It would take as example the 
Administration of Islamic Law Enactment of 2003 in Negeri Sembilan.
Notes
  1.	 J. Vanderlinden, “Le pluralisme juridique”, in: J. Gilissen (ed.), Le pluralisme juridique: Etudes 
(Etudes d’histoire et d’ethnologie juridiques 11) (Brussels: Centre d’histoire et d’ethnologie 
juridiques, Institut de sociologie, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 1972), 19.
  2.	 Virginia Matheson Hooker, A Short History of Malaysia: Linking East and West (Crows Nest NSW 
[Australia]: Allen and Unwin, 2003), 345; Cheah Boon Kheng, Malaysia: The Making of a Nation 
(Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2002), 263.
  3.	 This is the law relating to the punishment for zinā.
  4.	 Shad Saleem Faruqi, Document of Destiny: The Constitution of the Federation of Malaysia 
(Petaling Jaya, Selangor [Malaysia]: Star Publications Berhad, 2008), 125; J.C. Fong, Constitutional 
Federalism in Malaysia (Petaling Jaya, Selangor [Malaysia]: Sweet and Maxwell Asia, 2008), 7.


THE RULE OF LAW AND LEGAL PLURALISM IN MALAYSIA
105
ICR 2.1  Produced and distributed by Pluto Journals  ICR.plutojournals.org
  5.	 Shamrahayau A. Aziz, “Some Thoughts on the Relationship Between Law and Religion in Malaysia”, 
Current Law Journal 4 (2009), xxii.
  6.	 Che Omar [1988] 2 Malayan Law Journal, 55.
  7.	 Fong, Constitutional Federalism, 91.
  8.	 Ahmad Masum, “The Rule of Law under the Malaysian Federal Constitution”, Malayan Law Journal 
6 (2009), cxii.
  9.	 Jacques Chevallier, L’état de droit (Paris: Montchréstien, 2010, 5th ed.), 158.
10.	 Art. 4(1) of the Constitution says: “This Constitution is the supreme law of the Federation and any 
law passed after Merdeka Day which is inconsistent with the Constitution shall, to the extent of 
inconsistency, be void”. 
11.	 Article 74 Constitution:
(1) Without prejudice to any power to make laws conferred on it by any other Article, Parliament 
may make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the Federal List of the Concurrent 
List (that is to say, the First or Third List set out in the Ninth Schedule).
(2) Without prejudice to any power to make laws conferred on it by any other Article, the 
Legislature of a State may make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State 
List (that is to say, the Second List set out in the Ninth Schedule) or the Concurrent List.
(3) The power to make laws conferred by this Article is exercisable subject to any conditions or 
restrictions imposed with respect to any particular matter by this Constitution.
(4) Where general as well as specific expressions are used in describing any of the matters 
enumerated in the Lists set out in the Ninth Schedule the generality of the former shall not be 
taken to be limited by the latter.
12.	 Ninth Schedule (List II) of Article 74 of the Constitution:
1. Except with respect to the Federal Territories of Kuala Lumpur and Labuan, Islamic law and 
personal and family law of persons professing the religion of Islam, including the Islamic law 
relating to succession, testate and intestate, betrothal, marriage, divorce, dower, maintenance, 
adoption, legitimacy guardianship, gifts, partitions and non-charitable trusts; Wakafs and the 
definition and regulation of charitable and religious endowments, institutions, trusts, charities 
and charitable institutions operating wholly within the State; Malay customs. Zakat, Fitrah and 
Baitulmal or similar Islamic religious revenue, mosques or any Islamic public places of worship, 
creation and punishment of offences by persons professing the religion of Islam against precepts of 
that religion, except in regard to matters included in the Federal List; the constitution, organization 
and procedure of Syariah courts, which shall have jurisdiction only over person professing the 
religion of Islam and in respect only of any of the matters included in this paragraph, but shall 
not have jurisdiction in respect of offences except in so far as conferred by federal law, the 
control of propagating doctrines and beliefs among persons professing the religion of Islam; the 
determination of matters of Islamic law and doctrine Malay custom.
13.	 Shad Saleem Faruqi, “Jurisdiction of State Authorities to Punish Offences Against the Precepts 
of Islam: A Constitutional Perspective”, 28 September 2005, available online at http://www.
malaysianbar.org.my/constitutional_law/jurisdiction_of_state_authorities_to_punish_offences_
against_the_precepts_of_islam_a_constitutional_perspective.html (accessed on 1 July 2010).
14.	 Hamid Jusoh, The Position of Islamic Law in the Malaysian Constitution with Special Reference to 
the Conversion Case in Family Law (Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1991), 4–5; see 
also http://www.docstoc.com/docs/3776377/The-posiiton-of-Islamic-law-in-Malaysia (accessed on 
1 July 2010).
15.	 Shariah Criminal Offences Enactment of Perlis, No.4/1993; Shariah Criminal Offences Enactment 
of Pulau Pinang, No.3/1996; Shariah Criminal Offences Enactment of Perak, No.3/1992; Shariah 
Criminal Offences Enactment of Selangor, No.9/1995; Shariah Criminal Offences Act of Federal 
Territory 1997; Shariah Criminal Offences Enactment of Negeri Sembilan, No.4/1992; Shariah 
Criminal Offences Enactment of Johor, No.4/1997; Shariah Criminal Offences Enactment of 
Kelantan, No.2/1985; Shariah Criminal Offences Enactment of Sabah, No.3/1995; Shariah Criminal 


106
Constance Chevallier-Govers
Islam and Civilisational Renewal
Offences Enactment of Terengganu 2001; Shariah Criminal Offences Ordinance of Sarawak, 
No.6/1991.
16.	 Ahmad Mohamed Ibrahim, The Administration of Islamic Law in Malaysia (Kuala Lumpur: Institute 
of Islamic Understanding Malaysia (IKIM), 2000), 583.
17.	 Article 128 of the Constitution:
(1) The Supreme Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court, have jurisdiction to determine 
in accordance with any rules of court regulating the exercise of such jurisdiction –
(a) any question whether a law made by Parliament or by the Legislature of a State is invalid 
on the ground that it makes provision with respect to a matter over which Parliament or, as the 
case may be, the Legislature of the State has no power to make laws; and
(b) disputes on any other question between States or between the Federation and any State.
(2) Without prejudice to any appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, where in any proceedings 
before another court a question arises as to the effect of any provision of this Constitution, the 
Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction (subject to any rules of court regulating the exercise of that 
jurisdiction) to determine the question and remit the case to the other court to be disposed of in 
accordance with the determination.
(3) The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to determine appeals from a High Court or a judge 
thereof shall be such as may be provided by federal law.
18.	 Malaysia is a constitutional monarchy with an elected monarch as head of state. The position of 
the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (Malaysia’s paramount ruler, HM the King) de facto rotates every five 
years among the nine Rulers of the Malay states.
19.	 Article 130 of the Constitution: “The Yang di-Pertuan Agong may refer to the Supreme Court for 
its opinion on any question as to the effect of any provision of the Constitution which has arisen or 
appears to him likely to arise, and the Supreme Court shall pronounce in open court its opinion on 
any question so referred to it.” 
20.	 Masum, “The Rule of Law”, cxii.
21.	 Ibid.
22.	 Farid Sufian Shuaib, “Powers and Jurisdiction of Shariah Courts in Malaysia”, Malayan Law Journal 
(2003), 32.
23.	 Introduced by the Act No. A704 of 10/06/1988.
24.	 Ahmad Ibrahim, “The Amendment to Article 121 of the Federal Constitution: Its Effect on Admin-
istration of Islamic Law, Malayan Law Journal 2 (1989), xvii.
25.	 Shuaib, “Powers”, 145.
26.	 Salbiah Ahmad, “Islam in Malaysia: Constitutional and Human Rights Perspectives”, Muslim World 
Journal of Human Rights 2, no. 1 (2005), available online at http://www.bepress.com/mwjhr/vol2/
iss1/art7 (accessed on 1 July 2010).
27.	 Rasamani Kandiah, Marriage and Dissolution Handbook (Kelana Jaya, Selangor [Malaysia]: 
LexisNexis 2007, 2nd ed.), 156.
28.	 Ibrahim, Administration, 56.
29.	 Section 10 of the Islamic Family Law (Federal Territories) Act 1984.
30.	 A divorced Muslim woman is entitled to reasonable maintenance from her husband. She is entitled 
to be maintained by her husband during the ʿiddah period, during which husband and wife are 
considered rujūʿ i.e. resuming the conjugal relationship, which is approximately a period of three 
months. Three months is a very short period compared with the maintenance given by civil courts. 
The wife loses the right to maintenance if she is deemed to have denied the ‘lawful wishes’ of her 
husband.
31.	 Subashini Rajasingam v Saravanan Thangathoray, 27 December 2007, Federal Court [2008] 
Malayan Law Journal, 1.
32.	 Zaleha Kamaruddin, “Divorce Laws in Malaysia (Civil and Shariah)”, Malayan Law Journal (2005), 
227.
33.	 Subashini Rajasingam v Saravanan Thangathoray.


THE RULE OF LAW AND LEGAL PLURALISM IN MALAYSIA
107
ICR 2.1  Produced and distributed by Pluto Journals  ICR.plutojournals.org
34.	 Thio Li-ann, “Apostasy and Religious Freedom: Constitutional Issues Arising from the Lina Joy 
Litigation”, Malayan Law Journal (2006).
35.	 Lina Joy, Federal Court [case report] Malayan Law Journal (2007), 620.
36.	 Ahmad Masum, “Freedom of Religion Under the Malaysian Federal Constitution”, Current Law 
Journal 2 (2009), xiii.
37.	 Dato’ Abdul Hamid bin Haji Mohamad, “Civil and Syariah Courts in Malaysia: Conflict of 
Jurisdictions”, paper presented at the International Seminar on Islamic Law in the Contemporary 
World, organised by the Institute of Islamic Understanding Malaysia (IKIM), Kuala Lumpur, 24–25 
October 2000.
38.	 Masum, “Freedom”, xiii.
39.	 - Liberty of the person (Article 5);
- Prohibition of slavery and forced labour (Article 6);
- Protection against retrospective criminal laws and repeated trials (Article 7);
- Equality before the law (Article 8);
- Prohibition of banishment and the right to freedom of movement (Article 9);
- Freedom of speech, assembly and association (Article 10);
- Freedom of religion (Article 11);
- Rights in respect of education (Article 12);
- Rights to property (Article 13).
40.	 Reservations to Articles 5(a), 7(b), 9(2), 16(1)(a), (c), (f) and (g) and 16(2).
41.	 Reservations to Article 2, 7, 13, 14, 15, 28(1)(a).
42.	 Human Rights Commission of Malaysia Act 1999, Act 597.
43.	 4(4): “For the purpose of this Act, regard shall be had to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
1948 to the extent that it is not inconsistent with the Federal Constitution.”
44.	 Article 11 of the Constitution:
(1) Every person has the right to profess and practice his religion and, subject to Clause (4), to 
propagate it.
(2) No person shall be compelled to pay any tax the proceeds of which are specially allocated in 
whole or in part for the purposes of a religion other than his own.
(3) Every religious group has the right:
(a) to manage its own religious affairs;
(b) to establish and maintain institutions for religious or charitable purposes;
(c) to acquire and own property and hold and administer it in accordance with law.
(4) State law and in respect of the Federal Territories of Kuala Lumpur and Labuan, federal 
law may control or restrict the propagation of any religious doctrine or belief among persons 
professing the religion of Islam.
(5) This Article does not authorize any act contrary to any general law relating to public order, 
public health or morality.
45.	 Mohamed Azam Mohamed Adil, “Restrictions in Freedom of Religion in Malaysia: A Conceptual 
Analysis with Special Reference to the Law of Apostasy”, Muslim World Journal of Human Rights 
4 (2007).
46.	 “Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This right shall include 
freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice, and freedom, either individually or 
in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in worship, 
observance, practice and teaching. No one shall be subject to coercion which would impair his 
freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice.”
47.	 The UN Human Rights Committee in 1993 issued an authoritative General Comment on Article 18 
of the ICCPR, making the following points: “The freedom to ‘have or to adopt’ a religion includes 
‘the right to replace one’s current religion or belief with another […]”.
48.	 Lee Hock Guan, “Affirmative Action in Malaysia”, Southeast Asian Affairs (2005), 211–28.


108
Constance Chevallier-Govers
Islam and Civilisational Renewal
49.	 Article 160 §2: “‘Malay’ means a person who professes the religion of Islam, habitually speaks the 
Malay language, conforms to Malay custom and:
(a) was before Merdeka Day born in the Federation or in Singapore or born of parents one of 
whom was born in the Federation or in Singapore, or is on that day domiciled in the Federation 
or in Singapore; or
(b) is the issue of such a person.
50.	 In the Lina Joy case, the Federal Court has adopted a controversial interpretation of Article 160§2 
asserting that a Malay remains within the Islamic faith until his dying days.
51.	 According to Professor Kamali, during an interview in April 2010. The opposite, too, is quite clear: 
a non-Muslim Malaysian who converts to Islam does not become a Malay.
52.	 Malaysia, like other Muslim-majority countries, has made reservations inter alia on Art. 16 CEDAW, 
which concerns equality between men and women in all matters relating to marriage and family 
relations.
53.	 Suad Joseph Afsaneh Najmabadi (eds), Encyclopedia of Women and Islamic Cultures, vol. 2: 
“Family, Law, and Politics” (Leiden: Brill, 2005), 394; Nik Noriani Nik Badli Shah, Marriage 
and Divorce: Law Reform Within Islamic Framework (Kuala Lumpur: International Law Book 
Services, 2000), 47; Sayed Sikandar Shah Haneef, “Modern State-Enacted Islamic Laws: Towards 
a Purposive Legal Codification”, Shariah Law Report 1 (2008), 39–64.
54.	 The guardian’s unreasonable refusal to consent to his ward’s marriage may be considered either as 
an abuse of a right or a failing in duty. If the walī withholds the consent unreasonably, the sharīʿah 
court may act on his behalf as walī ḥākim to give the consent.
55.	 According to Islamic family law, a marriage can be dissolved in four ways: ṭalāq (repudiation by 
the husband), khulʿ (redemption by the wife), taʿlīq (delegated repudiation by the wife as stipulated 
in the marriage contract) and faskh (judicial dissolution of marriage).
56.	 CEDAW/C/MYS/CO/2: “The Committee is concerned about the existence of the dual legal system 
of civil law and multiple versions of Syariah law, which results in continuing discrimination against 
women, particularly in the field of marriage and family relations. The Committee is also concerned 
about the State party’s restrictive interpretation of Syariah law, including in the recent Islamic Family 
Law (Federal Territories) Amendment Act 2005, which adversely affects the rights of Muslim 
women. The Committee is further concerned about the lack of clarity in the legal system, particularly 
as to whether civil or Syariah law applies to the marriages of non-Muslim women whose husbands 
convert to Islam.”
57.	 Shariah Criminal Offences Enactment of Kelantan, No. 1/1985.
58.	 Shariah Criminal Offences Enactment (Tazir) of Terengganu No. 7/2001.
59.	 In December 2007, Kartika Sari Dewi Shukarno, a Malaysian who lives in Singapore, was caught 
drinking beer at a hotel in Kuantan, the capital of the Malaysian State of Pahang. The Sharīʿah 
High Court in Pahang sentenced her to six strokes of the cane and fined her RM 5,000 after she had 
pleaded guilty. She declined to appeal and came back to Malaysia for the punishment. The appeals 
panel of the Sharīʿah High Court in Kuantan upheld the sentence. She finally obtained the Sultan’s 
pardon. He commuted the caning sentence to community work.
60.	 Press statement, “Sisters in Islam Condemns Caning of Three Muslim Women Under Syariah Law”, 
17 February 2010, available online at http://www.sistersinislam.org.my/index.php?option=com_con
tent&task=view&id=986&Itemid=1 (accessed on 1 July 2010).
61.	 Masum, “Freedom”, xiii.