Chronic Absenteeism and Disrupted Learning Require an All-Hands-on-Deck Approach

K-12 absenteeism has increased since the onset of COVID-19 and has contributed to falling test scores. Improving engagement is key for student success and the broader economy.



Policies promoting strong schools and academic success impact students’ lives as adults, long after they leave the classroom. Beyond the significance for individuals, the educational development of our children and young people is a key input into the economy and has spillover benefits to society more broadly.  While the evidence is clear that students and society benefit from attending well-resourced schools with effective teachers, these benefits can only materialize if students are present and engaged. 

A necessary step to ensure students benefit from all that schools have to offer is to support students’ consistent presence in the classroom—which is why the Biden-Harris Administration is focused on the issue of chronic absenteeism. In the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic, one study found that the number of public school students who are chronically absent—meaning they miss at least 10 percent of days in a school year, whether excused or unexcused—has nearly doubled, from about 15 percent in the 2018-2019 school year to around 30 percent in 2021-2022.[1] These large increases in absenteeism are widespread: every state for which data were available in this study saw significant increases in rates of chronic absenteeism between the 2018-2019 and 2021-2022 school years. Disparities in levels of chronic absenteeism across racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic lines also widened.

Research shows that school absences take a toll on grades and performance on standardized tests. Beyond test scores, irregular attendance can be a predictor of high school drop-out, which has been linked to poor labor market prospects, diminished health, and increased involvement in the criminal justice system. Students who are chronically absent are at higher risk for these adverse outcomes.

The increases in chronic absenteeism are large enough that they could be a substantial contributor to declines in post-pandemic test scores. (While test scores are not the only important aspect of student success, they provide a measurable early indicator that is predictive of broader long-term outcomes.)  To examine this question, the Council of Economic Advisers partnered with the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) to analyze national data which includes measures of both standardized test scores and absenteeism during the 2018-2019 and 2021-2022 school years.[2] Using regression analysis to document the strong association between absenteeism and test scores (after controlling for other factors), we then implement a decomposition analysis to simulate how much of the decline in test scores could be attributed to increases in absenteeism.[3]

Figure 1 illustrates the results of this descriptive analysis. The vertical bars indicate the average decline in scores between 2019 and 2022, by subject and grade level. The green portions of each bar indicate how much smaller these declines might be if absenteeism had not increased at all. We find that, even after controlling for changes in other characteristics of the student body over time, the observed association between absenteeism and test scores is large enough to account for 16-27 percent of the overall test score declines in math, and 36-45 percent of the declines in reading.

These results come with several caveats: most importantly, we do not yet know the extent to which the recent increase in absenteeism is a stand-alone, causal contributor to test score declines, and to what extent it is a symptom of other factors that could account for both the increases in student absenteeism and declines in performance. Such factors could include declining mental and physical health, familial responsibilities, or other demands on students’ mental and physical resources.



Given the magnitude of test score declines and extent of chronic absenteeism, pandemic recovery efforts require an “all-hands-on-deck” response.  While State-administered test scores from the 2021-2022 and 2022-2023 school years show some early signs of rebounding from the major disruptions of the pandemic, estimates suggest the average elementary school student would need sufficient supports and instructional time to sustain additional gains for several years in order to reach the performance of comparable pre-COVID cohorts. Without such sustained investments, one group of researchers estimated that these disruptions could cost American students $2 trillion in lifetime earnings.

Ensuring that all students benefit from the full scope of pandemic recovery efforts requires that they are present in schools. Targeted interventions such as early warning systems, mailing outreach, and text nudges have shown promise in increasing attendance, especially among students who would have otherwise have been chronically absent from school. Research on the potential benefits of high-dosage tutoring and other evidence-based interventions implemented in afterschool programs or summer school can help educators and school leaders create a network of supports that best address student needs.

The Biden-Harris Administration has undertaken significant efforts to combat chronic absenteeism and make sure that students are in the classroom and engaged in school. This includes: disseminating grant funds that can resource interventions and supports; offering technical assistance to States and districts; investing in comprehensive mental health programs for students; and establishing and strengthening the National Partnership for Student Success, which marshals evidence-backed supports such as tutoring and mentoring to help keep students engaged and on-track. Additionally, States have until next school year to use remaining Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief funds set aside for P-12 schools in the American Rescue Plan that can be used towards academic recovery, school attendance and engagement, and other efforts.

Making up for lost time and learning disruption means empowering students and their families to take an active role in their academic recovery, and tracking and addressing chronic absenteeism will be an important aspect of these recovery efforts in the months and years to come. Ultimately, whether chronic absenteeism is a symptom or a cause—or both—of ongoing academic disruption, the evidence is clear that the road to recovery runs through the classroom.



[1] These chronic absenteeism rates come from an academic study that collected administrative data from 40 states (and the District of Columbia), accounting for over 92 percent of K-12 public school students in the United States.

[2] We analyze student level test scores from the National Assessment of Student Progress (NAEP) in this analysis. NAEP, also known as the “Nation’s Report Card,” is the largest nationally representative and continuing assessment of student learning. The absenteeism measure in NAEP is self-reported by students and reflects days missed over the past month. While the levels of absenteeism are measured differently than in administrative records, the increases over time are similarly large.

[3] The analysis is a type of non-causal, Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition which takes account of 1) the magnitude of changes in absenteeism over time and 2) the observed association between absenteeism and test scores (after controlling for other factors), to compute how much of the test score decline could potentially be explained by changes in absenteeism. The regressions include controls for race/ethnicity, gender, English language proficiency, free and reduced-price lunch status, number of books at home, and disability status. To the extent that absenteeism is also correlated with these controls, the analysis may understate the explanatory role of absenteeism.





FACT SHEET: Update on the United States Commitment to Expanding Access to Medicines Around the World

Since Day One, the Biden-Harris Administration has worked to ensure the United States is better prepared for the next pandemic. U.S. national security and prosperity depend on countries around the world being prepared to prevent outbreaks when possible, and to rapidly detect and respond to emerging infectious disease threats when they occur. Detecting infectious disease threats quickly, and sharing that information widely, is critical to limit global transmission, and to rapidly develop necessary diagnostics, vaccines, treatments, personal protective equipment, and other countermeasures. Once available, facilitating equitable domestic and global access to medical countermeasures, like vaccines, tests and treatments, is the best way to minimize global morbidity and mortality, as well as to reduce economic and other disruptions. Collectively, these actions will make the United States, and the world, safer from the risk posed by pandemics and other biological events.

Coupled with broader investments in health, the United States is supporting countries around the world to expand access to quality medical countermeasures (MCMs), including vaccines, tests, and treatments, to end long-standing threats such as HIV, growing threats such as measles, and novel threats like COVID-19. These investments built on decades of global health and health security leadership by the United States. In the first three years of the Biden-Harris Administration, the United States invested nearly $32 billion globally to: better prepare for the next pandemic; fight existing epidemics like HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis (TB), and malaria; and ensure high-need communities have access to essential health services like routine childhood immunization and maternal and child healthcare. Starting in 2021, the United States also invested $16 billion in the global COVID-19 response, including sharing nearly 700 million COVID-19 vaccine doses with countries around the world. The President’s FY 2025 Budget includes nearly $10 billion to continue these investments in critical global health programs, strengthen health systems, and enhance pandemic preparedness.

The Biden-Harris Administration remains committed to expanding access to MCMs around the world, including through investments in innovation, research and development; building sustainable global manufacturing and supply chain capacity; providing vaccines, tests and treatments and support for their delivery; expanding pandemic response financing for MCMs; and strengthening legal and regulatory systems. Examples include:

Investing in Innovation, Research and Development

The U.S. government invested billions of dollars in mRNA technology in advance of the COVID-19 pandemic. These public investments translated into millions of lives saved in the United States and around the world, and were crucial to developing the mRNA vaccine technology that can be leveraged in a future pandemic, as well as potentially treating other diseases.

The Biden-Harris Administration’s historic investments in science and technology, from basic science to piloting innovative financing mechanisms to real-time research during health emergencies, are transforming the tools and approaches we use to detect, contain and respond to health threats. This work is often done in partnership with biopharmaceutical innovators and manufacturers that have unique roles to play in global health security. Examples include:

Public-private partnership on the Ebola virus. Public-private partnerships through the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA), resulted in a licensed Ebola vaccine, two licensed monoclonal antibody treatments, and one cleared diagnostic for Ebola; technologies that are now being applied to other viruses such as Marburg.

Support for the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), which is working to accelerate the development of life-saving vaccines against emerging disease threats, and to transform capability for rapid countermeasure development in response to future threats. Notable achievements include: the market authorization of the world’s first Chikungunya vaccine; the advancement through clinical development of vaccine candidates against Lassa, Nipah, and coronaviruses, among others; and the launch of a new Disease X Vaccine Library with six viral families prioritized as high risk.

Innovation in TB and HIV prevention and treatment. Pretomanid, a treatment for drug-resistant TB, developed with support from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), has reduced TB treatment time from up to 18 months to 6 months and dramatically improved outcomes. New long-acting HIV/AIDS prevention options such as cabotegravir, a single bi-monthly injection, could avert many new future HIV infections in low- and middle-income countries. The dapivirine vaginal ring, a long-acting HIV prevention tool, is a breakthrough innovation that offers women another method of discreet protection.

New products to address drug-resistant infections. BARDA is investing over $2 billion in new products to address drug-resistant infections that have resulted in 10 therapeutics and diagnostics receiving Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval or clearance and revitalizing late-stage antimicrobial product development across dozens of products for both adults and children.

Building Sustainable Global Manufacturing and Supply Chain Capacity

The United States is investing in sustainable and resilient global medical manufacturing and supply chain capacity. Robust systems for production and delivery of MCMs not only helps improve health – ensuring more people are able to routinely receive life-saving vaccines and therapeutics like antiretrovirals (ARVs) – they also serve as an essential foundation for effective emergency response. Sustainable systems must provide the infrastructure, resilience, quality assurance, operational efficiency, steady demand, and public confidence necessary to respond promptly and effectively to emergencies while ensuring the continuity of essential healthcare services. Examples of United States investments in sustainable manufacturing systems include:

U.S. Development Finance Corporation (DFC) finances and catalyzes investments by the private sector and other development finance institutions in health commodity manufacturing and supply chain for MCMs in developing countries, with a focus on Africa. DFC, along with International Finance Corporation and other like-minded development finance institutions (DFIs), is supporting the Institut Pasteur de Dakar in Senegal to become a key hub in the African Union’s vaccine production network. DFC previously provided a $3.3 million technical assistance grant for early-stage project development and is evaluating additional financing for expansion of the industrial-scale facility. DFC is also working with peer DFIs to provide working capital to regional manufacturers to enable producers to pivot and scale up efforts during a health emergency.

Accelerating the expansion of vaccine manufacturing in Africa. The United States is supporting Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance (Gavi), working in collaboration with the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC), to establish the African Vaccine Manufacturing Accelerator, a $1 billion advanced market commitment financial instrument that would provide financial support over the next ten years to accelerate the expansion of commercially viable vaccine manufacturing in Africa.

Sourcing MCMs from African manufacturers. The United States is sourcing MCMs from African producers to address African needs through programs such as the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) and the President’s Malaria Initiative (PMI). PEPFAR aims to procure 15 million HIV tests produced in Africa by 2025, and work alongside other partners to shift 2 million patients on first-line ARV treatments to African-produced products. Since 2023, PEPFAR has procured nearly 100,000 HIV tests from the Africa-based manufacturers towards that goal, and has worked with the World Health Organization (WHO), the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria (Global Fund) and Unitaid to launch an open Expert Review Panel for Diagnostics for African manufacturers of HIV rapid tests to accelerate the availability of HIV rapid tests produced in Africa. PMI is committed to building a more resilient supply chain and is leveraging its procurement volume to accelerate growth in African regional manufacturing. PMI is actively working, in coordination with partners like the Global Fund and Medicines for Malaria Ventures, to increase the number of African suppliers they procure from and their share of PMI’s total procurement. In FY 2023, PMI doubled the share of its procurements sourced from Africa to 10 percent.

Medical supply chain studies in the Americas Region. Through the Americas Partnership for Economic Prosperity, the United States is working closely with the Inter-American Development Bank to carry out supply chain competitiveness studies in three critical sectors: clean energy, semiconductors, and medical supplies.

Providing Vaccines, Tests and Treatments and Supporting Delivery

The Biden-Harris Administration provides MCMs for ongoing and emergency health threats, and makes significant long-term investments to support country readiness to receive, deliver and effectively use vaccines, tests, PPE and treatments. These investments range from bed nets to protect children and families from malaria, to ARVs for those living with HIV, to supporting skilled health workers, and to MCMs to support outbreak response. Examples include:

Provision of HIV treatment. The PEPFAR program continues to support the African continent with the provision of more than $700 million in health commodities to African HIV programs in 2023, alongside the more than $2.1 billion in health commodities provided to Africa in 2023 through the Global Fund, to which the United States is the largest donor.   

Provision of and improvement in Ebola treatments. Since the 2014-2016 outbreak of Ebola in West Africa, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response (ASPR) has worked with impacted nations to supply the standard-of-care treatments for Ebola patients. In 2018, HHS made existing therapeutics available to support the international response to the second largest Ebola outbreak in history, partnering with researchers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) on a randomized controlled trial that demonstrated superior efficacy of two therapeutics. The United States has since made those treatments available to impacted nations and WHO in every outbreak of Ebola in Africa since 2018. This includes an outbreak in Guinea in February 2021 in which U.S.-supplied therapeutic doses were available for use in a remote Guinean treatment facility less than one week after the identification of the first case.

Public-private partnerships to deliver vaccines. Project Last Mile collaborates with regional Coca-Cola bottlers and suppliers to strengthen public health systems capacity in supply chain. This partnership between the Coca-Cola Company and Foundation, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Global Fund, and USAID applies Coca-Cola’s expertise in route-to-market, cold chain, and marketing for improved vaccine distribution and uptake. 

Responding to mpox outbreaks. The Biden-Harris Administration is currently working to make a vaccine available to African nations where mpox is endemic. For all donations, technical experts from ASPR, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and NIH are supporting the recipient nation in the development of vaccination strategies based on local epidemiology. Discussions about vaccine donations are ongoing with multiple countries, including DRC, which is responding to an unprecedented surge in mpox cases.

Supporting access to medicines in Ukraine. Since the start of Russia’s full-scale war against Ukraine on February 24, 2022, the United States has focused on meeting Ukraine’s urgent needs, while maintaining support for long-term development goals. For example, in March 2022, USAID rapidly expanded support for Ukraine’s public health supply chain systems, enabling Ukraine to transparently and efficiently receive, distribute and account for more than $400 million in medicines and supplies donated from around the world during the first six months of the war, helping to sustain access to lifesaving medicines.

Expanding Pandemic Response Financing

Since Day One, the Biden-Harris Administration has prioritized transforming the global financing architecture to better support pandemic prevention, preparedness and response. One of the causes of disparities in delivery times for vaccines and medical countermeasures in the COVID-19 response was that many health organizations and national health systems lacked the capital they needed to place early orders with vaccine manufacturers. Ensuring funding is available to accelerate MCM access during health emergencies is vital for achieving health security.

Supporting multilateral development bank (MDB) evolution. MDBs have a key role to play in helping countries address global challenges. The United States is working with other shareholders to evolve the visions, incentive structures, operational approaches, and financial capacity of the MDBs to equip these institutions to respond to transboundary global challenges with sufficient speed and scale. The United States and other shareholders have urged the World Bank to prioritize pandemics along with climate change and fragility, and in response it has expanded its crisis preparedness and response toolkit and announced a Global Challenge Program aimed at enhancing health emergency prevention, preparedness, and response.  The United States is also exploring how the World Bank can strengthen partnerships, enable coordinated and right-timed financing in the event of a pandemic, and help client countries assess critical pandemic preparedness gaps. 

G7 partnership on surge financing. The DFC is partnering with G7 DFIs to transform institutional capacity individually and collectively to effectively provide surge financing for procurement, production, and delivery of medical countermeasures in low- and middle-income countries. This partnership is working toward the launch of at least two new DFI-led and shared MCM surge financing facilities in 2024 and is working to develop viable options, with the G7 DFIs, including the European Investment Bank and IFC, to enhance pooled procurement instruments and delivery of tests, treatments, supplies and vaccines, by the end of 2024.

Support for Gavi’s Day Zero Financing Facility. The United States has supported Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance in establishing the Day Zero Financing Facility, a suite of tools that will mobilize, for example, up to $2 billion in risk-tolerant surge and contingent capital to enable Gavi to quickly meet the demand for vaccines in a pandemic. The United States also supports the roles of CEPI, the Global Fund, and other regional and multilateral organizations in the development of analogous capacity to surge financing for MCMs.

Support for the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator (ACT-A). The United States was the world’s largest donor to ACT-A and provided global leadership to raise additional billions in critical funding through the U.S.-hosted and co-hosted Global COVID-19 Summits to save lives globally, end the pandemic, and build stronger health security.

Strengthening Regulatory and Legal Systems

Under President Biden’s leadership, the United States is working to promote and strengthen global regulatory and legal systems to better prepare for health emergencies and otherwise ensure the safety, efficacy and accessibility of MCMs. Examples include:

Strengthening regulatory systems. FDA advances multi-lateral and bilateral regulatory systems strengthening by providing technical support to FDA counterparts in foreign countries and international organizations as part of cooperative regulatory activities. The United States also actively engages in diverse multilateral health and regulatory forums such as the International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities, International Convention on Harmonization of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals of Human Use, and the International Medical Device Regulators Forum to inform internationally recognized technical guidance documents, standards and scientific principles, common or similar practices and procedures, related to MCMs. FDA also provides technical assistance to WHO’s efforts.

Support for the Legal Preparedness Action Package. The HHS Office of Global Affairs (OGA) and CDC co-Chair the Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA) Legal Preparedness Action Package to develop and promote guidance and capacity building tools on legal mapping, regulatory strengthening, and liability risk management with a network of experts from around the world to support efforts in strengthening legal preparedness, including to promote equitable access to medical countermeasures.











National COVID-⁠19 Preparedness Plan

Today, the U.S. government is releasing the National COVID-19 Preparedness Plan – which will enable America to move forward safely, sustaining and building on the progress we’ve made over the past 13 months. This plan lays out the roadmap to help us fight COVID-19 in the future as we begin to get back to our more normal routines. We look to a future when Americans no longer fear lockdowns, shutdowns, and our kids not going to school. It’s a future when the country relies on the powerful layers of protection we have built and invests in the next generation of tools to stay ahead of this virus.

The President’s National COVID-19 Preparedness Plan focuses on four key goals:

Protect Against and Treat COVID-19

The United States has experienced five waves of the pandemic since 2020, including three in the past year that were driven by new variants. America experienced a wave of COVID-19 cases driven by the Alpha variant in early Spring 2021 – a time when the U.S. vaccination program was administering a record number of vaccines every day. The Delta variant, which was more than twice as contagious as the original coronavirus strain, then swept across the country starting in Summer 2021, beginning in the South and spreading to the Midwest and Rocky Mountain regions. 

Omicron represented another step in the virus’s evolution, and has been one of the most contagious viruses in history, causing record numbers of infections around the world over the past three months. However, because of both lower severity of the Omicron variant and a stronger level of population immunity from vaccinations, Omicron has caused relatively fewer cases of severe COVID-19. Compared to prior waves of COVID-19 in the United States, the Omicron wave has had a lower proportion of cases resulting in hospitalization or death. 

America has weathered the current Omicron wave with minimal disruption – schools and businesses largely remained open. As the country emerges from the Omicron wave, our path forward relies on maintaining and continually enhancing the numerous tools we now have to protect ourselves and our loved ones – from vaccines, to tests, to treatments, to masks, and more. 

In January 2021, Americans had very few tools to protect against COVID-19, and the tools we did have were in limited supply. Over the last year, together, with states, localities, and public and private partners, the Administration has mobilized an unprecedented, whole-of-society effort to give Americans the tools they need to protect themselves. 

The Administration has put vaccines at the center of our COVID-19 response because vaccines are the best tool we have to prevent hospitalization and death. We stood up the largest free vaccination program in our country’s history – mobilizing 90,000 vaccination locations, standing up dozens of federally-run mass vaccination sites with the ability to administer more than a combined 125,000 shots a day, and deploying over 9,000 federal personnel to support vaccinations nationwide – including over 5,000 active duty troops. 

As a result, today, the vast majority of Americans have the protection of a vaccine – with 215 million Americans fully vaccinated, and an estimated two-thirds of eligible adults having received their booster shot. Vaccinated and boosted people are 41 times less like to die of COVID-19 than unvaccinated individuals. And America’s unprecedented vaccination campaign has saved lives: a December 2021 estimate suggested that vaccines saved over 1 million American lives and successfully prevented over 10 million hospitalizations. 

The Administration has also expedited the development, manufacturing, and procurement of COVID-19 treatments, building a diverse medicine cabinet filled with more treatments now than at any point in the pandemic.  Today about 4 million treatment courses are available to Americans, with 1 million additional courses of the Pfizer antiviral available in March, and another 2.5 million additional courses of the Pfizer antiviral available in April. In total, we have secured 20 million courses of Pfizer’s life-saving antiviral pills, which have been shown to reduce the risk of hospitalization or death by 89%. 

The nation’s testing supply has increased dramatically. We now have free testing sites at 21,500 locations around the country. In January 2021, there were no rapid, at-home tests on the market available to Americans; during January 2022, there were more than 480 million at-home tests available to Americans on top of all other testing options. And we stood up COVIDtests.gov so Americans could order tests that shipped directly to their homes — for free. Private insurance and Medicaid now cover rapid at-home tests for free, and Medicare will fully cover these at-home tests starting this spring. 

And the U.S. government has successfully put equity at the heart of a nationwide public health response. Hispanic, Black, and Asian adults are now vaccinated at the same rates as White adults. This is the result of an all-of-society effort that got America to where it is today: employers who offered paid time off for their employees; child care providers who offered drop-in services for caregivers to get vaccinated; public transit authorities and ride-sharing companies that provided free rides to vaccination sites; churches, civic organizations, barbershops, and beauty salons, who opened their doors to be trusted spaces for vaccinations; and the families who made vaccination a family affair.  

The path forward in the fight against COVID-19 is clear: we must maintain and continually enhance the tools we have to protect against and treat COVID-19. The Administration looks forward to working with Congress to ensure that we have the resources to do just that. 

Because we have these tools, we can begin to get back to our more normal routines safely and the use of public health mitigation measures like masking can be less frequent. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has updated its framework for recommendations on preventive measures like masking, so masks are recommended when and where they matter the most and Americans will be wearing masks less often. 

Make no mistake, as America moves forward we will leave no one behind. Equity will remain at the very center of our path forward in the fight against COVID-19. And we will be there to support Americans with the long-term impacts of COVID-19, including people experiencing Long COVID or mental and behavioral health challenges; as well as families suffering from the tragedy of losing someone they loved.

The Administration will work with Congress to secure the necessary funding to:

Launch an effort to vaccinate America’s youngest children as soon as the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) authorizes and the CDC recommends a vaccine for that age group.

If the FDA authorizes and CDC recommends a vaccine for children . If the FDA authorizes and the CDC recommends a vaccine for children under five years of age, the United States is prepared to immediately distribute vaccines through a network of thousands of pediatricians’ offices, children’s hospitals, health centers, and local sites, so that vaccines are made available conveniently to families across the country.

Ensure that Americans – of all ages – can get the protection of an effective vaccine.

To ensure that people stay protected, the U.S. government will The Administration will continue to ensure that all Americans have ready access to free and safe vaccines, because vaccines are the most effective defense against COVID-19. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) will also continue to monitor the efficacy and durability of currently authorized vaccines against current and future variants and make recommendations to optimize protection.

Increase American manufacturing capacity to reliably produce an additional 1 billion vaccine doses per year – three times the U.S. population – and accelerate research and development of a single COVID vaccine that protects against SARS-CoV-2 and all its variants, as well as previous SARS-origin viruses.

To ensure that people stay protected, the U.S. government will continue to use advance purchasing agreements when appropriate and work closely with vaccine manufacturers to produce shots quickly and safely. Fully supporting this effort to scale up domestic vaccine manufacturing will require additional resources from Congress. Additionally, we will maintain a network of tens of thousands of sites to deliver shots to the American people at any time this effort is needed.

Continue vaccination outreach and education efforts and combat misinformation and disinformation.

HHS will continue its work to equip Americans with the tools to identify misinformation and to invest in longer-term efforts to build resilience against health misinformation.

Ensure there are enough treatments for every American who needs them.

The U.S. government will procure additional treatments; continue to use an expedited, streamlined process to review treatments for authorization by the FDA; and accelerate research and development into next generation treatments. These efforts will require additional funding and authorities from Congress.

Launch a nationwide Test to Treat Initiative so Americans can rapidly access treatment, including by visiting a “one-stop” location to get a free test and free treatment pills.

The Administration will put forth new educational efforts for the public and providers so that Americans can rapidly access treatments. The Administration will establish “One-Stop Test to Treat” locations at pharmacy-based clinics, community health centers, Long-Term Care Facilities, and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) facilities across the country. “One-stop” sites will be operational by March. 

Update the framework for recommendations on preventive measures like masking to reflect the current state of the disease.

Masks have been a critical tool to protect ourselves, but they have a time and a place. With a broad range of other protective tools in place, the CDC has announced an updated framework for guidance on preventive measures like masking – moving away from simply basing broad recommendations on case counts and test positivity, and instead encouraging prevention measures like masking when they are most needed to minimize severe disease and to keep our hospitals from becoming overwhelmed in times when COVID-19 is surging. By monitoring community risk, masks can be worn when the risk of severe disease in the community is high and taken off when the risk is low. Overall, it means Americans will be wearing masks less because so many people are protected from severe disease.

Launch a one-stop-shop website that allows Americans to easily find public health guidance based on the COVID-⁠19 risk in their local area and access tools to protect themselves.

The Administration will launch a website where Americans can find the level of COVID-19 risk in their community and specific guidance based on that risk. The site will also point people to the tools we now have to fight COVID-19, such as locating a vaccination site in their neighborhood or finding a free high-quality mask at a local grocery store or pharmacy.

Sustain and increase American manufacturing of COVID-⁠19 tests, so we can continue to have a robust supply of tests.

The Administration will continue to use the expedited authorization process to help test manufacturers get tests to market quickly; maintain America’s network of thousands of free testing sites; use the Defense Production Act (DPA) and other authorities, where warranted, to increase manufacturing capacity; and invest in innovation to make tests less expensive. These continued investments in testing will require additional funding from Congress.

Prioritize protections for the immunocompromised and take new actions to protect people with disabilities and older adults.

The Administration will continue to provide strong support for the immunocompromised, including providing prioritized access to treatments and preventive interventions – pending additional funding from Congress – as well as ensuring access to boosters. The Administration will also increase equitable access to testing and COVID-19 mitigation resources for people with disabilities and older adults, and engage industry to accelerate research and development of accessible self-tests. Securing sufficient preventive treatments for people who are immunocompromised will require additional funding from Congress.

Help Americans with the long-term impacts of COVID-⁠19.

In recognition of the wide-reaching long-term impacts of COVID-19 on our society, the President will direct the U.S. government to accelerate efforts to detect, prevent, and treat Long COVID; coordinate efforts to provide support to families who have experienced the COVID-related loss of a loved one; and attend to the mental health and well-being of our communities. The Administration will also propose to make new investments in health care workers to support their mental health and well-being.

Ensure equitable access to COVID-⁠19 health care and public health resources.

 The Administration will continue to prioritize providing equitable access to COVID-19 health care and public health resources – including personal protective equipment (PPE), tests, treatments, masks, and vaccines; and address COVID-related health inequities among communities defined by race, ethnicity, geography, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, and other factors. The U.S. government will support dedicated resources for local community-based organizations, community health centers, and rural health clinics.



Prepare for New Variants

As we work to keep ourselves protected against COVID-19, America must remain prepared for any new variant that may come our way. To do so, the Administration has developed a comprehensive plan for how we monitor this virus to stay ahead of it, adapt our tools swiftly to combat a new variant, and deploy emergency resources to help communities.

Before January 2021, the federal government had insufficient data and sequencing capabilities and was ill-equipped to respond to new variants. Electronic case reporting was in place for only a handful of states in 2020 and the country could sequence only 3,000 viral isolates per week. America had no plan for responding to a new variant or standing up comprehensive efforts to respond to a surge in COVID-19 cases.   

The Administration has enhanced our collection, production, and analysis of data, and expanded electronic case reporting to all 50 states, Washington D.C., Puerto Rico, and thousands of health care facilities. The CDC now tracks a range of key COVID-19 response metrics including cases, tests, vaccinations, and hospital admissions in real-time. Additionally, the CDC launched – and is continually enhancing – the National Wastewater Surveillance System (NWSS) to track the presence of SARS-COV-2 in wastewater samples collected across the country. And America has established a world-class sequencing operation, sequencing up to 90,000 isolates a week. The CDC’s sequencing efforts can now reliably detect variants that account for as little as 0.1% of all COVID-19 cases circulating in the United States. And when new variants are identified, the federal government has a network of researchers – federal, academic, and commercial – who are able to study the sequence and assess mutations rapidly, allowing the government to respond quickly to concerning variants.  

The Administration has also successfully built a robust emergency response infrastructure. Our surge response – led by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and HHS – developed capabilities to stand up over 100 federal mass vaccination sites and federal surge testing sites; distribute millions of critical supplies; and deploy thousands of federal clinical and non-clinical personnel to support states, Tribes, and territories. Since July 2021, the federal government has deployed over 4,000 military and non-military personnel including doctors, nurses, and paramedics; sent over 3,400 ventilators, ambulances, and other critical supplies; and shipped over 115 million pieces of PPE. And over the last year, FEMA has invested $300 million in state hospital preparedness to expand hospital capacity in 38 states. 

Moving forward, the Administration will maintain our proven data, sequencing, variant response, and surge response capabilities. The CDC will continue to improve COVID-19 data collection, reporting, and analysis so America is better informed and ready to respond to new variants. And if new variants emerge, the federal government will leverage established playbooks to assess a new variant’s impact on our vaccines, treatments, and tests, and rapidly deploy the tools, personnel, and resources Americans need. America will also retain a significant stockpile of tools to combat COVID-19 that remain ready for deployment.

The Administration will work with Congress to secure the necessary funding to:

Improve our data collection, sequencing, and wastewater surveillance capabilities to immediately identify and detect new and emerging variants; and strengthen pandemic preparedness.

The U.S. government will continue improvements to COVID-19 The U.S. government will continue improvements to COVID-19 disease and vaccination data collection, wastewater surveillance, and virus sequencing capacity so we are better prepared to respond rapidly to emerging threats. This includes strengthening data infrastructure and interoperability so that more jurisdictions can link case surveillance and hospital data to vaccine data. The Administration is also leveraging COVID-19 response capabilities into stronger pandemic preparedness.

Leverage a COVID-⁠19 Variant Playbook to determine the impact of a new variant on our vaccines, treatments, and tests, and shore up and update our tools, if needed.

The Administration has developed a variant playbook to rapidly assess the disease severity and transmissibility of a new variant, and to expedite the rapid laboratory evaluation of the effectiveness of vaccines, tests, and treatments against any variant. The U.S. The Administration has developed a variant playbook to assess the disease severity and transmissibility of a new variant immediately, and to expedite the rapid laboratory evaluation of the effectiveness of vaccines, tests, and treatments against any variant. The U.S. government has also developed a series of plans in coordination with manufacturers for the accelerated development, approval, manufacturing, and delivery of updated vaccines, tests, and treatments. These expedited plans and processes suggest that updated vaccines can be deployed in 100 days instead of many months or years.  

Utilize new FDA processes to expedite regulatory review of variant-specific versions of vaccines and treatments, so America can get them in place, if needed.

FDA has developed new processes to accelerate the authorization and approval of a vaccine or treatment that targets any new variant while maintaining strict and longstanding practices to ensure the safety and efficacy of the products.

Support new FDA processes to expedite regulatory review of variant-specific versions of vaccines and treatments, so Americans can get them quickly if needed.

FDA has developed new approaches to accelerate the authorization of a vaccine or treatment that targets any new variant while maintaining strict and longstanding practices to ensure the safety and efficacy of the products.

Leverage a proven COVID-⁠19 Surge Response Playbook.

The Administration has developed a comprehensive emergency response COVID-19 surge playbook to stand up mass vaccination and testing sites, expedite deployments of surge medical and emergency personnel, expand hospitals and emergency facilities, and provide emergency supplies.

Add at-home tests, antiviral pills, and masks for the general population to America’s stockpile for the first time.

America will stockpile new categories of supplies including at-home tests, antiviral pills, and masks for the general population for the first time. The Administration will also maintain a fully stocked Strategic National Stockpile (SNS) with an inventory of masks, ventilators, gloves, gowns, and hospital equipment. The U.S. government will be ready to deploy supplies to the American people to ensure adequate supply in times of surges, COVID-19 outbreaks, or new variants.

The U.S. government has established a permanent logistics and operational hub at HHS to ensure accelerated development, production, and delivery of COVID-⁠19 vaccines and treatments.

The Administration has transitioned an emergency logistics and operational organization into a permanent agency structure at HHS, which has allowed the Administration to build on its progress, retain expertise and skills, and continue providing the necessary tools to the American people during this pandemic and for any future disease outbreaks.



Prevent Economic and Educational Shutdowns

Our path forward relies on giving schools and businesses the tools they need to prevent economic and educational shutdowns, so that our students can remain safe in school, our workers can be safe at work, and our economy can continue to grow. 

At the beginning of last year, America was experiencing widespread school and business shutdowns: only 46% of K-12 schools were open for in-person learning, and millions of businesses had closed and tens of millions of Americans had lost their jobs in 2020. Throughout the last year, the Administration worked to provide schools, child care providers, and businesses with the necessary tools and resources to safely open, while keeping our children, students, and workers safe. 

The Administration provided a historic investment of $130 billion from the American Rescue Plan to reopen schools by improving school ventilation, accessing tests, and hiring more teachers, nurses, and staff. To protect workers and keep our businesses open, the Administration launched the largest vaccination campaign in history – working hand-in-hand with the business community; and requiring vaccinations where we could, including for federal workers.

Today, about 99% of K-12 schools are open for in-person learning. And since President Biden took office, there has been historic job growth. The U.S. economy created 6.6 million jobs in 2021 – the strongest job growth of any year on record – and grew 5.7% in 2021, the fastest pace of economic growth in nearly four decades. The U.S. was also the first major economy to exceed its pre-pandemic economic output. 

The path forward in the fight against COVID-19 is clear: schools, workers, and workplaces have resources and guidance to prevent shutdowns.

The Administration will work with Congress to secure the necessary funding to:

Give schools and businesses guidance, tests, and supplies to stay open, including tools to improve ventilation and air filtration.

The U.S. government will also provide a Clean Air in Buildings Checklist that all buildings can use to improve indoor ventilation and air filtration and will encourage uptake of ventilation improvements. The Administration will also provide technical assistance that encourages schools, public buildings, and state, local, and Tribal governments to make ventilation improvements and upgrades using American Rescue Plan funds.

Work with Congress to provide paid sick leave to workers who need to miss work due to a case of COVID-⁠19 or to care for a loved one who has COVID-⁠19.

The Administration will work with Congress to reinstate tax credits to help small- and mid-size businesses provide paid sick and family leave to deal with COVID-related absences.

Update guidance for employers to ensure safer workplaces.

The Department of Labor’s Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) will update workplace guidance to better equip employers with the tools they need to ensure safe workplaces, including guidance on how employers can continue to support increased vaccination and boosting of their employees; support workers such as people who are immunocompromised who choose to wear high-quality masks; limit workplace-based infections; and enhance ventilation.

Engage early care and education providers to help them remain safely open and help parents return to work with peace of mind.

Early care and education providers, including child care centers, family child care providers, pre-K and more, have been essential in our fight against COVID-19. The Administration invested $40 billion in American Rescue Plan funds to states, territories, and Tribes to help child care providers and Head Start grantees keep their doors open and provide safe care that is crucial for parents getting back to work. Building on this funding, the Administration will continue to engage the community of early care and education providers to ensure they have tools and support to stay safely open and to continue supporting our families.

With the vast majority of federal workers at their workplaces, substantially expand levels of services at public-facing federal offices (like local Social Security offices).

COVID-19 no longer needs to dictate how we work. Federal agencies will lead by example, increasing the hours public-facing federal offices are open for in-person appointments and in-person interactions in the month of April.



Continue to Lead the Effort to Vaccinate the World and Save Lives

Fighting this virus abroad is key to America’s effort to protect people and stay ahead of new variants. To do so, we will continue to lead in providing vaccines to the world, helping to get those vaccines into arms, and deploying emergency supplies to countries experiencing surges in COVID-19. We will also continue to advance sustainable capacity and financing for health security to fight COVID-19 variants.

The President committed that the United States would be the world’s arsenal for vaccines – both because it’s the right thing to do and in our collective interest. And America is delivering on that commitment. The United States stands alone in procuring 1 billion vaccines for the sole purpose of donating them. And overall, the Administration has committed to donating 1.2 billion doses to other countries – for free, with zero strings attached, which represents the largest commitment of any single country or group of countries in the world. As of today, the U.S. government has delivered over 475 million free doses to 112 countries around the world – four times the number of free doses shared with the world than any other country. 

In addition, the U.S. government has delivered life-saving resources like oxygen, treatments, PPE, and other essential supplies worth more than $1 billion to countries experiencing outbreaks. U.S. government public health experts from the CDC, U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), the U.S. Department of State (State), HHS and the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) and other entities are working side-by-side with on-the-ground providers, providing technical assistance in vaccine program implementation, care provision, and outbreak investigation. We have increased the world’s capacity to manufacture vaccines and have fostered an enabling environment for innovation, including by spurring African manufacturing.

Over the last year, the Biden Administration pioneered the model to donate and deliver surplus vaccines to the rest of the world. America was the first country to announce a purchase of doses solely for donation to other countries; the first country to give up our place in line for vaccines – allowing the African Union to immediately start receiving up to 110 million doses of Moderna at a reduced rate negotiated by the United States; and the first country to negotiate a deal to send vaccines directly to humanitarian settings and conflict zones to vaccinate displaced persons. The path forward in the pandemic will require doubling down on our commitment to help vaccinate the globe and to save lives by making tests, treatments, and PPE widely available.

The Administration will work with Congress to secure the necessary funding to:

Leverage the vaccine donation model America pioneered to deliver the 1.2 billion doses we committed to donate to the rest of the world.

America will continue to deliver the 1.2 billion doses we committed to donate to countries in need, continuing to leverage the partnerships the U.S. government built to donate and deliver vaccines to the rest of the world.

Increase efforts to get shots in arms around the world.

The U.S. government will increase investment in the Initiative for Global Vaccine Access (Global VAX), an ambitious global vaccination initiative to get doses into arms by working with partner countries to more quickly implement their plans. This includes supporting efforts such as jumpstarting communications campaigns, providing and supporting vaccinators on the front lines, purchasing cold chain supplies and syringes, paying for shipping and logistics to expedite vaccine delivery to hard-to-reach areas, ensuring people at high risk of hospitalization and deaths like the elderly and immunocompromised are vaccinated, and building vaccine confidence on the ground. Expanded global shots-in-arms efforts will require additional funding from Congress.

Save lives by solving the oxygen crisis and making emergency supplies widely available.

The U.S. government will make oxygen and PPE available; enhance testing; provide treatments; strengthen global health systems to fight COVID-19; protect health workers from COVID-19 and essential health services from COVID-19 disruptions; improve detection, monitoring and mitigation of new COVID-19 variants; and increase regional and local manufacturing of countermeasures. These continued investments will require additional funding from Congress.

Continue global leadership on the COVID-⁠19 response and build better health security for the future.

 The U.S. government will continue to work to build better capacity to fight COVID-19, manage future variants, and advance health security and preparedness for future pandemics. America is committed to establishing a new health security financial intermediary fund at the World Bank in 2022, and we call on all countries and public and private organizations to commit to urgent action to assist in the global COVID-19 response.