AbbVie News Center

An open-label, efficacy assessor-blinded study comparing SKYRIZI  (risankizumab) to Otezla  (apremilast) for the treatment of adult patients with moderate
plaque psoriasis who were candidates for systemic therapy was published in the British Journal of Dermatology
Significantly more patients in the study achieved co-primary endpoints of PASI 90 and sPGA 0/1 at Week 16 with risankizumab versus apremilast
In apremilast patients not achieving PASI 75 at Week 16, significantly more achieved the primary endpoint of PASI 90 at Week 52 who were re-randomized to
risankizumab versus continued with apremilast
Based on TSQM-9, higher treatment satisfaction domain scores were reported at Week 16 for patients taking risankizumab (nominal p-values versus apremilast)
Risankizumab was well-tolerated with no new safety signals identified
NORTH CHICAGO, Ill., July 26, 2023 /PRNewswire/ -- AbbVie (NYSE: ABBV) today announced the British Journal of Dermatology published results from the head-to-head
Phase 4 IMMpulse study that evaluated the efficacy and safety of SKYRIZI  (risankizumab) compared to Otezla  (apremilast) among adult patients with moderate plaque
psoriasis eligible for systemic therapy.  This study achieved all primary and ranked secondary endpoints with no new safety signals identified.
"This study highlights the efficacy of SKYRIZI compared to Otezla in helping systemic-eligible patients achieve high levels of skin clearance and reinforces the safety profile
observed in previous studies," said Mudra Kapoor, M.D., vice president, global medical affairs, immunology, AbbVie. "These head-to-head data are crucial to help patients and
their doctors make informed treatment decisions for uncontrolled disease and add to the body of evidence supporting SKYRIZI as a treatment option for adults living with
moderate psoriasis."
Highlights from this open-label, efficacy assessor-blinded study include:
At Week 16, a significantly higher proportion of patients who received risankizumab achieved the Period A co-primary endpoints of Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI)
90 and Static Physician's Global Assessment (sPGA) 0/1 [55.9% (66/118) of patients achieved PASI 90 and 75.4% (89/118) achieved sPGA 0/1 with risankizumab versus
5.1% (12/234) and 18.4% (43/234) with apremilast; both with P<0.001].
The proportion of patients achieving the ranked secondary endpoint of PASI 75 at Week 16 was also significantly higher in risankizumab- versus apremilast-treated
patients [84.7% (100/118) versus 18.8% (44/234) respectively; P<0.001].
At Week 52, among patients who failed to achieve PASI 75 after 16 weeks of treatment with apremilast, a significantly higher proportion of patients re-randomized to
treatment with risankizumab achieved the Period B primary endpoint of PASI 90 as compared to those re-assigned to continue treatment with apremilast [72.3% (60/83)
versus 2.6% (2/78); P<0.001].
After 52 weeks of continuous treatment, 73.7% of risankizumab patients achieved the pre-specified endpoints of PASI 90 and 63.6% PASI 100, with 4.5% and 2.7%
of apremilast patients achieving PASI 90 and PASI 100 at Week 52, respectively (nominal p-value <0.001 for both comparisons).
The safety profile for risankizumab in this study was consistent with previously reported studies; it was well-tolerated with no new safety signals identified.  The most frequent
adverse events (reported in ≥5%) in risankizumab-treated patients were COVID-19, nasopharyngitis and upper respiratory tract infection.  Diarrhea, nausea and headache were
most frequent among apremilast-treated patients.  Serious adverse events were reported in 0.8% and 2.9% of risankizumab-treated patients and 1.7% and 2.1% of apremilast-
treated patients in Periods A and B, respectively. During Period A and Period B among the re-randomization arms, 6.8% and 5.2% of apremilast-treated patients discontinued
treatment due to an adverse event, respectively, while no patient discontinued on risankizumab; on the continuous risankizumab arm, one patient discontinued due to an adverse
event.
"As a physician, it's crucial to validate different options that can achieve high treatment targets, and this study provides practice-relevant data," said lead study investigator, Linda
Stein Gold, M.D., director of clinical research, department of dermatology, Henry Ford Health System. "These data reinforce the efficacy of SKYRIZI for use in systemic-eligible
moderate psoriasis patients with an observed safety profile similar to prior studies."
Based on analyses of the Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire for Medication version 9 (TSQM-9), which were pre-specified unranked endpoints, risankizumab-treated patients
reported greater treatment satisfaction at Week 16, with higher scores (out of 100) in all three domains of satisfaction with effectiveness (80.6), satisfaction with convenience
(84.9) and global satisfaction (86.2) compared to apremilast-treated patients (46.9, 69.0 and 47.7, respectively; nominal p-value <0.001 for all comparisons).



SKYRIZI is part of a collaboration between Boehringer Ingelheim and AbbVie, with AbbVie leading development and commercialization globally.
About Psoriasis
Psoriasis is a chronic, immune-mediated, inflammatory skin condition that produces thickened, scaling skin due to rapid growth of skin cells.  It affects around 2-3% of people
worldwide.  People with psoriasis also experience a significant emotional, psychological and social burden that can negatively impact their quality of life.
About IMMpulse Study
IMMpulse is a Phase 4, global, multicenter, randomized, open-label, efficacy assessor-blinded, active comparator study examining the effect of risankizumab (150 mg X 1 s.c at
wk0, wk4, wk16, wk28, wk40) compared to apremilast (30 mg BID oral following titration) in adults with moderate plaque psoriasis who are candidates for systemic therapy.
Patients must have stable moderate psoriasis at both screening and baseline, defined as: 1) BSA ≥10% and ≤15%; 2) PASI ≥12; 3) sPGA =3 (moderate) to enter the study. The
study design comprised a screening period of up to 35 days, a 52-week treatment period and a follow-up phone call for safety. The 52-week treatment duration included two
periods: Period A from Weeks 0 to 16, which evaluated the superiority of risankizumab over apremilast, and Period B from Weeks 16 to 52, which evaluated the outcomes
following re-randomization to risankizumab versus continuing apremilast in patients who were PASI 75 non-responders with apremilast at Week 16.
About SKYRIZI  (risankizumab)
SKYRIZI is an interleukin-23 (IL-23) inhibitor that selectively blocks IL-23 by binding to its p19 subunit.  IL-23, a cytokine involved in inflammatory processes, is thought to be
linked to a number of chronic immune-mediated diseases, including psoriasis.
EU Indications and Important Safety Information about SKYRIZI  (risankizumab)
Indications
Skyrizi (risankizumab) is indicated for the treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis in adults who are candidates for systemic therapy.
Skyrizi, alone or in combination with methotrexate (MTX), is indicated for the treatment of active psoriatic arthritis in adults who have had an inadequate response or who have
been intolerant to one or more disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs).
Skyrizi is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with moderately to severely active Crohn's disease who have had an inadequate response to, lost response to, or were
intolerant to conventional therapy or a biologic therapy.
Important Safety Information
Risankizumab is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to the active substance or to any of the excipients, and in patients with clinically important active infections (e.g. active
tuberculosis). Risankizumab may increase the risk of infection. In patients with a chronic infection, a history of recurrent infection, or known risk factors for infection, risankizumab
should be used with caution. Treatment with risankizumab should not be initiated in patients with any clinically important active infection until the infection resolves or is
adequately treated.
Patients treated with risankizumab should be instructed to seek medical advice if signs or symptoms of clinically important chronic or acute infection occur. If a patient develops
such an infection or is not responding to standard therapy for the infection, the patient should be closely monitored and risankizumab should not be administered until the infection
resolves.
Prior to initiating treatment with risankizumab, patients should be evaluated for tuberculosis (TB) infection. Patients receiving risankizumab should be monitored for signs and
symptoms of active TB. Anti-TB therapy should be considered prior to initiating risankizumab in patients with a past history of latent or active TB in whom an adequate course of
treatment cannot be confirmed.
Prior to initiating therapy with risankizumab, completion of all appropriate immunisations should be considered according to current immunisation guidelines. If a patient has
received live vaccination (viral or bacterial), it is recommended to wait at least 4 weeks prior to starting treatment with risankizumab. Patients treated with risankizumab should not
receive live vaccines during treatment and for at least 21 weeks after treatment.
If a serious hypersensitivity reaction occurs, administration of risankizumab should be discontinued immediately and appropriate therapy initiated.
The most frequently reported adverse reactions were upper respiratory infections (from 13% in psoriasis to 15.6% in Crohn's disease). Commonly (greater than or equal to 1/100
to less than 1/10) reported adverse reactions included tinea infections, headache, pruritus, rash, fatigue and injection site reactions.
This is not a complete summary of all safety information.
2
3
3
1,4
®
5
6
®
5


Please see the SmPC for complete prescribing information.
Globally, prescribing information varies; refer to the individual country product label for complete information.
About the British Journal of Dermatology (BJD)
The British Journal of Dermatology (BJD) is a top-ranked international dermatology journal, publishing the highest-quality research to advance the understanding and
management of skin disease to improve patient outcomes. The BJD is one of the journals of the British Association of Dermatologists, the professional membership body for
dermatologists in the UK.
Oxford University Press (OUP) is BAD's publishing partner. OUP publishes over 500 academic and research journals covering a broad range of subject areas, two-thirds of which
are published in collaboration with learned societies and other international organizations. OUP has been publishing journals for more than a century and, as the world's largest
university press, has more than 500 years of publishing expertise. For more information, visit academic.oup.com.
About AbbVie
AbbVie's mission is to discover and deliver innovative medicines and solutions that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow. We strive
to have a remarkable impact on people's lives across several key therapeutic areas – immunology, oncology, neuroscience, and eye care – and products and services in our
Allergan Aesthetics portfolio. For more information about AbbVie, please visit us at www.abbvie.com. Follow @abbvie on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, YouTube and LinkedIn.
AbbVie Forward-Looking Statements
Some statements in this news release are, or may be considered, forward-looking statements for purposes of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The
words "believe," "expect," "anticipate," "project" and similar expressions, among others, generally identify forward-looking statements. AbbVie cautions that these
forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those indicated in the forward-looking
statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, failure to realize the expected benefits from AbbVie's acquisition of Allergan plc ("Allergan"),
failure to promptly and effectively integrate Allergan's businesses, competition from other products, challenges to intellectual property, difficulties inherent in the
research and development process, adverse litigation or government action, changes to laws and regulations applicable to our industry and the impact of public health
outbreaks, epidemics or pandemics, such as COVID-19. Additional information about the economic, competitive, governmental, technological and other factors that may
affect AbbVie's operations is set forth in Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of AbbVie's 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which has been filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission, as updated by its subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q. AbbVie undertakes no obligation to release publicly any revisions to forward-looking
statements as a result of subsequent events or developments, except as required by law.
References:
1. Stein Gold, L.F., et al (2023), Comparison of risankizumab and apremilast for the treatment of adult patients with moderate plaque psoriasis eligible for systemic therapy:
results from a randomised, open-label, assessor-blinded phase IV (IMMpulse) study. British Journal of Dermatology. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljad252
2. National Psoriasis Foundation. About Psoriasis. Available at: https://www.psoriasis.org/about-psoriasis/. Accessed on July 19, 2023.
3. National Psoriasis Foundation. Psoriasis Statistics. Available at: https://www.psoriasis.org/psoriasis-
statistics/#:~:text=Prevalence&text=125%20million%20people%20worldwide%20%E2%80%94%202,the%20World%20Psoriasis%20Day%20consortium. Accessed on July
19, 2023.
4. Study of subcutaneous risankizumab injection compared to oral apremilast tablets to assess change in disease activity and adverse events in adult participants with
moderate plaque psoriasis who are candidates for systemic therapy. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2023. Available at: https://classic.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04908475.
Accessed on July 19, 2023.
5. SKYRIZI [Summary of Product Characteristics]. AbbVie Ltd. Available at: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/product-information/skyrizi-epar-product-
information_en.pdf. Accessed on July 19, 2023.
6. Duvallet E., Sererano L., Assier E., et al. Interleukin-23: a key cytokine in inflammatory diseases. Ann Med. 2011. Nov 43(7):503-11.
 
SOURCE AbbVie


For further information: Global Media: Mary Byun, +1 (646) 709-4409, Mary.Byun@abbvie.com; U.S. Media: Stephanie Tennessen, +1 (224) 214-8638,
Stephanie.Tennessen@abbvie.com; Investors: Liz Shea, +1 (847) 935-2211, Liz.Shea@abbvie.com
https://news.abbvie.com/2023-07-26-SKYRIZI-R-risankizumab-Achieved-Superiority-Versus-Apremilast-for-Co-Primary-Endpoints-Among-Adult-Patients-with-
Moderate-Plaque-Psoriasis-in-Phase-4-Head-to-Head-Study


HIGHLIGHTS OF PRESCRIBING INFORMATION 
These highlights do not include all the information needed to use 
SKYRIZI safely and effectively. See full prescribing information for 
SKYRIZI. 
 
SKYRIZI® (risankizumab-rzaa) injection, for subcutaneous or 
intravenous use 
Initial U.S. Approval: 2019 
 
 RECENT MAJOR CHANGES  
Indications and Usage, Ulcerative Colitis (1.4) 
6/2024 
Dosage and Administration, General Considerations for 
Administration (2.2) 
1/2024 
Preparation and Administration Instruction (Plaque Psoriasis 
and Psoriatic Arthritis) (2.5) 
1/2024 
Dosage and Administration, Recommended Dosage for 
Ulcerative Colitis (2.7) 
6/2024 
Dosage and Administration, Preparation and Administration 
Instructions (Crohn’s Disease and Ulcerative Colitis) (2.8) 
6/2024 
Warnings and Precautions, Hepatotoxicity in Treatment of 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease (5.4) 
6/2024 
  
 INDICATIONS AND USAGE  
SKYRIZI is an interleukin-23 antagonist indicated for the treatment of: 
• moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis in adults who are candidates for 
systemic therapy or phototherapy. (1.1)  
• active psoriatic arthritis in adults. (1.2) 
• moderately to severely active Crohn's disease in adults. (1.3) 
• moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis in adults. (1.4) 
  
 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION  
• For the treatment of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis: Obtain liver 
enzymes and bilirubin levels prior to initiating treatment with SKYRIZI. 
(2.1, 5.4)  
• Complete all age-appropriate vaccinations as recommended by current 
immunization guidelines (2.1, 5.5) 
Recommended Dosage 
Plaque Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis: 
• 150 mg administered by subcutaneous injection at Week 0, Week 4, and 
every 12 weeks thereafter. (2.3, 2.4) 
• In patients with psoriatic arthritis SKYRIZI can be administered alone or in 
combination with non-biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs 
(DMARDs). (2.4)  
Crohn’s Disease: 
• The recommended induction dosage is 600 mg administered by intravenous 
infusion over at least one hour at Week 0, Week 4, and Week 8. The 
recommended maintenance dosage is 180 mg or 360 mg administered by 
subcutaneous injection at Week 12, and every 8 weeks thereafter. Use the 
lowest effective dosage to maintain therapeutic response. (2.6)  
Ulcerative Colitis: 
• The recommended induction dosage is 1,200 mg administered by 
intravenous infusion over at least two hours at Week 0, Week 4, and Week 
8. The recommended maintenance dosage is 180 mg or 360 mg 
administered by subcutaneous injection at Week 12, and every 8 weeks 
thereafter. Use the lowest effective dosage to maintain therapeutic 
response. (2.7) 
 
  
 DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS  
Subcutaneous injection (3) 
• Injection: 150 mg/mL in each single-dose prefilled pen.  
• Injection: 90 mg/mL in each single-dose prefilled syringe. 
• Injection: 150 mg/mL in each single-dose prefilled syringe.  
• Injection: 180 mg/1.2 mL (150 mg/mL) in each single-dose prefilled 
cartridge.  
• Injection: 360 mg/2.4 mL (150 mg/mL) in each single-dose prefilled 
cartridge.  
Intravenous infusion (3) 
• Injection: 600 mg/10 mL (60 mg/mL) in each single-dose vial.  
  
 CONTRAINDICATIONS  
• SKYRIZI is contraindicated in patients with a history of serious 
hypersensitivity reaction to risankizumab-rzaa or any of the excipients (4)  
  
 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS  
• Hypersensitivity Reactions: Serious hypersensitivity reactions, including 
anaphylaxis, may occur. (5.1) 
• Infections: SKYRIZI may increase the risk of infection. Instruct patients to 
seek medical advice if signs or symptoms of clinically important infection 
occur. If such an infection develops, do not administer SKYRIZI until the 
infection resolves. (5.2)  
• Tuberculosis (TB): Evaluate for TB prior to initiating treatment with 
SKYRIZI. (5.3)  
• Hepatotoxicity in Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Drug-
induced liver injury during induction has been reported. Monitor liver 
enzymes and bilirubin levels at baseline and, during induction, up to at 
least 12 weeks of treatment. Monitor thereafter according to routine patient 
management. (5.4) 
• Administration of Vaccines: Avoid use of live vaccines. (5.5)  
 
ADVERSE REACTIONS  
Most common adverse reactions are: 
• Plaque Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis (≥ 1%): upper respiratory 
infections, headache, fatigue, injection site reactions, and tinea infections. 
(6.1) 
• Crohn’s Disease (>3%):  
o 
Induction: upper respiratory infections, headache, and arthralgia. (6.1) 
o 
Maintenance: arthralgia, abdominal pain, injection site reactions, 
anemia, pyrexia, back pain, arthropathy, and urinary tract infection. 
(6.1) 
• Ulcerative Colitis (≥3%):  
o 
Induction: arthralgia. (6.1) 
o 
Maintenance: arthralgia, pyrexia, injection site reactions, and rash. 
(6.1) 
 
To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact AbbVie Inc. 
at 1-800-633-9110 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch.  
 
See 17 for PATIENT COUNSELING INFORMATION and Medication 
Guide. 
 
Revised: 6/2024 
 
FULL PRESCRIBING INFORMATION: CONTENTS* 
1 INDICATIONS AND USAGE 
1.1 Plaque Psoriasis 
1.2 Psoriatic Arthritis 
1.3 Crohn’s Disease 
1.4 Ulcerative Colitis 
2 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION 
2.1 Procedures Prior to Treatment Initiation 
2.2 General Considerations for Administration 
2.3 Recommended Dosage for Plaque Psoriasis 
2.4 Recommended Dosage for Psoriatic Arthritis 
2.5 Preparation and Administration Instructions (Plaque Psoriasis and 
Psoriatic Arthritis) 
2.6 Recommended Dosage for Crohn’s Disease 
2.7 Recommended Dosage for Ulcerative Colitis 
2.8 Preparation and Administration Instructions (Crohn’s Disease and 
Ulcerative Colitis) 
3 DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS 
4 CONTRAINDICATIONS 
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS 
5.1 Hypersensitivity Reactions  
5.2 Infections 
5.3 Tuberculosis 
5.4 Hepatotoxicity in Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease 
5.5 Administration of Vaccines 
6 ADVERSE REACTIONS 
6.1 Clinical Trials Experience 
6.2 Immunogenicity 
6.3 Postmarketing Experience  
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS 
8.1 Pregnancy 
8.2 Lactation 
8.4 Pediatric Use 
8.5 Geriatric Use 
11 DESCRIPTION 
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
12.1 Mechanism of Action 
12.2 Pharmacodynamics 
12.3 Pharmacokinetics 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 NONCLINICAL TOXICOLOGY 
13.1 Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility 
14 CLINICAL STUDIES 
14.1 Plaque Psoriasis 
14.2 Psoriatic Arthritis 
14.3 Crohn’s Disease 
14.4 Ulcerative Colitis 
16 HOW SUPPLIED/STORAGE AND HANDLING 
17 PATIENT COUNSELING INFORMATION 
*Sections or subsections omitted from the full prescribing information are not 
listed.
 


 
 
 
 
 
FULL PRESCRIBING INFORMATION 
1 INDICATIONS AND USAGE 
1.1 Plaque Psoriasis 
SKYRIZI® is indicated for the treatment of moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis in adults who 
are candidates for systemic therapy or phototherapy.  
1.2 Psoriatic Arthritis 
SKYRIZI is indicated for the treatment of active psoriatic arthritis in adults. 
1.3 Crohn’s Disease 
SKYRIZI is indicated for the treatment of moderately to severely active Crohn's disease in 
adults. 
1.4 Ulcerative Colitis 
SKYRIZI is indicated for the treatment of moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis in 
adults. 
2 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION 
2.1 Procedures Prior to Treatment Initiation  
• For the treatment of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis, obtain liver enzymes and bilirubin 
levels prior to initiating treatment with SKYRIZI [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)] 
 
• Evaluate patients for tuberculosis (TB) infection prior to initiating treatment with SKYRIZI 
[see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].  
 
• Complete all age-appropriate vaccinations as recommended by current immunization 
guidelines [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5)]. 
 
2.2 General Considerations for Administration 
• Visually inspect SKYRIZI for particulate matter and discoloration prior to administration. 
The solution may contain a few translucent to white particles. 
o SKYRIZI 150 mg/mL, 180 mg/1.2 mL, and 360 mg/2.4 mL: a colorless to yellow, 
and clear to slightly opalescent solution.  
o SKYRIZI 90 mg/mL and 600 mg/10 mL: a colorless to slightly yellow, and clear 
to slightly opalescent solution. 
o Do not use if the solution contains large particles or is cloudy or discolored. 


 
 
 
 
 
• Discard after use. Do not reuse. 
2.3 Recommended Dosage for Plaque Psoriasis 
The recommended dosage is 150 mg administered by subcutaneous injection at Week 0, Week 4, 
and every 12 weeks thereafter.  
2.4 Recommended Dosage for Psoriatic Arthritis 
The recommended dosage is 150 mg administered by subcutaneous injection at Week 0, Week 4, 
and every 12 weeks thereafter.  
SKYRIZI may be administered alone or in combination with non-biologic disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs). 
2.5 Preparation and Administration Instructions (Plaque Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis) 
• Administer SKYRIZI 150 mg/mL prefilled pen or prefilled syringe subcutaneously. 
• Patients may self-inject SKYRIZI after training in subcutaneous injection technique. 
Provide proper training to patients and/or caregivers on the subcutaneous injection 
technique of SKYRIZI. 
• Before injecting, remove the carton with SKYRIZI from the refrigerator and without 
removing the prefilled pen or prefilled syringe from the carton, allow SKYRIZI to reach 
room temperature out of direct sunlight (30 to 90 minutes for the prefilled pen and 15 to 
30 minutes for the prefilled syringe). 
• Do not inject into areas where the skin is tender, bruised, erythematous, indurated or 
affected by psoriasis. Administration of SKYRIZI in the upper, outer arm may only be 
performed by a healthcare professional or caregiver. 
• If a dose is missed, administer the dose as soon as possible. Thereafter, resume dosing at 
the regular scheduled time. 
The SKYRIZI “Instructions for Use” contains more detailed instructions on the preparation 
and administration of SKYRIZI [see Instructions for Use]. Instruct the patient to read the 
Instructions for Use before administration.  
2.6 Recommended Dosage for Crohn’s Disease 
Adult Patients: Induction 
The recommended induction dosage of SKYRIZI is 600 mg administered by intravenous 
infusion over a period of at least one hour at Week 0, Week 4, and Week 8.  
Adult Patients: Maintenance 
The recommended maintenance dosage of SKYRIZI is 180 mg or 360 mg administered by 
subcutaneous injection at Week 12, and every 8 weeks thereafter. Use the lowest effective 
dosage needed to maintain therapeutic response.   


 
 
 
 
 
2.7 Recommended Dosage for Ulcerative Colitis 
Adult Patients: Induction 
The recommended induction dosage of SKYRIZI is 1,200 mg administered by intravenous 
infusion over a period of at least two hours at Week 0, Week 4, and Week 8.  
Adult Patients: Maintenance 
The recommended maintenance dosage of SKYRIZI is 180 mg or 360 mg administered by 
subcutaneous injection at Week 12, and every 8 weeks thereafter. Use the lowest effective 
dosage needed to maintain therapeutic response. 
2.8 Preparation and Administration Instructions (Crohn’s Disease and Ulcerative Colitis) 
Intravenous Induction Dosing Regimen: 
1. SKYRIZI vial for intravenous administration is intended for administration by a healthcare 
provider using aseptic technique. 
 
2. Prior to intravenous administration, determine the dose and number of SKYRIZI vials 
needed based on the patient’s indication (see table below). Withdraw 10 mL of SKYRIZI 
solution from a vial (600 mg/10 mL) and inject into an intravenous infusion bag or glass 
bottle containing 5% Dextrose Injection or 0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection (see Table 1 
below) for a final concentration of approximately 1.2 mg/mL to 6 mg/mL. Discard any 
remaining solution in the vial. 
 
Table 1. Total Volume of Diluent Required for Intravenous Induction Dose 
 
 
Indication 
Intravenous 
Induction Dose 
Number of SKYRIZI 600 
mg/10 mL Vials 
Total Volume of 5% 
Dextrose or  
0.9% Sodium Chloride 
Injection 
Crohn’s 
disease 
600 mg 
1 
100 mL, or 250 mL, or 500 
mL 
Ulcerative 
colitis 
1,200 mg 
2 
250 mL, or 500 mL  
 
3. Infuse the diluted solution intravenously over a period of at least one hour for the SKYRIZI 
600 mg dose; at least two hours for the SKYRIZI 1,200 mg dose. If stored refrigerated, allow 
the diluted SKYRIZI solution in the infusion bag or glass bottle to warm to room temperature 
prior to the start of the intravenous infusion. 
4. Do not administer SKYRIZI diluted solution concomitantly in the same intravenous line with 
other medicinal products. 
Handling and Storage of the Vial and the Diluted Solution: 
• Do not shake the vial or diluted solution in the infusion bag or glass bottle. 


 
 
 
 
 
• Use the prepared infusion immediately. If not used immediately, store the diluted SKYRIZI 
solution refrigerated and protected from light for up to 20 hours between 36°F to 46°F (2°C 
to 8°C).  
• Immediately after preparation or removal from refrigeration, the diluted SKYRIZI solution 
can be stored at room temperature at up to 77°F (25°C) (protected from sunlight) for 4 hours 
(cumulative time from start of dilution to start of infusion). 
• Exposure to indoor light is acceptable during room temperature storage and administration. 
• Do not freeze. 
Subcutaneous Maintenance Dosing Regimen:  
Using the single-dose 180 mg or 360 mg prefilled cartridge with On-Body Injector:  
• SKYRIZI is intended for use under the guidance and supervision of a healthcare professional.   
• Patients may self-inject SKYRIZI using the on-body injector with prefilled cartridge after 
training in subcutaneous injection technique. Provide proper training to patients and/or 
caregivers on the subcutaneous injection technique of SKYRIZI.  
• Before using the on-body injector with prefilled cartridge, remove the carton from the 
refrigerator and allow to reach room temperature out of direct sunlight (45 to 90 minutes) 
without removing the prefilled cartridge or on-body injector from the carton. 
• Use the on-body injector to administer SKYRIZI 180 mg/1.2 mL or SKYRIZI 360 mg/2.4 
mL prefilled cartridge subcutaneously on thigh or abdomen. 
• Start the injection within 5 minutes after inserting the prefilled cartridge into the On-Body 
Injector. 
• Do not inject into areas where the skin is tender, bruised, erythematous, indurated or affected 
by any lesions.  
• If a dose is missed, administer the dose as soon as possible. Thereafter, resume dosing at the 
regular scheduled time. 
The SKYRIZI “Instructions for Use” contains more detailed instructions on the preparation and 
administration of SKYRIZI [see Instructions for Use]. Instruct the patient to read the 
Instructions for Use before administration. 
Using the 90 mg/mL prefilled syringe: 
• Administer each SKYRIZI 90 mg/mL prefilled syringe subcutaneously. 
• Patients may self-inject SKYRIZI after training in subcutaneous injection technique. Provide 
proper training to patients and/or caregivers on the subcutaneous injection technique of 
SKYRIZI. 
• Before injecting, remove the carton from the refrigerator and without removing the prefilled 
syringes from the carton, allow SKYRIZI to reach room temperature out of direct sunlight 
(15 to 30 minutes). 


 
 
 
 
 
• Use the 90 mg/mL prefilled syringes to administer SKYRIZI 180 mg or SKYRIZI 360 mg 
subcutaneously as follows:  
o When using SKYRIZI 90 mg/mL prefilled syringes, for a 180 mg maintenance dose, 
two 90 mg prefilled syringes are required. Inject one prefilled syringe after the other 
in different anatomic locations (such as thighs or abdomen).  
o When using SKYRIZI 90 mg/mL prefilled syringes, for a 360 mg maintenance dose, 
four 90 mg prefilled syringes are required. Inject one prefilled syringe after the other 
in different anatomic locations (such as thighs or abdomen).  
• Do not inject into areas where the skin is tender, bruised, erythematous, indurated or affected 
by any lesions. Administration of SKYRIZI in the upper, outer arm may only be performed 
by a healthcare professional or caregiver. 
• If a dose is missed, administer the dose as soon as possible. Thereafter, resume dosing at the 
regular scheduled time. 
The SKYRIZI “Instructions for Use” contains more detailed instructions on the preparation and 
administration of SKYRIZI [see Instructions for Use]. Instruct the patient to read the 
Instructions for Use before administration. 
3 DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS 
Subcutaneous Injection  
SKYRIZI Pen 
• Injection: 150 mg/mL as a colorless to yellow and clear to slightly opalescent solution in 
each single-dose prefilled pen. 
SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe 
• Injection: 90 mg/mL as a colorless to slightly yellow and clear to slightly opalescent 
solution in each single-dose prefilled syringe. 
• Injection: 150 mg/mL as a colorless to yellow and clear to slightly opalescent solution in 
each single-dose prefilled syringe. 
SKYRIZI Prefilled Cartridge with Supplied On-Body Injector 
• Injection: 180 mg/1.2 mL (150 mg/mL) as a colorless to yellow, and clear to slightly 
opalescent solution in each single-dose prefilled cartridge for use with the on-body 
injector. 
• Injection: 360 mg/2.4 mL (150 mg/mL) as a colorless to yellow, and clear to slightly 
opalescent solution in each single-dose prefilled cartridge for use with the on-body 
injector. 
Intravenous Infusion 
 SKYRIZI Vial 


 
 
 
 
 
• Injection: 600 mg/10 mL (60 mg/mL) as a colorless to slightly yellow, and clear to 
slightly opalescent solution in each single-dose vial.  
4 CONTRAINDICATIONS 
SKYRIZI is contraindicated in patients with a history of serious hypersensitivity reaction to 
risankizumab-rzaa or any of the excipients [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].  
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS 
5.1 Hypersensitivity Reactions  
Serious hypersensitivity reactions, including anaphylaxis, have been reported with use of 
SKYRIZI. If a serious hypersensitivity reaction occurs, discontinue SKYRIZI and initiate 
appropriate therapy immediately [see Adverse Reactions (6.1)].  
5.2 Infections 
SKYRIZI may increase the risk of infections [see Adverse Reactions (6.1)].  
Treatment with SKYRIZI should not be initiated in patients with any clinically important active 
infection until the infection resolves or is adequately treated. 
In patients with a chronic infection or a history of recurrent infection, consider the risks and 
benefits prior to prescribing SKYRIZI. Instruct patients to seek medical advice if signs or 
symptoms of clinically important infection occur. If a patient develops such an infection or is not 
responding to standard therapy, monitor the patient closely and do not administer SKYRIZI until 
the infection resolves.  
5.3 Tuberculosis 
Evaluate patients for tuberculosis (TB) infection prior to initiating treatment with SKYRIZI. 
Across the Phase 3 psoriasis clinical studies, of the 72 subjects with latent TB who were 
concurrently treated with SKYRIZI and appropriate TB prophylaxis during the studies, none 
developed active TB during the mean follow-up of 61 weeks on SKYRIZI. Two subjects taking 
isoniazid for treatment of latent TB discontinued treatment due to liver injury. Of the 31 subjects 
from the PsO-3 study with latent TB who did not receive prophylaxis during the study, none 
developed active TB during the mean follow-up of 55 weeks on SKYRIZI. Consider anti-TB 
therapy prior to initiating SKYRIZI in patients with a past history of latent or active TB in whom 
an adequate course of treatment cannot be confirmed. Monitor patients for signs and symptoms 
of active TB during and after SKYRIZI treatment. Do not administer SKYRIZI to patients with 
active TB.  
5.4 Hepatotoxicity in Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease   
A serious adverse reaction of drug-induced liver injury in conjunction with a rash that required 
hospitalization was reported in a patient with Crohn’s disease (ALT 54x ULN, AST 30x ULN, 
and total bilirubin 2.2x ULN) following two 600 mg intravenous doses of SKYRIZI. The liver 


 
 
 
 
 
test abnormalities resolved following administration of steroids. SKYRIZI was subsequently 
discontinued. 
For the treatment of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis, evaluate liver enzymes and bilirubin 
at baseline, and during induction at least up to 12 weeks of treatment. Monitor thereafter 
according to routine patient management. 
Consider other treatment options in patients with evidence of liver cirrhosis. Prompt 
investigation of the cause of liver enzyme elevation is recommended to identify potential cases 
of drug-induced liver injury. Interrupt treatment if drug-induced liver injury is suspected, until 
this diagnosis is excluded. Instruct patients to seek immediate medical attention if they 
experience symptoms suggestive of hepatic dysfunction. 
5.5 Administration of Vaccines 
Avoid use of live vaccines in patients treated with SKYRIZI. Medications that interact with the 
immune system may increase the risk of infection following administration of live vaccines. 
Prior to initiating therapy with SKYRIZI, complete all age-appropriate vaccinations according to 
current immunization guidelines. No data are available on the response to live or inactive 
vaccines. 
6 ADVERSE REACTIONS 
The following adverse reactions are discussed in other sections of labeling:  
• Hypersensitivity Reactions [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)] 
• Infections [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)] 
• Tuberculosis [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)] 
• Hepatotoxicity in Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease [see Warnings and Precautions 
(5.4)] 
  
6.1 Clinical Trials Experience 
Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse drug reaction 
rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared with rates in the 
clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice.  
Plaque Psoriasis 
A total of 2234 subjects were treated with SKYRIZI in clinical development trials in plaque 
psoriasis. Of these, 1208 subjects with psoriasis were exposed to SKYRIZI for at least one year.  
Data from placebo- and active-controlled trials were pooled to evaluate the safety of SKYRIZI 
for up to 16 weeks. In total, 1306 subjects were evaluated in the SKYRIZI 150 mg group.  
Table 2 summarizes the adverse drug reactions that occurred at a rate of at least 1% and at a 
higher rate in the SKYRIZI group than the placebo group during the 16-week controlled period 
of pooled clinical trials.  
 


 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Adverse Drug Reactions Occurring in ≥ 1% of Subjects with Plaque Psoriasis on 
SKYRIZI through Week 16 
Adverse Drug Reactions 
SKYRIZI 
N = 1306 
n (%) 
Placebo 
N = 300 
n (%) 
Upper respiratory infectionsa 
170 (13.0) 
29 (9.7) 
Headacheb 
46 (3.5) 
6 (2.0)  
Fatiguec 
33 (2.5) 
3 (1.0) 
Injection site reactionsd 
19 (1.5) 
3 (1.0) 
Tinea infectionse 
15 (1.1) 
1 (0.3) 
a Includes: respiratory tract infection (viral, bacterial or unspecified), sinusitis (including acute), rhinitis, 
nasopharyngitis, pharyngitis (including viral), tonsillitis 
b Includes: headache, tension headache, sinus headache, cervicogenic headache  
c Includes: fatigue, asthenia 
d Includes: injection site bruising, erythema, extravasation, hematoma, hemorrhage, infection, inflammation, 
irritation, pain, pruritus, reaction, swelling, warmth 
e Includes: tinea pedis, tinea cruris, body tinea, tinea versicolor, tinea manuum, tinea infection, onychomycosis  
 
  
Adverse drug reactions that occurred in < 1% but > 0.1% of subjects in the SKYRIZI group and 
at a higher rate than in the placebo group through Week 16 were folliculitis and urticaria.  
Specific Adverse Drug Reactions 
Infections 
In the first 16 weeks, infections occurred in 22.1% of the SKYRIZI group (90.8 events per 100 
subject-years) compared with 14.7% of the placebo group (56.5 events per 100 subject-years) 
and did not lead to discontinuation of SKYRIZI. The rates of serious infections for the SKYRIZI 
group and the placebo group were ≤0.4%. Serious infections in the SKYRIZI group included 
cellulitis, osteomyelitis, sepsis, and herpes zoster. In Studies PsO-1 and PsO-2, through Week 
52, the rate of infections (73.9 events per 100 subject-years) was similar to the rate observed 
during the first 16 weeks of treatment.  
Safety Through Week 52 
Through Week 52, no new adverse reactions were identified, and the rates of the adverse 
reactions were similar to those observed during the first 16 weeks of treatment. During this 
period, serious infections that led to study discontinuation included pneumonia.  
Psoriatic Arthritis 
The overall safety profile observed in subjects with psoriatic arthritis treated with SKYRIZI is 
generally consistent with the safety profile in subjects with plaque psoriasis. Additionally, in the 
Phase 3 placebo-controlled trials the incidence of hepatic events was higher in the SKYRIZI 
group (5.4%, 16.7 events per 100 patient years) compared to the placebo group (3.9%, 12.6 
events per 100 patient years). Of these, the most common events that were reported more 
frequently in both the placebo group and the SKYRIZI group were ALT increased (placebo: 
n=12 (1.7%); SKYRIZI: n=16 (2.3%)), AST increased (placebo: n=9 (1.3%); SKYRIZI: n=13 
(1.8%)), and GGT increased (placebo: n=5 (0.7%); SKYRIZI: n=8 (1.1%)). There were no 
serious hepatic events reported. The incidence of hypersensitivity reactions was higher in the 


 
 
 
 
 
SKYRIZI group (n=16, 2.3%) compared to the placebo group (n=9, 1.3%). In the Phase 3 
placebo-controlled trials, hypersensitivity reactions reported at a higher rate in the SKYRIZI 
group included rash (placebo: n=4 (0.6%); SKYRIZI: n=5 (0.7%), allergic rhinitis (placebo: n=1 
(0.1%); SKYRIZI: n=2 (0.3%), and facial swelling (placebo: n=0 (0.0%); SKYRIZI n=1 (0.1%). 
One case of anaphylaxis was reported in a subject who received SKYRIZI in the Phase 2 clinical 
trial. 
Crohn’s Disease  
SKYRIZI was studied up to 12 weeks in subjects with moderately to severely active Crohn’s 
disease in two randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled induction studies (CD-1, CD-2) and 
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-finding study (CD-4; NCT02031276). 
Long-term safety up to 52 weeks was evaluated in subjects who responded to induction therapy 
in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled maintenance study (CD-3) [see Clinical 
Studies (14.3)].  
In the two induction studies (CD-1, CD-2) and the dose finding study (CD-4), 620 subjects 
received the SKYRIZI intravenous induction regimen at Weeks 0, 4 and 8. In the maintenance 
study (CD-3), 297 subjects who achieved clinical response, defined as a reduction in CDAI of at 
least 100 points from baseline after 12 weeks of induction treatment with intravenous SKYRIZI 
in studies CD-1 and CD-2, received a maintenance regimen of SKYRIZI either 180 mg or 360 
mg subcutaneously at Week 12 and every 8 weeks thereafter for up to an additional 52 weeks. 
Adverse reactions reported in > 3% of subjects in induction studies and at a higher rate than 
placebo are shown in Table 3. 
Table 3. Adverse Drug Reactions Reported in > 3% of Subjects with Crohn’s Disease 
Treated with SKYRIZI in Placebo-Controlled 12-Week Induction Studies (CD-1, CD-2, 
and CD-4) 
Adverse Drug Reactions 
SKYRIZI 
600 mg Intravenous 
Infusiona 
N = 620 
n (%) 
Placebo 
N = 432 
n (%) 
Upper respiratory infectionsb 
  66 (10.6) 
40 (9.3) 
Headachec 
41 (6.6)  
24 (5.6) 
Arthralgia 
31 (5.0) 
19 (4.4) 
a SKYRIZI 600 mg as an intravenous infusion at Week 0, Week 4, and Week 8. 
b Includes: influenza like illness, nasopharyngitis, influenza, pharyngitis, upper respiratory tract infection, viral 
upper respiratory tract infection, COVID-19, nasal congestion, respiratory tract infection viral, viral pharyngitis, 
tonsillitis, upper respiratory tract inflammation 
c Includes: headache, tension headache 
Adverse reactions reported in >3% of subjects in the maintenance study and at a higher rate than 
placebo are shown in Table 4. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
Table 4. Adverse Reactions Reported in >3% of Subjects with Crohn’s Disease Treated 
with SKYRIZIa in Placebo-Controlled 52-Week Maintenance Study (CD-3)  
Adverse Drug Reactions 
SKYRIZI 
180 mg Subcutaneous 
Injection 
N = 155 
n (%) 
SKYRIZI 
360 mg Subcutaneous 
Injection 
N = 142 
n (%) 
Placebo 
N = 143 
n (%) 
Arthralgia 
13 (8.4) 
13 (9.2) 
12 (8.4) 
Abdominal painb 
9 (5.8) 
12 (8.5) 
6 (4.2) 
Injection site reactionsc,d 
7 (4.5) 
8 (5.6) 
4 (2.8)  
Anemia 
7 (4.5) 
7 (4.9) 
6 (4.2) 
Pyrexia 
4 (2.6) 
7 (4.9) 
4 (2.8) 
Back pain  
3 (1.9) 
6 (4.2) 
3 (2.1) 
Arthropathy 
1 (0.6) 
5 (3.5) 
2 (1.4) 
Urinary tract infection 
1 (0.6) 
5 (3.5) 
4 (2.8) 
a SKYRIZI 180 mg or 360 mg at Week 12 and every 8 weeks thereafter for up to an additional 52 weeks  
b Includes: abdominal pain, abdominal pain upper, abdominal pain lower 
c Includes: injection site rash, injection site erythema, injection site swelling, injection site urticaria, injection site 
warmth, injection site pain, injection site hypersensitivity, injection site reaction 
d Some subjects had multiple occurrences of injection site reactions. In this table, injection site reactions are counted 
only once per subject for the rate calculations. 
Specific Adverse Drug Reactions 
Infections 
In the maintenance study (CD-3) through Week 52, the rate of infections was 32.3% (50.2 events 
per 100 subject-years) in subjects who received SKYRIZI 180 mg and 36.6% (60.8 events per 
100 subject-years) in subjects who received SKYRIZI 360 mg compared to 36.4% (60.3 events 
per 100 subject-years) in subjects who received placebo after SKYRIZI induction. The rate of 
serious infections was 2.6% (2.7 events per 100 subject-years) in subjects who received 
SKYRIZI 180 mg and 5.6% (7.4 events per 100 subject-years) in subjects who received 
SKYRIZI 360 mg compared to 2.1% (2.4 events per 100 subject-years) in subjects who received 
placebo after SKYRIZI induction. 
Lipid Elevations 
 
Elevations in lipid parameters (total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol [LDL-
C]) were first assessed at 4 weeks following initiation of SKYRIZI in the induction trials (CD-1, 
CD-2). Increases from baseline and increases relative to placebo were observed at Week 4 and 
remained stable to Week 12. Following SKYRIZI induction, mean total cholesterol increased by 
9.4 mg/dL from baseline to a mean absolute value of 175.1 mg/dL at Week 12. Similarly, mean 
LDL-C increased by 6.6 mg/dL from baseline to a mean absolute value of 92.6 mg/dL at Week 
12. Mean LDL-C increased by 3.1 mg/dL from baseline to a mean absolute value of 99.0 mg/dL 
at Week 52 with SKYRIZI 180 mg maintenance treatment and by 2.3 mg/dL from baseline to a 
mean absolute value of 102.2 mg/dL at Week 52 with SKYRIZI 360 mg maintenance treatment 
(CD-3).  


 
 
 
 
 
Ulcerative Colitis  
SKYRIZI was studied up to 12 weeks in subjects with moderately to severely active ulcerative 
colitis in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled induction study (UC-1) and a 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-finding study (UC-3). Long-term safety up 
to 52 weeks was evaluated in subjects who responded to induction therapy in a randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled maintenance study (UC-2) [see Clinical Studies (14.4)].  
In the induction studies (UC-1 and UC-3), 712 subjects received the SKYRIZI 1,200 mg 
intravenous induction regimen at Weeks 0, 4 and 8. In the maintenance study (UC-2), 347 
subjects who achieved clinical response, defined as  a decrease in mMS of ≥2 points and ≥30% 
from baseline and a decrease in RBS ≥1 from baseline or an absolute RBS ≤1, received a 
maintenance regimen of SKYRIZI either 180 mg or 360 mg subcutaneously at Week 12 and 
every 8 weeks thereafter for up to an additional 52 weeks. 
The adverse reaction reported in ≥3% subjects treated with SKYRIZI in the ulcerative colitis 
induction studies (UC-1 and UC-3) and at a higher rate than placebo was arthralgia (3% 
SKYRIZI vs 1% placebo).  
Adverse reactions reported in ≥3% of subjects treated with SKYRIZI in the maintenance study 
(UC-2) and at a higher rate than placebo are shown in Table 5. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
Table 5. Adverse Reactions Reported in ≥3% of Subjects with Ulcerative Colitis Treated 
with SKYRIZIa in Placebo-Controlled 52-Week Maintenance Study (UC-2)  
Adverse Drug Reactions 
SKYRIZI 
180 mg Subcutaneous 
Injection 
N = 170 
n (%) 
SKYRIZI 
360 mg Subcutaneous 
Injection 
N = 177 
n (%) 
Placebo 
N = 173 
n (%) 
Arthralgia 
9 (5.3) 
17 (9.6) 
8 (4.6) 
Pyrexia 
8 (4.7) 
7 (4.0) 
6 (3.5) 
Injection site reactionsb,c 
5 (2.9) 
  5 (2.8) 
 2 (1.2) 
Rashd 
7 (4.1) 
 1 (0.6) 
  3 (1.7) 
a SKYRIZI 180 mg or 360 mg at Week 12 and every 8 weeks thereafter for up to an additional 52 weeks 
b Includes: application site pain, injection site erythema, injection site pain, injection site pruritus, injection site 
reaction 
c Some subjects had multiple occurrences of injection site reactions. In this table, injection site reactions are counted 
only once per subject for the rate calculations. 
d Includes: rash and rash macular 
 
Specific Adverse Drug Reactions 
The rates of infections, serious infections, and lipid elevations in subjects with UC who received 
SKYRIZI compared to subjects who received placebo in the induction studies (UC-1 and UC-3) 
and maintenance study (UC-2) were similar to the rates in subjects with CD who received 
SKYRIZI compared to subjects who received placebo in the induction studies (CD-1, CD-2, and 
CD-4) and maintenance study (CD-3).  
 
6.2 Immunogenicity 
As with all therapeutic proteins, there is potential for immunogenicity. The detection of antibody 
formation is highly dependent on the sensitivity and specificity of the assay. Additionally, the 
observed incidence of antibody (including neutralizing antibody) positivity in an assay may be 
influenced by several factors including assay methodology, sample handling, timing of sample 
collection, concomitant medications, and underlying disease. For these reasons, comparison of 
the incidence of antibodies in the studies described below with the incidence of antibodies in 
other studies or to other products, including other risankizumab products, may be misleading.  
Plaque Psoriasis 
By Week 52, approximately 24% (263/1079) of subjects treated with SKYRIZI at the 
recommended dose developed antibodies to risankizumab-rzaa. Of the subjects who developed 
antibodies to risankizumab-rzaa, approximately 57% (14% of all subjects treated with SKYRIZI) 
had antibodies that were classified as neutralizing. Higher antibody titers in approximately 1% of 
subjects treated with SKYRIZI were associated with lower risankizumab-rzaa concentrations and 
reduced clinical response.  


 
 
 
 
 
Psoriatic Arthritis 
By Week 28, approximately 12.1% (79/652) of subjects treated with SKYRIZI at the 
recommended dose developed antibodies to risankizumab-rzaa. None of the subjects who 
developed antibodies to risankizumab-rzaa had antibodies that were classified as neutralizing. 
Antibodies to risankizumab-rzaa were not associated with changes in clinical response for 
psoriatic arthritis. A higher proportion of subjects with anti-drug antibodies experienced 
hypersensitivity reactions (6.3% (5/79)) and injection site reactions (2.5% (2/79)) compared to 
subjects without anti-drug antibodies (3.8% (22/574) with hypersensitivity reactions and 0.7% 
(4/574) with injection site reactions). None of these hypersensitivity and injection site reactions 
led to discontinuation of risankizumab-rzaa. 
 
Crohn’s Disease 
By Week 64, antibodies to risankizumab-rzaa developed in approximately 3.4% (2/58) of 
subjects treated with SKYRIZI induction followed by 360 mg maintenance regimen. No subjects 
(0/57) treated with SKYRIZI induction followed by 180 mg maintenance regimen developed 
antibodies to risankizumab-rzaa. None of the subjects who developed antibodies to 
risankizumab-rzaa had antibodies that were classified as neutralizing. 
Ulcerative Colitis 
By Week 64, antibodies to risankizumab-rzaa developed in approximately 8.9% (8/90) or 4.4% 
(4/91) of subjects treated with SKYRIZI induction followed by the 180 mg or 360 mg 
maintenance regimen, respectively. Of the subjects who developed antibodies to risankizumab-
rzaa, 75% (6.7% of all subjects treated with SKYRIZI induction followed by the 180 mg 
maintenance regimen) or 50% (2.2% of all subjects treated with SKYRIZI induction followed by 
the 360 mg maintenance regimen), respectively, had antibodies that were classified as 
neutralizing.  
6.3 Postmarketing Experience 
The following adverse reactions have been reported during post-approval of SKYRIZI. Because 
these reactions are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always 
possible to reliably estimate their frequency or establish a causal relationship to SKYRIZI 
exposure: 
• Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders: eczema and rash 
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS 
8.1 Pregnancy 
Pregnancy Exposure Registry 
There is a pregnancy exposure registry that monitors outcomes in women who become pregnant 
while treated with SKYRIZI. Patients should be encouraged to enroll by calling 1-877-302-2161 or 
visiting http://glowpregnancyregistry.com. 


 
 
 
 
 
Risk Summary 
Available pharmacovigilance and clinical trial data with risankizumab use in pregnant women 
are insufficient to establish a drug-associated risk of major birth defects, miscarriage or other 
adverse maternal or fetal outcomes. Although there are no data on risankizumab-rzaa, 
monoclonal antibodies can be actively transported across the placenta, and SKYRIZI may cause 
immunosuppression in the in utero-exposed infant. There are adverse pregnancy outcomes in 
women with inflammatory bowel disease (see Clinical Considerations). 
In an enhanced pre- and post-natal developmental toxicity study, pregnant cynomolgus monkeys 
were administered subcutaneous doses of 5 or 50 mg/kg risankizumab-rzaa once weekly during 
the period of organogenesis up to parturition. Increased fetal/infant loss was noted in pregnant 
monkeys at the 50 mg/kg dose (see Data). The 50 mg/kg dose in pregnant monkeys resulted in 
approximately 5 times the exposure (AUC) in humans administered the maximum recommended 
induction dose (1,200 mg) and 32 times the exposure (AUC) to the maximum recommended 
maintenance dose (360 mg). No risankizumab-rzaa-related effects on functional or 
immunological development were observed in infant monkeys from birth through 6 months of 
age. The clinical significance of these findings for humans is unknown.  
All pregnancies have a background risk of birth defect, loss, or other adverse outcomes. The 
background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated population is unknown. 
In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and 
miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2% to 4% and 15% to 20%, respectively.  
 
Clinical Considerations  
Disease-associated maternal and embryo/fetal risk 
Published data suggest that the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes in women with inflammatory 
bowel disease is associated with increased disease activity. Adverse pregnancy outcomes include 
preterm delivery (before 37 weeks of gestation), low birth weight (less than 2,500 g) infants, and 
small for gestational age at birth. 
 
Fetal/Neonatal adverse reactions 
Transport of endogenous IgG antibodies across the placenta increases as pregnancy progresses, 
and peaks during the third trimester. Because risankizumab may interfere with immune response 
to infections, risks and benefits should be considered prior to administering live vaccines to 
infants exposed to SKYRIZI in utero. There are insufficient data regarding infant serum levels of 
risankizumab at birth and the duration of persistence of risankizumab in infant serum after birth. 
Although a specific timeframe to delay live virus immunizations in infants exposed in utero is 
unknown, a minimum of 5 months after birth should be considered because of the half-life of the 
product. 
 
Data 
Animal Data 
An enhanced pre- and post-natal developmental toxicity study was conducted in cynomolgus 
monkeys. Pregnant cynomolgus monkeys were administered weekly subcutaneous doses of 
risankizumab-rzaa of 5 or 50 mg/kg from gestation day 20 to parturition, and the cynomolgus 


 
 
 
 
 
monkeys (mother and infants) were monitored for 6 months after delivery. No maternal toxicity 
was noted in this study. There were no treatment-related effects on growth and development, 
malformations, developmental immunotoxicology, or neurobehavioral development. However, a 
dose-dependent increase in fetal/infant loss was noted in the risankizumab-rzaa-treated groups 
(32% and 43% in the 5 mg/kg and 50 mg/kg groups, respectively) compared with the vehicle 
control group (19%). The increased fetal/infant loss in the 50 mg/kg group was considered to be 
related to risankizumab-rzaa treatment. The no-observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) for 
maternal toxicity was identified as 50 mg/kg, and the NOAEL for developmental toxicity was 
identified as 5 mg/kg. The 5 mg/kg dose in pregnant monkeys resulted in approximately 0.6 
times the exposure (AUC) in humans administered the maximum recommended induction dose 
(1,200 mg) and 5 times the exposure (AUC) in humans administered the maximum 
recommended maintenance dose (360 mg). In the infants, mean serum concentrations increased 
in a dose-dependent manner and were approximately 17%-86% of the respective maternal 
concentrations. Following delivery, most adult female cynomolgus monkeys and all infants from 
the risankizumab-rzaa-treated groups had measurable serum concentrations of risankizumab-rzaa 
up to 91 days postpartum. Serum concentrations were below detectable levels at 180 days 
postpartum.  
8.2 Lactation 
Risk Summary 
There are no data on the presence of risankizumab-rzaa in human milk, the effects on the 
breastfed infant, or the effects on milk production. Endogenous maternal IgG and monoclonal 
antibodies are transferred in human milk. The effects of local gastrointestinal exposure and 
limited systemic exposure in the breastfed infant to risankizumab-rzaa are unknown. The 
developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should be considered along with the mother's 
clinical need for SKYRIZI and any potential adverse effects on the breastfed infant from 
SKYRIZI or from the underlying maternal condition.  
8.4 Pediatric Use 
The safety and effectiveness of SKYRIZI have not been established in pediatric patients. 
8.5 Geriatric Use 
Of the 6,862 subjects exposed to SKYRIZI, a total of 664 were 65 years or older (243 subjects 
with plaque psoriasis, 246 subjects with psoriatic arthritis, 72 subjects with Crohn’s disease and 
103 subjects with ulcerative colitis), and 71 subjects were 75 years or older.  
Clinical studies of SKYRIZI, within each indication, did not include sufficient numbers of 
subjects 65 years of age and older to determine whether they respond differently from younger 
adult subjects. 
No clinically meaningful differences in the pharmacokinetics of risankizumab-rzaa were 
observed based on age[see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
 


 
 
 
 
 
11 DESCRIPTION 
Risankizumab-rzaa, an interleukin-23 (IL-23) antagonist, is a humanized immunoglobulin G1 
(IgG1) monoclonal antibody. Risankizumab-rzaa is produced by recombinant DNA technology 
in Chinese hamster ovary cells and has an approximate molecular weight of 149 kDa.  
SKYRIZI (risankizumab-rzaa) injection 90 mg/mL prefilled syringe for subcutaneous use 
Each SKYRIZI prefilled syringe contains a sterile, preservative-free, colorless to slightly yellow, 
and clear to slightly opalescent solution. Each syringe delivers 90 mg of risankizumab-rzaa, and 
inactive ingredients polysorbate 20 (0.2 mg), sodium succinate (0.63 mg), sorbitol (41 mg), 
succinic acid (0.059 mg), and Water for Injection, USP. The pH is 6.2. 
SKYRIZI (risankizumab-rzaa) injection 150 mg/mL prefilled syringe or prefilled pen for 
subcutaneous use 
Each SKYRIZI prefilled pen or prefilled syringe contains a sterile, preservative-free, colorless to 
yellow, and clear to slightly opalescent solution. Each syringe and pen delivers 150 mg of 
risankizumab-rzaa and the inactive ingredients glacial acetic acid (0.054 mg), polysorbate 20 
(0.2 mg), sodium acetate (0.75 mg), trehalose (63.33 mg), and Water for Injection, USP. The pH 
is 5.7. 
SKYRIZI (risankizumab-rzaa) injection 180 mg/1.2mL (150 mg/mL) prefilled cartridge for use 
with supplied on-body-injector for subcutaneous use  
Each SKYRIZI prefilled cartridge contains a sterile, preservative-free, colorless to yellow, and 
clear to slightly opalescent solution. Each cartridge delivers 180 mg of risankizumab-rzaa, and 
the inactive ingredients glacial acetic acid (0.065 mg), polysorbate 20 (0.24 mg), sodium acetate 
(0.9 mg), trehalose (76 mg), and Water for Injection, USP. The pH is 5.7.  
SKYRIZI (risankizumab-rzaa) injection 360 mg/2.4 mL (150 mg/mL) prefilled cartridge for use 
with the supplied on-body injector for subcutaneous use 
Each SKYRIZI prefilled cartridge contains a sterile, preservative-free, colorless to yellow, and 
clear to slightly opalescent solution. Each cartridge delivers 360 mg of risankizumab-rzaa, and 
the inactive ingredients glacial acetic acid (0.13 mg), polysorbate 20 (0.48 mg), sodium acetate 
(1.8 mg), trehalose (152 mg), and Water for Injection, USP. The pH is 5.7. 
SKYRIZI 600 mg/10 mL (60 mg/mL) in a vial for intravenous infusion 
SKYRIZI (risankizumab-rzaa) injection 600 mg/10 mL (60 mg/mL) is a sterile, preservative-
free, colorless to slightly yellow, and clear to slightly opalescent solution in a 10 mL single-dose 
vial. 
Each 10 mL single-dose vial contains 600 mg of risankizumab-rzaa, and the inactive ingredients 
glacial acetic acid (0.54 mg), polysorbate 20 (2 mg), sodium acetate (7.5 mg), trehalose (633.3 
mg), and Water for Injection, USP. The pH is 5.7. 


 
 
 
 
 
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
12.1 Mechanism of Action 
Risankizumab-rzaa is a humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody that selectively binds to the p19 
subunit of human IL-23 cytokine and inhibits its interaction with the IL-23 receptor. IL-23 is a 
naturally occurring cytokine that is involved in inflammatory and immune responses.  
Risankizumab-rzaa inhibits the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines.  
12.2 Pharmacodynamics 
No formal pharmacodynamics studies have been conducted with risankizumab-rzaa. 
12.3 Pharmacokinetics 
Risankizumab-rzaa plasma concentrations, after single dose administration increased dose 
proportionally from 18 mg to 360 mg when administered subcutaneously (0.12 to 2.4 times the 
lowest recommended dose and 0.05 to 1 times the highest recommended dose) and from 200 mg 
to 1,800 mg when administered as an up to 3-hour intravenous infusion (0.2 to 3 times the 
recommended dose) in healthy subjects.   
In subjects with plaque psoriasis treated with 150 mg subcutaneously at Weeks 0, 4, and every 
12 weeks thereafter, steady-state peak concentration (Cmax) and trough concentration (Ctrough) are 
estimated to be 12 mcg/mL and 2 mcg/mL, respectively.  
With the same subcutaneous dosing regimen, the pharmacokinetics of risankizumab-rzaa in 
subjects with psoriatic arthritis were similar to that in subjects with plaque psoriasis. 
In subjects with Crohn’s disease treated with 600 mg intravenous induction dose at Weeks 0, 4, 
and 8, followed by 180 mg or 360 mg subcutaneous maintenance dose at Week 12 and every 8 
weeks thereafter, the median Cmax and Ctrough are estimated to be 156 mcg/mL and 38.8 mcg/mL, 
respectively, during Weeks 8-12; and the steady state median Cmax and Ctrough are estimated to be 
14.0 mcg/mL and 4.1 mcg/mL, respectively for 180 mg or 28.0 mcg/mL and 8.1 mcg/mL, 
respectively, for 360 mg, during Weeks 40-48.  
In subjects with ulcerative colitis treated with 1,200 mg intravenous induction dose at Weeks 0, 
4, and 8, followed by 180 mg or 360 mg subcutaneous maintenance dose at Week 12 and every 8 
weeks thereafter, the median Cmax and Ctrough are estimated to be 350 and 87.7 mcg/mL, 
respectively, during the induction period (Weeks 8-12); and the steady state median Cmax and 
Ctrough are estimated to be 19.6 and 4.64 µg/mL, respectively, for 180 mg or 39.2 mcg/mL and 
9.29 mcg/mL, respectively, for 360 mg, during the maintenance period (Weeks 40-48). 
Based on population pharmacokinetic analyses, the pharmacokinetics of risankizumab-rzaa in 
subjects with ulcerative colitis was generally similar to that in subjects with Crohn’s disease. 
Absorption 
The absolute bioavailability of risankizumab-rzaa was estimated to be 74 to 89% following 
subcutaneous injection. In healthy subjects, following administration of a single subcutaneous 
dose, Cmax was reached by 3 to 14 days.  
Distribution 


 
 
 
 
 
The estimated steady-state volume of distribution (inter-subject CV%) was 11.2 L (34%) in 
subjects with plaque psoriasis, and 7.68 L (64%) in subjects with Crohn’s disease.  
Elimination 
The estimated systemic clearance (inter-subject CV%) was 0.31 L/day (24%) and 0.30 L/day 
(34%) and terminal elimination half-life was approximately 28 days and 21 days in subjects with 
plaque psoriasis and Crohn’s disease, respectively.  
Metabolism 
The metabolic pathway of risankizumab-rzaa has not been characterized. As a humanized IgG1 
monoclonal antibody, risankizumab-rzaa is expected to be degraded into small peptides and 
amino acids via catabolic pathways in a manner similar to endogenous IgG.  
Specific Populations 
Risankizumab-rzaa exposures (Ctrough) in geriatric patients (≥65 years) are comparable to those in 
younger adult patients within each indication. No studies have been conducted to determine the 
effect of renal or hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of risankizumab-rzaa.  
Body Weight 
Risankizumab-rzaa clearance and volume of distribution increase and plasma concentrations 
decrease as body weight increases; however, no dose adjustment is recommended based on body 
weight. 
Drug Interaction Studies 
Cytochrome P450 Substrates 
No clinically significant changes in exposure of caffeine (CYP1A2 substrate), warfarin 
(CYP2C9 substrate), omeprazole (CYP2C19 substrate), metoprolol (CYP2D6 substrate), or 
midazolam (CYP3A substrate) were observed when used concomitantly with risankizumab-rzaa 
in subjects with plaque psoriasis (risankizumab-rzaa 150 mg administered subcutaneously at 
Weeks 0, 4, 8, and 12) and subjects with Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis (risankizumab-rzaa 
1,800 mg administered intravenously at Weeks 0, 4, and 8, i.e., 3 times and 1.5 times the 
recommended dose for Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis, respectively).  
13 NONCLINICAL TOXICOLOGY 
13.1 Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility 
Carcinogenicity and mutagenicity studies have not been conducted with SKYRIZI.  
No effects on male fertility parameters were observed in sexually mature male cynomolgus 
monkeys dosed weekly for 26 weeks with 50 mg/kg risankizumab-rzaa at 4 times the exposure 
(AUC) in humans administered the maximum recommended induction dose (1,200 mg) and 39 
times the exposure in humans administered the maximum recommended maintenance dose (360 
mg).  


 
 
 
 
 
14 CLINICAL STUDIES 
14.1 Plaque Psoriasis 
Four multicenter, randomized, double-blind studies [PsO-1 (NCT02684370), PsO-2 
(NCT02684357), PsO-3 (NCT02672852), and PsO-4 (NCT02694523)] enrolled 2,109 subjects 
18 years of age and older with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis who had a body surface area 
(BSA) involvement of ≥10%, a static Physician’s Global Assessment (sPGA) score of ≥3 
(“moderate”) in the overall assessment (plaque thickness/induration, erythema, and scaling) of 
psoriasis on a severity scale of 0 to 4, and a Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) score ≥12.  
Overall, subjects had a median baseline PASI score of 17.8 and a median BSA of 20%. Baseline 
sPGA score was 4 (“severe”) in 19% of subjects. A total of 10% of study subjects had a history 
of diagnosed psoriatic arthritis.  
Across all studies, 38% of subjects had received prior phototherapy, 48% had received prior non-
biologic systemic therapy, and 42% had received prior biologic therapy for the treatment of 
psoriasis.  
Studies PsO-1 and PsO-2 
In studies PsO-1 and PsO-2, 997 subjects were enrolled (including 598 subjects randomized to 
the SKYRIZI 150 mg group, 200 subjects randomized to the placebo group, and 199 to the 
biologic active control group). Subjects received treatment at Weeks 0, 4, and every 12 weeks 
thereafter.  
Both studies assessed the responses at Week 16 compared with placebo for the two co-primary 
endpoints:  
• the proportion of subjects who achieved an sPGA score of 0 (“clear”) or 1 (“almost clear”) 
• the proportion of subjects who achieved at least a 90% reduction from baseline PASI 
(PASI 90) 
  
Secondary endpoints included the proportion of subjects who achieved PASI 100, sPGA 0, and 
Psoriasis Symptom Scale (PSS) 0 at Week 16.  
The results are presented in Table 6.  
 
  
Table 6. Efficacy Results at Week 16 in Adults with Plaque Psoriasis in PsO-1 and PsO-2 
  
PsO-1 
PsO-2 
  
SKYRIZI 
(N=304) 
n (%) 
Placebo 
(N=102) 
n (%) 
SKYRIZI 
(N=294) 
n (%) 
Placebo 
(N=98) 
n (%) 
sPGA 0 or 1 
(“clear or 
almost clear”)a 
267 (88) 
8 (8) 
246 (84) 
5 (5) 
PASI 90a 
229 (75) 
5 (5) 
220 (75) 
2 (2) 
sPGA 0 
(“clear”) 
112 (37) 
2 (2) 
150 (51) 
3 (3) 
PASI 100 
109 (36) 
0 (0) 
149 (51) 
2 (2) 


 
 
 
 
 
a Co-primary endpoints  
 
  
Examination of age, gender, race, body weight, baseline PASI score and previous treatment with 
systemic or biologic agents did not identify differences in response to SKYRIZI among these 
subgroups at Week 16.  
In PsO-1 and PsO-2 at Week 52, subjects receiving SKYRIZI achieved sPGA 0 (58% and 60%, 
respectively), PASI 90 (82% and 81%, respectively), and PASI 100 (56% and 60%, 
respectively).  
Patient Reported Outcomes 
Improvements in signs and symptoms related to pain, redness, itching and burning at Week 16 
compared to placebo were observed in both studies as assessed by the PSS. In PsO-1 and PsO-2, 
about 30% of the subjects who received SKYRIZI achieved PSS 0 (“none”) at Week 16 
compared to 1% of the subjects who received placebo.  
Study PsO-3 
Study PsO-3 enrolled 507 subjects (407 randomized to SKYRIZI 150 mg and 100 to placebo). 
Subjects received treatment at Weeks 0, 4, and every 12 weeks thereafter.  
At Week 16, SKYRIZI was superior to placebo on the co-primary endpoints of sPGA 0 or 1 
(84% SKYRIZI and 7% placebo) and PASI 90 (73% SKYRIZI and 2% placebo). The respective 
response rates for SKYRIZI and placebo at Week 16 were: sPGA 0 (46% SKYRIZI and 1% 
placebo); PASI 100 (47% SKYRIZI and 1% placebo); and PASI 75 (89% SKYRIZI and 8% 
placebo).  
Maintenance and Durability of Response 
In PsO-1 and PsO-2, among the subjects who received SKYRIZI and had PASI 100 at Week 16, 
80% (206/258) of the subjects who continued on SKYRIZI had PASI 100 at Week 52. For PASI 
90 responders at Week 16, 88% (398/450) of the subjects had PASI 90 at Week 52.  
In PsO-3, subjects who were originally on SKYRIZI and had sPGA 0 or 1 at Week 28 were re-
randomized to continue SKYRIZI every 12 weeks or withdrawal of therapy. At Week 52, 87% 
(97/111) of the subjects re-randomized to continue treatment with SKYRIZI had sPGA 0 or 1 
compared to 61% (138/225) who were re-randomized to withdrawal of SKYRIZI.  
14.2 Psoriatic Arthritis 
The safety and efficacy of SKYRIZI were assessed in 1407 subjects in 2 randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled studies (964 in PsA-1 [NCT03675308] and 443 in PsA-2 
[NCT03671148]) in subjects 18 years and older with active psoriatic arthritis (PsA). 
Subjects in these studies had a diagnosis of PsA for at least 6 months based on the Classification 
Criteria for Psoriatic Arthritis (CASPAR), a median duration of PsA of 4.9 years at baseline, ≥ 5 
tender joints and ≥ 5 swollen joints, and active plaque psoriasis or psoriatic nail disease at 
baseline. Regarding baseline clinical presentation, 55.9% of subjects had ≥3% BSA with active 
plaque psoriasis; 63.4% and 27.9% of subjects had enthesitis and dactylitis, respectively. In PsA-
1 where psoriatic nail disease was further assessed, 67.3% had psoriatic nail disease. 


 
 
 
 
 
In PsA-1, all subjects had a previous inadequate response or intolerance to non-biologic 
DMARD therapy and were biologic naïve. In PsA-2, 53.5% of subjects had a previous 
inadequate response or intolerance to non-biologic DMARD therapy, and 46.5% of subjects had 
a previous inadequate response or intolerance to biologic therapy.   
In both studies, subjects were randomized to receive SKYRIZI 150 mg or placebo at Weeks 0, 4, 
and 16. Starting from Week 28, all subjects received SKYRIZI every 12 weeks. Both studies 
included a long-term extension for up to an additional 204 weeks. Regarding use of concomitant 
medications, 59.6% of subjects were receiving concomitant methotrexate (MTX), 11.6% were 
receiving concomitant non-biologic DMARDs other than MTX, and 28.9% were receiving 
SKYRIZI monotherapy.  
For both studies, the primary endpoint was the proportion of subjects who achieved an American 
College of Rheumatology (ACR) 20 response at Week 24.  
Clinical Response  
In both studies, treatment with SKYRIZI resulted in significant improvement in measures of 
disease activity compared with placebo at Week 24. See Tables 7 and 8 for key efficacy results. 
In both studies, similar responses were seen regardless of concomitant non-biologic DMARD 
use, number of prior non-biologic DMARDs, age, gender, race, and BMI. In PsA-2, responses 
were seen regardless of prior biologic therapy. 
 
 
Table 7. Efficacy Results in Study PsA-1 
Endpoint 
Placebo 
N=481 
Response Rate  
SKYRIZI  
N=483 
Response Rate  
Difference from Placebo  
(95% CI) 
ACR20 Response*  
   Week 16  
33.4% 
56.3%a 
23.1% (16.8, 29.4) 
   Week 24  
33.5% 
57.3%a 
24.0% (18.0, 30.0) 
ACR50 Response*  
   Week 16 
11.1% 
26.4%  
15.4% (10.6, 20.2) 
   Week 24 
11.3% 
33.4 % 
22.2% (17.3, 27.2) 
ACR70 Response*  
   Week 16 
2.7% 
11.8%  
9.2% (6.1, 12.4) 
   Week 24 
4.7% 
15.3%  
10.5% (6.9, 14.2) 
a. multiplicity-controlled p≤0.001, SKYRIZI vs. placebo comparison.  
*A Subject was considered as a non-responder after initiation of rescue medication or concomitant medications 
for PsA that could meaningfully impact efficacy assessment.  
 
Table 8. Efficacy Results in Study PsA-2 
Endpoint 
Placebo 
N=219 
Response Rate 
SKYRIZI  
N=224 
Response Rate 
Difference from Placebo 
(95% CI) 
ACR20 Response*  


 
 
 
 
 
   Week 16  
25.3%  
48.3% a 
22.6% (13.9, 31.2) 
   Week 24  
26.5%  
51.3% a 
24.5% (15.9, 33.0) 
ACR50 Response*  
   Week 16 
6.8% 
20.3% 
13.5% (7.3, 19.7) 
   Week 24 
9.3% 
26.3% 
16.6% (9.7, 23.6) 
ACR70 Response*  
   Week 16 
3.4% 
11.2% 
7.8% (3.0, 12.6) 
   Week 24 
5.9% 
12.0% 
6.0% (0.8, 11.3) 
a. multiplicity-controlled p≤0.001, SKYRIZI vs. placebo comparison.  
*A Subject was considered as a non-responder after initiation of rescue medication or concomitant medications 
for PsA that could meaningfully impact efficacy assessment.  
 
The percent of subjects achieving ACR20 responses in study PsA-1 through Week 24 is shown 
in Figure 1. 
Figure 1. Percent of Subjects Achieving ACR20 Responses in Study PsA-1 through Week 24 
 
The results of the components of the ACR response criteria for both studies are shown in Table 9.  
 
Table 9. Mean Change from Baseline in ACR Components 
 
 
PsA-1  
PsA-2  


 
 
 
 
 
 
Placebo 
(N=481)  
Mean (SD) 
SKYRIZI  
(N=483)  
Mean (SD) 
Placebo 
(N=219)  
Mean (SD) 
SKYRIZI  
(N=224)  
Mean (SD) 
Number of Swollen Joints (0-66) 
 
    Baseline 
12.2 (8.0) 
12.1 (7.8) 
13.6 (9.0) 
13.0 (8.7) 
    Mean change at Week 16 
-5.5 (7.0) 
-7.7 (7.2) 
-5.4 (8.5) 
-8.0 (7.4) 
    Mean change at Week 24 
-6.7 (7.2) 
-8.7 (7.2) 
-6.5 (7.8) 
-9.1 (7.6) 
Number of Tender Joints (0-68) 
 
    Baseline 
20.5 (12.8) 
20.8 (14.0) 
22.3 (13.8) 
22.8 (14.9) 
    Mean change at Week 16 
-6.3 (11.1) 
-10.7 (11.4)  
-6.0 (13.1) 
-11.3 (13.0)  
    Mean change at Week 24 
-7.9 (10.7) 
-12.0 (12.3)  
-8.3 (11.3) 
-13.0 (12.5) 
Patient’s Assessment of Pain a 
 
    Baseline 
57.1 (22.6) 
57.1 (22.6) 
57.0 (23.1) 
55.0 (23.5) 
    Mean change at Week 16 
-8.6 (23.7) 
-18.4 (26.3)  
-5.7 (22.7) 
-14.4 (26.4)  
    Mean change at Week 24 
-10.9 (25.4) 
-21.4 (26.5)  
-8.7 (25.3) 
-15.3 (26.5)  
Patient’s Global Assessment a 
 
    Baseline 
57.4 (22.1) 
57.9 (21.7) 
56.2 (23.0) 
56.2 (21.8) 
   Mean change at Week 16 
-10.2 (23.9) 
-19.4 (25.7)  
-4.9 (23.6) 
-17.0 (27.1)  
    Mean change at Week 24 
-11.1 (25.1) 
-22.6 (26.9)  
-8.7 (25.4) 
-17.7 (27.7)  
Physician Global Assessment a 
 
    Baseline 
62.4 (17.0) 
61.3 (17.6) 
60.7 (16.4) 
63.0 (17.0) 
    Mean change at Week 16 
-18.3 (22.5) 
-31.1 (23.4)  
-19.0 (23.3) 
-32.7 (24.7)  
    Mean change at Week 24 
-22.2 (22.8) 
-34.8 (23.2)  
-21.3 (25.2) 
-35.5 (25.6)  
Health Assessment Questionnaire - Disability Index (HAQ-DI) b 
 
    Baseline 
1.2 (0.7) 
1.2 (0.7) 
1.1 (0.6) 
1.1 (0.6) 
    Mean change at Week 16 
-0.1 (0.5) 
-0.3 (0.5)  
-0.1 (0.5) 
-0.2 (0.5) 
    Mean change at Week 24 
-0.1 (0.5) 
-0.3 (0.5)  
-0.1 (0.4) 
-0.2 (0.5)  
High sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) mg/L 
 
    Baseline 
11.3 (14.1) 
11.9 (15.9) 
8.2 (17.1) 
7.4 (10.9) 
    Mean change at Week 16 
-0.3 (14.7) 
-4.8 (14.2)  
-0.1 (6.8) 
-2.1 (7.5)  
    Mean change at Week 24 
-0.2 (11.7) 
-4.3 (12.8)  
-0.5 (14.5) 
-1.8 (13.4) 
SD= Standard Deviation. 
a. 
Assessment based on Visual Analog Scale (100 mm) with the left end indicating “no pain” (for patient’s 
assessment of pain), “very well” (for patient global assessment), or “no arthritis activity” (for physician global 
assessment) and the right end indicating “the worst possible pain” (for patient assessment of pain), “poor” (for 
patient global assessment), or “extremely active arthritis” (for physician global assessment). 
b.  Disability Index of the Health Assessment Questionnaire; 0 = no difficulty to 3 = inability to perform, measures 
the patient’s ability to perform the following: dressing, arising, eating, walking, hygiene, reaching, gripping, and 
activities of daily living. 
 


 
 
 
 
 
Treatment with SKYRIZI resulted in improvement in dactylitis and enthesitis in subjects with 
pre-existing dactylitis or enthesitis. 
In patients with coexistent plaque psoriasis receiving SKYRIZI, the skin lesions of psoriasis 
improved with treatment, relative to placebo, as measured by the Psoriasis Area Severity Index 
(PASI 90) at Week 24. 
Physical Function  
In both studies, patients treated with SKYRIZI showed statistically significant improvement 
from baseline in physical function compared with placebo as assessed by HAQ-DI at Week 24 
(Table 7). The mean difference (95% CI) from placebo in HAQ-DI change from baseline at 
Week 24 was -0.20 (-0.26, -0.14) in study PsA-1 and -0.16 (-0.26, -0.07) in study PsA-2. 
In both studies, a greater proportion of subjects achieved a reduction of at least 0.35 in HAQ-DI 
score from baseline in the SKYRIZI group compared with placebo at Week 24.  
Other Health Related Outcomes 
In both studies, general health status was assessed by the 36-Item Short Form Health Survey (SF-
36 V2). Fatigue was assessed by Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy Fatigue 
Scale (FACIT-Fatigue).  
In both studies at Week 24, subjects treated with SKYRIZI showed improvements in the SF-36 
physical component summary scores compared with subjects who received placebo. There were 
also numerical improvements in subjects treated with SKYRIZI in physical functioning, role 
physical, bodily pain, general health, vitality, social functioning, mental health, role emotional 
domain scores and mental component summary scores in both studies at week 24 compared to 
placebo. In both studies at Week 24, subjects treated with SKYRIZI showed improvements in 
FACIT-Fatigue scores compared with subjects who received placebo. 
14.3 Crohn’s Disease  
Induction Trials (Studies CD-1 and CD-2) 
In two 12-week induction studies (CD-1; NCT03105128 and CD-2; NCT03104413), subjects 
with moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease were randomized to receive SKYRIZI 600 
mg, SKYRIZI 1,200 mg, or placebo as an intravenous infusion at Week 0, Week 4, and Week 8. 
Moderately to severely active CD was defined as a Crohn’s Disease Activity Index (CDAI) of 
220 to 450 and Simple Endoscopic Score for Crohn’s disease (SES-CD) ≥6 (or ≥4 for isolated 
ileal disease). Subjects with inadequate response, loss of response, or intolerance to oral 
aminosalicylates, corticosteroids, immunosuppressants, and/or biologic therapy were enrolled.   
At baseline, the median CDAI was 307 (range: 76 – 634) and 307 (range: 72 – 651), and the 
median SES-CD was 12 (range: 4 – 45) and 13 (range 4 – 40), in CD-1 and CD-2, respectively. 
In CD-1, 58% (491/850) of subjects had failed or were intolerant to treatment with one or more 
biologic therapies (prior biologic failure). All subjects in CD-2 had prior biologic failure. At 
baseline, 30% and 34% of patients were receiving corticosteroids, 24% and 23% of patients were 
receiving immunomodulators (azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, methotrexate), and 31% and 19% 
of patients were receiving aminosalicylates in CD-1 and CD-2, respectively. In CD-1 and CD-2 


 
 
 
 
 
combined, the median age was 36 years (ranging from 16 to 80 years), 81% (1145/1419) of 
subjects were white, and 53% (753/1419) were male. 
In CD-1 and CD-2, the co-primary endpoints were clinical remission and endoscopic response at 
Week 12. Secondary endpoints included clinical response and endoscopic remission (see Table 
10 and Table 11). The SKYRIZI 1,200 mg dosage did not demonstrate additional treatment 
benefit over the 600 mg dosage and is not a recommended regimen [see Dosage and 
Administration (2.6)]. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
Table 10. Proportion of Subjects Meeting Efficacy Endpoints at Week 12 – Study CD-1  
Endpoint 
Placebo  
 
SKYRIZI 
600 mg 
Intravenous 
Infusiona 
 
Treatment 
Difference b 
(95% CI) 
Clinical Remissionc,d 
Total Population 
N=175 
25% 
N=336 
45% 
21% e 
(12%, 29%) 
Prior biologic failuref 
N=97 
26%  
N=195 
42%  
 
   Without prior biologic failure 
N=78 
23% 
 
N=141 
49% 
 
 
Endoscopic Responsec,g 
Total Population 
N=175 
12% 
N=336 
40% 
28% e 
(21%, 35%) 
   Prior biologic failuref 
N=97 
11% 
N=195 
33% 
 
   Without prior biologic failure 
N=78 
13% 
N=141 
50% 
 
Clinical Responseh 
Total Population 
N=175 
37% 
N=336 
60% 
23% e 
(14%, 32%) 
   Prior biologic failuref 
N=97 
34% 
N=195 
58% 
 
   Without prior biologic failure 
N=78  
40% 
N=141 
62% 
 
Endoscopic Remissioni 
Total Population 
N=175 
9% 
N=336 
24% 
15% e 
(9%, 21%) 
   Prior biologic failuref 
N=97 
5% 
N=195 
18% 
 
   Without prior biologic failure 
N=78 
14% 
N=141 
32% 
 


 
 
 
 
 
a. SKYRIZI 600 mg as an intravenous infusion at Week 0, Week 4, and Week 8 
b. Adjusted treatment difference (95% CI) based on Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel method adjusted for 
randomization stratification factors  
c. Co-primary endpoints 
d. CDAI <150 
e. p <0.001 
f. Prior biologic failure includes inadequate response, loss of response, or intolerance to one or more biologic 
treatments for CD 
g. A decrease in SES-CD > 50% from baseline, or a decrease of at least 2 points for subjects with a baseline 
score of 4 and isolated ileal disease, based on central reading 
h. A reduction of CDAI ≥ 100 points from baseline 
i. SES-CD ≤ 4 and at least a 2-point reduction from baseline, with no individual subscore greater than 1, based 
on central reading 
  
Table 11. Proportion of Subjects Meeting Efficacy Endpoints at Week 12 – Study CD-2a  
Endpoint 
Placebo  
N=187 
 
SKYRIZI 
600 mg 
Intravenous 
Infusionb 
N=191 
 
Treatment 
Differencec 
(95% CI) 
Clinical Remissiond,e 
20% 
42% 
22% f 
(13%, 31%) 
Endoscopic Response d,g 
11% 
29% 
18% f 
(10%, 25%) 
Clinical Responseh 
30% 
60% 
29% f 
(20%, 39%) 
Endoscopic Remissioni 
4% 
19% 
15% f 
(9%, 21%) 
a. All subjects enrolled in CD-2 had prior biologic failure. Prior biologic failure includes inadequate response, 
loss of response, or intolerance to one or more biologic treatments for CD 
b. SKYRIZI 600 mg as an intravenous infusion at Week 0, Week 4, and Week 8 
c. Adjusted treatment difference (95% CI) based on Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel method adjusted for 
randomization stratification factors 
d. Co-primary endpoints 
e. CDAI score <150 
f. p < 0.001 
g. A decrease in SES-CD > 50% from baseline, or a decrease of at least 2 points for subjects with a baseline 
score of 4 and isolated ileal disease, based on central reading 
h. A reduction of CDAI ≥ 100 points from baseline 
i. SES-CD ≤ 4 and at least a 2-point reduction versus from baseline, with and no individual subscore greater than 
1, based on central reading 
Onset of clinical response and clinical remission based on CDAI occurred as early as Week 4 in 
a greater proportion of subjects treated with the SKYRIZI 600 mg induction regimen compared 
to placebo. 
 


 
 
 
 
 
Reductions in stool frequency and abdominal pain were observed in a greater proportion of 
subjects treated with the SKYRIZI 600 mg induction regimen compared to placebo at Week 12. 
Study CD-3 
The maintenance study CD-3 evaluated 382 subjects who achieved clinical response defined as a 
reduction in CDAI of at least 100 points from baseline after 12 weeks of induction treatment 
with intravenous SKYRIZI in studies CD-1 and CD-2. Subjects were randomized to receive a 
maintenance regimen of SKYRIZI 180 mg or SKYRIZI 360 mg or placebo at Week 12 and 
every 8 weeks thereafter for up to an additional 52 weeks. 
The co-primary endpoints in CD-3 were clinical remission and endoscopic response at Week 52 
(see Table 12).   
 Table 12. Proportion of Subjects Meeting Efficacy Endpoints at Week 52 - Study CD-3 
Endpoint 
Placeboa 
 
SKYRIZI  
180 mg 
Subcutaneous 
Injectionb 
 
SKYRIZI  
360 mg 
Subcutaneous 
Injectionc 
 
 Treatment Difference vs 
Placebod  
(95% CI) 
 
 
 
 
SKYRIZI 
180 mg 
SKYRIZI 
360 mg 
Clinical Remissione,f 
Total Population 
N=130 
46% 
N=135 
61% 
N=117 
57% 
17%g 
(6%, 28%) 
14%g 
(3%, 26%) 
Prior biologic 
failureh 
N=99 
40% 
N=95 
56% 
N=83 
51% 
 
Without prior 
biologic failure 
N=31 
65% 
N=40 
75% 
N=34 
71% 
 
Endoscopic Responsee,i 
Total Population 
N=130 
22% 
N=135 
50% 
N=117 
48% 
30%g 
(20%, 39%) 
31%g 
(21%, 41%)  
Prior biologic 
failureh 
N=99 
21% 
N=95 
44% 
N=83 
44% 
 
Without prior 
biologic failure 
N=31 
23% 
N=40 
65% 
N=34 
59% 
a. The placebo group consisted of patients who were in response to SKYRIZI and were randomized to receive 
placebo at the start of maintenance therapy. 
b. SKYRIZI 180 mg at Week 12 and every 8 weeks thereafter for up to an additional 52 weeks 
c. SKYRIZI 360 mg at Week 12 and every 8 weeks thereafter for up to an additional 52 weeks 
d. Adjusted treatment difference and 95% CI computed using Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel method adjusted for 
randomization stratification factors 
e. Co-primary endpoints 
f. CDAI <150 
g. p <0.05 
h. Prior biologic failure includes inadequate response, loss of response, or intolerance to one or more biologic 
treatments for CD  


 
 
 
 
 
i. A decrease in SES-CD > 50% from baseline, or a decrease of at least 2 points for subjects with a baseline score 
of 4 and isolated ileal disease, based on central reading 
Endoscopic remission was observed at Week 52 in 33% (44/135) of subjects treated with the 
SKYRIZI 180 mg maintenance regimen and 41% (48/117) of subjects treated with the SKYRIZI 
360 mg maintenance regimen, compared to 13% (17/130) of subjects treated with placebo. This 
endpoint was not statistically significant under the prespecified multiple testing procedure.  
14.4 Ulcerative Colitis 
Induction Trial (Study UC-1) 
In the 12-week induction study (UC-1; NCT03398148), 966 subjects with moderately to severely 
active ulcerative colitis were randomized and received SKYRIZI 1,200 mg or placebo as an 
intravenous infusion at Week 0, Week 4, and Week 8. Disease activity was assessed by the 
modified Mayo score (mMS), a 3-component Mayo score (0-9) which consists of the following 
subscores (0 to 3 for each subscore): stool frequency (SFS), rectal bleeding (RBS), and findings 
on centrally read endoscopy score (ES). An ES of 2 was defined by marked erythema, lack of 
vascular pattern, any friability, and/or erosions; an ES of 3 was defined by spontaneous bleeding 
and ulceration. Enrolled subjects had a mMS between 5 and 9, with an ES of 2 or 3. Subjects 
with inadequate response, or intolerance to oral aminosalicylates, corticosteroids, 
immunomodulators, biologics, Janus Kinase inhibitors (JAKi), and/or sphingosine-1-phosphate 
receptor modulators (S1PRM) were enrolled.   
At baseline in UC-1, the median mMS was 7; 37% had severely active disease (mMS >7); 69% 
had an ES of 3. In UC-1, 52% (499/966) of subjects had failed (inadequate response or 
intolerance) treatment with one or more biologics, JAKi or S1PRM. Of these 499 subjects, 484 
(97%) failed biologics and 90 (18%) failed JAK inhibitors.  Enrolled subjects were permitted to 
use a stable dose of oral corticosteroids (up to 20 mg/day prednisone or equivalent), 
immunomodulators, and aminosalicylates. At baseline, 36% of subjects were receiving 
corticosteroids, 16% of subjects were receiving immunomodulators (including azathioprine, 6-
mercaptopurine, methotrexate), and 73% of subjects were receiving aminosalicylates in UC-1. 
In UC-1, the primary endpoint was clinical remission defined using the mMS at Week 12 (see 
Table 13). Key secondary endpoints included clinical response, endoscopic improvement, and 
histologic endoscopic mucosal improvement (see Table 13). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 13. Proportion of Subjects Meeting Efficacy Endpoints at Week 12 – Study UC-1 
Endpoint 
Placebo 
SKYRIZI 1,200 
mg Intravenous 
Infusiona 
Treatment 
Difference (95% 
CI)b 
Clinical Remissionc 
Total Population 
N=320 
8% 
N=646 
24% 
16%h 
(12%, 20%) 
Prior biologic, JAKi, or S1PRM 
failured 
N=168 
6% 
N=331 
14% 
 
Without prior biologic, JAKi, or 
S1PRM failure 
N=152 
9% 
N=315 
33% 
 
Clinical Responsee 
Total Population 
N=320 
36% 
N=646 
65% 
29%h 
(23%, 35%) 
Prior biologic, JAKi, or S1PRM 
failured 
N=168 
32% 
N=331 
56% 
 
Without prior biologic, JAKi, or 
S1PRM failure 
N=152 
41% 
N=315 
75% 
 
Endoscopic Improvementf 
Total Population 
N=320 
12% 
N=646 
36% 
25%h 
(20%, 30%) 
Prior biologic, JAKi, or S1PRM 
failured 
N=168 
10% 
N=331 
26% 
 
Without prior biologic, JAKi, or 
S1PRM failure 
N=152 
14% 
N=315 
47% 
 
Histologic Endoscopic Mucosal Improvement (HEMI)g 
Total Population 
N=320 
7% 
N=646 
24% 
17%h 
(13%, 21%) 
Prior biologic, JAKi, or S1PRM 
failured 
N=168 
7% 
N=331 
16% 
 
Without prior biologic, JAKi, or 
S1PRM failure 
N=152 
8% 
N=315 
33% 
 
a SKYRIZI 1,200 mg as an intravenous infusion at Week 0, Week 4, and Week 8 
b Adjusted treatment difference (95% CI) based on Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel method adjusted for 
stratification factors 
c Per mMS:  SFS ≤ 1 and not greater than baseline, RBS = 0, and ES ≤ 1 without friability 
d Prior failure includes inadequate response or intolerance to treatment with one or more of the 
following: biologic therapies, Janus Kinase inhibitors (JAKi), and/or sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 
modulators (S1PRM) 
e Per mMS: decrease ≥ 2 points and ≥ 30% from baseline, and a decrease in RBS ≥ 1 from baseline or 
an absolute RBS ≤ 1 
f ES ≤ 1 without the evidence of friability 


 
 
 
 
 
g ES ≤ 1 without the evidence of friability and Geboes score ≤ 3.1 (indicating neutrophil infiltration in 
<5% of crypts, no crypt destruction and no erosions, ulcerations or granulation tissue) 
h p < 0.001 
UC-1 was not designed to evaluate the relationship of histologic endoscopic mucosal 
improvement at week 12 to disease progression and long-term outcomes. 
Rectal Bleeding and Stool Frequency Subscores 
 
Decreases in rectal bleeding and stool frequency subscores in subjects treated with SKYRIZI 
compared to placebo were observed as early as 4 weeks. 
Endoscopic Assessment  
Endoscopic remission was defined as ES of 0. At Week 12, a greater proportion of subjects 
treated with SKYRIZI compared to placebo achieved endoscopic remission (11% vs 3%).  
Bowel Urgency 
A greater proportion of subjects treated with the SKYRIZI 1,200 mg induction regimen 
compared to placebo had no bowel urgency (44% vs 27%) at Week 12. 
Fatigue 
In UC-1, subjects treated with SKYRIZI experienced a clinically meaningful improvement in 
fatigue, assessed by change from baseline in FACIT-F score, at Week 12, compared to placebo-
treated subjects. The effect of SKYRIZI to improve fatigue after 12 weeks of induction has not 
been established. 
Other UC Symptoms  
The proportion of subjects who had no nocturnal bowel movements was greater in subjects 
treated with SKYRIZI compared to placebo at Week 12 (67% vs 43%).                  
Maintenance Study UC-2 
The maintenance study (UC-2; NCT03398135) evaluated 547 subjects who received one of three 
SKYRIZI induction regimens, including the 1,200 mg regimen, for 12 weeks in Studies UC-1 or 
UC-3 and demonstrated clinical response per mMS after 12 weeks. Subjects were randomized to 
receive a maintenance regimen of subcutaneous (SC) SKYRIZI 180 mg or SKYRIZI 360 mg or 
placebo at Week 12 and every 8 weeks thereafter for up to an additional 52 weeks. 
In UC-2, 75% (411/547) of subjects had failed (inadequate response or intolerance) treatment 
with one or more biologics, JAKi, or S1PRM. Of these 411 subjects, 407 (99%) failed biologics 
and 78 (19%) failed JAK inhibitors.  
The primary endpoint in UC-2 was clinical remission using mMS at Week 52 (see Table 14). 
Key secondary endpoints included corticosteroid-free clinical remission, endoscopic 
improvement, and histologic endoscopic mucosal improvement (see Table 14). 
Table 14. Proportion of Subjects Meeting Efficacy Endpoints at Week 52 - Study UC-2 


 
 
 
 
 
Endpoint 
Placeboa 
SKYRIZI 180 mg 
SC Injectionb 
 
SKYRIZI 360 mg SC 
Injectionc 
 
Clinical remissiond 
Total Population 
N=182 
26% 
N=179 
45% 
N=186 
41% 
Treatment Difference vs Placeboe 
(95% CI) 
 
20% j 
[11%, 29%] 
16% j 
[7%, 25%] 
Prior biologic, JAKi, or S1PRM 
failuref 
N=138 
24% 
N=134 
41% 
N=139 
32% 
Without prior biologic, JAKi, or 
S1PRM failure 
N=44 
32% 
N=45 
58% 
N=47 
67% 
Corticosteroid-free clinical remissiong 
Total Population 
N=182 
26% 
N=179 
45% 
N=186 
40% 
Treatment Difference vs Placeboe 
(95% CI) 
 
20% j 
[11%, 29%] 
16%j 
[7%, 25%] 
 Prior biologic, JAKi, or S1PRM 
failuref 
N=138 
24% 
N=134 
40% 
N=139 
32% 
Without prior biologic, JAKi, or 
S1PRM failure 
N=44 
32% 
N=45 
58% 
N=47 
64% 
Endoscopic improvementh 
Total Population 
N=182 
31% 
N=179 
51% 
N=186 
48% 
Treatment Difference vs Placeboe 
(95% CI) 
 
20% j 
[11%, 30%] 
18% j 
[8%, 27%] 
Prior biologic, JAKi, or S1PRM 
failuref 
N=138 
30% 
N=134 
48% 
N=139 
39% 
Without prior biologic, JAKi, or 
S1PRM failure 
N=44 
34% 
N=45 
60% 
N=47 
76% 
Histologic Endoscopic Mucosal Improvementi 
Total Population 
N=182 
24% 
N=179 
43% 
N=186 
42% 
Treatment Difference vs Placeboe 
(95% CI) 
 
20% j 
[11%, 29%] 
20% j 
[11%, 29%] 
Prior biologic, JAKi, or S1PRM 
failuref 
N=138 
22% 
N=134 
39% 
N=139 
33% 


 
 
 
 
 
Without prior biologic, JAKi, or 
S1PRM failure 
N=44 
30% 
N=45 
55% 
N=47 
69% 
a The placebo group consisted of subjects who were in response to 12 weeks of SKYRIZI induction and were 
randomized to receive placebo at the start of maintenance therapy. 
b SKYRIZI 180 mg at Week 12 and every 8 weeks thereafter for up to an additional 52 weeks  
c SKYRIZI 360 mg at Week 12 and every 8 weeks thereafter for up to an additional 52 weeks 
d Per mMS: SFS ≤ 1 and not greater than baseline, RBS = 0, and ES ≤ 1 without friability  
e Adjusted treatment difference (95% CI) based on Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel method adjusted for stratification 
factors  
f Prior failure includes inadequate response or intolerance to treatment with one or more of the following: biologic 
therapies, Janus Kinase inhibitors (JAKi), and/or sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor modulators (S1PRM) 
g Clinical remission per mMS at Week 52 and corticosteroid-free for ≥90 days  
h ES ≤ 1 without the evidence of friability 
i ES ≤ 1without the evidence of friability and Geboes score ≤ 3.1 (indicating neutrophil infiltration in <5% of crypts, 
no crypt destruction and no erosions, ulcerations or granulation tissue) 
j p < 0.001 
 
Endoscopic Assessment  
Endoscopic remission was defined as ES of 0. In UC-2, a greater proportion of subjects treated 
with SKYRIZI 180 mg and SKYRIZI 360 mg compared to placebo achieved endoscopic 
remission at Week 52 (23% and 24% vs 15%). 
16 HOW SUPPLIED/STORAGE AND HANDLING 
How Supplied 
SKYRIZI (risankizumab-rzaa) injection is supplied in the following strengths: 
Strength 
Pack Size 
NDC 
Subcutaneous Injection 
150 mg/mL single-dose pen 
Carton of 1 
0074-2100-01 
90 mg/mL single-dose prefilled 
syringe 
Carton of 2 
0074-7040-02 
Carton of 4 
0074-7042-04 
150 mg/mL single-dose prefilled 
syringe 
Carton of 1 
0074-1050-01 
180 mg/1.2 mL (150 mg/mL) single-
dose prefilled cartridge with on-body 
injector 
Kit 
0074-1065-01 
360 mg/2.4 mL (150 mg/mL) single-
dose prefilled cartridge with on-body 
injector 
Kit  
0074-1070-01 
Intravenous Infusion 
600 mg/10 mL (60 mg/mL) single-
dose vial 
Carton of 1  
0074-5015-01 
 


 
 
 
 
 
Subcutaneous Injection 
SKYRIZI 150 mg/mL prefilled syringe or prefilled pen contains a sterile, preservative-free, 
colorless to yellow, and clear to slightly opalescent solution. Each prefilled syringe or prefilled 
pen consists of a 1 mL glass syringe with a fixed 27-gauge ½ inch needle with needle guard.  
SKYRIZI 90 mg/mL prefilled syringe is a sterile, preservative-free, colorless to slightly yellow 
and clear to slightly opalescent solution. Each prefilled syringe consists of a 1 mL glass syringe 
with a fixed 29-gauge ½ inch needle with needle guard. 
SKYRIZI 180 mg/1.2 mL (150 mg/mL) cyclic olefin polymer prefilled cartridge with a septum 
and cap contains a sterile, preservative-free, colorless to yellow, and clear to slightly opalescent 
solution for use with supplied on-body injector administration device.  
SKYRIZI 360 mg/2.4 mL (150 mg/mL) cyclic olefin polymer prefilled cartridge with a septum 
and cap contains a sterile, preservative-free, colorless to yellow, and clear to slightly opalescent 
solution for use with supplied on-body injector administration device.  
Intravenous Infusion 
SKYRIZI 600 mg/10 mL (60 mg/mL) vial contains a sterile and preservative-free, colorless to 
slightly yellow, and clear to slightly opalescent solution. Each glass vial is closed with a stopper 
and blue flip cap. 
Storage and Handling 
• Store in a refrigerator at 36°F to 46° F (2°C to 8°C). 
• Do not freeze. 
• Do not shake. 
• Keep in the original cartons to protect from light. 
• Not made with natural rubber latex. 
  
17 PATIENT COUNSELING INFORMATION 
Advise the patient and/or caregiver to read the FDA-approved patient labeling (Medication 
Guide and Instructions for Use). 
Hypersensitivity Reactions 
Advise patients to discontinue SKYRIZI and seek immediate medical attention if they 
experience any symptoms of serious hypersensitivity reactions [see Warnings and Precautions 
(5.1)].  
Infections 
Inform patients that SKYRIZI may lower the ability of their immune system to fight infections. 
Instruct patients of the importance of communicating any history of infections to the healthcare 
provider and contacting their healthcare provider if they develop any symptoms of an infection 
[see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].  
Hepatotoxicity in Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease 


 
 
 
 
 
Inform patients that SKYRIZI may cause liver injury, especially during the initial 12 weeks of 
treatment. Instruct patients to seek immediate medical attention if they experience symptoms 
suggestive of liver dysfunction. (e.g., unexplained rash, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, 
fatigue, anorexia, or jaundice and/or dark urine) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]. 
Administration of Vaccines 
Advise patients that vaccination with live vaccines is not recommended during SKYRIZI 
treatment and immediately prior to or after SKYRIZI treatment. Medications that interact with 
the immune system may increase the risk of infection following administration of live vaccines. 
Instruct patients to inform the healthcare practitioner that they are taking SKYRIZI prior to a 
potential vaccination [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5)]. 
Administration Instruction 
Instruct patients or caregivers to perform the first self-injected dose under the supervision and 
guidance of a qualified healthcare professional for training in preparation and administration of 
SKYRIZI, including choosing anatomical sites for administration, and proper subcutaneous 
injection technique [see Instructions for Use].  
If using SKYRIZI 90 mg/mL, instruct patients or caregivers to administer two 90 mg single-dose 
syringes to achieve the full 180 mg maintenance dose or four 90 mg single-dose syringes to 
achieve the full 360 mg maintenance dose of SKYRIZI for Crohn’s disease [see Instructions for 
Use].  
Instruct patients or caregivers in the technique of pen or syringe disposal [see Instructions for 
Use].  
Pregnancy 
Advise patients that there is a pregnancy registry that monitors pregnancy outcomes in women 
exposed to SKYRIZI during pregnancy [see Use in Specific Populations (8.1)]. 



 
 
 
 
 
 
Medication Guide 
SKYRIZI® (sky-RIZZ-ee) 
(risankizumab-rzaa) 
injection, for subcutaneous or intravenous use 
What is the most important information I should know about SKYRIZI?  
SKYRIZI may cause serious side effects, including: 
Serious allergic reactions. Stop using SKYRIZI and get emergency medical help right away if you get 
any of the following symptoms of a serious allergic reaction: 
• 
fainting, dizziness, feeling lightheaded (low blood pressure)  
• 
swelling of your face, eyelids, lips, mouth, tongue, or throat  
• 
trouble breathing or throat tightness  
• 
chest tightness  
• 
skin rash, hives  
• 
itching  
 
Infections. SKYRIZI may lower the ability of your immune system to fight infections and may increase 
your risk of infections. Your healthcare provider should check you for infections and tuberculosis (TB) 
before starting treatment with SKYRIZI and may treat you for TB before you begin treatment with 
SKYRIZI if you have a history of TB or have active TB. Your healthcare provider should watch you 
closely for signs and symptoms of TB during and after treatment with SKYRIZI. Tell your healthcare 
provider right away if you have an infection or have symptoms of an infection, including: 
• 
fever, sweats, or chills 
• 
muscle aches 
• 
weight loss 
• 
cough 
• 
shortness of breath 
• 
blood in your mucus 
(phlegm) 
• 
warm, red, or painful skin or 
sores on your body different 
from your psoriasis 
• 
diarrhea or stomach pain 
• 
burning when you urinate 
or urinating more often 
than normal 
See “What are the possible side effects of SKYRIZI?” for more information about side effects. 
What is SKYRIZI? 
SKYRIZI is a prescription medicine used to treat:  
• 
moderate to severe plaque psoriasis in adults who may benefit from taking injections or pills 
(systemic therapy) or treatment using ultraviolet or UV light (phototherapy). 
• 
active psoriatic arthritis in adults. 
• 
moderate to severe Crohn’s disease in adults. 
• 
moderate to severe ulcerative colitis in adults. 
It is not known if SKYRIZI is safe and effective in children. 
Who should not use SKYRIZI? 
Do not use SKYRIZI if you are allergic to risankizumab-rzaa or any of the ingredients in SKYRIZI. 
See the end of this Medication Guide for a complete list of ingredients in SKYRIZI. 
Before using SKYRIZI, tell your healthcare provider about all of your medical conditions, 
including if you:  
• 
have any of the conditions or symptoms listed in the section “What is the most important 
information I should know about SKYRIZI?” 
• 
have an infection that does not go away or that keeps coming back. 
• 
have TB or have been in close contact with someone with TB. 
• 
have recently received or are scheduled to receive an immunization (vaccine). Medicines that 
interact with the immune system may increase your risk of getting an infection after receiving live 
vaccines. You should avoid receiving live vaccines right before, during, or right after treatment with 
SKYRIZI. Tell your healthcare provider that you are taking SKYRIZI before receiving a vaccine. 
• 
are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. It is not known if SKYRIZI can harm your unborn baby. 
• 
are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. It is not known if SKYRIZI passes into your breast milk. 
• 
If you become pregnant while taking SKYRIZI, you are encouraged to enroll in the Pregnancy 
Registry. The purpose of the pregnancy registry is to collect information about the health of you 
and your baby. Talk to your healthcare provider or call 1-877-302-2161 to enroll in this registry. 
Tell your healthcare provider about all the medicines you take, including prescription and over-the-
counter medicines, vitamins, and herbal supplements. 


 
 
 
 
 
How should I use SKYRIZI? 
See the detailed “Instructions for Use” that comes with SKYRIZI for information on how to 
prepare and inject a dose of SKYRIZI, and how to properly throw away (dispose of) a used 
SKYRIZI prefilled pen, prefilled syringe, or prefilled cartridge with on-body injector. 
• 
Use SKYRIZI exactly as your healthcare provider tells you to use it. 
• 
Your healthcare provider will tell you how much SKYRIZI is right for you and how often you should 
receive it. 
• 
Before self-injecting with SKYRIZI prefilled pen, prefilled syringe, or prefilled cartridge with on-body 
injector, your healthcare provider should show you how to inject SKYRIZI. 
• 
If you miss your SKYRIZI dose, inject a dose as soon as you remember. Then, take your next dose 
at your regular scheduled time. Call your healthcare provider if you are not sure what to do.  
• 
If you inject more SKYRIZI than prescribed, call your healthcare provider right away. 
Adults with plaque psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis will receive SKYRIZI as an injection under the skin 
(subcutaneous injection) using the prefilled pen or prefilled syringe. 
Adults with Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis will receive their starter doses with SKYRIZI through a 
vein in the arm (intravenous infusion) in a healthcare facility by a healthcare provider. After completing 
the starter doses, patients will receive SKYRIZI as 1 or more injections under the skin (subcutaneous 
injection) using the prefilled cartridge with on-body injector or prefilled syringe. 
What are the possible side effects of SKYRIZI? 
SKYRIZI may cause serious side effects including:  
• 
See “What is the most important information I should know about SKYRIZI?” 
• 
Liver problems may happen while being treated for Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis. A 
person with Crohn’s disease who received SKYRIZI by intravenous infusion (through a vein in the 
arm) developed changes in liver blood tests with a rash that led to hospitalization. Your healthcare 
provider will do blood tests to check your liver before, during, and at least up to 12 weeks of 
treatment with SKYRIZI. Your healthcare provider may stop treatment with SKYRIZI if you develop 
liver problems. Tell your healthcare provider right away if you notice any of the following symptoms: 
o 
unexplained 
rash 
o 
vomiting 
o 
tiredness 
(fatigue) 
o 
yellowing of the skin 
and eyes (jaundice) 
o 
nausea 
o 
stomach (abdominal) 
pain 
o 
loss of 
appetite 
o 
dark urine 
The most common side effects of SKYRIZI in people treated for Crohn’s disease and ulcerative 
colitis include: 
• upper respiratory infections  
• headache 
• stomach (abdominal) pain 
• injection site reactions 
• fever 
• back pain 
• joint pain 
• low red blood cells (anemia) 
• urinary tract infection 
• rash 
The most common side effects of SKYRIZI in people treated for plaque psoriasis and psoriatic 
arthritis include: 
• upper respiratory infections  • feeling tired 
•  fungal skin infections  
• headache 
• injection site reactions 
 
These are not all the possible side effects of SKYRIZI. 
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-
FDA-1088. 
How should I store SKYRIZI? 
• 
Store SKYRIZI in the refrigerator between 36°F to 46°F (2°C to 8°C). 
• 
Do not freeze SKYRIZI. 
• 
Do not shake SKYRIZI. 
• 
Keep SKYRIZI in the original carton to protect it from light. 
• 
SKYRIZI is not made with natural rubber latex. 
Keep SKYRIZI and all medicines out of the reach of children. 
General information about the safe and effective use of SKYRIZI. 


 
 
 
 
 
Medicines are sometimes prescribed for purposes other than those listed in a Medication Guide. Do 
not use SKYRIZI for a condition for which it was not prescribed. Do not give SKYRIZI to other people, 
even if they have the same symptoms that you have. It may harm them. You can ask your pharmacist 
or healthcare provider for information about SKYRIZI that is written for health professionals. 
What are the ingredients in SKYRIZI? 
Active ingredient: risankizumab-rzaa. 

 
 


 
 
 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
SKYRIZI® (sky-RIZZ-ee) Pen 
(risankizumab-rzaa) 
injection, for subcutaneous use 
 
Read Before First Use 
 
Refer to the Medication Guide for product information. 
 
Read this Instructions for Use before using SKYRIZI Pen (risankizumab-rzaa) injection. 
 
Before using SKYRIZI, you should receive training from your healthcare provider on how to inject 
SKYRIZI. 
 
SKYRIZI Single-Dose Pen 
  
 
 
 
Important Information 
• Store SKYRIZI in the refrigerator at 36°F to 46°F (2°C to 8°C). 
• Keep SKYRIZI in the original carton to protect from light until you are ready to use. 
• Before injecting, take the SKYRIZI carton out of the refrigerator. Leave the carton at room 
temperature and out of direct sunlight for 30 to 90 minutes. 


 
 
 
 
 
• The liquid in the inspection window should look clear to yellow and may contain tiny white or clear 
particles. 
• Do not use SKYRIZI if the liquid is discolored, cloudy or contains flakes or large particles. 
• Do not use SKYRIZI if the expiration date (EXP) has passed. 
• Do not use SKYRIZI if the liquid has been frozen, even if it has been thawed.  
• Do not shake SKYRIZI. 
• Do not use if the SKYRIZI Pen has been dropped or damaged.  
• Do not use SKYRIZI if carton perforations are broken. Return product to pharmacy. 
• Do not remove the dark gray cap until right before injection. 
• SKYRIZI is not made with natural rubber latex. 
 
 
Prepare SKYRIZI injection  
 
 
 
 
 
Take the SKYRIZI carton out of the refrigerator. Leave 
the carton at room temperature and out of direct 
sunlight for 30 to 90 minutes before injecting.  
• Do not remove the Pen from the carton while 
allowing SKYRIZI to reach room temperature. 
• Do not warm SKYRIZI in any other way. For 
example, do not warm it in a microwave or in hot 
water. 
• Do not use the Pen if the liquid has been frozen, 
even if it has been thawed. 
 
 
 
 
Check expiration date (EXP). Do not use the Pen if 
expiration date has passed. 
Place the following on a clean, flat surface: 
• 1 single-dose SKYRIZI Pen (included) 
• 1 alcohol swab (not included) 
• 1 cotton ball or gauze pad (not included) 
• FDA-cleared sharps disposal container (not 
included). See “Used SKYRIZI Prefilled Pen 
Disposal” for information on how to throw away 
(dispose of) used Pens.  
Wash and dry your hands. 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Choose an injection site: 
• on the front of your thighs or 
• your abdomen (belly) at least 2 inches from your 
navel (belly button) 
Wipe the injection site in a circular motion with the 
alcohol swab and let it dry. 
• Do not touch or blow on the injection site after it is 
cleaned. Allow the skin to dry before injecting.  
• Do not inject through clothes. 
• Do not inject into skin that is sore, bruised, red, 
hard, scarred, has stretch marks, or areas with 
psoriasis. 
 
 
 
 
 
Hold the Pen with the dark gray cap pointing up. 
• Pull the dark gray cap straight off. 
• Throw the dark gray cap away. 
Check the liquid through the inspection window. 
• It is normal to see 1 or more bubbles in the liquid.  
• The liquid should look clear to yellow and may 
contain tiny white or clear particles. 
• Do not use if the liquid is discolored, cloudy or 
contains flakes or large particles. 
 
 Give SKYRIZI injection 
 
 
 
 
 
Hold the Pen with your fingers on the gray hand grips. 
Turn the Pen so that the white needle sleeve points 
toward the injection site and you can see the green 
activator button. 
Pinch the skin at your injection site to make a raised 
area and hold it firmly. 
Place the white needle sleeve straight (90-degree 
angle) against the raised injection site. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hold the Pen so that you can see the green activator 
button and inspection window.  
Push and keep pressing the Pen down against the 
raised injection site.  
• The Pen will activate only if the white needle sleeve 
is pressed down against the injection site before 
pressing the green activator button. 
Press the green activator button and hold the Pen for 
15 seconds. 
• The first loud “click” means the start of the injection. 
 
 
 
 
 
Keep pressing the Pen down against the injection 
site. 
The injection is complete when:  
• the Pen has made a second “click” or  
• the yellow indicator has filled the inspection window  
This takes up to 15 seconds. 
After SKYRIZI injection 
 
 
 
 
 
When the injection is complete, slowly pull the Pen 
straight out from the skin.  
The white needle sleeve will cover the needle tip and 
make another “click.”  
After completing the injection, place a cotton ball or 
gauze pad on the skin at the injection site.  
• Do not rub the injection site. 
• Slight bleeding at the injection site is normal. 


 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Throw away (dispose of) the used Pen in a FDA-
cleared sharps disposal container right away after 
use. 
• Do not dispose of used Pens in your household 
trash unless your community guidelines permit this. 
• Do not recycle your sharps disposal container. 
The dark gray cap, alcohol swab, cotton ball or gauze 
pad, and packaging may be placed in your household 
trash. 
For more information, see “Used SKYRIZI Prefilled 
Pen Disposal”. 
 
 
 
Important Information 
• Store SKYRIZI in the refrigerator at 36°F to 46°F (2°C to 8°C). 
• Keep SKYRIZI in the original carton to protect from light until you are ready to use. 
• Before injecting, take the SKYRIZI carton out of the refrigerator. Leave the carton at room 
temperature and out of direct sunlight for 30 to 90 minutes. 
• The liquid in the inspection window should look clear to yellow and may contain tiny white or clear 
particles. 
• Do not use SKYRIZI if the liquid is discolored, cloudy or contains flakes or large particles. 
• Do not use SKYRIZI if the expiration date (EXP) has passed. 
• Do not use SKYRIZI if the liquid has been frozen, even if it has been thawed.  
• Do not shake SKYRIZI. 
• Do not use if the SKYRIZI Pen has been dropped or damaged.  
• Do not use SKYRIZI if carton perforations are broken. Return product to pharmacy. 
• Do not remove the dark gray cap until right before injection. 
• SKYRIZI is not made with natural rubber latex. 
 
Keep the SKYRIZI Pen and sharps disposal container out of the reach of children.  
 
Call your healthcare provider or (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 if you need help or do not know how to 
proceed. 
 
Questions About Using the SKYRIZI Pen 
Q. What if I need help on how to inject SKYRIZI?  
A.  Call your healthcare provider or (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 if you need help. 
 
Q. I have removed the dark gray cap and pressed the green activator button. Why isn’t my 
injection starting? 
A. The green activator button will not start the injection unless the white needle sleeve is pressed firmly 
against the injection site. 
 
Q. How do I know when the injection is complete? 
A. The injection is complete if the Pen makes a second “click” or the yellow indicator fills the inspection 
window. This takes up to 15 seconds. 
 
Q. What should I do if there are more than a few drops of liquid on the injection site? 
A. Call (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 for help. 
 
Q. What should I do with the used Pen after my injection? 


 
 
 
 
 
A. Dispose of the used Pen in a sharps disposal container right after use. Do not dispose of the used 
Pen in your household trash. 
You can sign up to receive sharps containers for SKYRIZI Pen disposal at no additional cost by going 
to www.SKYRIZI.com or calling (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494. 
 
Call (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 or go to www.SKYRIZI.com for help with your injection. 
 
 
To help remember when to inject, mark your calendar with the date you give your 
SKYRIZI injection. 
 
Keep the SKYRIZI Pen and sharps disposal container out of the reach of children.  
 
Call your healthcare provider or (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 if you need help or have questions 
about the use of SKYRIZI. 
 
Used SKYRIZI Prefilled Pen Disposal 
If you do not have a FDA-cleared sharps disposal container, you may use a household container 
that is: 
• made of a heavy-duty plastic,  
• can be closed with a tight-fitting, puncture-resistant lid, without sharps being able to come out,  
• upright and stable during use,  
• leak-resistant, and 
• properly labeled to warn of hazardous waste inside the container. 
 
When your sharps disposal container is almost full, you will need to follow your community guidelines for 
the right way to dispose of your sharps disposal container. There may be state or local laws about how 
you should throw away used Pens. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
Refer to the Medication Guide for product information.  
 
SKYRIZI Single-Dose Prefilled Syringe 
 
  
 
Important Information 
• Keep SKYRIZI in the original carton to protect from light until time to use. 
• The liquid should look clear to yellow and may contain tiny white or clear particles. 
• Do not use SKYRIZI if the liquid is discolored, cloudy or contains flakes or large particles.  
• Do not use SKYRIZI if the expiration date (EXP:) shown on the carton and prefilled syringe has 
passed.  
• Do not use SKYRIZI if the liquid has been frozen (even if thawed).  
• Do not shake SKYRIZI.  
• Do not use SKYRIZI if the prefilled syringe has been dropped or damaged.  
• Do not use SKYRIZI if carton perforations are broken. Return product to the pharmacy.  
• Do not remove the needle cover until right before giving the injection.  
 
Keep SKYRIZI and all medicines out of the reach of children. 
 
Please Read Complete Instructions for Use Before Using SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe 
 
Before Injecting 
• Receive training on how to inject SKYRIZI before giving injection. Call your healthcare provider or 
(866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 if you need help.  
• Mark your calendar ahead of time to remember when to take SKYRIZI.  
• Leave the carton at room temperature and out of direct sunlight for 15 to 30 minutes to warm. 
• Do not remove the syringe from the carton while allowing SKYRIZI to reach room temperature.  
• Do not warm SKYRIZI in any other way (for example, do not warm it in a microwave or in hot 
water).  
 
Important Information 
• The liquid should look clear to yellow and may contain tiny white or clear particles. 
• Do not use SKYRIZI if the liquid is discolored, cloudy or contains flakes or large particles.  


 
 
 
 
 
• Do not use SKYRIZI if the expiration date (EXP:) shown on the carton and prefilled syringe has 
passed.  
• Do not use SKYRIZI if the syringe has been dropped or damaged.  
• Do not use SKYRIZI if carton perforations are broken. Return product to the pharmacy.  
 
Storage Information 
• Store SKYRIZI in the refrigerator between 36°F to 46°F (2°C to 8°C).  
• Do not shake SKYRIZI.  
• Keep SKYRIZI in the original carton to protect from light until time to use. 
• SKYRIZI is not made with natural rubber latex. 
• Do not use if the liquid has been frozen (even if thawed).  
 
Keep SKYRIZI and all medicines out of the reach of children. 
 
Call your healthcare provider or (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 if you need help or do not know how to 
proceed.  
 
 
 
 
  
  
Gather the supplies for the injection.  
• Do not hold or pull the plunger rod when removing the 
prefilled syringe from the sleeve. 
Place the following on a clean, flat surface:  
• 1 prefilled syringe (included) 
• 1 alcohol swab (not included)  
• 1 cotton ball or gauze pad (not included)  
• FDA-cleared sharps disposal container (not included). 
See “Used SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe Disposal” for 
information on how to throw away (dispose of) used 
prefilled syringes. 
Wash and dry your hands.  
 
 
 
Remove prefilled syringe from cardboard sleeve by holding 
the finger grip. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Pick from the 3 injectable areas:  
• Front of left thigh or right thigh 
• Your abdomen (belly) at least 2 inches from your navel 
(belly button)  
Wipe the injection site in a circular motion with the alcohol 
swab before the injection. 
• Do not touch or blow on the injection site after it is 
cleaned. Allow the skin to dry before injecting.  
• Do not inject through clothes.  
• Do not inject into skin that is sore, bruised, red, hard, 
scarred, or has stretch marks, or into areas affected by 
psoriasis.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Hold the prefilled syringe with covered needle facing down, 
as shown.  
Check the liquid in the prefilled syringe. 
• It is normal to see 1 or more bubbles in the window. 
• The liquid should look clear to yellow and may contain 
tiny white or clear particles. 
• Do not use the prefilled syringe if the liquid is 
discolored, cloudy or contains flakes or large 
particles.  
 
 
 
 
Remove the needle cover.  
• Hold the prefilled syringe in 1 hand between the finger 
grip and needle cover. 
• With the other hand, gently pull the needle cover straight 
off. 
• Do not hold or pull the plunger rod when removing the 
needle cover.  
• You may see a drop of liquid at the end of the needle. 
This is normal. 
• Throw away the needle cover. 
• Do not touch the needle with your fingers or let the 
needle touch anything.  
 
 
Hold the body of the prefilled syringe in 1 hand between the 
thumb and index fingers.  
Pinch the area of cleaned skin with your other hand and 
hold it firmly.  
Insert the needle into the skin at about a 45-degree angle 
using a quick, short movement. Hold angle steady.  


 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Slowly push the plunger rod all the way in until all of the 
liquid is injected, and the prefilled syringe is empty.  
Pull the needle out of the skin while keeping the prefilled 
syringe at the same angle.  
Release the plunger rod and allow the prefilled syringe to 
move up until the entire needle is covered by the needle 
guard.  
The prefilled syringe needle guard will not activate 
unless all the liquid has been injected.  
• Press a cotton ball or gauze pad over the injection site 
and hold for 10 seconds.  
• Do not rub the injection site. You may have slight 
bleeding. This is normal.  
 
 
 
 
Put your used prefilled syringe in a FDA-cleared sharps 
disposal container right away after use.  
• Do not throw away (dispose of) the used prefilled 
syringe in the household trash.  
For more information, see “Used SKYRIZI Prefilled 
Syringe Disposal” section.  
 
Questions About Using SKYRIZI 
Q. 
What if I need help on how to inject SKYRIZI?  
A. 
Call your healthcare provider or (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 if you need help.  
 
 
Q. 
What should I do with the used prefilled syringe after my injection? 
A. 
Throw away (dispose of) the used prefilled syringe in a sharps disposal container and not your 
household trash.  
You can sign up to receive sharps containers for SKYRIZI syringe disposal at no additional cost by 
going to www.SKYRIZI.com or calling (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494.  
 
 
Q. 
 
How do I know when the injection is complete?  
A. 
The injection is complete when the prefilled syringe is empty, the plunger rod is pushed all the way 
in, and the syringe needle guard is activated.  
 
 
 
Used SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe Disposal 
If you do not have a FDA-cleared sharps disposal container, you may use a household container 
that is:  
• made of a heavy-duty plastic,  
• can be closed with a tight-fitting, puncture-resistant lid, without sharps being able to come out,  
• upright and stable during use, 
• leak-resistant, and 
• properly labeled to warn of hazardous waste inside the container. 
 
When your sharps disposal container is almost full, you will need to follow your community guidelines for 
the right way to dispose of your sharps disposal container. There may be state or local laws about how 
you should throw away used needles and syringes.  


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 x 90 mg/mL single-dose prefilled syringes for a total 180 mg/2 mL dose 
Read Before First Use 
Refer to the Medication Guide for product information. 
 
SKYRIZI Single-Dose Prefilled Syringe 
 
Keep SKYRIZI and all medicines out of the reach of children.  
 
Important Information: 
• 
Keep SKYRIZI in the original carton to protect from light until time to use. 
• 
The liquid should look clear to slightly yellow and may contain tiny white or clear particles. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the liquid is discolored, cloudy or contains flakes or large particles. 
Return product to pharmacy. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the expiration date (EXP:) shown on the carton and prefilled syringe has 
passed. Return product to pharmacy. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the liquid has been frozen (even if thawed). 
• 
Do not shake the syringe. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the prefilled syringe has been dropped or damaged. Return product to 
pharmacy. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if carton perforations are broken. Return product to the pharmacy. 
• 
Do not remove the needle cover until right before giving the injections. 
• 
SKYRIZI is not made with natural rubber latex. 
Please Read Complete Instructions for Use Before Using SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe 
 
Before Injecting: 
• 
Receive training on how to inject SKYRIZI before giving injections. Call your healthcare provider 
or (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 if you need help. 
• 
Mark your calendar ahead of time to remember when to take SKYRIZI. 
• 
Leave the carton at room temperature and out of direct sunlight for 15 to 30 minutes to warm. 


 
 
 
 
 
o 
Do not remove the prefilled syringes from the carton while allowing SKYRIZI to reach room 
temperature. 
o 
Do not warm SKYRIZI in any other way (for example, do not warm it in a microwave or in 
hot water). 
 
Important Information: 
 
• 
The liquid should look clear to slightly yellow and may contain tiny 
white or clear particles. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the liquid is discolored, cloudy or contains flakes 
or large particles. Return product to pharmacy. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the expiration date (EXP:) shown on the carton and prefilled syringe has 
passed. Return product to pharmacy. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the prefilled syringe has been dropped 
or damaged. Return product to pharmacy. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if carton perforations are broken. Return product to pharmacy. 
 
Storage Information: 
• 
Store SKYRIZI in the refrigerator between 36°F to 46°F (2°C to 8°C). 
• 
Do not shake SKYRIZI.  
• 
Keep SKYRIZI in the original carton to protect from light until time to use. 
• 
SKYRIZI is not made with natural rubber latex. 
• 
Do not use if liquid has been frozen (even if thawed). 
 
Keep SKYRIZI and all medicines out of the reach of children. 
Call your healthcare provider or (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 if you need help or do not know how to 
proceed. 
 
 
 
Gather the supplies for the injections and place the following on 
a clean, flat surface: 
• 
2 prefilled syringes  
• 
2 alcohol swabs and 2 cotton balls or gauze pads (not 
included) 
• 
FDA-cleared sharps disposal container (not included) 
See “Used SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe Disposal” for 
information on how to throw away (dispose of) used prefilled 
syringes. 
 
Wash and dry your hands. 
Start with 1 prefilled syringe for first injection. 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pick from the 3 injectable areas: 
• 
Front of left thigh or right thigh 
• 
Your abdomen (belly) at least 2 inches from your navel 
(belly button) 
 
 
 
Wipe the injection site in a circular motion with the alcohol swab 
(before both injections) 
• 
Do not touch or blow on the injection site after it is cleaned. 
Allow the skin to dry before injecting. 
• 
Do not inject through clothes. 
• 
Do not inject into skin that is sore, bruised, red, hard, 
scarred, or has stretch marks. 
 
 
 
Hold the prefilled syringe with covered needle facing down, as 
shown. 
Check the liquid in the prefilled syringe. 
• 
It is normal to see one or more bubbles in the window. 
• 
The liquid should look clear to slightly yellow and may 
contain tiny white or clear particles. 
• 
Do not use the prefilled syringe if liquid is discolored, 
cloudy or contains flakes or large particles. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remove the needle cover. 
• 
Do not hold or pull plunger rod when removing the needle 
cover. 
• 
Hold the syringe in 1 hand between the finger grip and 
needle cover. 
• 
With the other hand, carefully pull the needle cover straight 
off. 
• 
You may see a drop of liquid at the end of the needle. This 
is normal. 
• 
Throw away the needle cover. 
• 
Do not touch the needle with your fingers or let the needle 
touch anything. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hold the body of the prefilled syringe in 1 hand between the 
thumb and index finger. 
Gently pinch the area of cleaned skin with your other hand and 
hold it firmly. 
Insert the needle into the skin at about a 45-degree angle using 
a quick, short movement. Hold angle steady. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Slowly push the plunger rod all the way in until all of the liquid 
is injected and the syringe is empty. 
Pull the needle out of the skin while keeping the syringe at the 
same angle. 
Release the plunger rod. 
• 
Allow the prefilled syringe to move up until the entire needle 
is covered by the needle guard. 
The needle guard will not automatically activate unless all 
the liquid has been injected. 
• 
Press a cotton ball or gauze pad over the injection site and 
hold for 10 seconds. 
• 
Do not rub the injection site. You may have slight bleeding. 
This is normal. 
 
 
 
 
 
Repeat Steps 2 through 6 with the 2nd prefilled syringe for a 
full dose. 
• 
Use the 2nd prefilled syringe right after using the 1st syringe. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Put your used prefilled syringes in an FDA-cleared sharps 
disposal container right away after use. 
• 
Do not throw away (dispose of) used prefilled syringes in 
the household trash. 
For more information, or if you do not have an FDA-cleared 
sharps container see “Used SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe 
Disposal” section located on the other side of these instructions. 
 
 
Questions About Using the SKYRIZI Syringe 
Q. What if I have not received in-person training from a healthcare professional? 
A. Call your healthcare provider or (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 if you need help. Receive training on 
how to inject SKYRIZI before giving injections. 
 
Q. What should I do with both used prefilled syringes after my injections? 
A. Throw away (dispose of) both used prefilled syringes in a sharps disposal container. Do not put in 
household trash. For more information, see “Used SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe Disposal” section. 
You can sign up to receive sharps containers for SKYRIZI prefilled syringe disposal at no additional cost 
by going to www.SKYRIZI.com or calling (866) 759-7494 
 
Q. How do I know when the injection is complete? 
A. The injection is complete when the prefilled syringe is empty, the plunger rod is pushed all the way in, 
and the syringe needle guard is activated. 
 
Used SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe Disposal 
Throw away (dispose of) both used prefilled syringes in a sharps disposal container. Do not put in 
household trash. 
If you do not have an FDA-cleared sharps disposal container, you may use a household container 
that: 
• 
is made of a heavy-duty plastic, 
• 
can be closed with a tight-fitting, puncture-resistant lid, without sharps being able to come out, 
• 
stays upright and stable during use, 
• 
is leak-resistant, and 
• 
has been properly labeled to warn of hazardous waste inside the container. 


 
 
 
 

 


 
 
 
 
 
Instructions for Use 
SKYRIZI® (sky-RIZZ-ee) 
(risankizumab-rzaa) 
injection, for subcutaneous use 
 
4 x 90 mg/mL single-dose prefilled syringes for a total 360 mg/4 mL dose 
Read Before First Use 
Refer to the Medication Guide for product information. 
 
SKYRIZI Single-Dose Prefilled Syringe 
 
Keep SKYRIZI and all medicines out of the reach of children.  
 
Important Information: 
• 
Keep SKYRIZI in the original carton to protect from light until time to use. 
• 
The liquid should look clear to slightly yellow and may contain tiny white or clear particles. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the liquid is discolored, cloudy or contains flakes or large particles. 
Return product to pharmacy. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the expiration date (EXP:) shown on the carton and prefilled syringe has 
passed. Return product to pharmacy. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the liquid has been frozen (even if thawed). 
• 
Do not shake the syringe. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the prefilled syringe has been dropped or damaged. Return product to 
pharmacy. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if carton perforations are broken. Return product to the pharmacy. 
• 
Do not remove the needle cover until right before giving the injections. 
• 
SKYRIZI is not made with natural rubber latex. 
Please Read Complete Instructions for Use Before Using SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe 
 
Before Injecting: 
• 
Receive training on how to inject SKYRIZI before giving injections. Call your healthcare provider 
or (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 if you need help. 
• 
Mark your calendar ahead of time to remember when to take SKYRIZI. 
• 
Leave the carton at room temperature and out of direct sunlight for 15 to 30 minutes to warm. 


 
 
 
 
 
o 
Do not remove the prefilled syringes from the carton while allowing SKYRIZI to reach room 
temperature. 
o 
Do not warm SKYRIZI in any other way (for example, do not warm it in a microwave or in 
hot water). 
 
Important Information: 
 
• 
The liquid should look clear to slightly yellow and may contain tiny 
white or clear particles. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the liquid is discolored, cloudy or contains flakes 
or large particles. Return product to pharmacy. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the expiration date (EXP:) shown on the carton and prefilled syringe has 
passed. Return product to pharmacy. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the prefilled syringe has been dropped 
or damaged. Return product to pharmacy. 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if carton perforations are broken. Return product to pharmacy. 
 
Storage Information: 
• 
Store SKYRIZI in the refrigerator between 36°F to 46°F (2°C to 8°C). 
• 
Do not shake SKYRIZI.  
• 
Keep SKYRIZI in the original carton to protect from light until time to use. 
• 
SKYRIZI is not made with natural rubber latex. 
• 
Do not use if liquid has been frozen (even if thawed). 
 
Keep SKYRIZI and all medicines out of the reach of children. 
Call your healthcare provider or (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 if you need help or do not know how to 
proceed. 
 
 
 
Gather the supplies for the injections and place the following on 
a clean, flat surface: 
• 
4 prefilled syringes  
• 
4 alcohol swabs and 4 cotton balls or gauze pads (not 
included) 
• 
FDA-cleared sharps disposal container (not included) 
See “Used SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe Disposal” for 
information on how to throw away (dispose of) used prefilled 
syringes. 
 
Wash and dry your hands. 
Start with 1 prefilled syringe for first injection. 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pick from the 3 injectable areas: 
• 
Front of left thigh or right thigh 
• 
Your abdomen (belly) at least 2 inches from your navel 
(belly button) 
 
 
 
Wipe the injection site in a circular motion with the alcohol swab 
(before all four injections) 
• 
Do not touch or blow on the injection site after it is cleaned. 
Allow the skin to dry before injecting. 
• 
Do not inject through clothes. 
• 
Do not inject into skin that is sore, bruised, red, hard, 
scarred, or has stretch marks. 
 
 
 
Hold the prefilled syringe with covered needle facing down, as 
shown. 
Check the liquid in the prefilled syringe. 
• 
It is normal to see one or more bubbles in the window. 
• 
The liquid should look clear to slightly yellow and may 
contain tiny white or clear particles. 
• 
Do not use the prefilled syringe if liquid is discolored, 
cloudy or contains flakes or large particles. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remove the needle cover. 
• 
Do not hold or pull plunger rod when removing the needle 
cover. 
• 
Hold the syringe in 1 hand between the finger grip and 
needle cover. 
• 
With the other hand, carefully pull the needle cover straight 
off. 
• 
You may see a drop of liquid at the end of the needle. This 
is normal. 
• 
Throw away the needle cover. 
• 
Do not touch the needle with your fingers or let the needle 
touch anything. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hold the body of the prefilled syringe in 1 hand between the 
thumb and index finger. 
Gently pinch the area of cleaned skin with your other hand and 
hold it firmly. 
Insert the needle into the skin at about a 45-degree angle using 
a quick, short movement. Hold angle steady. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Slowly push the plunger rod all the way in until all of the liquid 
is injected and the syringe is empty. 
Pull the needle out of the skin while keeping the syringe at the 
same angle. 
Release the plunger rod. 
• 
Allow the prefilled syringe to move up until the entire needle 
is covered by the needle guard. 
The needle guard will not automatically activate unless all 
the liquid has been injected. 
• 
Press a cotton ball or gauze pad over the injection site and 
hold for 10 seconds. 
• 
Do not rub the injection site. You may have slight bleeding. 
This is normal. 
 
 
 
 
 
Repeat Steps 2 through 6 with the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th prefilled 
syringe for a full dose. 
• 
Use the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th prefilled syringe right after using 
the 1st syringe. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Put your used prefilled syringes in an FDA-cleared sharps 
disposal container right away after use. 
• 
Do not throw away (dispose of) used prefilled syringes in the 
household trash. 
For more information, or if you do not have an FDA-cleared 
sharps container see “Used SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe 
Disposal” section located on the other side of these instructions. 
 
 
Questions About Using the SKYRIZI Syringe 
Q. What if I have not received in-person training from a healthcare professional? 
A. Call your healthcare provider or (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 if you need help. Receive training on 
how to inject SKYRIZI before giving injections. 
 
Q. What should I do with all four used prefilled syringes after my injections? 
A. Throw away (dispose of) all 4 used prefilled syringes in a sharps disposal container. Do not put in 
household trash. For more information, see “Used SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe Disposal” section. 
You can sign up to receive sharps containers for SKYRIZI prefilled syringe disposal at no additional cost 
by going to www.SKYRIZI.com or calling (866) 759-7494 
 
Q. How do I know when the injection is complete? 
A. The injection is complete when the prefilled syringe is empty, the plunger rod is pushed all the way in, 
and the syringe needle guard is activated. 
 
Used SKYRIZI Prefilled Syringe Disposal 
Throw away (dispose of) all four used prefilled syringes in a sharps disposal container. Do not put in 
household trash. 
If you do not have an FDA-cleared sharps disposal container, you may use a household container 
that: 
• 
is made of a heavy-duty plastic, 
• 
can be closed with a tight-fitting, puncture-resistant lid, without sharps being able to come out, 
• 
stays upright and stable during use, 
• 
is leak-resistant, and 
• 
has been properly labeled to warn of hazardous waste inside the container. 


 
 
 
 
 
When your sharps disposal container is almost full, you will need to follow your community guidelines for 
the right way to dispose of your sharps disposal container. There may be state or local laws about how you 
should throw away used needles and syringes. 
For more information about safe sharps disposal, and for specific information about sharps disposal in the 
state that you live in, go to the FDA's website at: www.fda.gov/safesharpsdisposal. 
Do not recycle your used sharps disposal container. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Instructions for Use 
SKYRIZI® (sky-RIZZ-ee) On-Body Injector 
risankizumab-rzaa 
injection, for subcutaneous use only 
 On-Body Injector and 180 mg/1.2 mL Prefilled Cartridge, 
On-Body Injector and 360 mg/2.4 mL Prefilled Cartridge 
 
Read this Instructions for Use before you start using SKYRIZI and each time you get a refill. There may 
be new information. This information does not take the place of talking to your healthcare provider about 
your medical condition or treatment. 
Refer to the Medication Guide for SKYRIZI product information. Call your healthcare provider, call (866) 
SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 or go to SKYRIZI.com if you need help. 
 
Important information you need to know before injecting SKYRIZI 
• 
Receive training on how to inject SKYRIZI before giving an injection.  
• 
Do not shake the SKYRIZI carton, On-Body Injector or prefilled cartridge.  
• 
Do not remove the On-Body Injector or prefilled cartridge from the carton until you are ready to 
inject. 
• 
Do not wait more than 5 minutes to start the injection after loading the cleaned prefilled cartridge 
into the On-Body Injector. Waiting will dry out the medicine and the On-Body Injector will not work 
afterwards.  
• 
Do not touch the start button until you place the On-Body Injector loaded with the prefilled 
cartridge onto your skin and are ready to inject.  
o 
You can only press the start button 1-time. 
• 
Do not use On-Body Injector or prefilled cartridge if either has been dropped or damaged. 
• 
Do not reuse On-Body Injector or prefilled cartridge. The On-Body Injector and prefilled cartridge 
are for 1-time (single-dose) use only. 
• 
Do not let the On-Body Injector get wet with water or any other liquids.  
• 
This single-dose On-Body Injector is designed for use with SKYRIZI prefilled cartridge only.  
• 
Physical activity should be limited during the injection process. Moderate physical activities can 
be done, such as walking, reaching and bending.  
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the expiration date (EXP:) has passed.  
• 
Do not use the prefilled cartridge if the liquid is discolored, cloudy or contains flakes or large 
particles. The liquid should look clear to yellow and may contain tiny white or clear particles.  
• 
The On-Body Injector and the prefilled cartridge are not made with natural rubber latex.  
• 
Keep SKYRIZI and all medicines out of the reach of children.  
 
Storage and preparation for use 
• 
Keep SKYRIZI in the original carton to protect from light and physical damage until time to use. 
• 
Store SKYRIZI in your refrigerator between 36°F to 46°F (2°C to 8°C).  
• 
When ready to use, take the carton out of the refrigerator and leave it at room temperature for at 
least 45 minutes up to 90 minutes to allow SKYRIZI to warm.  
o 
The On-Body Injector will not work if left at room temperature for less than 45 minutes. 
• 
Do not leave out in direct sunlight. 
• 
Do not remove the On-body Injector or prefilled cartridge from the carton while allowing SKYRIZI 
to reach room temperature. 
• 
Do not warm SKYRIZI in any other way. For example, do not warm it in a microwave or in hot 
water.  
• 
Do not use if liquid has been frozen (even if thawed). 
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if carton perforations are broken. Return product to the pharmacy.  


 
 
 
 
 
• 
Do not use the On-Body Injector and prefilled cartridge if the white paper tray seal is missing or 
damaged and return the carton to the pharmacy. 
 
Get to know your SKYRIZI On-Body Injector and prefilled cartridge 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please read complete Instructions for Use before using SKYRIZI. Call your healthcare provider or 
(866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 or go to www.SKYRIZI.com if you need help or if you do not know 
how to proceed. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
Step 1 Get ready 
Before using SKYRIZI, you should receive training on how to inject SKYRIZI. 
 
 
 
 Check expiration date 
• 
Remove the carton from the refrigerator.  
• 
Check expiration date (EXP:) on the carton.  
• 
Do not use SKYRIZI if the expiration date 
(EXP:) has passed. 
 
Wait at least 45 minutes  
• 
Leave unopened carton at room temperature 
to warm. 
• 
Keep out of direct sunlight.  
• 
Wait at least 45 minutes up to a maximum of 
90 minutes to allow SKYRIZI to warm. 
o 
The On-Body Injector will not work if left 
at room temperature for less than 45 
minutes. 
• 
Do not warm SKYRIZI in any other way (for 
example, do not warm it in a microwave or in 
hot water).  
 
 
Open the carton and remove the plastic tray  
• 
Lift up the flap on the side of the carton.  
• 
Take out the plastic tray.  
 
Gather all supplies and wash hands 
• 
Place the following on a clean surface:  
o 
plastic tray containing the On-Body 
Injector and prefilled cartridge (included) 
o 
2 alcohol wipes (not included) 
o 
cotton ball or gauze pad (not included) 
o 
sharps disposal container (not included) 
(see “Disposing of SKYRIZI”) 
• 
Wash and dry your hands. 
 
  
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remove the white paper tray seal  
• 
Locate the black arrow.  
• 
Peel away the white paper tray seal from the 
plastic tray.  
• 
Do not use the On-Body Injector and prefilled 
cartridge if the white paper tray seal is 
missing or damaged and return the carton to 
the pharmacy.  
 
 
Lift the plastic cover  
• 
Locate the rounded opening on the top cover.  
• 
Insert your pointer finger in the opening and 
place your thumb on the opposite side.  
• 
Lift the cover to remove and set aside.  
 
 
Inspect the On-Body Injector  
• 
Check that the On-Body Injector is intact and 
undamaged.  
• 
Do not close the gray door before the 
prefilled cartridge is loaded. 
• 
The gray door should be slightly open.  
• 
If the gray door does not open, press in firmly 
on the gray door ridges (left side of door) and 
swing open the door.  
• 
Do not use On-Body Injector if you drop it, 
discover missing pieces, or it is damaged. 
• 
Do not let the On-Body Injector get wet with 
water or any other liquids. 
 Do not touch the gray start button until it is 
time to inject. It can be pressed 1-time only.   
If the gray start button is pressed before 
placing it on your body, the On-Body Injector 
can no longer be used. Call (866) SKYRIZI or 
(866) 759-7494. 
• 
Do not touch the needle cover or the needle. 
• 
Proceed to Set up On-Body Injector.  
 
 
Step 2 Set up On-Body Injector 
 
Fully open the gray door 


 
 
 
 
 
   
 Avoid touching the needle cover or the needle 
on the back of the On-Body Injector. The 
needle is behind the needle cover.  
• 
Swing the gray door all the way to the right to 
open it.  
• 
If the gray door does not open, press in firmly 
on the gray door ridges (left side of door) and 
swing open the door.  
• 
Do not close the gray door before the 
prefilled cartridge is loaded. 
• 
Do not touch the needle cover or needle.  
• 
Put the On-Body Injector aside. 
 
Inspect the prefilled cartridge  
• 
Carefully remove the prefilled cartridge from 
the plastic tray.  
• 
Do not twist or remove cartridge top.  
• 
Check the prefilled cartridge to make sure:  
o 
The expiration date (EXP:) has not 
passed.  
o 
The liquid should look clear to yellow and 
may contain tiny white or clear particles. 
It is normal to see one or more bubbles.  
o 
The prefilled cartridge parts appear 
intact, and the clear plastic is not cracked 
or broken.  
• 
Do not use if the expiration date (EXP:) has 
passed.  
• 
Do not use if the liquid is cloudy, discolored, 
or contains flakes or large particles.  
• 
Do not use if the liquid has been frozen (even 
if thawed).  
• 
Do not use the prefilled cartridge if you drop 
it, discover missing pieces, or it is damaged.  
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Clean the smaller bottom tip of the prefilled 
cartridge 
• 
Locate the smaller bottom tip of the prefilled 
cartridge. 
• 
Clean the smaller bottom tip of the prefilled 
cartridge with an alcohol wipe. Make sure to 
use the alcohol wipe to clean the center of the 
smaller bottom tip of the prefilled cartridge.  
• 
Do not touch the smaller bottom tip of the 
prefilled cartridge after cleaning.  
 
 
  
 
 
Load the cleaned prefilled cartridge into the 
On-Body Injector  
• 
Do not twist or remove the prefilled cartridge 
top.  
• 
Insert the smaller bottom tip of the prefilled 
cartridge into the On-Body Injector first.  
• 
Firmly push down on the prefilled cartridge 
top until you hear a “click”.  
• 
After loading the prefilled cartridge, you may 
see a few drops of medicine on the back of 
the On-Body Injector. This is normal. 
 
Make sure that you start the injection within 5 minutes after inserting the prefilled 
cartridge into the On-Body Injector. Waiting will dry out the medicine and the On-
Body Injector will not work afterwards. 
 
  
 
Close the gray door 
• 
Swing the gray door to the left, then squeeze 
firmly and listen for the gray door to "snap" 
shut.  
• 
The gray door should stay locked after 
loading the prefilled cartridge. 
• 
Do not close the gray door if the prefilled 
cartridge is not fully inserted or is missing.  
• 
Proceed without delay to Prepare to inject 
 
Step 3 Prepare to inject 
Keep electronic devices including cell phones at least 12 inches (30 cm) from On-Body Injector 
until injection is complete 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Pick your injection area  
Locate a firm and flat area on your bare skin. 
Make sure the area is clear of clothing:  
• 
Your abdomen (belly) at least 2 inches from 
your navel (belly button).  
• 
The front of your left thigh or your right thigh.  
• 
Do not inject into areas of the skin that 
naturally fold or bulge because the On-Body 
Injector could fall off during wear.  
• 
Do not inject into skin that is sore, bruised, 
red, hard, scarred, or has stretch marks, 
moles or excessive hair. You can trim the 
excessive hair from the injection area.  
 
Clean the injection area  
• 
Clean injection area with an alcohol wipe.  
• 
Allow the injection area to completely dry.  
• 
Do not touch cleaned injection area before 
placing the On-Body Injector on the skin.  
 


 
 
 
 
 
   
Peel both tabs to expose adhesive  
• 
Turn the On-Body Injector over to find both 
green pull tabs.  
 Avoid touching the needle cover (needle 
inside).  
• 
Peel away the large section using the green 
pull tab to expose the adhesive.  
• 
Peel away the small section using the green 
pull tab to expose the adhesive. This will 
remove the clear plastic strip, activating the 
On-Body Injector.  
• 
Do not pull the adhesive material off the On-
Body Injector or allow the sticky side to fold 
and stick to itself.  
• 
Check the status light when the On-Body 
Injector beeps.  
• 
The status light will flash blue when the On-
Body Injector is activated.  
• 
If the status light does not flash blue, call 
(866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494. 
• 
Do not press the gray start button yet.  
• 
Do not touch the needle cover or the needle.  
 
   
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepare the On-Body Injector for placement  
• 
For the abdomen (belly), move and hold the 
skin to create a firm, flat surface for injection 
at least 2 inches from your navel (belly 
button). Make sure to adjust your posture (sit 
up straight) to avoid skin folds and bulges. 
• 
You do not need to pull the skin flat for the 
front of left thigh or right thigh.  
• 
Make sure to position the On-Body Injector so 
that you can see the blue status light.  
 
Place the On-Body Injector on your skin  
• 
When the blue light flashes, the On-Body 
Injector is ready. Place the On-Body Injector 
onto the cleaned skin with the status light 
visible.  
• 
Do not place the On-Body Injector on clothes. 
Only place on bare skin.  
• 
Run your finger around the adhesive material 
to secure it. Make sure all of the adhesive is 
attached to your skin. 
• 
Do not move or adjust the On-Body Injector 
after it has been placed on your skin.  
• 
When the On-Body Injector is on your skin, 
proceed to Inject medicine 
 
Step 4 Inject medicine 
  
Start injection  
• 
Firmly press the gray start button until you 
hear a click. Then release the gray start 
button.  
• 
Do not touch the gray start button until you 
place the On-Body Injector loaded with the 
prefilled cartridge onto your skin and are 
ready to inject. You can only press the start 
button 1 time. 
• 
You may feel a needle pinch.  
• 
Check the status light when the On-Body 
Injector beeps.  
• 
After starting the injection, the status light will 
continuously flash green.  
• 
You will hear pumping sounds as the On-
Body Injector delivers the medicine.  


 
 
 
 
 
• 
Do not continue to use the On-Body Injector if 
status light flashes red and beeps. Carefully 
remove from skin if the status light flashes 
red. Call (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494.  
 
 
 
 
 Wait for the injection to finish  
• 
It may take up to 5 minutes to complete full 
dose of medicine. The On-Body Injector will 
automatically stop when the injection is 
finished.  
During the injection: 
o 
the status light will continue to flash 
green.  
o 
you will hear pumping sounds as the On-
Body Injector continues delivering the 
medicine. 
o 
moderate physical activities can be done, 
such as walking, reaching and bending.  
• 
Do not continue to use the On-Body Injector if 
the status light flashes red and beeps. 
Carefully remove it from the skin if the status 
light flashes red and beeps. Call (866) 
SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Injection is finished 
• 
The On-Body Injector will stop on its own.  
• 
After the injection is finished, you will hear 
beeps and the status light will change to solid 
green. Check the status light. If it has 
changed to solid green, this means that the 
injection is finished. 
• 
When the injection is finished, proceed to next 
step. 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remove the On-Body Injector  
• 
Do not put your fingers on the back side of 
the On-Body Injector when removing it from 
your skin.  
• 
When the injection is done, grab the corner of 
the adhesive to carefully peel the On-Body 
Injector from the skin.  
 Avoid touching the needle cover or needle on 
the back of the On-Body Injector.  
• 
After removing the On-Body Injector, you will 
hear several beeps and the status light will 
turn off.  
• 
The needle cover will cover the needle when 
the On-Body Injector is removed from the 
skin. 
• 
It is normal to see a few small drops of liquid 
on your skin after removing the On-Body 
Injector. If you see more than a few small 
drops of liquid left on your skin, call (866) 
SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494. 
• 
Press a cotton ball or gauze pad over the 
injection site on your skin and hold for 10 
seconds.  
• 
Do not rub the injection site.  
• 
Slight bleeding at the injection site is normal. 
• 
Proceed to Confirm and dispose 
 


 
 
 
 
 
Step 5 Confirm and dispose 
 
 
 
 
Check the On-Body Injector  
• 
Inspect the medicine window and status light.  
• 
Check to see that the used white plunger fills 
the medicine window and the solid green light 
turns off, letting you know that all the 
medicine has been injected.  
 If the used white plunger does not fill the 
window, call (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-
7494. 
  
 
Put the used On-Body Injector in an FDA-
cleared sharps disposal container right away 
after use 
• 
Leave the prefilled cartridge in the On-Body 
Injector.  
• 
Do not throw away (dispose of) the used On-
Body Injector in your household trash.  
• 
For more information, see “Disposing of 
SKYRIZI” section. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please read complete Instructions for Use before using SKYRIZI. Call your healthcare provider or 
(866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 or go to www.SKYRIZI.com if you need help or if you do not know 
how to proceed. 
Commonly asked questions  
Q.  What if I cannot open the On-Body Injector door to insert the prefilled cartridge?  
A.  To open the On-Body Injector door, press in firmly on the left side of the door to release the 
door latch. If you are still unable to open the door, call (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494.  
Q.  What if I push the gray start button before I place the On-Body Injector on my skin?  
A.  The gray start button may be pressed just 1 time only. If the gray start button is pressed before 
placing it on your body, it can no longer be used. Call (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494.  
Q.  What if the On-Body Injector does not beep and the blue status light does not flash when 
I remove the green pull tabs?  
A.  Peeling off small green pull tab will remove the clear plastic strip, activating the On-Body 
Injector. If all of the adhesive paper has been removed and the On-Body Injector still does not 
turn on, call (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494.  
Q.  What if I push the start button as instructed after placing the On-Body Injector on the 
skin and the light remains blue?  


 
 
 
 
 
A.  Firmly press the gray start button again. If the status light remains blue or flashes red, remove 
the On-Body Injector by carefully peeling it away from your skin. Do not re-apply the On-Body 
Injector. Call (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494.  
 
Q.  What if the status light flashes red and beeps while wearing the On-Body Injector?  
A.  If the status light continuously flashes red and beeps, do not use the On-Body Injector. If it is 
attached to your   body, carefully remove it. Call (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494.  
Q.  What should I do if the On-Body Injector comes off my body during the injection?  
 A.  The loaded On-Body Injector can no longer be used. Do not re-apply it to your body. Call (866) 
SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494.  
Q.  How do I know when the injection is complete?  
A.  The injection is complete when the On-Body Injector beeps, the white plunger has completely 
filled the medicine window, and the status light turns from flashing green to solid green.  
Q.  What should I do if there are more than a few drops of liquid on the injection area?  
A.  Call (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 for help.  
Q.  What should I do with the used On-Body Injector after my injection?  
A.  Throw away (dispose of) used On-Body Injector in a FDA-cleared sharps disposal container 
and not your household trash. You can receive a sharps container for SKYRIZI disposal at no 
additional cost by going to www.SKYRIZI.com or by calling (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494.  
Q.  What if I have not received in-person training from a healthcare professional?  
A.  Call your healthcare provider or (866) SKYRIZI or (866) 759-7494 if you need help. Receive 
training on how to inject SKYRIZI before giving injections. 
 
 
 
 
Disposing of SKYRIZI  
• 
Put SKYRIZI in an FDA-cleared sharps disposal container right away after use. Do not throw away 
(dispose of) SKYRIZI in your household trash.  
• 
If you do not have an FDA-cleared sharps disposal container, you may use a household container 
that is:  
o 
made of a heavy-duty plastic, 
o 
can be closed with a tight-fitting, puncture-resistant lid, without sharps being able to come out,  
o 
upright and stable during use,  
o 
leak-resistant, and  
o 
properly labeled to warn of hazardous waste inside the container.  
 
When your sharps disposal container is almost full, you will need to follow your community guidelines for 
the right way to dispose of your sharps disposal container. There may be state or local laws about how 
you should throw away used needles and syringes.  
 


 
 
 
 
 
For more information about safe sharps disposal in the state that you live in, go to the FDA’s website at: 
www.fda.gov/safesharpsdisposal. 
 
Do not recycle your used sharps disposal container.  
 
Additional information 
• 
Type BF applied part. 
• 
 On-Body Injector sterilized using ethylene oxide. 
• 
Altitude range is -1,312 feet to 10,499 feet (-400 meters to 3,200 meters). 
 
 
Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) of the On-Body Injector 
The On-Body Injector is intended for home use or use in a professional healthcare environment and 
complies with ISO 11608-1:2014 and IEC 60601-1-2:2014.  
Care should be taken to use the On-Body Injector within the following specific limits and environments to 
avoid adversely impacting the performance (missed or incomplete SKYRIZI dose). 
• 
Keep electronic devices including cell phones at least 12 inches (30 cm) from the On-Body Injector 
until injection is complete. The potential impact of electronic interference is unknown when the On-
Body Injector is operated within 12 inches (30 cm). 
• 
Do not expose the On-Body Injector to Magnetic Resonance (MR) Environment (e.g., MRI). 
• 
If it is used adjacent to other electrical equipment, observe the On-Body Injector and other equipment 
to ensure it is operating normally. 
Emissions 
Emissions test name 
Test levels 
Radiated Radio frequency electromagnetic 
fields 
Per CISPR 11, class B 
Electromagnetic Immunity 
Test Name  
Test Levels 
Electrostatic discharge (ESD) 
± 8 kV contact 
± 2 kV, ± 4 kV, ± 8 kV, ± 15 kV air 
Radio frequency electromagnetic field 
10 V/m  
80 MHz – 2.7 GHz  
Power frequency 50 Hz magnetic field  
30 A/m 
 
 
The enclosure port immunity to RF wireless communications equipment complies with IEC 60601-1-
2:2014.  
   
 
Glossary of symbols  
Symbol 
Description of Symbol 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Keep dry 
 
Sterilized using ethylene oxide 
 
Do not re-use 
 
Do not use if package is damaged and consult instructions for use 
 
Date of manufacture 
 
Batch code 
 
Catalogue number 
 
Serial number 
 
Refer to instruction manual / booklet 
 
Type BF Applied Part  
 
MR Unsafe 
 



AbbVie News Center
AbbVie's SKYRIZI® (risankizumab) Met All Primary and Secondary Endpoints Versus Stelara® (ustekinumab) in Head-to-Head
Study in Crohn's Disease
SEQUENCE, a Phase 3 head-to-head study (study drug open-label and efficacy assessment blinded) compared risankizumab to ustekinumab for the treatment of
adult patients with moderately to severely active Crohn's disease who have failed one or more anti-TNFs1
Risankizumab met both primary endpoints of non-inferiority for clinical remission (Crohn's Disease Activity Index [CDAI]) at week 24 and superiority of endoscopic
remission at week 48 versus ustekinumab
All secondary endpoints achieved statistical significance for superiority versus ustekinumab
Safety results were consistent with the overall safety profile of risankizumab, with no new safety risks identified
NORTH CHICAGO, Ill., Sept. 12, 2023 /PRNewswire/ -- AbbVie (NYSE: ABBV) today announced top-line results from the Phase 3 SEQUENCE clinical trial evaluating
risankizumab (SKYRIZI®, 600 mg intravenous [IV] induction at week 0, 4 and 8 and 360 mg subcutaneous injection [SC] starting at week 12 and every 8 weeks thereafter)
versus ustekinumab (STELARA®, IV dose at week 0 and 90 mg SC every 8 weeks thereafter) through week 48 in patients with moderately to severely active Crohn's
disease who have failed one or more anti-TNFs.
The results of the first primary endpoint, clinical remission (per Crohn's Disease Activity Index [CDAI], defined as CDAI <150) at week 24, met non-inferiority of
risankizumab versus ustekinumab (non-inferiority margin of 10%); remission rates were 59% in risankizumab group and 40% in ustekinumab group.1
The results of the second primary endpoint, endoscopic remission (SES-CD ≤4 and at least a 2-point reduction versus baseline and no sub-score greater than 1 in any
individual component) at week 48 met superiority of risankizumab versus ustekinumab; remission rates were 32% in risankizumab group and 16% in ustekinumab group (p
<0.0001).1  
"We are encouraged by these results, which demonstrate the impact SKYRIZI can have in helping patients achieve both clinical and endoscopic remission," said Roopal
Thakkar, senior vice president, development and regulatory affairs and chief medical officer, AbbVie. "These head-to-head data reinforce SKYRIZI is an effective treatment
option for patients living with Crohn's disease."
The safety profile of risankizumab in the SEQUENCE study was consistent with the known safety profile of risankizumab, with no new safety risks observed.1 The most
common adverse events were COVID-19, headache and Crohn's disease for the risankizumab group and COVID-19, Crohn's disease, and arthralgia for the ustekinumab
group.1
"Head-to-head studies like the SEQUENCE study are important in helping physicians understand differences in therapies and define treatment algorithms in clinical
practice," said Laurent Peyrin-Biroulet, M.D., Ph.D., director of the Infinity Institute, professor of gastroenterology and head of the Inflammatory Bowel Disease group at
the Gastroenterology Department, University Hospital of Nancy, France. "These results add to our growing body of evidence for SKYRIZI in Crohn's Disease. This study
highlights the efficacy of SKYRIZI compared to ustekinumab in helping eligible patients achieve clinical and endoscopic treatment goals and also reinforces the safety
profile observed in previous studies."
Full results from the SEQUENCE study will be presented at a future medical meeting and submitted for publication in a peer-reviewed journal.
Risankizumab (SKYRIZI) is part of a collaboration between Boehringer Ingelheim and AbbVie, with AbbVie leading development and commercialization globally. 


About Crohn's Disease
Crohn's disease is a chronic, systemic disease that manifests as inflammation within the gastrointestinal tract, causing persistent diarrhea and abdominal pain.2,3 It is a
progressive disease, meaning it gets worse over time in a substantial proportion of patients or may develop complications that require urgent medical care, including
surgery.2,3 Because the signs and symptoms of Crohn's disease are unpredictable, it causes a significant burden on people living with the disease—not only physically, but
also emotionally and economically.2
About the SEQUENCE Study1
The SEQUENCE study is a Phase 3, multicenter, randomized, head-to-head study (study drug open-label and efficacy assessment blinded) to evaluate risankizumab with
ustekinumab for the treatment of adults with moderate to severe Crohn's disease with a history of one or more failed anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) therapies. All
participants had confirmed diagnosis of Crohn's disease for at least 3 months, Crohn's Disease Activity Index (CDAI) score of 220 to 450 at baseline, confirmed diagnosis
of moderate to severe Crohn's disease assessed by stool frequency, abdominal pain score, Simple Endoscopy Score for Crohn's Disease (SES-CD), and demonstrated
intolerance or inadequate response to one or more anti-TNF therapies.
More information on this trial can be found at https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ (NCT04524611).
About Risankizumab (SKYRIZI®)
SKYRIZI is an interleukin-23 (IL-23) inhibitor that selectively blocks IL-23 by binding to its p19 subunit.4 IL-23, a cytokine involved in inflammatory processes, is
thought to be linked to a number of chronic immune-mediated diseases.5 SKYRIZI is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European
Medicines Agency for the treatment of plaque psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and Crohn's disease. Phase 3 trials of risankizumab in psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, Crohn's disease
and ulcerative colitis are ongoing.5-7
U.S. Indications and Important Safety Information about SKYRIZI® (risankizumab-rzaa)8
SKYRIZI is a prescription medicine used to treat adults with:
moderate to severe plaque psoriasis who may benefit from taking injections or pills (systemic therapy) or treatment using ultraviolet or UV light (phototherapy).
active psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
moderate to severe Crohn's disease.
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
What is the most important information I should know about SKYRIZI® (risankizumab-rzaa)?
SKYRIZI is a prescription medicine that may cause serious side effects, including:
Serious allergic reactions:
Stop using SKYRIZI and get emergency medical help right away if you get any of the following symptoms of a serious allergic reaction:
-   fainting, dizziness, feeling lightheaded (low blood pressure)
-   swelling of your face, eyelids, lips, mouth, tongue, or throat
-   trouble breathing or throat tightness
-   chest tightness


-   skin rash, hives
-   itching
Infections:
SKYRIZI may lower the ability of your immune system to fight infections and may increase your risk of infections. Your healthcare provider should check you for
infections and tuberculosis (TB) before starting treatment with SKYRIZI and may treat you for TB before you begin treatment with SKYRIZI if you have a history of TB
or have active TB. Your healthcare provider should watch you closely for signs and symptoms of TB during and after treatment with SKYRIZI.
Tell your healthcare provider right away if you have an infection or have symptoms of an infection, including:
–  fever, sweats, or chills
–  cough
–  shortness of breath
–  blood in your mucus (phlegm)
–  muscle aches
–  warm, red, or painful skin or sores on your body different from your psoriasis
–  weight loss
–  diarrhea or stomach pain
–  burning when you urinate or urinating more often than normal
Do not use SKYRIZI if you are allergic to risankizumab-rzaa or any of the ingredients in SKYRIZI. See the Medication Guide or Consumer Brief Summary for a
complete list of ingredients.
Before using SKYRIZI, tell your healthcare provider about all of your medical conditions,
including if you:
have any of the conditions or symptoms listed in the section "What is the most important information I should know about SKYRIZI?"
have an infection that does not go away or that keeps coming back.
have TB or have been in close contact with someone with TB.
have recently received or are scheduled to receive an immunization (vaccine). Medicines that interact with the immune system may increase your risk of getting an
infection after receiving live vaccines. You should avoid receiving live vaccines right before, during, or right after treatment with SKYRIZI. Tell your healthcare
provider that you are taking SKYRIZI before receiving a vaccine.
are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. It is not known if SKYRIZI can harm your unborn baby.
are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. It is not known if SKYRIZI passes into your breast milk.
become pregnant while taking SKYRIZI. You are encouraged to enroll in the Pregnancy Registry, which is used to collect information about the health of you and
your baby. Talk to your healthcare provider or call 1-877-302-2161 to enroll in this registry.
Tell your healthcare provider about all the medicines you take, including prescription and over-the-counter medicines, vitamins, and herbal supplements.
What are the possible side effects of SKYRIZI?
SKYRIZI may cause serious side effects. See "What is the most important information I should know about SKYRIZI?"
Liver problems in Crohn's disease: A person with Crohn's disease who received SKYRIZI through a vein in the arm developed changes in liver blood tests with a rash
that led to hospitalization. Your healthcare provider will do blood tests to check your liver before, during, and up to 12 weeks of treatment and may stop treatment with


SKYRIZI if you develop liver problems. Tell your healthcare provider right away if you notice any of the following symptoms: unexplained rash, nausea, vomiting,
stomach (abdominal) pain, tiredness (fatigue), loss of appetite, yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice), and dark urine.
The most common side effects of SKYRIZI in people treated for Crohn's disease include: upper respiratory infections, headache, joint pain, stomach (abdominal) pain,
injection site reactions, low red blood cells (anemia), fever, back pain, and urinary tract infection.
The most common side effects of SKYRIZI in people treated for plaque psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis include: upper respiratory infections, headache, feeling tired,
injection site reactions, and fungal skin infections.
These are not all the possible side effects of SKYRIZI. Call your doctor for medical advice about
side effects.
Use SKYRIZI exactly as your healthcare provider tells you to use it.
SKYRIZI is available in a 150 mg/mL prefilled syringe and pen, a 600 mg/10 mL vial for intravenous infusion, and a 180 mg/1.2 mL or 360 mg/2.4 mL single-dose
prefilled cartridge with on-body injector.
You are encouraged to report negative side effects of prescription drugs to the FDA. Visit http://www.fda.gov/medwatch or call 1-800-FDA-1088.
If you are having difficulty paying for your medicine, AbbVie may be able to help. Visit AbbVie.com/myAbbVieAssist to learn more.
Please click here for Full Prescribing Information and Medication Guide for SKYRIZI.
Globally, prescribing information varies; refer to the individual country product label for complete information.
About AbbVie in Gastroenterology
With a robust clinical trial program, AbbVie is committed to cutting-edge research to drive exciting developments in inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), like ulcerative
colitis and Crohn's disease. By innovating, learning and adapting, AbbVie aspires to eliminate the burden of IBD and make a positive long-term impact on the lives of
people with IBD. For more information on AbbVie in gastroenterology, visit https://www.abbvie.com/our-science/therapeutic-focus-areas/immunology/immunology-focus-
areas/gastroenterology.html.
About AbbVie
AbbVie's mission is to discover and deliver innovative medicines and solutions that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow. We
strive to have a remarkable impact on people's lives across several key therapeutic areas – immunology, oncology, neuroscience, and eye care – and products and services
in our Allergan Aesthetics portfolio. For more information about AbbVie, please visit us at www.abbvie.com. Follow @abbvie on X (formerly Twitter), Facebook,
Instagram, YouTube and LinkedIn. 
Forward-Looking Statements
Some statements in this news release are, or may be considered, forward-looking statements for purposes of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The words
"believe," "expect," "anticipate," "project" and similar expressions and uses of future or conditional verbs, generally identify forward-looking statements. AbbVie cautions
that these forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the
forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, challenges to intellectual property, competition from other products, difficulties


inherent in the research and development process, adverse litigation or government action, and changes to laws and regulations applicable to our industry. Additional
information about the economic, competitive, governmental, technological and other factors that may affect AbbVie's operations is set forth in Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of
AbbVie's 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, as updated by its subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form
10-Q. AbbVie undertakes no obligation, and specifically declines, to release publicly any revisions to forward-looking statements as a result of subsequent events or
developments, except as required by law. 
References: 
1. AbbVie. Data on File: ABVRRTI76627
2. Crohn's disease. symptoms and causes. Mayo Clinic. Accessed September 1, 2023. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/crohns-disease/symptoms-
causes/syc-20353304.
3. The facts about inflammatory bowel diseases. Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America. Published November 2014. Accessed September 1, 2023.
https://www.crohnscolitisfoundation.org/sites/default/files/2019-02/Updated%20IBD%20Factbook.pdf.
4. SKYRIZI [Summary of Product Characteristics]. AbbVie Ltd. Available at: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/product-information/skyrizi-epar-product-
information_en.pdf. Accessed on September 11, 2023.
5. Pipeline – Our Science | AbbVie. AbbVie. 2021. Available at: https://www.abbvie.com/our-science/pipeline.html. Accessed on August 22, 2022.
6. A study comparing risankizumab to placebo in participants with active psoriatic arthritis including those who have a history of inadequate response or intolerance to
biologic therapy(ies) (KEEPsAKE2). ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03671148. Updated February 28, 2023. Accessed March 3, 2023.
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03671148
7. A multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled induction study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of risankizumab in participants with moderately to
severely active ulcerative colitis. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03398148. Updated March 10, 2023. Accessed March 12, 2023.
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/record/NCT03398148 
8. SKYRIZI [package insert]. North Chicago, IL: AbbVie Inc.; 2022.
 
SOURCE AbbVie
For further information: Global Media: Jenina Nuñez, +1 (703) 603 5755, jenina.nunez@abbvie.com; Investors: Liz Shea, +1 (847) 935-2211, liz.shea@abbvie.com
https://news.abbvie.com/2023-09-12-AbbVies-SKYRIZI-R-risankizumab-Met-All-Primary-and-Secondary-Endpoints-Versus-Stelara-R-ustekinumab-in-Head-to-Head-
Study-in-Crohns-Disease


AbbVie News Center
U.S. FDA Approves SKYRIZI® (risankizumab-rzaa) for Ulcerative Colitis, Expanding AbbVie's Portfolio Across Inflammatory Bowel
Disease
Approval supported by two Phase 3 clinical trials that evaluated SKYRIZI® for the treatment of moderate to severe ulcerative colitis: a 12-week induction study,
INSPIRE,1 and a 52-week maintenance study, COMMAND2
Data showed that clinical remission, the primary endpoint in both the induction and maintenance studies, was achieved along with endoscopic improvement, a key
secondary endpoint1,2
SKYRIZI is the first IL-23 antagonist approved for both ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease
NORTH CHICAGO, Ill., June 18, 2024 /PRNewswire/ -- AbbVie (NYSE: ABBV) today announced the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved
SKYRIZI® (risankizumab-rzaa) for adults with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis, making it the first IL-23 specific inhibitor approved for both moderate to
severe ulcerative colitis and moderate to severe Crohn's disease.3 SKYRIZI is now approved for four indications across immune-mediated inflammatory diseases.
Access the multimedia news release here: https://www.multivu.com/players/English/9251951-abbvie-fda-ulcerative-colitis/
"When treating patients with ulcerative colitis, it's important to prioritize both early and sustained clinical remission as well as endoscopic improvement," said Edward V.
Loftus, Jr., M.D., Maxine and Jack Zarrow Family Professor of Gastroenterology in the division of gastroenterology and hepatology at Mayo Clinic in Rochester,
Minnesota. "This approval for SKYRIZI is an important step toward addressing these treatment goals."
With over 1 million people living with ulcerative colitis, the United States has one of the largest populations affected by this disease and the numbers are continuing to
rise.4 Ulcerative colitis is a form of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) that causes inflammation in the digestive tract and can result in damage to the colon lining.5 Patients
often experience a range of unpredictable symptoms that impact their daily lives, such as abdominal pain, bloody stool and urgency to use the bathroom.5,6 The disease
course of ulcerative colitis varies between patients, and in some cases can lead to surgery or complications, including cancer or death.6,7
"Today's approval of SKYRIZI for ulcerative colitis expands our IBD portfolio and demonstrates our commitment to helping address ongoing needs of patients," said
Roopal Thakkar, M.D., senior vice president, chief medical officer, global therapeutics, AbbVie. "We will continue to invest in transforming the treatment landscape and the
lives of people suffering from lBD."
Dosing of SKYRIZI for this indication includes a 12-week induction period with three 1200 mg doses delivered every four weeks, followed by maintenance therapy of
either 180 mg or 360 mg delivered every eight weeks.3 Following the induction period, SKYRIZI treatment can be maintained at home using an on-body injector (OBI).3
The OBI is a hands-free device designed with patients in mind that adheres to the body and takes about five minutes to deliver the medication following preparation steps.3
Do not use if you are allergic to SKYRIZI. SKYRIZI may cause serious side effects, including serious allergic reactions, an increased risk of infections, and liver
problems. Stop using SKYRIZI and get emergency medical help right away if experiencing symptoms of a serious allergic reaction. Before starting treatment, your doctor
should check for infections and tuberculosis. Tell your doctor right away about any infections or symptoms of infection and about planned or recent vaccines. Liver
problems may happen while being treated for Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis that can lead to hospitalization. Your doctor will do liver blood tests before and during
treatment and may stop SKYRIZI if liver problems develop.
Risankizumab (SKYRIZI) is part of a collaboration between Boehringer Ingelheim and AbbVie, with AbbVie leading development and commercialization globally.


For more information about SKYRIZI, visit SKYRIZI.com.
Patient Access & Support
AbbVie is committed to helping people access SKYRIZI and other medicines, including offering a patient support program and co-pay card that may reduce out-of-pocket
costs to as little as $0 per month for eligible, commercially insured patients. Financial support might also include reimbursement for out-of-pocket costs related to IV
administration. For those with limited or no health insurance, AbbVie offers myAbbVie Assist, a patient assistance program that provides SKYRIZI at no charge to those
who qualify. More information about this assistance program can be found at www.AbbVie.com/myAbbVieAssist.
About Ulcerative Colitis
Ulcerative colitis is a chronic, idiopathic, immune-mediated inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) of the large intestine that causes continuous mucosal inflammation
extending, to a variable extent, from the rectum to the more proximal colon.5,8 The hallmark signs and symptoms of ulcerative colitis include rectal bleeding, abdominal
pain, bloody diarrhea, tenesmus (a sense of pressure), urgency and fecal incontinence.5,6 The disease course of ulcerative colitis varies between patients and can range from
quiescent disease to chronic refractory disease, which in some cases can lead to surgery or complications, including cancer or death.6,7 The severity of symptoms and
unpredictability of disease course can lead to substantial burden and often disability among those living with the disease.9
About the INSPIRE Induction Study1
INSPIRE is a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 3 study evaluating the efficacy and safety of risankizumab 1200 mg IV administered every
four weeks as induction therapy in subjects with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis.
The primary endpoint is clinical remission (per Adapted Mayo Score, defined as SFS ≤1 and not greater than baseline, RBS of 0 and endoscopic subscore ≤1 without
friability) at week 12. Secondary endpoints include clinical response (decrease from baseline in the Adapted Mayo Score ≥2 points and ≥30% from baseline, plus a decrease
in RBS ≥1 or an absolute RBS ≤1), endoscopic improvement (endoscopic subscore ≤1 without friability), and histologic and endoscopic mucosal improvement (HEMI)
(endoscopic subscore of 0 or 1 without friability and Geboes score ≤3.1) at week 12. More information can be found on www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT03398148).
About the COMMAND Maintenance Study2
The COMMAND study is a Phase 3, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, controlled, 52-week maintenance study designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of
risankizumab 180 mg or 360 mg SC in adults with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis. This study followed a re-randomized withdrawal design in which all
patients received risankizumab IV induction and those who responded to risankizumab were re-randomized to receive risankizumab 180 mg or 360 mg SC or withdrawal
from risankizumab treatment (induction-only control group). For those randomized to withdraw from risankizumab treatment (induction-only control group), the rest of the
study duration was a risankizumab washout. The objective of the Phase 3 study is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of risankizumab 180 mg or 360 mg as maintenance
therapy versus withdrawal from risankizumab treatment (control) in patients with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis who responded to risankizumab IV
induction in the INSPIRE study.
The primary endpoint is clinical remission (per Adapted Mayo Score, defined as SFS ≤1 and not greater than baseline, RBS of 0 and endoscopic subscore ≤1 without
evidence of friability) at week 52. Secondary endpoints include endoscopic improvement (endoscopic subscore ≤1 without evidence of friability), histologic and
endoscopic mucosal improvement (HEMI) (endoscopic subscore of ≤1 without evidence of friability and Geboes score ≤3.1), and steroid-free clinical remission (defined as
clinical remission per Adapted Mayo Score at week 52 and corticosteroid free for ≥90 days prior to week 52) at week 52. More information can be found on
www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT03398135).
About SKYRIZI® (risankizumab-rzaa)
SKYRIZI is an interleukin-23 (IL-23) inhibitor that selectively blocks IL-23 by binding to its p19 subunit.10 IL-23, a cytokine involved in inflammatory processes, is


thought to be linked to a number of chronic immune-mediated diseases.11 SKYRIZI is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of
moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis, plaque psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and Crohn's disease.11,12,13
SKYRIZI® (risankizumab-rzaa) U.S. Uses and Important Safety Information3
SKYRIZI is a prescription medicine used to treat adults with:  
moderate to severe plaque psoriasis who may benefit from taking injections or pills (systemic therapy) or treatment using ultraviolet or UV light (phototherapy). 
active psoriatic arthritis. 
moderate to severe Crohn's disease.
moderate to severe ulcerative colitis.
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
What is the most important information I should know about SKYRIZI® (risankizumab-rzaa)?
SKYRIZI is a prescription medicine that may cause serious side effects, including: 
Serious allergic reactions: 
Stop using SKYRIZI and get emergency medical help right away if you get any of the following symptoms of a serious allergic reaction: 
    –    fainting, dizziness, feeling lightheaded (low blood pressure)
    –    swelling of your face, eyelids, lips, mouth, tongue, or throat 
    –    trouble breathing or throat tightness 
    –    chest tightness
    –    skin rash, hives
    –    itching 
Infections: 
SKYRIZI may lower the ability of your immune system to fight infections and may increase your risk of infections. Your healthcare provider should check you for
infections and tuberculosis (TB) before starting treatment with SKYRIZI and may treat you for TB before you begin treatment with SKYRIZI if you have a history of TB
or have active TB. Your healthcare provider should watch you closely for signs and symptoms of TB during and after treatment with SKYRIZI. 
Tell your healthcare provider right away if you have an infection or have symptoms of an infection, including:
    –    fever, sweats, or chills
    –    cough
    –    shortness of breath 
    –    blood in your mucus (phlegm) 
    –    muscle aches 
    –    warm, red, or painful skin or sores on your body different from your psoriasis 
    –    weight loss
    –    diarrhea or stomach pain 
    –    burning when you urinate or urinating more often than normal 


Do not use SKYRIZI if you are allergic to risankizumab-rzaa or any of the ingredients in SKYRIZI. See the Medication Guide or Consumer Brief Summary for a
complete list of ingredients. 
Before using SKYRIZI, tell your healthcare provider about all of your medical conditions, including if you: 
have any of the conditions or symptoms listed in the section "What is the most important information I should know about SKYRIZI?" 
have an infection that does not go away or that keeps coming back. 
have TB or have been in close contact with someone with TB. 
have recently received or are scheduled to receive an immunization (vaccine). Medicines that interact with the immune system may increase your risk of getting an
infection after receiving live vaccines. You should avoid receiving live vaccines right before, during, or right after treatment with SKYRIZI. Tell your healthcare
provider that you are taking SKYRIZI before receiving a vaccine. 
are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. It is not known if SKYRIZI can harm your unborn baby. 
are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. It is not known if SKYRIZI passes into your breast milk. 
become pregnant while taking SKYRIZI. You are encouraged to enroll in the Pregnancy Registry, which is used to collect information about the health of you and
your baby. Talk to your healthcare provider or call 1-877-302-2161 to enroll in this registry. 
Tell your healthcare provider about all the medicines you take, including prescription and over-the- counter medicines, vitamins, and herbal supplements. 
What are the possible side effects of SKYRIZI? 
SKYRIZI may cause serious side effects. See "What is the most important information I should know about SKYRIZI?" 
Liver problems may happen while being treated for Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis: A person with Crohn's disease who received SKYRIZI through a vein in the
arm developed changes in liver blood tests with a rash that led to hospitalization. Your healthcare provider will do blood tests to check your liver before, during, and at least
up to 12 weeks of treatment, and may stop treatment with SKYRIZI if you develop liver problems. Tell your healthcare provider right away if you notice any of the
following symptoms: unexplained rash, nausea, vomiting, stomach (abdominal) pain, tiredness (fatigue), loss of appetite, yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice), and
dark urine. 
The most common side effects of SKYRIZI in people treated for Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis include: upper respiratory infections, headache, joint pain,
stomach (abdominal) pain, injection site reactions, low red blood cells (anemia), fever, back pain, urinary tract infection, and rash. 
The most common side effects of SKYRIZI in people treated for plaque psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis include: upper respiratory infections, headache, feeling tired,
injection site reactions, and fungal skin infections. 
These are not all the possible side effects of SKYRIZI. Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. 
Use SKYRIZI exactly as your healthcare provider tells you to use it. 
SKYRIZI (risankizumab-rzaa) is available in a 150 mg/mL prefilled syringe and pen, a 600 mg/10 mL vial for intravenous infusion, and a 180 mg/1.2 mL or 360 mg/2.4
mL single-dose prefilled cartridge with on- body injector. 
You are encouraged to report negative side effects of prescription drugs to the FDA. Visit www.fda.gov/medwatch or call 1-800-FDA-1088.
If you are having difficulty paying for your medicine, AbbVie may be able to help. Visit AbbVie.com/myAbbVieAssist to learn more.


Please click here for the Full Prescribing Information and Medication Guide.
Globally, prescribing information varies; refer to the individual country product label for complete information.
About AbbVie in Gastroenterology
With a robust clinical trial program, AbbVie is committed to cutting-edge research to drive exciting developments in inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), like ulcerative
colitis and Crohn's disease. By innovating, learning and adapting, AbbVie aspires to eliminate the burden of IBD and make a positive long-term impact on the lives of
people with IBD. For more information on AbbVie in gastroenterology, visit https://www.abbvie.com/our-science/therapeutic-focus-areas/immunology/immunology-focus-
areas/gastroenterology.html.
About AbbVie
AbbVie's mission is to discover and deliver innovative medicines that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow. We strive to have a
remarkable impact on people's lives across several key therapeutic areas – immunology, oncology, neuroscience, eye care – and products and services in our Allergan
Aesthetics portfolio. For more information about AbbVie, please visit us at www.abbvie.com. Follow @abbvie on LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram, X (formerly Twitter) and
YouTube.
Forward-Looking Statements
Some statements in this news release are, or may be considered, forward-looking statements for purposes of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The words
"believe," "expect," "anticipate," "project" and similar expressions and uses of future or conditional verbs, generally identify forward-looking statements. AbbVie cautions
that these forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the
forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, challenges to intellectual property, competition from other products, difficulties
inherent in the research and development process, adverse litigation or government action, and changes to laws and regulations applicable to our industry. Additional
information about the economic, competitive, governmental, technological and other factors that may affect AbbVie's operations is set forth in Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of
AbbVie's 2023 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, as updated by its subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form
10-Q. AbbVie undertakes no obligation, and specifically declines, to release publicly any revisions to forward-looking statements as a result of subsequent events or
developments, except as required by law.
US-SKZG-240225
1 AbbVie. Data on file: ABVRRTI75696.
2 AbbVie. Data on File: ABVRRTI76012.
3 SKYRIZI [package insert]. North Chicago, IL: AbbVie Inc.; 2024.
4 Lewis JD, Parlett LE, Jonsson Funk ML, et al. Incidence, prevalence, and racial and ethnic distribution of inflammatory bowel disease in the United States.
Gastroenterology. 2023;165(5). doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2023.07.003
5 The Facts about Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America. 2014. Available
at: https://www.crohnscolitisfoundation.org/sites/default/files/2019-02/Updated%20IBD%20Factbook.pdf. Accessed June 2024. 
6 Ulcerative colitis. Mayo Clinic. 2022. Available at: https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/ulcerative-colitis/symptoms-causes/syc-20353326. Accessed June
2024. 
7 Monstad, I, Hovde O, Solberg IC, A Moum B. Clinical course and prognosis in ulcerative colitis: results from population-based and observational studies. Ann
Gastroenterol. 2014;27(2):95-104.
8 Gajendran M, Loganathan P, Jimenez G, et al. A comprehensive review and update on ulcerative colitis. Dis Mon. 2019;65(12):100851.
doi:10.1016/j.disamonth.2019.02.004


9 Mehta F. Report: economic implications of inflammatory bowel disease and its management. Am J Manag Care. 2016;22(3 Suppl):s51-60.
10 Duvallet E, Sererano L, Assier E, Falgarone G, Boissier MC. Interleukin-23: a key cytokine in inflammatory diseases. Ann Med. 2011;43(7):503-11.
doi:10.3109/07853890.2011.577093
11 Pipeline. AbbVie. Available at: https://www.abbvie.com/our-science/pipeline.html. Accessed June 2024.
12 A study comparing risankizumab to placebo in participants with active psoriatic arthritis including those who have a history of inadequate response or intolerance to
biologic therapy(ies) (KEEPsAKE2). ClinicalTrials.gov. Updated June 18, 2024. Available at: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03671148. Accessed June 2024. 
13 A multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled induction study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of risankizumab in participants with moderately to
severely active ulcerative colitis. ClinicalTrials.gov. Updated August 1, 2023. Available at: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/record/NCT03398148. Accessed June 2024. 
 
   
SOURCE AbbVie
For further information: U.S. Media: Shannelle Fowler, +1 (773) 520-2106, shannelle.fowler@abbvie.com, OR Investors: Liz Shea, +1 (862) 261-8130,
liz.shea@abbvie.com
Additional assets available online:  Photos (1)
https://news.abbvie.com/2024-06-18-U-S-FDA-Approves-SKYRIZI-R-risankizumab-rzaa-for-Ulcerative-Colitis,-Expanding-AbbVies-Portfolio-Across-Inflammatory-
Bowel-Disease


AbbVie News Center
AbbVie Announces European Commission Approval of SKYRIZI® (risankizumab) for the Treatment of Adults with Moderately to
Severely Active Ulcerative Colitis
The marketing authorization for SKYRIZI® (risankizumab) marks its fourth approved indication in the European Union
The approval is supported by data from two pivotal Phase 3 trials: The INSPIRE induction trial1 and COMMAND maintenance trial2
In both trials, SKYRIZI achieved the primary endpoint of clinical remission (per Adapted Mayo Score*) and key secondary endpoints, including mucosal healing**
and histologic endoscopic mucosal healing†,1,2
NORTH CHICAGO, Ill., July 26, 2024 /PRNewswire/ -- AbbVie (NYSE: ABBV) today announced that the European Commission has approved SKYRIZI®
(risankizumab) for the treatment of adult patients with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis (UC) who have had an inadequate response to, lost response to, or
were intolerant to conventional therapy or a biologic therapy.3
"Ulcerative colitis is a chronic, unpredictable and sometimes debilitating disease, and people living with the condition need sustained symptom relief," said Edouard Louis,
M.D., Ph.D., professor and head of gastroenterology, Liège University Hospital, dean of faculty, Liège University, and INSPIRE trial investigator. "Patients treated with
SKYRIZI in the INSPIRE and COMMAND clinical trials experienced significant improvements in clinical remission and mucosal healing. These are important findings as
mucosal healing goes beyond symptom management to restoration of the intestinal lining and is associated with improved long-term outcomes. This approval introduces a
new treatment option to help patients with UC reach their long-term treatment goals," continued Professor Louis.
UC is estimated to affect 5 million people around the world, and the incidence is increasing worldwide.4 The common signs and symptoms of UC include diarrhea,
abdominal pain, blood in the stool, urgency to defecate, passing mucus from the rectum and rectal pain and bleeding.5 Because of the pain and discomfort, patients
commonly lack the ability or desire to pursue everyday activities.6
"The approval of SKYRIZI for the treatment of UC provides physicians with a new treatment option that is proven to help a wide range of patients with varying degrees of
prior therapy use, including conventional or biological therapy. Notably, in the Phase 3 trials we observed positive results in mucosal healing particularly in patients without
previous biologic experience or JAK inhibitor failure," said Roopal Thakkar, M.D., executive vice president, research & development, and chief scientific officer, AbbVie.
"The EU approval of SKYRIZI for people living with UC strengthens our diversified IBD portfolio, providing healthcare professionals with more options to treat their IBD
patients." 
The recommended SKYRIZI induction dose is 1,200 mg administered by intravenous (IV) infusion at week 0, week 4 and week 8. Starting at week 12 and every 8 weeks
thereafter, the recommended maintenance dose of either 180 mg or 360 mg administered by subcutaneous (SC) injection is based on individual patient presentation.
The approval of SKYRIZI was based on two Phase 3 clinical trials, INSPIRE and COMMAND.1,2 Primary and key secondary endpoint results from the Phase 3 trials
include the following:
Primary Endpoint: Clinical Remission
In the INSPIRE induction trial, a significantly higher proportion of patients treated with risankizumab 1,200 mg IV achieved the primary endpoint of clinical
remission (per Adapted Mayo Score*) at week 12 than patients receiving placebo (20% vs 6%; p<.00001).3


In the COMMAND maintenance trial, a significantly higher proportion of patients who received risankizumab 180 mg or 360 mg SC achieved clinical remission at
week 52 than patients in the induction-only control group: 40% and 38%, respectively, versus 25% (p≤.01).3
Key Secondary Endpoint: Mucosal Healing
In INSPIRE, mucosal healing** was observed at week 12 in 37% of patients treated with risankizumab 1,200 mg IV compared to 12% of those receiving placebo
(p<.00001).3
Specifically in patients without previous biologic or JAK inhibitor failure, 48% of patients treated with risankizumab 1,200 mg IV achieved mucosal healing at
week 12 versus 14% of those receiving placebo.3
In COMMAND, 51% of patients treated with risankizumab 180 mg and 48% of patients treated with risankizumab 360 mg achieved mucosal healing at week 52
versus 32% of patients in the induction-only control group (p<.001).3
In patients without previous biologic or JAK inhibitor failure, 60% of patients who received risankizumab 180 mg and 76% who received risankizumab 360
mg achieved mucosal healing versus 36% of patients in the induction-only control group.3
Key Secondary Endpoint: Histologic Endoscopic Mucosal Healing (HEMH)
In INSPIRE, 24% of patients treated with risankizumab 1,200 mg IV achieved HEMH† at week 12 versus 8% of those receiving placebo (p<.00001).1
In COMMAND, significantly more patients treated with risankizumab 180 mg and 360 mg achieved HEMH at week 52 than those treated with the induction dose
only: 43% and 42%, respectively, versus 23% (p≤0.01).2
*Adapted Mayo Score is based on the stool frequency subscore (SFS), rectal bleeding subscore (RBS) and endoscopic score (ES).
** Mucosal healing is defined as ES ≤1 without friability.
†HEMH is defined as Geboes score ≤3.1 and ES ≤1 without friability.
The safety profile of SKYRIZI in both trials was consistent with the safety profile observed in previous trials across other indications, with no new safety risks observed.
The most common adverse events observed were COVID-19, anemia, nasopharyngitis and arthralgia.1,2 
Results from the INSPIRE induction and COMMAND maintenance Phase 3 trials were published in The Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) in July
2024.
SKYRIZI is part of a collaboration between Boehringer Ingelheim and AbbVie, with AbbVie leading development and commercialization globally.
About Ulcerative Colitis (UC)
UC is a chronic, idiopathic, immune-mediated IBD of the large intestine that causes continuous mucosal inflammation extending, to a variable extent, from the rectum to
the more proximal colon.7,8 The hallmark signs and symptoms of UC include rectal bleeding, abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea, tenesmus (a sense of pressure), urgency and
fecal incontinence.6,9 The disease course of UC varies between patients and can range from quiescent disease to chronic refractory disease, which in some cases can lead to
surgery or life-threatening complications.6,9 The severity of symptoms and unpredictability of disease course can lead to substantial burden and often disability among
those living with the disease.9


About the INSPIRE Induction Trial1
INSPIRE is a Phase 3, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial evaluating the efficacy and safety of risankizumab 1,200 mg IV administered at 0, 4
and 8 weeks as induction therapy in patients with moderately to severely active UC.
Topline results of the study were shared in March 2023. More information can be found on www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT03398148).
About the COMMAND Maintenance Trial2
The COMMAND trial is a Phase 3, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, controlled, 52-week maintenance trial designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of
risankizumab 180 mg or 360 mg SC in adults with moderately to severely active UC. This study followed a rerandomized withdrawal design in which all patients received
risankizumab IV induction, and those with a response to risankizumab were rerandomized to receive risankizumab 180 mg or 360 mg SC or withdrawal from risankizumab
treatment (induction-only control group). For those patients randomized to withdraw from risankizumab treatment (induction-only control group), the rest of the study
duration was a risankizumab washout. The objective of the Phase 3 trial is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of risankizumab 180 mg or 360 mg as maintenance therapy
versus withdrawal from risankizumab treatment (control) in patients with moderately to severely active UC with a response to risankizumab IV induction in the INSPIRE
trial.
Topline results from this study were shared in June 2023. More information can be found on www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT03398135).
About SKYRIZI® (risankizumab)
SKYRIZI is an interleukin (IL)-23 inhibitor that selectively blocks IL-23 by binding to its p19 subunit.3 IL-23, a cytokine involved in inflammatory processes, is thought to
be linked to a number of chronic immune-mediated diseases.10,11 SKYRIZI is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the EMA for the treatment of
plaque psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis.3,12
EU Indications and Important Safety Information About Risankizumab (SKYRIZI)3
Indications
SKYRIZI is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis who have had an inadequate response to, lost response to, or
were intolerant to conventional therapy or a biologic therapy. SKYRIZI is indicated for the treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis in adults who are candidates
for systemic therapy. SKYRIZI, alone or in combination with methotrexate, is indicated for the treatment of active psoriatic arthritis in adults who have had an inadequate
response or who have been intolerant to one or more disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. SKYRIZI is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with moderately to
severely active Crohn's disease who have had an inadequate response to, lost response to, or were intolerant to conventional or biologic therapy.
Important Safety Information
SKYRIZI is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to the active substance or to any of its excipients and in patients with clinically important active infections (e.g.,
active tuberculosis [TB]). SKYRIZI may increase the risk of infection. In patients with a chronic infection, a history of recurrent infection, or known risk factors for
infection, SKYRIZI should be used with caution. Treatment with SKYRIZI should not be initiated in patients with any clinically important active infection until the
infection resolves or is adequately treated.
Patients treated with SKYRIZI should be instructed to seek medical advice if signs or symptoms of clinically important chronic or acute infection occur. If a patient
develops such an infection or is not responding to standard therapy for the infection, the patient should be closely monitored, and SKYRIZI should not be administered
until the infection resolves.


Prior to initiating treatment with SKYRIZI, patients should be evaluated for TB infection. Patients receiving SKYRIZI should be monitored for signs and symptoms of
active TB. Anti-TB therapy should be considered prior to initiating SKYRIZI in patients with a past history of latent or active TB in whom an adequate course of treatment
cannot be confirmed. 
Prior to initiating therapy with SKYRIZI, completion of all appropriate immunizations should be considered according to current immunization guidelines. If a patient has
received live vaccination (viral or bacterial), it is recommended to wait at least 4 weeks prior to starting treatment with SKYRIZI. Patients treated with SKYRIZI should
not receive live vaccines during treatment and for at least 21 weeks after treatment.
If a serious hypersensitivity reaction occurs, including anaphylaxis, administration of SKYRIZI should be discontinued immediately, and appropriate therapy initiated.
The most frequently reported adverse reactions were upper respiratory infections (13.0 % in PSO, 15.6% in Crohn's disease and 26.2% in ulcerative colitis). Commonly
(≥1/100 to <1/10) reported adverse reactions included tinea infections, headache, pruritus, rash, eczema, fatigue, and injection site reactions.
This is not a complete summary of all safety information.
See the full Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC) for SKYRIZI at www.ema.europa.eu.
Globally, prescribing information varies; refer to the individual country product label for complete information.
About AbbVie in Gastroenterology
With a robust clinical trial program, AbbVie is committed to cutting-edge research to drive exciting developments in IBD, like ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease. By
innovating, learning, and adapting, AbbVie aspires to eliminate the burden of IBD and make a positive long-term impact on the lives of people with IBD. For more
information on AbbVie in gastroenterology, visit https://www.abbvie.com/our-science/therapeutic-focus-areas/immunology/immunology-focus-areas/gastroenterology.html.
About AbbVie
AbbVie's mission is to discover and deliver innovative medicines and solutions that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow. We
strive to have a remarkable impact on people's lives across several key therapeutic areas – immunology, oncology, neuroscience and eye care – and with products and
services in our Allergan Aesthetics portfolio. For more information about AbbVie, please visit us at www.abbvie.com. Follow @abbvie on LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram,
X (formerly Twitter), and YouTube.
Forward-Looking Statements
Some statements in this news release are, or may be considered, forward-looking statements for the purposes of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The
words "believe," "expect," "anticipate," "project" and similar expressions and uses of future or conditional verbs generally identify forward-looking statements. AbbVie
cautions that these forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in
the forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, challenges to intellectual property, competition from other products, difficulties
inherent in the research and development process, adverse litigation or government action and changes to laws and regulations applicable to our industry. Additional
information about the economic, competitive, governmental, technological and other factors that may affect AbbVie's operations is set forth in Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of
AbbVie's 2023 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, as updated by its subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form
10-Q. AbbVie undertakes no obligation, and specifically declines, to release publicly any revisions to forward-looking statements as a result of subsequent events or
developments, except as required by law. 
References
1. Louis, E. et al. (2023). "OP021 Risankizumab Induction Therapy in Patients With Moderately to Severely Active Ulcerative Colitis: Efficacy and Safety in the
Randomized Phase 3 INSPIRE Study." United European Gastroenterol J. 11(8):26.


2. Louis, E. et al. (2024). "OP06 Risankizumab Maintenance Therapy in Patients With Moderately to Severely Active Ulcerative Colitis: Efficacy and Safety in the
Randomised Phase 3 COMMAND Study." J Crohns Colitis. 18(1):i10-i12. doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjad212.0006.
3. SKYRIZI. Summary of Product Characteristics. https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/product-information/skyrizi-epar-product-information_en.pdf. Accessed July
9. 2024.
4. Le Berre, C. et al. (2023). "Ulcerative Colitis." Lancet. 402(10401):571-584. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)00966-2   
5. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. "Ulcerative Colitis." https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/ulcerative-
colitis/all-content. Updated September 2020. Accessed July 15, 2024.
6. Rapport, F. et al. (2019). "Patient Views About the Impact of Ulcerative Colitis and Its Management With Drug Treatment and Surgery: A Nested Qualitative Study
Within the CONSTRUCT Trial." BMC Gastroenterol. 19(1):166. doi:10.1186/s12876-019-1085-y.
7. Gajendran, M. et al. (2019). "A Comprehensive Review and Update on Ulcerative Colitis." Dis Mon. 65(12):100851. doi:10.1016/j.disamonth.2019.02.004.
8. Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America. "The Facts About Inflammatory Bowel Diseases." https://www.crohnscolitisfoundation.org/sites/default/files/2019-
02/Updated%20IBD%20Factbook.pdf. Published November 2014. Accessed July 15, 2024.
9. Mehta, F. (2016). "Report: Economic Implications of Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Its Management." Am J Manag Care. 22(3 suppl):s51-60.
10. Duvallet, E. et al. (2011). "Interleukin-23: A Key Cytokine in Inflammatory Diseases." Ann Med. 43(7):503-511. doi:10.3109/07853890.2011.577093.
11. Moschen, A.R. et al. (2019). "IL-12, IL-23 and IL-17 in IBD: Immunobiology and Therapeutic Targeting." Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 16(3):185-196.
doi:10.1038/s41575-018-0084-8.
12. Skyrizi. Highlights of Prescribing Information. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2022/761262s000lbl.pdf. Updated June 2022. Accessed July 15,
2024.
 
SOURCE AbbVie
For further information: International Media: Kristin Pawliw, +1 224-440-7846, kristin.pawliw@abbvie.com, U.S. Media: Jasmine Farley, jasmine.farley@abbvie.com,
Investors: Liz Shea, +1 (862) 261-8130, liz.shea@abbvie.com
https://news.abbvie.com/2024-07-26-AbbVie-Announces-European-Commission-Approval-of-SKYRIZI-R-risankizumab-for-the-Treatment-of-Adults-with-Moderately-to-
Severely-Active-Ulcerative-Colitis