China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission
2016
Annual Report on 
International Commercial 
Arbitration in China


5
PREFACE
Preface
Currently, the vision of the Belt and Road Initiative is becoming a reality. 
Governmental and non-governmental economic and trade exchanges and 
cooperation between China and other countries involved in the Belt and Road 
construction are entering into a new stage of rapid development with the 
initiation of a large number of cooperation projects, the preliminary shaping of 
an infrastructure network and the advancement of industrial cooperation along 
the Belt and Road. However, trade and investment disputes and conflicts are 
unavoidable along with the continuous progress of the cooperative projects. 
Therefore, efficient and impartial resolution of disputes and the protection of the 
legitimate rights and interests of all parties concerned are of great significance 
in the construction of the Belt and Road, which also creates a best development 
opportunity in history for international commercial arbitration in China.   
The China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission (the 
CIETAC) released its 2014 Annual Report on International Commercial 
Arbitration in China at Beijing on 22 September 2015. That was the first annual 
report ever released in China on the development of international commercial 
arbitration in China, which is normally called the foreign-related arbitration 
in China. The release of the 2014 and 2015 Annual Reports on International 
Commercial Arbitration in China in both Chinese and English has attracted 
extensive attention of arbitration practitioners and researchers in and outside 


6
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
China. The CIETAC decides to carry out its preparation and publication of its 
2016 Annual Report as an effort to sum up the annual development of the legal 
system of international commercial arbitration in China, promote the perfection 
of China’s international commercial arbitration system, the development of 
arbitration and the exchange of information, enhance China’s influence in 
international commercial arbitration arena, and provide suggestions and references 
for future development of international commercial arbitration in China. 
Through empirical analysis and theoretical research, the 2016 Annual Report 
on International Commercial Arbitration in China covers data analysis and legal 
system progress in the micro level, the improvement of arbitration practice and 
system in the medium level and the judicial review and industry development in 
the macro level so as to show the highlights in the development of international 
commercial arbitration in China. Specifically, based on the analysis of the data 
of international commercial arbitration cases in 2016, the 2016 Annual Report 
follows  the developments of the legal system of international commercial 
arbitration in China, discusses the judicial supervision in the field of international 
commercial arbitration in China, makes special observation on the application 
of the International Commercial Terms (the Incoterms) published by the 
International Chamber of Commerce (the ICC) in such field, and takes the 
promotion of resolving intellectual property disputes through arbitration as an 
example to analyze the current situation and prospect of specified sectors of 
international commercial arbitration in China. 


7
PREFACE
The 2016 Annual Report is divided into four chapters in addition to the Preface 
and the Summary of the Year. Chapter One Overview of the Development of 
International Commercial Arbitration in China is an overview of the development 
of international commercial arbitration nationwide, the analysis of data regarding 
arbitration cases in China, judicial support and supervision of international 
commercial arbitration cases by the Supreme People’s Court (the SPC), and the 
development of theoretical research on international commercial arbitration in 
China in 2016. In the 2015 Annual Report, special observation was made on the 
application of the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International 
Sale of Goods (the CISG) in China’s international commercial arbitration. The 
Incoterms is another most influential legal document regarding the international 
sale of goods. Thus, Chapter Two of the 2016 Annual Report Special Observation 
on Application of the Incoterms in International Commercial Arbitration in 
China makes a special observation on the application of the Incoterms in China’s 
international commercial arbitration. Through analysis of typical cases, the Report 
reveals the common problems in the application of the Incoterms by parties 
involved in international trade, summarizes and studies experience for China’s 
international commercial arbitration practice, and makes recommendations for 
international trade practitioners and potential parties of arbitration cases. Chapter 
Three Judicial Supervision of International Commercial Arbitration in China 
focuses on the judicial supervision of international commercial arbitration in 
China, including confirmation of validity of arbitration agreements, annulment 
and enforcement of arbitration awards. Chapter Four Development of China’s 


8
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
International Commercial Arbitration in Specific Sectors-Promotion of Resolving 
Intellectual Property Disputes through Arbitration contains in-depth investigation 
on the status of China’s intellectual property arbitration practice through analyzing 
relevant cases handled by the CIETAC in recent years, analyzes the existing gap 
between theories and practice, and puts forward proposals on pushing forward the 
development of intellectual property arbitration. 
The 2016 Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China is 
written by the research team of the Renmin University of China, led by Professor 
Du Huanfang, Vice President and Deputy Party Secretary of the Law School of 
Renmin University of China, and Mr. Li Bing, Director of the CIETAC Research 
Institute. Main team members are Professor Song Lianbin from the International 
Law School of China University of Political Science and Law, Dr. Shen Hongyu, 
judge of the 4
th Civil Division of the SPC and Mr. Dong Xiao, Partner of Anjie 
Law Firm. The work of the members is divided as follows: Preface and Summary 
of the Year by Professor Du Huanfang, Chapter One by Professor Song Lianbin’s 
team with participation of Mr. Dong Xiao and Dr. Shen Hongyu with Dr. Shen 
providing the data for Part III, Judicial Supervision of Commercial Arbitration 
in China. Mr. Liao Yuyi, postdoctoral researcher of the SPC Applied Science 
of Law Research Institute, and Mr. Huang Baojin, PHD candidate of private 
international law of China University of Political Science and Law, participated 
in the composition of Part IV, Theoretical Research on International Commercial 
Arbitration In China. Chapter Two was accomplished by Mr. Dong Xiao’s team. 


9
PREFACE
Chapter Three is written by Dr. Shen Hongyu while Chapter four by Mr. Li 
Xiansen, PHD candidate of International Law of the Law School of the Renmin 
University of China. Professor Du Huanfang and Director Li Bing compiled and 
edited this Report after the completion of the draft while Mr. Wang Chengjie, the 
CIETAC Vice Chairman and Secretary General, Dr. Li Hu, the CIETAC Party 
Chief and Deputy Secretary General, and Dr. Zhao Jian, the Vice President of the 
CIETAC Arbitration Court reviewed the draft.
We hereby acknowledge the kind support and generous assistance from the Legal 
System Coordination Department of the Office of Legislative Affairs of the State 
Council, the Fourth Civil Division of the SPC, the CIETAC, Anjie Law Firm, 
Renmin University of China, China University of Political Science and Law, 
etc. for providing information, drafting and providing advice and assessment for 
this Report, and extend our gratitude to Ms. Yue Jie and Ms. Yang Fan, who are 
both the CIETAC arbitrators, for their pertinent advice, to Ms. Zhang Bei, Mr. 
Liu Gang, Ms. Zhao Jinxin, Ms. Su Sa and Ms. Cai Fei of the CIETAC Research 
Institute for their great efforts in data collection, proofreading and typographical 
arrangement of the Report.
Our special thanks and appreciation also go to the following persons for their hard 
work in translating the Report into English: Ms. Gu Huaning for translating the 
Report into English, Ms. Jin Xi for proofreading of the translation of Preface and 
Chapter One, Ms. Lu Yahan for proofreading of Chapter Two, Ms. Liu Yang for 
proofreading of Chapter Three, Ms. Li Shuzhen for proofreading of Chapter Four 


10
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
and Summary of the Year, and last but not the least, Ms. Jie Wang for the final 
proofreading of the whole English version of the Report.
The Research Team of 2016 Annual Report on International Commercial 
Arbitration in China
20 August 2017


11
CHAPTER 1
Chapter One Overview of the 
Development of International 
Commercial Arbitration in China
The caseload of arbitration commissions in China continued its surging trend 
in 2016 with the number of foreign-related arbitration cases increasing steadily. 
Though no legislation was made in 2016 that relates to arbitration, the SPC issued 
important judicial interpretations and normative documents in 2016, highlighting 
its policy of supporting arbitration. Meanwhile, a number of arbitration 
commissions amended their arbitration rules. Concerning the research on 
international commercial arbitration, the methodology of empirical research was 
so widely used that outsiders could have a better understanding of the confidential 
arbitration while active discussion was made in China regarding the latest hot 
issues in the international arbitration community such as investment arbitration, 
third-party founding, interim measures, professional ethics of arbitrators and 
codes of conduct for agents.
I. Data Analysis of Commercial Arbitration Cases in 
China
Since the implementation of the 1995 PRC Arbitration Law (the Arbitration Law), 
Chinese arbitration commissions have maintained the increase in caseloads and 
dispute amounts for over 20 years, with the average annual increase rate being 
over 30%. In total, over 1.2 million cases involving civil and commercial disputes 


12
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
with the total amount of dispute of RMB 2,260 billion have been accepted. The 
rate of errors found through judicial supervision remains below 1%.
1 The number 
of cases accepted and the dispute amount reached a historic high in 2016.
2
1. Overview of Caseload 
The number of cases accepted by the 251 Chinese arbitration commissions in 
2016 was 208,545, an increase of 71,621 cases at the increase rate of 52% as 
compared to the previous year. The total amount of dispute was RMB 469.5 
billion, an increase of RMB 58.3 billion at the increase rate of 14% as compared 
to the previous year. The average caseload is 831, an increase of 270 cases and 
48% over the previous year. The average amount of dispute was RMB1.9 billion, 
an increase of RMB 0.2 billion at the increase rate of 12% as compared to the 
previous year. 
1 The Statistics on Cases Accepted by Chinese Arbitration Commissions in 2016, provided by the Legal 
System Coordination Department of the Office of Legislative Affairs of the State Council, http://fzb.wuxi.
gov.cn/doc/2017/06/28/1373728.shtml (last visited on 19 August 2017).
2 Source: Relevant Situation in Chinese Arbitration in 2016, the Legal System Coordination Department of 
the Office of Legislative Affairs of the State Council, March 2017.


13
CHAPTER 1
Total Number of Cases Accepted by Chinese 
Arbitration Commissions
Year 2016
208545
Year 2015
136924
120%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0
250000
200000
150000
100000
50000
0
Figure 1.1
 
Total Dispute Amount of Cases Accepted by Chinese 
Arbitration Commissions (unit: RMB 0.1 billion)
Year 2016
4695
Year 2015
4112
120%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0
4800
4600
4400
4200
4000
3800
Figure 1.2


14
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
 
Average Number of Cases Accepted by 
Chinese Arbitration Commissions
120%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Year 2016
831
Year 2015
561
Figure 1.3
 
Average Dispute Amount of Cases Accepted by Chinese 
Arbitration Commissions (unit: RMB 0.1 billion)
120%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0
19.5
19
18.5
18
17.5
17
16.5
16
Year 2016
19
Year 2015
17
Figure 1.4


15
CHAPTER 1
Among the 251 Chinese arbitration commissions in 2016, the three arbitration 
commissions established within the CCOIC/CCPIT, i.e. the CIETAC, the Chinese 
Maritime Arbitration Commission (the CMAC) and the Arbitration Center Across 
the Straits (the ACAS) accepted 2,250 cases in 2016, accounting for 1% of the 
national total caseload. The amount of dispute was RMB 59.9 billion, accounting 
for 13% of the national total dispute amount. The four arbitration commissions 
in municipalities directly under the central government accepted 10,286 cases, 
accounting for 5% of the national total caseload. The amount of dispute was RMB 
75.9 billion, accounting for 16% of the national total dispute amount. The 27 
arbitration commissions in cities where the people’s governments of provinces 
and autonomous regions are located accepted 89,475 cases, accounting for 43% 
of the national total caseload. The amount of dispute was RMB 133.6 billion, 
accounting for 28% of the national total dispute amount. The 218 arbitration 
commissions in other prefecture-level cities accepted 106,534 cases, accounting 
for 51% of the national total caseload. The amount of dispute was RMB 200.3 
billion, accounting for 43% of the national total dispute amount.
 


16
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Statistics of Caseloads (unit: Number of Cases) and 
Percentages in National Total Caseload
■ Arbitration 
Commissions in other 
Prefecture-level 
Cities
106, 534, 51%
■ Arbitration Commissions 
Established within CCOIC
2.250, 1%
■ Arbitration Commissions in 
Municipalities Directly under the 
Central Government
10, 286, 5%
■ Arbitration 
Commissions in Cities 
where the 
Governments of 
Provinces and 
Autonomous Regions 
are Located
89, 475, 43%
Figure 1.5
Amounts of Dispute (unit: RMB billion) and Percentages in 
National Total Dispute Amount
■ Arbitration Commissions 
in other Prefecture-level 
Cities 200.3, 43%
■ Arbitration Commissions 
in Municipalities Directly 
under the Central 
Government
75.9, 16%
■ Arbitration Commissions in 
Cities where the Governments 
of Provinces and Autonomous 
Regions are Located
133.6, 28%
■ Arbitration Commissions Established 
within CCOIC 59.9, 13%
Figure 1.6


17
CHAPTER 1
1) Caseloads of Arbitration Commissions
The number of arbitration commissions accepting over 500 cases were 76, 
accounting for 30% of the arbitration commissions nationwide. The number of 
arbitration commissions accepting between 200 and 500 cases were 53, accounting 
for 21% of the arbitration commissions nationwide. The number of arbitration 
commissions accepting between 50 and 200 cases were 71, accounting for 28% of 
the arbitration commissions nationwide. The number of arbitration commissions 
accepting less than 50 cases were 51, accounting for 21% of the arbitration 
commissions nationwide. Among the 76 arbitration commissions accepting over 
500 cases, one was the CIETAC established within the CCOIC, 4 were arbitration 
commissions in municipalities directly under the central government, 22 were 
arbitration commissions in cities where the people’s governments of provinces 
and autonomous regions are located and 49 were arbitration commissions in other 
prefecture-level cities.
2) Statistics of Caseloads of Arbitration Commissions in Comparison with 
the National Average Caseload
There were 46 arbitration commissions accepting more cases than the national 
average caseload of 831, accounting for 18% of the arbitration commissions 
nationwide. These commissions accepted a total of 162,766 cases, accounting 
for 78% of the national total caseload. There were 205 arbitration commissions 
accepting fewer cases than the national average caseload, accounting for 82% of 
the arbitration commissions nationwide. Altogether, these commissions accepted 
45,779 cases, accounting for 22% of the national total caseload.


18
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
3) Comparison of Caseloads of 2016 and 2015
In 2016, the number of arbitration commissions that had an increased caseload 
was 159, accounting for 63% of the arbitration commissions nationwide, which 
was a 3% decrease compared to the 162 arbitration commissions accounting for 
66% of the arbitration commissions nationwide in 2015. The number of arbitration 
commissions with increased dispute amount was 138, accounting for 55% of the 
arbitration commissions nationwide, which was a 17% decrease compared to the 
176 arbitration commissions accounting for 72% of the arbitration commissions 
nationwide in 2015. The number of arbitration commissions with increased 
caseload and dispute amount was 101, accounting for 40% of the arbitration 
commissions nationwide, which was a 13% decrease compared to the 129 
arbitration commissions accounting for 53% of the arbitration commissions 
nationwide in 2015. 
4) Statistics of Cases Settled through Mediation or Conciliation
In 2016, 121,527 cases were settled through mediation or conciliation in, 
accounting for 58% of the national total caseload, which was an increase of 17% 
by 64,868 cases as compared with 56,659 cases settled through mediation or 
conciliation, accounting for 41% of the national total caseload in 2015.
 


19
CHAPTER 1
Number of Cases Settled through Mediation or 
Conciliation
Year 2016
121527
Year 2015
56659
140000
120000
100000
80000
60000
40000
20000
0
Figure 1.7
2. Statistics of Foreign-related, Hong Kong-related, Macao-related 
and Taiwan-related Cases
Most cases were domestic in 2016. There were 62 arbitration commissions 
accepting altogether 3,141 foreign-related, Hong Kong-related, Macao-related 
and Taiwan-related (HMT-related) cases, accounting for 1.5% of the national 
total caseload. The ratio was almost the same as in 2015. Among these cases, 
1,187 cases were Hong Kong-related, 173 Macau-related, 235 Taiwan-related and 
1,546 foreign-related. The foreign-related cases mentioned above are international 
commercial arbitration cases accepted by Chinese arbitration commissions.
According to statistics, there were 22 arbitration commissions that accepted 
over 10 foreign-related and HMT-related cases, 1 arbitration commission that 


20
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
accepted 9 cases, 3 arbitration commissions that accepted 5 cases, 2 arbitration 
commissions that accepted 4 cases, 4 arbitration commissions that accepted 
3 cases, 5 arbitration commissions that accepted 2 cases, and 25 arbitration 
commissions that accepted 1 case. Arbitration commissions that accepted over 
100 cases were CIETAC, Guangzhou Arbitration Commission and Shanghai 
Arbitration Commission. 
It is obvious from the above statistics that the proportion of foreign-related cases 
in the total national caseload was not high, accounting for only 1.5%. The number 
of foreign-related cases was very uneven among Chinese arbitration commissions. 
This also indicates that there is still space for further development of international 
commercial arbitration in China.
3. Comparison of China’s International Commercial Arbitration 
Practice
Considering that China’s international commercial arbitration is institutional 
arbitration in the sense of both legislation and practice, this Chapter endeavors 
to analyze the features, the latest trend and development direction of China’s 
international commercial arbitration practice mainly through comparison based 
on the 2016 annual reports and case statistics published by major international 
arbitration institutions on their websites or through other official channels. 
1) Caseload
The CIETAC celebrated its 60
th anniversary in 2016. In the past 60 years, the 
CIETAC had continuously improved its arbitration service and maintained a 


21
CHAPTER 1
steady growth in its caseload. In 2016, the CIETAC accepted 2,181 cases, an 
increase of 10.82% compared to the previous year. There were 483 foreign-related 
cases, an increase of 10.53% compared to the previous year. There were 59 cases 
conducted in English or in both Chinese and English. There were 1,517 summary-
procedure cases, accounting for 69.56% of the total caseload.
The International Court of Arbitration of International Chamber of Commerce 
(the ICC Arbitration Court) accepted 966 cases in 2016, 165 cases more than the 
figure in 2015, reaching a record high in the 94 years since its establishment. 
The London Court of International Arbitration (the LCIA) accepted 303 cases 
in 2016, a slight decrease compared to the previous year. Among them, there 
were 253 cases where the LCIA Arbitration Rules were applied, and in the rest 
50 cases, the LCIA either acted as the appointing authority or provided other 
administrative service in cases where the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules applied, 
or took the role of funds trustee in such cases and other ad hoc cases. 
The Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (the SCC) 
accepted 199 cases in 2016. Among them, 96 were Swedish domestic cases 
and 103 were international ones. The SCC Rules were applied in 123 cases, the 
SCC Rules for Expedited Arbitration was applied in 55 cases, while emergency 
arbitrators were appointed in 13 cases.
The Singapore International Arbitration Centre (the SIAC) accepted 343 cases in 
2016, 80% of which were international ones. The SIAC received 70 applications 
for fast-track procedure with 28 approved. 


22
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
The Hong Kong International Arbitration Centre (the HKIAC) accepted 262 
cases in 2016. The HKIAC administered 94 cases according to its Rules or the 
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. Meanwhile, the majority of the cases accepted by 
HKIAC in 2016 were international ones. 78.4% of the cases involved at least one 
party from outside Hong Kong. 87.2% of the institutional cases were international 
ones. 49.1% of the cases did not involve Hong Kong. 6.6% of the cases did not 
involve Asia.
The statistics of the caseloads of the above arbitration institutions are shown in 
Figure 1.8.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CIETAC
ICC
SLAC
LCIA
HKIAC
SCC
 
 
Statistics of Caseloads of Arbitration Institutions is 2016 
(unit: Number of Cases)
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
2181
966
343
303
262
199
Figure 1.8
2) Parties


23
CHAPTER 1
The internationalization of the parties may reflect how much an arbitration 
institution is recognized in international arbitration. According to the statistics 
published by the major international arbitration institutions, the parties of the 
cases accepted in 2016 were from the following countries or regions: 
The parties of the CIETAC cases were from 57 countries or regions. The top 10 
countries or regions, excluding Mainland China, with the most parties involved 
were Hong Kong, the U.S., South Korea, Singapore, Germany, U.K., Russia, 
Japan, Taiwan and British Virgin Islands (BVI).
 
 
 
 
Top 10 Countries or Regions with the Most Parties Involved in 
the 2016 CIETAC Cases 
(Besides Mainland China, unit: Number of Cases)
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
137
11
12
12
13
16
22
29
31
11
Japan
Taiwan
Russia
U. K.
Germany
Singapore
South Korea
U. S.
BVI
Hong Kong
Figure 1.9
The 3,099 parties of the 966 cases accepted by the ICC Arbitration Court in 2016 
were from 137 countries or regions. Nearly half of the cases involved three or 
more parties while 20% of the cases involved five or more parties. One case even 


24
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
involved as many as 46 parties.
The parties of the cases accepted by the HKIAC in 2016 were from 39 countries 
or regions. The top 10 countries or regions with the most parties involved were 
Hong Kong, mainland China, BVI, Singapore, the U.S., South Korea, Marshall 
Islands, Taiwan, Macao and Cayman Islands.
The parties of the cases accepted by the SIAC in 2016 were from 56 countries 
or regions. The top 10 countries or regions with the most parties involved were 
India, Mainland China, the U.S., Indonesia, South Korea, Australia, Malaysia, 
Hong Kong, U.K. and the Netherlands.
The parties of the cases accepted by the SCC in 2016 were from 44 countries 
or regions. The top 6 countries or regions with the most parties involved were 
Sweden, Russia, Ukraine, the U.S., Germany and Azerbaijan. 
3) Types of Disputes
There were 18 types of cases accepted by the CIETAC in 2016, with a continuous 
increase of new types of cases. The numbers of cases involving disputes arising 
from sale of goods and electro-mechanical equipment kept increasing, reaching 
461 and 268 respectively. The numbers of cases involving disputes arising from 
service contracts, construction and real estate remained high, reaching 237 and 
184 respectively. There were 171 cases involving disputes arising from share 
investment and transfer, 151 cases involving disputes arising from financial 
leasing, and 113 cases involving disputes arising from finance, loans and other 
capital matters.


25
CHAPTER 1
 
Statistics of Types of Cases Accepted by the CIETAC 
in 2016 (unit: Number of Cases)
■ Joint Venture Disputes, 30, 1%
■ Electromechanical 
Equipment Disputes,
268, 12%
■ Sale of Goods 
Disputes, 461, 21%
■ Maritime Disputes, 1, 0%
■ Intellectual Property Disputes, 
8, 0%
■ Service Contract 
Disputes, 237, 11%
■ Construction, Decoration, 
Contract Project, Real Estates 
Construction and Development, 184, 8%
■ Share Investment and Transfer Disputes, 171, 8%
■ Other Disputes, 171, 8%
■ Financial Leasing 
Disputes, 151, 7%
■ Industrial Raw 
Material Disputes, 
133, 6%
■ House, Land and Real 
Estate Disputes, 112, 5%
■ Financial Disputes, 78, 4%
■ Agency Agreement Disputes, 63, 3% 
■ Insurance Disputes, 42, 2%
■ Private Loan Contract Disputes, 
35, 2% 
■ Transport Contract Disputes, 10, 0%
■ Franchising and Licensing Disputes, 
20, 1%
Figure 1.10
According to the statistics from the LCIA, the cases accepted by the LCIA 
in 2016 were mainly concerning mineral and energy disputes accounting for 
22.53% of the total caseload, bank and financial disputes accounting for 20.55%, 
construction project disputes accounting for 16.2%, shipping and transportation of 
goods disputes accounting for 15.42%, consulting and other professional service 
disputes accounting for 5.14%.


26
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
According to the statistics from the SCC, the main types of disputes involved in 
the cases accepted by the SCC in 2016 were as follows: transport disputes (50 
cases), service disputes involved (38 cases), merge and acquisition disputes (25 
cases), construction project disputes (15 cases), and partnership disputes (15 
cases).
The main types of disputes involved in the cases accepted by the SIAC were trade 
and business disputes, including agency, distribution, franchising and licensing, 
etc., accounting for 24% of the total caseload, transport/maritime disputes 
accounting for 19%, trade disputes accounting for 16%, company disputes 
accounting for 16% and construction/project disputes accounting for 16%.
The main types of disputes involved in the cases accepted by the HKIAC in 
2016 were as follows: company and financial disputes accounting for 29.3% of 
the total caseload, maritime disputes accounting for 21.6%, construction project 
disputes accounting for 19.2%, international trade disputes accounting for 10.8%, 
intellectual property disputes accounting for 5.4%, energy disputes accounting for 
2.4%, insurance disputes accounting for 2.4% and other disputes accounting for 
8.9%.
4) Place of Arbitration
China, as one legal region, remained the place of arbitration for the majority of the 
cases accepted by the CIETAC in 2016. Meanwhile, the parties of 2 cases chose 
Hong Kong as the place of arbitration. Parties, when drafting arbitral clauses, 
normally agreed to choose major cities in Mainland China including Shanghai, 
Shenzhen, Guangzhou, Chongqing, etc. as the place to resolve their disputes. 


27
CHAPTER 1
Such agreement was  generally regarded as the parties’ agreement on the place of 
hearing. 
106 cities in 60 countries were chosen as the place of arbitration for cases 
accepted by the ICC Arbitration Court. Belize City of Central America and Doha, 
the capital of Qatar, were two new places of arbitration, which is directly related 
to the increase in the number of parties therefrom.
For cases accepted by the LCIA, London was the chosen or designated place of 
arbitration in as many as 235 cases while Geneva ranked the second with 3 cases 
and India the third with 2 cases.
Most parties chose cities in Sweden as the place of arbitration in cases accepted 
by the SCC in 2016. Stockholm was chosen in 77% of the cases while Goteborg 
and Malmo, located at the southern end of Sweden, ranked the second.
Hong Kong remained the most often chosen place of arbitration in cases accepted 
by HKIAC in 2016. The parties of 1 case chose Singapore as the place of 
arbitration.
5) Arbitrators
Foreign arbitrators or arbitrators from outside Mainland China participated in the 
hearing of 28 foreign-related cases accepted by the CIETAC in 2016, involving 
18 arbitrators from 6 countries and regions, including 10 from Hong Kong, 2 from 
Taiwan, 2 from Singapore, 2 from Germany, 1 from Sweden and 1 from New 
Zealand.


28
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
According to the data of the ICC Arbitration Court, 1,411 arbitrators from 76 
countries were appointed or confirmed by the ICC Arbitration Court in 2016. 
Among them, there were 209 female arbitrators from 47 countries, an increase of 
54% compared with the previous year, accounting for 14.8% of the total number.
3
In 2016, 496 arbitrators from 276 countries participated in the hearing of the 
LCIA cases. Among them, 82 arbitrators were appointed by the LCIA for the first 
time and102 arbitrators were females, accounting for 20.6% of the total number.
The SAIC appointed 167 arbitrators in 2016. They were from Australia, Canada, 
China, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, India, Ireland, Italy, Malaysia, 
New Zealand, the Philippines, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Swiss, 
Taiwan, U.K., U.S. and Vietnam. The statistics shows that the SIAC and the 
parties preferred arbitrators from Singapore, (34%), U.K.(27.3%) and Australia 
(10.6%). 
The HKIAC appointed 75 arbitrators and confirmed 62, totaling 137. The top 10 
countries where the arbitrators were from include U.K., Hong Kong, Australia, 
Singapore, Canada, Mainland China, Austria, Malaysia, U.S. and New Zealand. 
Female arbitrators were appointed by parties, co-arbitrators and the HKIAC for 18 
times (11.5%).
6) Dispute Amount
In international commercial arbitration, the dispute amount, which can be 
quantified, reflects to a certain extent not only the income of the arbitration 
3 https://iccwbo.org/media-wall/news-speeches/icc-court-sees-marked-progress-gender-diversity/


29
CHAPTER 1
institution but also the parties’ trust thereof.
In 2016, the amount in dispute in the 2,181 cases accepted by the CIETAC was 
RMB 58.66 billion (about USD 9.1 billion), an increase of 37.9% compared to the 
previous year. The average dispute amount per case was RMB 26.9 million per 
case, reaching a record high. 
In the cases accepted by the LCIA in 2016, 67% of the claimants specified the 
dispute amount in their application for arbitration. The statistic thereof is shown 
in Figure 1.11.
 
US $1M OR LESS
US $1-5M 
US $5-10M 
US $10-20M 
US $20-50M 
27.7%
30.2%
7.7%
6.7%
9.7%
18%
US $50M OR MORE
Figure 1.11
The total dispute amount of the cases accepted by the SCC was EURO 1.6 billion 
(about USD1.93 billion). The statistic thereof is shown in Figure 1.12.


30
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
UP to 100k 16.25%
100-500k 32.5%
1-5m 24.37%
5-10m 7.5%
500k-1m 9.4%
10-50m 6.25%
50-100m 1.25%
above 100m 2.5%
 
Figure 1.12
The total dispute amount of cases accepted by the SIAC in 2016 was SGD 17.13 
billion (about USD 11.85 billion), an increase of 175% compared to the previous 
year. The highest dispute amount involved in a case was SGD 2.03 billion (about 
USD 1.496 billion), while the average dispute amount per case was SGD 550,000 
(about USD 380,000 ).
The total dispute amount of the cases accepted by the HKIAC in 2016 was about 
HKD 19.4 billion (about USD 2.5 billion).
7) Conclusion
The following conclusion may be drawn from the above statistics and analysis 
of the annual reports and case data released by the relevant major international 
commercial arbitration institutions.
① The caseloads of major international commercial arbitration institutions were 
all on the rise, which indicated that arbitration had won greater recognition. The 


31
CHAPTER 1
ICC Court of Arbitration, the LCIA and other traditional arbitration institutions 
still took important positions in international arbitration. At the same time, the 
Asia-Pacific arbitration market was booming with great potential. The total 
caseload of China international arbitration bodies remains in the top. 
② In terms of internationalization, the ICC Court of Arbitration kept its prominent 
place in the international arbitration market, relying on the influence and 
neutrality of the ICC. The complexity and diversity of the parties involved in the 
ICC cases, the range of nationalities thereof (137 countries and regions) and the 
distribution of places of arbitration (106 cities in 60 countries) were significantly 
higher and wider than other international arbitration institutions established in a 
specific country or region. The degree of internationalization of all the arbitration 
institutions other than the ICC Arbitration Court, including the long-established 
LCIA, the SCC, etc. was influenced by the historical and geographical factors of 
the host country, resulting in a high proportion of domestic parties and foreign 
parties from about 50 countries and regions averagely. Meanwhile, the places of 
arbitration were mainly in the host countries or neighboring ones. Therefore, as 
the Belt and Road Initiatives are carried out in an all-round way and the exchange 
and cooperation between China’s international commercial arbitration community 
and the arbitration circles of the participating countries thereof is further 
expanded, the geographical advantages of China’s international commercial 
arbitration will become increasingly prominent. 
③ The cases accepted by China’s international commercial arbitration institutions 
covered more and more types of disputes. Though each institution has its own way 
of classifying its cases, it may be found that Chinese international commercial 


32
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
arbitration cases involved not only disputes in traditional sale of goods, electro-
mechanical equipments, joint venture and cooperative contracts etc., but also 
rather new ones in service contracts, finance, equity investment and share 
transfer, intellectual property, insurance contracts, etc., covering a wide range and 
distributing over a large spectrum, by which Chinese arbitration institutions have 
kept abreast with or even in some way surpassed their international counterparts. 
In addition, the CIETAC summed up its domain name online dispute resolution 
experience, and actively explored the Internet + Era online arbitration mechanism, 
laying the foundation for developing online arbitration.
④ In view of the diversity of arbitral tribunals, China’s international commercial 
institutions were slightly lagged behind compared to other international arbitration 
institutions, due to the restrictions by the arbitrator panel system, languages and 
others. However, the CIETAC offers parties more choices in the appointment 
of international arbitrators along with the increase in the number of its foreign 
arbitrators and the relaxation of restrictions on the arbitrator panel system. There 
are 1,437 arbitrators in the new CIETAC Panel of Arbitrators effective as from 1 
May 2017. Among them, 405 are from 65 countries and regions including Hong 
Kong, Macau and Taiwan, accounting for 28.2% of the total number of arbitrators, 
an increase of 24 countries compared with the preceding panel. The number 
of counties along the Belt and Road increased from 15 to 28. Parties can enjoy 
more choices while the CIETAC will have more influence in the international 
arbitration circle. 
⑤ With regard to the dispute amount, there was an apparent increase in the total 
dispute amount of all the international arbitration institutions in 2016. Among 


33
CHAPTER 1
them, the SIAC set a new record high while Chinese arbitration institutions still 
held a high share in the total amount.
In summary, Chinese international commercial arbitration institutions, represented 
by the CIETAC, have been among the well-known international arbitration 
institutions. Chinese international commercial arbitration institutions have 
been widely praised within and beyond China for their independent, impartial 
and efficient arbitration services, and have made positive contributions to the 
development of Chinese arbitration. Meanwhile, it can be predicted that with 
China’s strong support for arbitration and accelerated opening-up, Chinese 
international commercial arbitration institutions will continue to ‘go out’ while 
international commercial arbitration institutions will be gradually ‘invited in’ 
so as to enrich the practice of China’s international commercial arbitration to a 
greater extent. Therefore, China’s international arbitration institutions need to 
continue strengthening theoretical research and personnel training, constantly 
improve their rules and practice, follow the development path with the integration 
of internationalization and localization, avail of their own advantages, improve 
their service capabilities and standards, and give full play to the important role 
of China’s international commercial arbitration in the international commercial 
dispute resolution to further promote the development of China’s international 
commercial arbitration. 
II. Legislative Practice of International Commercial 
Arbitration in China
Compared with the SPC’s Interpretation concerning the Application of the 


34
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Civil Procedure Law of the People's Republic of China regulating all the major 
aspects of judicial supervision over arbitration in 2015, the judicial interpretations 
and opinions issued by the SPC in 2016 were more specialized, clarifying the 
positions and role of arbitration in the diversified dispute resolution mechanism 
and emphasizing the role of arbitration in the implementation of the Belt and 
Road Initiatives and the construction of pilot free trade zones (FTZs). They will 
surely have a profound impact on China’s international commercial arbitration.
1. On Property Preservation of Arbitration 
The Provisions of the Supreme People's Court on Several Issues Concerning the 
Handling of Property Preservation Cases by the People's Courts (Fa Shi [2016] 
No.22) issued on 7 November 2016 and effective as of 1 December 2016 contains 
stipulations on certain difficult judicial problems in property preservation in 
arbitration practice. The Provisions stipulate as follows:
1) Where a party applies for property preservation to a people's court during 
the process of arbitration, the written application, the notice of acceptance of 
an arbitration case, and other relevant materials shall be submitted through the 
arbitral institution to the people's court. If the people's court renders a ruling to 
take a preservation measure or dismiss the application, it shall serve the written 
ruling on the party and notify the arbitral institution.
2) Where an interested party applies for property preservation before an action is 
instituted and institutes the action or applies for arbitration according to the law 
within 30 days after a preservation measure is taken by the people's court, the 
preservation measure taken before the action is instituted shall be automatically 


35
CHAPTER 1
transferred into a preservation measure taken during the action or arbitration; 
and after the enforcement procedure commences, the preservation measure shall 
be automatically transferred into the seizure, impoundment, or freezing measure 
taken in enforcement, and the people's court need not render a written ruling 
again.
3) After a people's court takes a property preservation measure, under any of the 
following circumstances, the preservation applicant shall apply for removal of 
preservation in a timely manner. The people's court shall, within five days after 
receiving an application for removal of preservation, render a ruling to remove 
preservation; and in case of emergency, must, within 48 hours, render a ruling to 
remove preservation.
The above stipulations further improve the system of property preservation before 
and during the arbitration and provide a strong guarantee for the enforcement of 
effective awards and avoidance of damages to the prevailing creditors’ rights.
2. On Arbitration and Diversified Dispute Resolution Mechanism
After issuing the Decision on Designating Model Courts for Diversified Dispute 
Resolution Mechanism Reform in 2015, the SPC released the Opinions Concerning 
People’s Courts’ Further Deepening the Reform of the Diversified Dispute 
Resolution Mechanism (Fa Fa [2016] No.14), stating the main objectives of 
deepening the reform of the diversified dispute resolution mechanism as rationally 
allocating social resources of dispute resolution, and perfecting the connection 
and coordination among conciliation, mediation, arbitration, notarization, 
administrative adjudication, administrative reconsideration and litigation. People’s 


36
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
courts need to strengthen the connection with arbitration institutions, actively 
support the arbitration system reform, improve communication with commercial 
arbitration institutions, handle preservation applications of arbitration institutions 
timely, proceed cases involving revocation or non-enforcement of arbitral awards 
in accordance with law, and normalize judicial supervision procedures over 
foreign-related and foreign commercial arbitral awards. 
The SPC also pointed out in the Opinions that the diversity of Chinese and 
foreign parties’ legal cultures shall be fully respected and their choice of 
arbitration or other non-litigation way of dispute resolution shall be supported so 
that the internationalization of diversified dispute resolution mechanism could 
be promoted. The advantages of various dispute resolution methods shall be 
brought into full play to meet the diversified demands of Chinese and foreign 
parties in dispute resolution and to provide judicial services and guarantee for 
the implementation of the Belt and Road Initiatives. The Opinions is aimed at 
enhancing the international credibility of Chinese arbitration. It reflects Chinese 
courts’ firm stand in supporting the arbitration system reform and the development 
of arbitration. 
3. On Arbitration and Construction of Pilot FTZs
In order to support the arbitration system reform, the SPC made useful attempts 
on the validity of arbitration agreements and the arbitration types. On 30 
December 2016, the SPC issued the Opinions on Providing Judicial Safeguard 
for the Construction of Pilot Free Trade Zones (Fa Fa [2016] No.34). Article 9 
thereof has attracted wide attention.


37
CHAPTER 1
1) Where two FTZ-registered wholly foreign owned enterprises (WFOEs) agree 
to submit commercial disputes to arbitration seated in foreign jurisdictions, 
people’s courts shall dismiss challenges to the validity of such agreement on the 
sole ground that there is no foreign element involved in the disputes.  
2) Where one or two FTZ-registered foreign investment enterprises (FIEs) agree 
to submit commercial disputes to arbitration seated in foreign jurisdictions, 
people’s courts shall dismiss challenges to the validity of such arbitration 
agreement or the validity and enforceability of the award on the sole ground 
that there is no foreign element involved in the disputes if the party applying for 
the non-recognition or non-enforcement of the award is the claimant initiating 
arbitration in foreign jurisdictions or the respondent raising no objection to the 
validity of the arbitration agreement in the process of arbitration.
3) FTZ-registered enterprises’ agreements to arbitrate at a specific particular 
place in Mainland, by specific arbitrator(s), and under a specific set of arbitration 
rules may be deemed valid. People’s courts, if deeming such agreements invalid, 
shall report to higher-level courts for review. If higher-level courts approve the 
invalidity, they shall report to the SPC for its reply before making any ruling.  
The above stipulations are in line with general international practice, showing 
positive support to the development of international arbitration in China and 
injecting new legal power into the deepening implementation of the Belt and Road 
Initiatives. The Arbitration Law only regulates institutional arbitration without 
mentioning ad hoc arbitration. Thus, China lacks the practice of ad hoc arbitration. 
There are different voices in the theoretical circle regarding whether ad hoc 


38
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
arbitration can be rooted in the soil of China. The SPC, following the Siemens 
International Trading (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. vs. Shanghai Golden Landmark Co., 
Ltd. case involving the application for the recognition of a Singapore arbitral 
award [2013 Hu Yi Zhong Min Ren (Wai Zhong) Zi No. 2] and taking an open 
and inclusive mindset, showed an exploratory attitude towards the progressive 
development of ad hoc arbitration in pilot FTZs in the Opinions. In particular, 
ad hoc arbitration has been allowed in Mainland China as the third circumstance 
mentioned above, with the parties limited to FTZ-registered enterprises.
4 Party 
autonomy of FTZ-registered enterprises are fully respected. People’s courts may 
confirm the validity of FTZ-registered enterprises’ agreements on arbitration 
other than institutional arbitration if the requirements on specific places, specific 
arbitration rules and specific arbitrators are met. Thus, China is not confined to a 
single form of institutional arbitration while not completely copying the foreign 
ad hoc arbitration system. The reporting system is adopted for the ruling of 
invalidity of such arbitration agreements, under which the SPC has the final say. 
The experience of the FTZ arbitration will be timely summed up for the future 
amendment of the PRC Arbitration Law.
III. Judicial Review of International Commercial 
Arbitration in China
In 2016, Chinese people’s courts ruled to set aside arbitral awards in 232 
cases, accounting for 0.11% of the total number of cases, with a decrease of 
4 Starting from 22 August 2013 when the State Council approved the establishment of the Shanghai FTZ, 
altogether 11 FTZs have bee set up in Shanghai, Guangdong, Tianjin, Fujian, Liaoning, Zhejiang, Henan, 
Hubei, Chongqing, Sichuan and Shaanxi. Applications for FTZ are being made by other provinces and 
cities.


39
CHAPTER 1
0.04% compared with the rate of 0.15% (209 cases) in 2015, and ruled not to 
enforcement arbitral awards in 63 cases, accounting for 0.03% of the total number 
of cases, a decrease of 0.03% compared with the rate of 0.06% (84 cases) in 2015. 
Among the 251 Chinese arbitration commissions, 157 commissions had no awards 
being set aside or refused of enforcement, accounting for 63% of the total number 
of commissions while 16 commissions had over 5 cases wherein the courts ruled 
to set aside or not enforce the awards, accounting for 6% of the total number.
5
In 2016, people’s courts concluded 50 cases wherein applications for recognizing 
and enforcing foreign arbitral awards were made, and 8 cases wherein applications 
for recognizing and enforcing HMT-related arbitral awards were made. 3,278 
cases were concluded by the courts wherein applications for confirmation of 
the validity of arbitration agreements were made, including 34 cases applying 
for confirmation of the validity of foreign-related arbitration agreements and 22 
cases for confirmation of the validity of HMT-related arbitration agreements, and 
16,995 for revocation of the arbitral awards, among which 46 cases applying for 
revocation of foreign-related arbitral awards and 30 cases for revocation of HMT-
related awards.
6 
IV. Theoretical Research on International Commercial 
Arbitration in China
In 2016, appealing topics appeared in the research field on international 
commercial arbitration both within and outside China. Introduction and comments 
5 Source: Relevant Situation in Chinese Arbitration in 2016, the Legal System Coordination Department of 
the Office of Legislative Affairs of the State Council, March 2017.
6 Source: judicial statistics of the SPC Research Department.


40
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
thereof are as follows.
1. Major Topics of Arbitration Research in China
1) Perfection of International Commercial Arbitration System in the Context 
of the Belt and Road Initiatives
The Belt and Road dispute resolution mechanism has been a hot topic of wide 
concern since the promotion of the Belt and Road Initiatives in 2013. It is 
generally accepted by the academic circle that the promotion of the Belt and Road 
Initiatives is not only an issue of economic connection, but also an important legal 
topic. The Belt and Road goes through more than 60 countries and regions with 
different levels of economic and political development and varied legal systems, 
which makes the resolution of international disputes extremely difficult. In this 
context, it has been an important issue to seek an effective the Belt and Road 
dispute resolution way. Wang Jiayi proposed that in order to meet the practical 
demand of the Belt and Road Initiatives, China’s international commercial 
arbitration system urgently needs to be improved and be in line with international 
rules. Specifically, it is necessary to promote the de-administration of Chinese 
arbitration commissions, to clarify China’s international commercial arbitration 
institutions as non-profit corporate organizations, to reduce supervision and 
interference by government agencies, to ensure the independence of Chinese 
arbitration institutions, to recognize and introduce the ad hoc arbitration system, 
to promote ad hoc arbitration in pilot FTZs selectively and gradually and to 
push forward the reform with experience therefrom, and to actively promote 
online arbitration, optimizing online arbitration rules and fully protecting parties’ 


41
CHAPTER 1
autonomy.
7 Zhang Xianda also agrees that international commercial arbitration 
will play a vital role in the resolution of international commercial disputes among 
the Belt and Road countries along with the all-round implementation of the 
Initiatives. Thus, the reform on the arbitration agreement system should be taken 
as a breakthrough. First, broad interpretation should be made on the written form 
of arbitration agreements, with the only requirement for the proof of existence 
of the ‘arbitration consensus’. Secondly, the validity of implied arbitration 
agreements should be recognized conditionally. Finally, China should put ad 
hoc arbitration into trial use in pilot FTZs to gain experience for the nationwide 
adoption and promotion thereof.
8
Zhu Weidong holds that under the existing system, China should encourage 
parties to settle disputes through arbitration and create a good legal environment 
for the implementation of the Belt and Road Initiatives gradually through 
perfection of the foreign-related civil and commercial dispute resolution system in 
China, promotion of bilateral treaties with countries along the Belt and Road and 
actively proposing for the establishment of multilateral mechanisms.
9
Liu Mingping noted that since the promotion of the Belt and Road Initiatives, the 
economic and trade exchanges between China and other countries along the Belt 
and Road have been further developed in both frequency and depth, especially in 
the investment field. Thus, it is necessary to build the Belt and Road investment 
7 See Wang JIayi, The Construction of International Commercial Arbitration System under ‘the Belt and 
Road’ Initiatives, 5 People’s Forum( 2016), p241.
8 See Zhang Xianda, The Escort of ‘the Belt and Road’ by the International Commercial Arbitration 
Agreement System, 11 People’s Forum( 2016), p.149. 
9 See Zhu Weidong, The Perfection of Civil and Commercial Dispute Resolution Between China and Other 
Countries along ‘the Belt and Road’, 12 Qiu Suo( 2016), p.4.


42
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
dispute resolution mechanism. After collecting relevant data and consulting 
a large number of relevant research literatures, comparing and analyzing the 
typical international dispute resolution mechanisms constructed by the OECD, 
the WTO, the ICSID and the NAFTA, he made suggestions on the Belt and Road 
dispute resolution mechanism from such aspects as the construction method, the 
value preference, the settlement of jurisdiction conflicts, the procedure design 
and specific mechanism. He also analyzed major issues noticeable in investment 
dispute resolution process such as the connection of legal systems in the Belt and 
Road construction, the prerequisite for the exhaustion of local remedies in dispute 
resolution, the introduction of retaliation mechanism and the perfection of China’s 
overseas investment insurance system.
10
2) International Commercial Arbitration System from the Perspective of 
Economics
International commercial arbitration, ‘a kind of contractual system under 
which the parties to international commercial transactions settle their disputes 
voluntarily, that is, the parties agree to submit any disputes between them that 
have occurred or will possibly occur to arbitrators who act as private judges 
or tribunals as private courts for the settlement’,
11 has been developed into an 
important way of resolving international commercial disputes. In this sense, it is 
also a system regulating and adjusting international commercial and economic 
behaviors. Though a lot of research have been made on the international 
10 See Liu Mingping, Discussion on the Construction of ‘the Belt and Road’ Investment Dispute Settlement 
Mechanism, Master Thesis, Yun’nan University, 2016, p.3.
11 Zhao Xiuwen, Textbook for Theories and Cases of International Commercial Arbitration Laws, Law 
Press, 2010, p.4.


43
CHAPTER 1
commercial arbitration system and its various specific mechanisms in the 
theoretical circle, the research is more from the perspective of law and less from 
the economic point of view. Yan Lingju, in her book ‘Economic Analysis of 
International Commercial Arbitration System’,
12 adopted the economic analysis 
method to conduct a comprehensive and systematic investigation on the economic 
logic of the international commercial arbitration system from the hypothesis of 
a rational man. In particular, the book covers arbitration agreements, arbitration 
proceedings, arbitral awards and international recognition and enforcement of 
awards, etc., and is worthy of attention. 
3) Arbitrability of International Antitrust Disputes
The current development trend of international commercial arbitration system 
has less and less restriction on the arbitrability of disputed matters in national 
or regional legislations.
13 It has always been a matter of great concern and 
controversy in the theoretical and practical circles of various countries whether 
disputes arising from antitrust can be submitted to arbitration. China’s academic 
community has been paying attention to the arbitrability of antitrust disputes 
and made some achievements since the beginning of the 21
st century. But 
generally speaking, the current research on the arbitrability of antitrust disputes 
in China is still in its infancy. In his book ‘Research on the Arbitrability of 
Antitrust Disputes in International Commercial Arbitration’
14 Zhang Aiqing 
12 See Yan Lingju, Economic Analysis of International Commercial Arbitration System, Shanghai Sanlian 
Publishing House, 2016.
13 See Zhu Kepeng, Law Application in International Commercial Arbitration, Law Press, 1999, p.40; Ou 
Mingsheng, Research on Arbitrability of Civil and Commercial Disputes, Zhejiang University Publishing 
House, 2013, pp.113-114, etc.
14 See Zhang Aiqing, Research on the Arbitrability of Antitrust Disputes in International Commercial 


44
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
conducted a comprehensive, systematic and in-depth study on the arbitrability of 
antitrust disputes, which is commendable. The book covers the basic theory of 
arbitrability, the latest development of arbitrability, the jurisprudence and practice 
of arbitrability of antitrust disputes, the legislation and practice of antitrust dispute 
arbitration in various countries and China’s relevant legislation and practice and 
the improvement thereof.
4) Confidentiality in International Commercial Arbitration
Confidentiality is an important feature of international commercial arbitration. 
When making a choice between litigation and arbitration for the resolution of 
international commercial disputes, parties will always take confidentiality as an 
essential consideration factor. Therefore, the exploration on the confidentiality 
of international commercial arbitration is of great benefit to the development 
of the Arbitration Law and relevant practice. Xin Baichun, through detailed 
analysis, pointed out that all the nations have recognized confidentiality as the 
feature of and obligation in international commercial arbitration, and gradually 
reached the consensus that confidentiality in arbitration is not absolute but has 
some exceptions and is under restriction of certain factors and conditions. For 
China, the Arbitration Law should be amended in the future to make it a clear 
obligation of the parties, tribunals and other participants of arbitration proceedings 
to keep the arbitration confidential, and to provide specifically for the scope of 
confidentiality obligation, the restriction and exceptions thereof, the relief for 
breach of such obligation and other basic issues. Only in this way can China 
conform to the development trend of international commercial arbitration, keep 
Arbitration, Law Press, 2016.


45
CHAPTER 1
in line with the international system, and protect parties’ legitimate rights through 
proper handling of confidentiality in international commercial arbitration.
15 Zhang 
Yuqing, through careful analysis of the specific connotation of the confidentiality 
obligation in international commercial arbitration, believed that the private 
hearing of arbitration cases and the confidentiality obligation were two different 
concepts which should not be mixed up. The international legal provisions and 
practices regarding private hearing of arbitration cases are basically the same, but 
those regarding the confidentiality obligation are quite different, represented by 
U.K. and Australia respectively. U.K. recognizes the confidentiality obligation 
with the exception of disclosure requested by law. Australia reckons that there 
is no confidentiality obligation in arbitration unless parties agree so in the 
arbitration agreements. In view of the different judicial practice and stipulations 
in arbitration rules in various countries, Chinese enterprises, when getting more 
and more involved in international commercial arbitration, should better have 
clear provisions on the confidentiality obligation in arbitration, the disclosable 
matters and the applicable law of arbitration agreements in the dispute resolution 
clauses of the contracts so that tribunals or courts may have a rule to follow once 
disputes occur. However, such agreement is still rare in practice, which needs to 
be changed. In addition, in order to build itself into an international arbitration 
centre, China should also adopt a confidentiality system in line with international 
standards in the Arbitration Law and arbitration rules.
16
5) Issues on Introducing Foreign Commercial Arbitration Institutions into 
15 See Xin Baichun, Research on Confidentiality in International Commercial Arbitration, 2 Modern 
Science of Law(2016), p.124.
16 See Zhang Yuqing, Exploration and Thoughts on the Confidentiality Obligation in International 
Commercial Arbitration, 4 Modern Science of Law( 2016), p.96.


46
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
China
In April 2015, the State Council issued the Notice on Issuing the Plan for 
Further Deepening the Reform and Opening-up of China (Shanghai) Pilot 
Free Trade Zone, clearly pointing out that ‘FTZs shall support international 
well-known commercial dispute resolution institutions to have their offices 
therein so that China can keep in line with international commercial dispute 
resolution rules, optimize arbitration rules in pilot FTZs and enhance the degree 
of internationalization of commercial dispute arbitration. The establishment of 
a nationwide FTZ arbitration legal service alliance shall be explored and the 
creation of an Asia-Pacific arbitration centre for the world shall be accelerated’. It 
can be predicted that the introduction of foreign commercial arbitration institutions 
into China will inject new elements into the future internationalized development 
of China’s commercial arbitration. As of June 2016, internationally renowned 
commercial dispute resolution institutions such as the HKIAC, the SIAC and the 
ICC had set up representative offices in the Shanghai Pilot FTZ. Liu Xiaohong 
and others pointed out that there were obstacles and various uncertainties for 
foreign arbitration institutions to offer arbitration services in China either before 
or after setting up representative offices in China since China’s current arbitration 
laws and regulations were still lagged behind. Specific issues include the validity 
of arbitration agreements choosing foreign arbitration institutions to arbitrate in 
China, the judicial supervision of arbitral awards, the recognition and enforcement 
of arbitral awards and the market access of foreign arbitration institutions. China 
needs to accelerate the construction of relevant supporting systems such as the 
clarification of access conditions for foreign commercial arbitration institutions, 


47
CHAPTER 1
the exploration of multiple modes for these institutions’ access in FTZs, the 
adjustment of application of certain provisions in the PRC Arbitration Law in 
FTZs, the definition of ‘the standards for the place of arbitration’ and the issuance 
of relevant judicial interpretations, etc. with pilot FTZs as the testing platform.
17
6) Optimization of Institutional Functions of Arbitration Commissions
Yang Ling pointed out that the continuous expansion of the legal function 
of Chinese arbitration commissions has become a bottleneck that hinders the 
progress of Chinese arbitration legal system. Such expansion is mainly reflected 
in the determination of the nationality of arbitral awards by the nature of 
arbitration institutions, the determination of the validity of arbitral awards by 
the conduct of the arbitration commissions, the determination of the validity of 
arbitration agreements by lex fori, etc. At the same time, the system expansion 
and practical operation constantly challenge and alienate legislation along 
with the fragmentation trend of institutional norms. The main reasons for such 
expansion are the arbitration system centred on institutional arbitration, arbitration 
institutions analogous to courts and negligence of special features of international 
commercial arbitration. Such expansion affects the arbitration function of Chinese 
arbitration commissions, limits the internationalization of Chinese arbitration, 
and leads to litigious and administrative arbitration. The amendment of the 
PRC Arbitration Law should focus on weakening the legal function of Chinese 
arbitration commissions and improving the legal function of ‘arbitral tribunals’ 
and ‘the place of arbitration’. Specifically, the classification of arbitration 
17 See Liu Xiaohong, Wang Wei, Discussion on Legal Obstacles and Breakthroughs in China’s Opening-
up to Foreign Commercial Arbitration Institutions, 3 The Journal of Suzhou University (Law Edition 
2016), pp.15-17.


48
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
commissions shall be deleted, arbitration commissions’ power to intervene in 
arbitration proceedings shall be weakened and the impact of lex fori on arbitration 
agreements and arbitral awards shall be limited.
18
7) Extraterritorial Execution of International Commercial Arbitration 
Interim Measures 
More and more domestic laws, international commercial arbitration rules and 
international commercial arbitration documents of the international community 
contain provisions that parties may obtain interim measures from arbitral tribunals 
or competent courts. However, clear and specific provisions on the extraterritorial 
execution of such measures and the grounds, conditions, methods and other 
issues involved are still few. Thus, the extraterritorial circulation and execution 
of arbitration interim measures can hardly be guaranteed. At present, the 
extraterritorial execution of interim measures has become one of the bottlenecks 
restricting the development of international commercial arbitration. While scholars 
have been highly concerned about the extraterritorial execution of tribunals’ 
interim measures, there are only a few publications on the extraterritorial 
execution of interim measures either by tribunals or by courts. To this end, Zou 
Xiaoqiao, in his doctoral thesis ‘Research on Extraterritorial Execution of Interim 
Measures in International Commercial Arbitration’, conducted a thorough study 
on extraterritorial execution of interim measures in international commercial 
arbitration based on the latest development of international commercial arbitration 
conventions and documents and domestic arbitration legislations and judicial 
practices, drafts of relevant legislation by some international organizations, 
18 See Yang Ling, Criticism on Arbitration Institutions’ Legal Function, 2 Science of Law( 2016), p.175.


49
CHAPTER 1
execution of interim measures in specific areas and arbitration rules of major 
foreign and Chinese international commercial arbitration institutions. In particular, 
the thesis covers issues such as the definition of extraterritorial execution of 
interim measures in international commercial arbitration, the grounds, conditions 
and methods for such execution, and suggestions on the rules for such execution.
19
2. Research Trends of International Arbitration outside China
The high-profile 23
rd International Commercial Arbitration Conference of the 
International Council of Commercial Arbitration (the ICCA) was held in the 
Republic of Mauritius from 8 to 11 May 2016 under the theme of ‘International 
Arbitration and Its Contribution to and Compliance with the Rule of Law’. As 
the first top-level international arbitration conference ever held in Africa, the 
Conference invited Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations Secretary-General, and 
Dr. Mohamed El Baradei, the International Atomic Energy Director-General, to 
attend and gathered participants of politicians from African countries. Thousands 
of arbitration experts from various countries participated and made in-depth 
discussion on each topic of the conference. During the three-day conference, the 
participants not only exchanged ideas on commercial arbitration practices, but 
also discussed reflection and reform expectation of basis rules in international 
arbitration, especially on the latest hot issues in investment arbitration and major 
issues in international arbitration. On one hand, arbitration experts from all over 
the world put forward many targeted opinions and suggestions from different 
cultural habits, political background and legal concepts. On the other hand, 
the  international arbitration experts of about 1000 attending the conference 
19 See Zou Xiaoqiao, Research on Extraterritorial Execution of Interim Measures in International 
Commercial Arbitration, Doctoral Thesis of Wuhan University, 2016.


50
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
have considerable power of discourse and decision in their own countries and 
regions. It is conceivable that in the near future the achievements made in this 
ICCA Conference will be merged or absorbed in the development and rules of 
international arbitration, which will inevitably form a new development trend.
20
The relatively new topics of research on international commercial arbitration 
outside China are as follows.
1) Influence of Psychology on International Commercial Arbitration
Though psychology seems irrelevant to international commercial arbitration, 
psychological issues are involved not only in tribunals’ legal reasoning, parties 
and agents’ exhibition of evidence and arrangement of arguments but also in 
parties’ evaluation of the arbitration process and final awards. Accordingly, 
the study of psychological issues in international commercial arbitration will 
help to promote international commercial arbitration. The regular patterns of 
the occurrence, development and change of arbitration subjects’ psychology 
was discussed comprehensively for the first time in ‘The roles of Psychology in 
International Arbitration’ edited by Tony Cole.
21
2) Law Making by the Tribunal
‘In the process of resolving substantive issues of disputes, no tribunal can avoid 
the important problem what criteria they would use to judge disputed parties’ 
20 See Speech by Researcher Liu Jingdong at the 23rd ICCA Conference, http://www.iolaw.org.cn/
showNews.aspx?id=51378, last visited on 8 September 2017.
21 See Tony Cole, eds., The Roles of Psychology in International Arbitration, Kluwer Law International, 
2017.


51
CHAPTER 1
right or wrong and to determine parties’ rights and obligations’.
22 Tribunals 
may conduct amiable arbitration or arbitration according to law under almost 
all arbitration legislations, international commercial arbitration conventions and 
documents, and arbitration institution rules.
23 In the circumstances where parties 
have not expressly authorized tribunals to arbitrate amiably, tribunals shall render 
awards on substantive issues involved in the disputes according to law. Then, how 
will tribunals which ‘are formed by arbitrators appointed by parties or authorities 
authorized by parties, or according to legal provisions or stipulations in arbitration 
rules, are responsible for hearing disputed matters submitted to arbitration, and 
shall render substantive awards on disputed matters finally’
24 apply laws? Are the 
arbitrators legal craftsmen using law mechanically or can they create applicable 
laws and regulations through legal interpretation? Can tribunals have certain 
discretion? If yes, what are the grounds and limitations for tribunals’ law making? 
There are no existing answers to the above questions in current national or 
regional arbitration legislations, international commercial arbitration conventions 
and documents, and arbitration institutions’ rules. Dolores Bentolila, in ‘Arbitrators 
as Lawmakers: The Creation of General Rules through Consistent Decision 
Making in International Commercial and Investment Arbitration’, conducted a 
comprehensive and in-depth study of tribunals’ law making, covering issues such 
as circumstances, procedures and attributes of achievements thereof.
25
22 Pei Pu, Discussion on Law Application for Substantive Issues in International Commercial Arbitration, 
6 The Journal of Chongqing University (Social Science Edition 2008), p.102.
23 See Song Lianbin, eds., Arbitration Law, Wuhan University Publishing House, 2010, p.6; Chen Zhidong, 
International Commercial Arbitration Law, Law Press , 1998, pp.13-14; Han Jian, Theories and Practices 
of Modern International Commercial Arbitration Law (2nd edition), Law Press , 2000, pp.26-29, etc.
24 See Song Lianbin,eds., Arbitration Law, Wuhan University Publishing House, 2010, p.136.
25 See Dolores Bentolila, Arbitrators as Lawmakers: The Creation of General Rules through Consistent 
Decision Making in International Commercial and Investment Arbitration, Kluwer Law International, 2017.


52
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
3) Design of Provisions by the Tribunal regarding Determination of 
Substantive
Laws in International Commercial Arbitration in the Absence of Express 
Agreement by the Parties
Substantive laws in international commercial arbitration, i.e. ‘substantive laws 
relied on by tribunals to render awards on disputes involved in arbitration 
cases’,
26 are the main legal grounds for tribunals’ awarding on substantive 
issues of disputes.
27 It is generally believed that ‘the law application for dispute 
resolution shall be the basic connotation since the modern arbitration system is 
on a legalized track’.
28 In international commercial arbitration, tribunals shall 
apply laws applicable to substantive issues as agreed by parties, but also are under 
certain obligations when parties make no express agreement on substantive laws 
under national and regional arbitration legislations, international commercial 
arbitration conventions and documents, and arbitration institution rules. Under 
such circumstances, the method for tribunals’ determination of substantive laws 
is principled while the discretion of tribunals is too broad. Benjanmin Hayward, 
in ‘Conflict of Laws and Arbitral Discretion: The Closest Connection Test’, 
attempted to design specific provisions for tribunals’ determination of substantive 
laws in the absence of parties’ express agreement on applicable laws for 
26 See Xu Weigong, Discussion on Law Application for Substantive Issues in International Commercial 
Arbitration, 1 Law and Commerce Research (2001), p.94.
27 See Zhu Kepeng, Law Application in International Commercial Arbitration, Law Press, 1999, p.122; 
Han Jian, Theories and Practices of Modern International Commercial Arbitration Law (2nd edition), Law 
Press, 2000, p.273, etc.
28 Pei Pu, Discussion on Law Application for Substantive Issues in International Commercial Arbitration, 
6 The Journal of Chongqing University (Social Science Edition 2008), p.102.


53
CHAPTER 1
substantive issues in international commercial arbitration. He made suggestions 
on how to draft or amend relevant stipulations based on comparative analysis of 
arbitration legislations in 134 countries and regions, international commercial 
arbitration conventions and documents and arbitration institution rules.
29
The conflict law approach still plays an important role in international commercial 
arbitration. Markus A. Petsche, in ‘Choice of Law in International Commercial 
Arbitration’, pointed out that tribunals’ choice-of-law rules were different from 
courts’ rules and such difference was related to the following three choice-of-law 
issues. The first issue is the admissibility of the choice-of law result in absence 
of parties’ choice, the second is the interpretation and supplement of laws chosen 
by parties, and the third is the application of mandatary stipulations. Compared 
with common conflict-of-law rules, tribunals usually enjoy more freedom under 
specific choice-of-law rules in international commercial arbitration. In addition, 
tribunals, when attempting to interpret or make up the gap of domestic laws, may 
resort to non-state legal sources.
30
4) Relationship between International Commercial Arbitration and Foreign 
Direct Investment
In theory, international commercial arbitration should facilitate foreign direct 
investment (FDI) since companies can effectively avoid inconvenience of foreign 
courts and execute contracts more efficiently under the private commercial 
legal system set up in international commercial arbitration. Andrew Myburgh 
29 See Benjanmin Hayward, Conflict of Laws and Arbitral Discretion: The Closest Connection Test, 
Oxford University Press, 2017.
30 See Petsche M.A. Choice of Law in International Commercial Arbitration. In: Garimella S., Jolly S. (eds) 
Private International Law. Springer, Singapore.


54
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
and Jordi Paniagua, in ‘Does International Commercial Arbitration Promote 
Foreign Direct Investment?’, constructed a mathematical model, attempting to 
explain the practical effect of resolving international disputes through arbitration. 
The analysis result of the model confirmed the hypothesis that international 
commercial arbitration could facilitate FDI. It also pointed out the effect was 
more on the change in the investment amount while the impact on investment 
project quantities was not significant.
31
5) Legal Interpretation in International Commercial Arbitration
Joanna Jemielniak, in ‘Legal Interpretation in International Commercial 
Arbitration’, explored legal interpretation in international commercial arbitration. 
He pointed out that arbitration, as a unique legal and semantic phenomenon, is 
more like a discourse-based dynamic nonlinear legal reasoning model compared 
with the traditional three-stage linear legal reasoning. On the basis of theoretical 
analysis, he analyzed legal interpretation practice in international commercial 
arbitration in detail with institutional and ad hoc arbitration as the objects. As 
a conclusion, he pointed out that international commercial arbitration, as a 
representative of transnational legal order, still need to face the relationship with 
the existing institutionalized legal discourse though being independent from the 
influence of state systems.
32
6) Burden of Proof in International Commercial Arbitration
Francisco Blav and Gonzalo Vial, in ‘The Burden of Proof in International 
31 See Andrew Myburgh and Jordi Paniagua, “Does International Commercial Arbitration Promote Foreign 
Direct Investment?”, 59 The Journal of Law and Economics (2016), pp. 597-627.
32 See Joanna Jemielniak, Legal interpretation in international commercial arbitration, Routledge, 2016.


55
CHAPTER 1
Commercial Arbitration: Are We Allowed to Adjust the Scales’, explored the 
burden of proof in international commercial arbitration. They discussed the ability 
of parties and tribunals to change the rules of burden of proof in international 
commercial arbitration and pointed out that parties should be authorized to 
adjust certain rules under some restrictions such as the principle of fairness 
and equal treatment, mandatory rules, consideration of public policy and good 
faith. Furthermore, they noted that tribunals, though enjoying extensive power 
in changing the rules of burden of proof, often preferred to respect parties’ 
agreements.
33
33 See Blavi, Francisco, and Gonzalo Vial, “The Burden of Proof in International Commercial Arbitration: 
Are We Allowed to Adjust the Scales”, 39 Hastings Int'l & Comp. L. Rev. (2016), p. 41.


56
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Chapter Two Special Observation 
on International Commercial 
Arbitration in China- Application 
of the Incoterms in International 
Commercial Arbitration in China
The most influential legal document in international sale of goods besides the 
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods 
(the CISG) is the International Rules for the Interpretation of Trade Terms (the 
Incoterms) issued by the International Chamber of Commerce (the ICC). The 
Incoterms amended in 2010 covers 11 three-letter trade terms related to common 
sales practices and illustrates obligations of sellers and buyers under each term. 
The Incoterms intended primarily to clearly communicate the tasks, costs and 
risks associated with the transportation and delivery of goods.
1 The ICC, since 
publishing the Incoterms in 1936, has updated it along with the development of 
international trade, drafting and issuing eight versions in 1936, 1953, 1967, 1976, 
1980, 1990, 2000 and 2010. The ICC has begun consultations on the 2020 version. 
Due to the worldwide acceptance of the Incoterms, many buyers and sellers in 
domestic trade have adopted the Incoterms as well. Therefore, the application of 
the terms to both international and domestic transactions was officially confirmed 
by the subtitle ‘ICC rules for the use of domestic and international trade terms’ of 
the 2010 version. 
1 Introduction, Incoterms 2010, No.715 publication of the ICC. 


57
CHAPTER 2
This Chapter makes special research and observations on 97 international and 
domestic typical cases concluded by the CIETAC in which the parties chose 
to apply the Incoterms with the names of the parties and arbitrators and the 
case numbers omitted. In the 97 cases, the time period for the parties to submit 
their applications for arbitration was between July 2010 and June 2016. The 
tribunals issued final awards in all the cases. This Chapter shares with arbitration 
practitioners the basic information and features of application of the Incoterms 
in China’s international commercial arbitration practice, by comprehensively 
analyzing and studying factors in these cases such as the claimants and 
respondents’ nationalities, the parties’ identities in sales contracts, the time of 
application for arbitration, the time of awards, the number of arbitrators, the 
arbitration languages, the places of arbitration, the claim and counterclaim 
amounts, the applied trade terms, types and kinds of the trade, the applicable 
laws, types and focus of the disputes, the outcomes, etc. Meanwhile, it reveals 
the common problems in the application of the Incoterms by international trade 
participants, summarizes and refines the enlightenment of this study on China’s 
international commercial arbitration practice, and puts forward suggestions for 
international trade participants and potential parties of arbitration cases through 
the analysis of these typical cases. 
I. General Review of Incoterms-related Awards
1. Parties’ Nationalities, Identities and Absence from Hearing
In the six years (2010-2016), the claimants of the selected CIETAC cases were 
from 16 countries and regions including the U.A.E., the Republic of Ireland, 


58
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Russia, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the U.S., Japan, South Korea, Sweden, 
Seychelles, Tanzania, Spain, Singapore, U.K., Mainland China, Taiwan and Hong 
Kong. 
The respondents of these cases were from 21 countries and regions including the 
U.A.E., Oman, Australia, Brazil, Denmark, Germany, Russia, South Korea, the 
Netherlands, U.S., Japan, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, Spain, Singapore, Italy, 
Indonesia, U.K., Mainland China and Hong Kong.
The distribution of countries and regions where the claimants were from are 
shown in Figure 2.1 (arranged in a decreasing order).
 
 
Distribution of Countries and Regions where the 
Claimants were from
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
15
62
Japan
U. K.
Seychelles
Sweden
Kazakhstan
Ireland
U. A. E.
Russia
South Korea
U. S.
Taiwan
Tanzania
Hong Kong
China
Singapore
Spain
Figure 2.1


59
CHAPTER 2
The distribution of countries and regions where the respondents were from are 
shown in Figure 2.2 (arranged in a decreasing order).
 
 
Distribution of Countries and Regions where the 
Respondents were from
3
3
4
4
6
3
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
12
45
Germany
Japan
Indonesia
Brazil
Oma
Italy
Australia
U. A. E.
South Korea
Russia
Switzerland
U. S.
Netherlands
U. K.
Denmark
Hong Kong
China
Ukraine
Singapore
Turkey
Spain
Figure 2.2
Among these cases, 16 cases involved both parties from Mainland China, 26 
involved disputes between parties from Mainland China and Hong Kong or 
Taiwan parties, 1 involved both parties from Hong Kong and 5 involved disputes 
between Hong Kong parties and foreign parties.
As for the place of arbitration, most parties had made no express choice thereof 
and tribunals determined China as the place of arbitration according to CIETAC 
rules.
The above data seems to indicate that China’s international trade arbitration cases 


60
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
still have strong regional characteristics, i.e., the majority of parties are from Asia 
and traditional trade powers. As to contractual disputes involving both parties 
from outside Mainland China, we cannot see that Mainland China has become the 
preferred place of arbitration. In choosing arbitration institutions, Chinese parties 
are more inclined to choose their familiar ones.
Concerning the identity of the claimants under the sales contracts, the claimants 
of 48 cases were buyers or their insurance companies while those of 49 cases 
were sellers or their insurance companies. The balanced numbers happen to show 
that the legal risks for both the buyers and the sellers, especially the risks of being 
respondents, in China’s international trade are generally equal.
Furthermore, the cases in which the respondents failed to participate in the 
arbitration proceedings account for 20% of the total number of cases. 60% of these 
cases involved respondents from outside Mainland China while 40% involved 
respondents from Mainland China. Of these cases by default, in only 1 case the 
claims were dismissed because the claimant failed to prove his performance of 
contractual obligations while in all the others the claims were supported by the 
tribunals.
2. Choice of Trade Terms
Among the cases involving the Incoterms, terms in Group C
2 were the most used, 
2 In the 2000 version, the terms were arranged in four groups, that is, Group E, Group F, Group C and 
Group D, in the increasing order of the sellers’ liabilities, costs and risks. The 2010 Incoterms classified 
the terms in ‘terms applicable to any mode or modes of transport’ and ‘terms applicable to sea and inland 
waterway transport’ according to the applicable transport modes. However, parties, when choosing terms, 
are more accustomed to choosing the applicable ones under the classification standard of the 2000 version. 


61
CHAPTER 2
accounting for 56% of the cases, wherein the cases involving CIF applicable 
to sea or inland waterway transport account for 28% of the total number, those 
involving CFR account for 22% while the cases involving CIP or CPT applicable 
to any mode or modes of transport account for 3% respectively.
Terms of Group F rank the second most used, accounting for 25% of the cases, all 
of which used FOB with no application of FCA or FAS.
The cases involving terms of Group D account for 10% of the cases. Those 
involving DDP or DAP account for 8% and 3% respectively.
The cases involving Group E terms account for 8% of the cases. In over half 
of such cases, warehouses in the bonded area were designated as the place of 
delivery. 
 
Thus, this Chapter retains the classification of Group E,F,C and D in the 2000 version.


62
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
CPT 3%
CIP 3%
DAP 3%
CIF
28%
EXW
8%
CFR
22%
FOB
25%
DDP
8%
Figure 2.3
In addition, these selected cases involve a wide range of goods including 
traditional bulk cargos such as ore, fuel oil, rubber, corn and cow; high value-
added goods such as motorcycle, gear assembly, ultrasonic bone knife and robot; 
and combination of services with goods such as construction project equipment 
and services, production line equipment and technical training. According to 
statistics, the types of goods have certain impact on the selection of terms. For 
example, DDP was selected in 2 contracts involving services while the Group 
E terms was chosen in all the cases involving plastic raw materials including 
polycarbonate, polypropylene and polyethylene. One possible reason is Group E 
terms are mostly used in bonded area trade. However, no connection between the 


63
CHAPTER 2
types of goods and the selection of terms is found for Group C and F terms. 
Meanwhile, concerning the selection of terms and transport methods, most of 
the parties could properly understand the applicable way of transport for the 
terms. However, some non-matching cases such as ‘CIF Shanghai Airport’, 
‘FOB Shanghai Train Station’, etc. occurred. The tribunals generally took such 
agreements for reference when determining the place of delivery. For example, 
the tribunal held that ‘FOB Shanghai Train Station’ meant that ‘…the agreement 
on the FOB price between the claimant and the respondent in the contract 
indicates the parties’ consensus that the FOB rules shall be taken as reference 
for the transport of the equipment involved in this case by land…considering 
the situation of this case the seller shall be deemed as having delivered the 
equipment after loading the goods on the train where the risks were transferred 
to the claimant’. In reality, however, the buyer, if noticing the features of the 
FOB term in the contract negotiation, may change the FOB term, which is only 
applicable to sea transport, to the FCA term, which is applicable to train transport, 
so as to avoid the risks of damage or loss during the time from the preparation of 
unloading goods and transferring to the carrier upon the arrival of the train station 
to the loading of goods on the train.   
3. Expression of Trade Terms
The ICC recommended the trade terms to be used in the way of ‘the term + the 
specific place of delivery + the version of the Incoterms’, such as ‘FCA 38 Courts 
Albert 1er, Paris, France Incoterms® 2010.
3 Unfortunately, almost all of the 97 
3 Introduction, Incoterms 2010, No.715 publication of the ICC.


64
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
chosen cases failed to meet such standard. 
In 10% of the sales contracts involved in these cases, the parties made no 
agreement on the place of delivery. In the remaining 90% cases the parties only 
mentioned the specific names of cities, harbors, bonded areas or companies as the 
place of delivery.
Only 6 cases specified the specific version of the Incoterms in the contracts 
involved, mainly the 2000 and 2010 versions. The tribunals had to make extra 
discussion on the version of the Incoterms in the awards in the absence of such 
agreement since the Incoterms are only recommended for use and could not 
directly replace previous versions. 
Although there is no special controversy over the allocation of risk due to the 
unclear agreement on the place of delivery in the chosen cases, it is important to 
note that there are discrepancies among various versions of the Incoterms. For 
example, the latest 2010 version contains fewer terms than the 2000 version while 
the detailed contents of the remaining ones have been modified. For example, in 
the FOB and CIF terms, the point for the risk transfer has been changed from the 
long-term traditional standard of ‘the goods pass the ship rail’ to ‘the goods are 
loaded on board the vessel’. If it occurs that ‘the goods are dropped and damaged 
when being loaded on board’, though the probability of such occurrence is very 
small, the parties may argue over the applicable version of the Incoterms and the 
determination of risk transfer. 
It should also be noted that the concept of ‘trade terms’ is not invented by the 


65
CHAPTER 2
ICC. The International Law Association enacted Warsaw-Oxford Rules, i.e. the 
unified rule for CIF sales contracts, as early as 1928 and amended it in 1932. The 
1932 Warsaw-Oxford Rules has been used till now. The joint committee of the 
Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America, the National Council of 
American Importers and the National Foreign Trade Council enacted the Revised 
American Foreign Trade Definitions 1941, formally explained six trade terms 
including Ex, FOB, FAS, C&F, CIF and Ex Dock. The FOB term was further 
divided into 6 types. Among them, only the fifth one, i.e. FOB Vessel, contains 
similar meaning with the FOB term under the Incoterms. Though the Revised 
American Foreign Trade Definitions 1941 and its follow-up editions have been 
less used due to the wide acceptance of the Incoterms, they are still in use among 
American parties. The parties of the chosen cases had no controversy over 
whether the trade terms used by them were under the Incoterms or other rules, 
but it is necessary to indicate the version of the Incoterms so as to avoid possible 
controversies. 
4. Relationship between Trade Terms and Applicable Laws
Over half of the contracts of the selected cases contain agreements on the 
application of the Incoterms with no agreement on the applicable laws. An 
exceptional contract stipulated clearly in ‘the applicable law’ section that the 
Incoterms are the applicable law of the contract.
This shows that some international trade practitioners still pay little attention 
to the choice of law, or do not have a proper understanding of the nature of the 
Incoterms or the relationship between the Incoterms and the substantive law. 


66
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
The Incoterms regulates parties’ responsibilities and obligations in the delivery, 
receipt, packaging, transport and customs clearance of goods, but is not a 
complete set of contract law. There are a lot of problems in practice that cannot 
be solved by applying the Incoterms, such as the transfer of ownership, the 
determination of the quality, the conditions and time of payment, the connection 
of payment and delivery, the liability and consequence for breach of contract, the 
effect and rescission of contracts, etc. 
In addition, the Incoterms does not contain detailed rules for all the actual 
situations regarding its stipulations. For example, the Incoterms states in Section 
A10 ‘assistance with information and related costs’ that ‘the seller must…in a 
timely manner, provide to or render assistance in obtaining for the buyer, at the 
buyer’s request, risk and expense, any documents and information, including 
security-related information, that the buyer needs for the import of the goods and/
or for their transport to the final destination…’ As each contractual transaction 
may involve different requirements of various nations, the Incoterms can only 
use the general description of ‘any documents and information’ while the exact 
documents and information required in specific transactions need to be determined 
according to the actual situation. The parties involved need to agree thereon in 
contracts or reach agreement during performance. Disputes may arise when no 
such agreement can be reached.
5. Variations of Incoterms in Practice
Since the Incoterms is applied by party autonomy, parties are entitled to change 
the contents of the Incoterms by agreement. For example, parties may, when using 


67
CHAPTER 2
the CIF term applicable to delivery on board of the port of shipment, agree on 
delivery in factories, or, when using the FOB term, agree on the arrival at the port 
of destination as the point for transferring risks from the seller to the buyer.
In the event that parties make special agreement, tribunals will respect such 
agreement and determine parties’ legal liabilities accordingly and generally will 
not support the defense of invalidity of such agreement.  
II. Typical Cases Involving Application of the Incoterms
4 
in International Commercial Arbitration in China 
1. Licenses, Authorizations, Security Clearance and other 
Formalities 
The Incoterms stipulates the relevant obligations in Section A2 or Section B2 of 
the usage notes of each trade term. The specific stipulation is ‘the buyer/seller 
must obtain at his own risk and expense any import/export licence or other official 
authorization and carry out, where applicable, all customs formalities necessary 
for the import/export of the goods’ while the other party shall provide information 
for customs examination and formalities upon request and assist with the official 
authorization.
Such stipulation of the Incoterms is made with regard to the division of 
obligations for obtaining licences, authorization and formalities, leaving unsolved 
the problem of which party shall be liable if the import/export formalities cannot 
be obtained successfully. This point will be further illustrated by the following 
4 The contents of each term are in accordance with the 2010 Incoterms unless otherwise specified.


68
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
case. 
Case 1
The Claimant (the buyer, an American company) and the Respondent (the seller, 
a Chinese company) signed 121 contracts between 2006 and 2010, agreeing that 
the Claimant would purchase different types of motorcycles from the Respondent 
under the transaction mode of FOB Chongqing (Incoterms 2000). The contracts 
also stated that ‘the engines shall be EPA approved’.
5 The Respondents, before 
signing the contracts, had provided the Claimant with the EPA certificates listing 
an American third-party company as the applicant and holder thereof and the EPA 
public record information for the certificates. 
During the performance of the contracts, the Respondents supplied motorcycles 
with engines not in accordance with the EPA certificates. The Claimant (the 
buyer) could not obtain EPA certificates to import these motorcycles, thus the 
motorcycles were detained by the U.S. customs and could not get through.
The tribunal made the following determination regarding ‘the obligation of 
obtaining the U.S. EPA approval for the engines involved in this case’.
First, as a matter of fact, the tribunal clarified the content of the requirement 
for obtaining the U.S. EPA, i.e., the EPA certificate were needed and the 
EPA labelling requirements should be met for the engines of the motorcycles. 
Otherwise, the EPA would not approve or grant the Claimant’s import and sale of 
the motorcycles involved in the case in the U.S.
5 EPA is the abbreviation for Environmental Protection Agency of the U.S.


69
CHAPTER 2
As per the contractual provisions and the parties’ practice, the Respondent had 
in effect assumed the obligation of obtaining the EPA certificate and meeting the 
EPA labelling requirements. In spite of this, the Claimant should bear the risks 
and costs in obtaining important licenses including the EPA certificates according 
to the FOB term under the Incoterms 2000 stated in the contracts. The Claimant, 
being under direct administration of the EPA and the buyer under the FOB term, 
should have taken necessary and reasonable measures to obtain the EPA approval 
for the motorcycles delivered by the Respondent and meet the EPA regulatory 
requirements. 
The Respondent, before signing the contracts, had provided the Claimant with 
the EPA certificates with an American third-party company as the applicant and 
holder thereof and the EPA public record information, showing that the engines of 
the motorcycles supplied by the Respondent were under the ‘Cu Series’ approved 
in the certificates, had met the EPA requirements and could be approved by the 
EPA. The Claimant should have checked the EPA certificates and the sample 
motorcycles sent over by the Respondent. 
The tribunal, in the award, found the specifications of the motorcycles produced 
by the Respondent not in accordance with the parameters of the EPA certificates, 
thus the Claimant should bear certain liabilities for the loss due to its failure in 
conducting timely inspection of the motorcycles while the Respondent should 
bear most of the liabilities. However, the Incoterms contains stipulations for 
unclear agreement on the variation of the term. On one hand, the party with the 
obligation of obtaining licenses, authorization, formalities and other procedures 


70
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
shall ensure smooth customs clearance with due diligence. On the other hand, the 
seller is still liable for the failure in obtaining import licences if the failure is due 
to the seller’s faults such as poor quality of the goods.
2. Sellers’ Obligation of Delivery
The obligation of ‘delivery’ is stipulated in Section A4 of the Incoterms as ‘[T]he 
seller must deliver the goods… at the named place on the date or within the period 
agreed for delivery and in the manner ...’. Correspondingly, Section B4 states the 
buyer’s obligation as ‘[T]he buyer must take delivery of the goods when they have 
been delivered in accordance with A4.’
6 Disputes over delivery are quite common 
and the issue is the time of the sellers’ fulfilment of the delivery obligation and 
the specific ways of delivery, for example, whether delivery is made by delivering 
only the documents or by actually delivering the goods. 
Case 2
The Claimant (the buyer, a Chinese company) and the Respondent (the seller, a 
Chinese company) agreed on the purchase of goods stored in Shanghai Bonded 
Warehouse under the term ‘EXW Shanghai Bonded Warehouse’. The Claimant 
made full payment through a negotiating bank with the letter of credit. However, 
the warehouse refused the Claimant’s request for delivery of goods with the bill 
of lading provided by the Respondent. Thus, the Claimant could not pick up the 
goods. The two parties went together to the warehouse to take delivery, but were 
6 It is stated under the EXW term that ‘[T]he buyer must take delivery of the goods when they have been 
delivered in accordance with A4 and A7/B7’. Section A7 thereof stipulates that ‘[T]he seller must give the 
buyer sufficient notice as to when and where the goods will be placed at his disposal’.


71
CHAPTER 2
informed by the warehouse that the goods had been seized by the police and could 
not be delivered. 
The Claimant alleged that the Respondent failed to deliver the goods.
The Respondent argued that it had submitted the commercial invoice, the packing 
list and the bill of lading to the Claimant. In particular, it was clearly stated in 
the bill of lading that the Respondent was the consignor, the Claimant was the 
consignee, the place of delivery was Shanghai Bonded Warehouse and cargo 
details. The Respondent had delivered the goods to the Claimant in accordance 
with the instructions. 
The tribunal held that the contract of this case requested for actual delivery of 
goods since it was an EXW contract with Shanghai Bonded Warehouse as the 
agreed place of delivery. This contract was different from CIF, CFR or FOB 
contracts under which the seller would have completed the symbolic delivery as 
long as he loaded goods on board at designated ports of shipment within specified 
time and submitted legal and effective bill of lading representing the ownership 
of goods. However, according to the interpretation of EXW in Section A4 of the 
Incoterms 2000, the Respondent should have placed the goods at the disposal of 
the buyer at the named place of delivery, not loaded on any collecting vehicle, on 
the date or within the period. 
According to the provisions on the seller and the buyer’s delivery obligation 
under the EXW Incoterms 2000, the Respondent had obviously failed to fulfil 
the delivery obligation under the EXW (warehouse) contract of this case. The 


72
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Respondent’s argument that it had delivered documents requested under Article 
6 of the contract could not prove that the Respondent had actually delivered the 
goods. 
In another case of ‘EXW Huangpu Bonded Warehouse, China’ contract, the 
parties agreed that ‘the seller shall submit to the buyer all the documents under the 
letter of credit, especially the delivery order, and request the warehouse deliver 
the goods to the buyer by issuing the cargo title certificate’. The tribunal deemed 
that the parties’ agreement on delivery in the form of ‘submitting documents’ had 
actually changed the content of the term. The seller shall be deemed as having 
fulfilled the delivery obligation after submitting the cargo title documents to the 
buyer. Furthermore, the tribunal noticed that the seller’s staff and the warehouse 
staff had been charged and sentenced under criminal liabilities with contract fraud 
due to their collusion in forgery documents. Thus, the tribunal held that the goods 
stated in the documents submitted by the seller to the buyer did not exist at the 
time of delivering the cargo title certificate, therefore, it was impossible for the 
cargo title to be transferred along with the delivery of the documents. As a result, 
the seller had not fulfilled the delivery obligation.
In summary, parties need to distinguish between actual delivery under Group 
E and D terms and symbolic delivery under Group C and F terms.
7 Meanwhile, 
parties are advised to avoid deviation from the terms through contractual 
provisions different from the Incoterms because they can normally choose 
7 It usually refers to the situation when the buyer and seller have no direct contact, the seller loads the 
goods at the designated time and place and submits relevant documents including the title certificate to the 
buyer, performs the delivery obligation by obtaining the transport documents issued by the carrier or other 
commercial documents, and needs not to guarantee the arrival of the goods. 


73
CHAPTER 2
another more appropriate term. As for symbolic delivery, what documents shall 
be submitted to satisfy the ‘delivery’ requirements? Some tribunals deemed that 
‘the seller’s submission of negotiating documents required to the negotiating bank 
indicates the seller has fulfilled the obligation of delivering goods’. Some held 
that ‘the buyer, though having not received the original bill of lading, obtained 
the delivery order by issuing the letter of guarantee, which has the same effect as 
using the original bill of lading for collection of goods’. Others found that ‘the 
parties had changed the term content through contractual provisions, allowing the 
buyer to transfer the goods stated in the delivery instructions to other warehouses 
or re-sell the goods to others. Thus, the buyer had obtained the cargo title under 
the delivery instructions’. In short, the tribunals’ judging standard for the seller’s 
fulfillment of ‘the symbolic delivery’ obligation may be summarized as the extent 
to which the submitted documents can help the buyer to achieve the basic power 
of possessing, using, benefiting from and disposing of the goods. 
3. Risk Transfer Points
‘The buyer must bear all risks of loss of or damage to the goods from the time 
they have been delivered’ is the general provision in contract laws of various 
countries. The Incoterms also specifies the points of risk transfer under different 
trade terms. For example, the risks of goods transfer ‘from the time they have 
passed the ship's rail’ under the FOB term in pre-2010 versions, or ‘from the time 
they have been delivered to the carrier’ under the FCA term. However, we find 
that a considerable number of parties have deviated from the true meaning of ‘risks’ 
stipulated in the Incoterms, though in some cases the respondents deliberately 


74
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
‘distorted’ the term content according to their defense strategies. 
The ‘risks’ under the Incoterms refer to the risks of goods during transport, 
including damage, loss and other risks. If the goods have been damaged before 
the shipment while such damage may occur during transport, it is necessary to 
investigate into the real cause of the damage upon the arrival of the goods at the 
destination to find out the time of the damage. Under such circumstance, the seller 
cannot defend himself solely on the ground that ‘the risks have been transferred to 
the buyer at the time of delivery’ under the Incoterms. 
Case 3 
The Claimant (the seller, a Chinese company) sold chestnuts grown in China 
to the Respondent (the buyer, a Dutch company) under CIF Rotterdam. The 
Respondent, after receiving the goods, found serious quality problems in some 
of the goods, including worms in large quantities and a small amount of rotten 
and moldy chestnuts. In light of the foregoing, the Respondent had alleged the 
Claimant’s fundamental breach of contract and refused to pay the remaining 
contract price. The Claimant applied for arbitration to claim the outstanding 
payment.
During arbitration, the Respondent asserted that the quality problem of the 
chestnuts had existed before the shipment and submitted an Inspection Report. 
The Report stated that ‘…inspection conclusion: There are a large number of 
worms in the fresh chestnuts in No.XXX container because 1) the goods had not 
been frozen appropriately before shipment; 2) the goods had been rotten before 


75
CHAPTER 2
shipment; and 3) the worms in the goods had existed before shipment’.
The Claimant believed that the risks had been transferred to the buyer after the 
goods being loaded on board under the CIF term. The Claimant submitted the 
Phytosanitary Certificate and the Fumigation/Disinfection Certificate issued 
by one Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau, showing that ‘the batch 
of chestnuts has been inspected and tested in accordance with the prescribed 
procedures. There is no pest under the importing country or region’s quarantine 
requirements and basically no other pest. The importing country or regions’ 
current phytosanitary requirements are met’ and ‘the batch of chestnuts has been 
fumigated and disinfected on XX/XX/XXXX date’ respectively, to prove that the 
risks of goods damage by worms had occurred after the delivery. 
The tribunal considered the fact that the Inspection Report submitted by the 
Respondent had been issued by an independent third party, the Claimant had 
been aware of the inspection since the Respondent notified and communicated 
with the Claimant after finding the quality problem, the Claimant had been absent 
from the on-site inspection and submitted no evidence against the inspection 
conclusion of the Inspection Report, and the goods with quality problems had got 
no quality certificate while those without quality problems had got one. Therefore, 
the tribunal deemed that, in the absence of contradicting evidence, the Inspection 
Report submitted by the Respondent had probative effect. The Claimant 
could not rely solely on the Phytosanitary Certificate and the Fumigation/
Disinfection Certificate to prove the goods qualified through examination while 
the Respondent had proved the quality problems of the goods as shown in the 


76
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
inspection conclusion of the Inspection Report. Therefore, the tribunal held that 
the Claimant should bear the liability for failing to meet its burden of proof since 
it had submitted no evidence to the contrary when denying the Inspection Report 
submitted by the Respondent.
It is noteworthy in this case that the Inspection Report submitted by the 
Respondent shows the quality problem had existed before the delivery. When did 
the quality problem occur? Did it occur before or after the goods were loaded on 
board (for example, due to high temperature or pest infection during transport)? Is 
there any error in the inspection conclusion of the inspection institution authorized 
by the Dutch buyer? The seller only submitted certificates issued by Chinese 
inspection and quarantine authorities, and no further evidence was provided 
against the Inspection Report submitted by the Dutch buyer, such as evidence 
from the scientific and technological point of view. At this point, the seller could 
not be protected by the ‘transfer of risks at the time of delivery’. In the case when 
the buyer has submitted strong evidence, i.e. the Inspection Report issued after the 
arrival of goods, the seller could not satisfy its burden of proof with pre-loading 
inspection and quarantine certificates only. The application of the risk transfer 
rules under the Incoterms could only achieve the effect with sufficient convincing 
evidence.
Case 4
The Claimant (the buyer, a South Korean company) and the Respondent (the 
seller, a Chinese company) agreed on the sale of rolls under the CIF term. The 
buyer, after finding rust in the rolls and non-conformity with the quality standard 


77
CHAPTER 2
under the contract upon the arrival at the port of destination, initiated arbitration 
and claimed for compensation. Unlike the above case, the buyer failed to submit 
evidence ‘showing that the rust had occurred before delivery’. 
The tribunal of the case held that as the three contracts involved in this case 
were all CIF contracts and the Claimant failed to submit any evidence to prove 
the rust had existed before the loading of goods on board, the possibility of the 
occurrence of rust before or during loading could be precluded. The seller, i.e. the 
Respondent, should only bear all risks before the loading while the buyer, i.e. the 
Claimant, should bear all risks after the loading according to the stipulation on the 
risk transfer point under the CIF term in the Incoterms. Therefore, the Respondent 
should not be liable for the rust since the Claimant had submitted no evidence to 
prove the existence of rust before the loading of goods. 
Comparing the above two cases, we may find that in the Chinese arbitration 
practice, the tribunal’s general approach to determining ‘whether the non-
conformity of quality occurs before or after the transfer of risks of goods’ is to 
presume the goods quality according to the risk transfer points for each trade term 
under the Incoterms and shift the burden of proof to the seller if the buyer submits 
evidence to the contrary. 
4. Performance of Notification Obligation
Under the Incoterms, both the buyer and the seller have the obligation of sending 
notice to each other. For the seller, the delivery obligation covers not only sending 
goods to designated places but also notifying buyers or their agents. If a buyer 


78
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
alleges a seller’s failure in delivery, the seller cannot prove its delivery only with 
the evidence on sending the goods to the designated place. The seller should also 
prove that it has performed the notification obligation.
Case 5
The Claimant (the buyer, a Hong Kong company) purchased nickel ore from the 
Respondent (the seller, an Indonesian company) under the FOB major port of 
Indonesia term. 
The Claimant claimed for return of the deposit it had paid since the Respondent 
failed to deliver the goods.
The Respondent argued that the Claimant should have been aware of the delivery 
of the nickel ore to the port since the goods had been sent to the port and the 
Claimant had a representative at the port. 
On this issue, the tribunal deemed that according to Section A7 Notice to the 
buyer’ of the FOB Incoterms, ‘[T]he seller must give the buyer sufficient notice 
that the goods have been delivered in accordance with A4 or the vessel have not 
collected the goods within the agreed period with risks and fees borne by the 
buyer’; and according to A4, ‘[T]he seller must deliver the goods … at the named 
place of loading (if any) in the port of shipment on board the vessel nominated by 
the buyer, or in the manner of obtaining the goods already delivered onboard…’. 
It is easy to conclude from the above provisions that the seller, when delivering 
goods to the buyes at the place of loading in the port of shipment, must give 


79
CHAPTER 2
sufficient notice to the buyer. Furthermore, the seller normally need to send 
vessel nomination notices to the buyer for the buyer’s convenience of receiving 
goods since ports of shipment, specified quantities of goods and delivery time are 
involved in the FOB term. However, the Respondent of this case failed to prove 
its performance of the delivery obligation under the contract due to the lack of any 
notice of this kind. 
What is the exact meaning of the seller’s ‘notification obligation’? What should 
be the content of such notices? An answer is given by the tribunal in the following 
case.
Case 6
The Claimant (the seller, a South Korean company) sold hot rolled steel coils 
to the Respondent (the buyer, a Chinese company) under the FOB term. The 
Respondent did not send a vessel to take delivery of the hot rolled steel coils and 
the market price fell. The Claimant had to resell the goods and suffered loss due to 
price difference. Then, the Claimant applied for arbitration to claim compensation 
of the loss. 
The Claimant alleged that the main reason for non-delivery of the goods was the 
Respondent’s failure in nominating a vessel for shipment while the Respondent 
argued that the reason for such failure was the Claimant’s failure in notifying the 
Respondent that the goods had been ready for shipment. 
On the issue of ‘whether the Claimant should have notified the Respondent the 


80
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
goods was ready for shipment’, the tribunal held that there had been no contractual 
provision on the seller’s obligation of notifying the buyer that the goods had been 
ready for shipment. The FOB term should apply under the contract. Taking A7 
stipulation on the seller’s obligation under the FOB Incoterms that ‘[T]he seller 
must, at the buyer’s risk and expense, give the buyer sufficient notice either that 
the goods have been delivered in accordance with A4 or that the vessel has failed 
to collect the goods within the time agreed’ and B7 stipulation on the buyer’s 
obligation that ‘The buyer must give the seller sufficient notice of the vessel name, 
loading point and, where necessary, the selected delivery time within the agreed 
period as reference, the tribunal held that the Respondent, as the buyer, should 
have notified the seller of the vessel name, the loading point and the delivery time 
sufficiently while the Claimant, as the seller, should have sent sufficient notice 
to the buyer on the delivery of goods in accordance with A4. It is stipulated in 
Section A4 that ‘[T]he seller must deliver the goods …by placing them on board 
the vessel nominated by the buyer at the loading point, if any, indicated by the 
buyer at the named port of shipment…’, under which the seller is not obliged to 
notify the seller that the goods have been ready for shipment but is obliged to 
notify the buyer that the goods have been delivered or not been loaded within 
the agreed period only. The Claimant did not breach the contract for not having 
delivered the goods and notified the Respondent since the Respondent had not 
sent a vessel to the port of shipment. If the buyer had sent a vessel but the goods 
were not ready for shipment, the Claimant would have been liable for breach of 
contract. Thus, the Respondent, as the buyer, could not refuse to send a vessel on 
the excuse that the seller had not notified it that the goods had been ready, and had 


81
CHAPTER 2
breached the contract for not sending a vessel.
From the above two cases, it can be seen that different tribunals may have 
slightly different understanding of the extent of ‘sufficient notice’ by the seller 
concerning the specific content of the seller’s obligation under the FOB term due 
to their different understanding of international trade practices. We believe that 
the tribunal’s understanding in Case 6 seems to be more in line with the original 
meaning of the Incoterms 2010, i.e. the seller’s notification obligation does not 
refer to the status that goods are ready for delivery but that goods have been 
delivered or have not been loaded on the nominated vessel within the agreed 
period. Unless otherwise agreed in the contract, the seller has no obligation under 
the Incoterms to notify the buyer that the goods have been ready while the buyer 
is not entitled to refuse sending a vessel for the delivery of goods if there is no 
such notice from the seller. To avoid disputes on this specific issue, parties shall 
make clearer contractual provisions on the obligations of sending vessels and 
delivering goods and the sequence of relevant steps. 
5. Assistance in Information Provision
Under A10/B10 of each term in the Incoterms, both parties are obliged to timely 
send information related to the safe transport of goods to the other side in certain 
degrees. However, there is no clear and specific stipulation on the content and 
scope of such information in the Incoterms. 
Case 7


82
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
The Claimant (the buyer, a British company) purchased steel from the Respondent 
(the seller, a Chinese company) under the CFR term. It is stated in the contract 
that the seller agreed that the buyer would arrange inspection of the quantity 
and quality of goods by an internationally recognized inspection institution to 
ensure that the buyer could submit the certificate for loading and inspection in 
accordance with the end user’s requirements.
However, before the goods were loaded and departed from the port of shipment, 
the seller had neither sent any information in accordance with actual needs and 
business practice such as the nomination of loading vessel and the date thereof 
to the buyer nor allow sufficient time for the buyer to arrange the inspection. 
Therefore, the buyer had no opportunity to nominate the inspection institution for 
necessary inspection and certificates thereof. 
The buyer, relying on A10 of the CFR Incoterms 2000, alleged that the seller was 
obliged to notify the buyer timely and allow sufficient time for the buyer to entrust 
an independent inspection institution to inspect the goods at the port of shipment.  
The seller argued that the assistance requirement under either the contract or the 
CFR Incoterms 2000 involved only the passive assistance obligation ‘upon the 
buyer’s request’, so the seller was not obliged to provide relevant assistance on its 
own initiative in the absence of such request. 
The tribunal held that the seller’s assistance obligation under the CFR Incoterms 
2000 was very important while the obligation was only about some necessary 
contents in trade instead of specific assistance stipulated in the contract. In this 


83
CHAPTER 2
case, the inspection only involved the buyer’s requirements under the contract, 
but not the necessary contents in normal trade while the seller’s obligation was 
‘assisting and cooperating with the buyer when it arranges inspection of the 
goods on its own initiative’, so the general provisions in the Incoterms were not 
applicable.
The tribunal found that the final cause of the non-performance of the contract 
and loss thereof was the parties’ disagreement on whether the modified letter of 
credit was consistent with the shipment period which had no causal relationship 
with whether the goods had been inspected before shipment. Thus, the tribunal 
made no further discussion on whether the seller had performed its contractual 
obligation. However, we may find from this case that there is no clear definition 
on the assistance obligation in the Incoterms and it is impossible to determine a 
party’s assistance obligation regarding certain matter and the way of assistance 
based on the Incoterms only. Therefore, it is recommended that parties reach 
clearer and more specific agreement on specific matters. Tribunals have full 
discretion in the absence of clear and detailed agreement thereon. 
III. Comments on and Suggestions on Application of 
the Incoterms in China’s International Commercial 
Arbitration 
1.Brief Comments on Application of the Incoterms in China’s 
International Commercial Arbitration
It can be seen that when determining parties’ rights and obligations under the 


84
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Incoterms, tribunals have an accurate understanding of the meaning of the 
Incoterms stipulations with consideration of relevant trade practices. 
Meanwhile, when discussing disputes related to the Incoterms, tribunals prefer 
comprehensive discussion of the Incoterms, the applicable laws, the specific 
contractual provisions, the parties’ actual performance of contract and the parties’ 
trade practices over simple discussion on the Incoterms per se, thus combining 
the Incoterms with trade practices. It is obvious that such comprehensive and 
complete discussion has almost become the formula in arbitral awards, which 
undoubtedly reflects the development achievements and level of China’s 
international commercial arbitration over the years. 
It is found through research that tribunals can investigate facts objectively, 
respect party autonomy fully, apply laws and international practices fairly no 
matter where the parties are from. At the same time, the CIETAC arbitrators 
have achieved high professional level in languages and managing arbitration 
proceedings. Chinese arbitrators are proficient at drafting English awards and vice 
versa. 
2. Suggestions to Practitioners of International Trade and Parties 
in International Commercial Arbitration
The following suggestions are made for international trade practitioners and 
potential parties in international commercial arbitration based on the analysis of 
97 cases involving the Incoterms between 2010 and 2016.


85
CHAPTER 2
1) Appropriate Selection and Use of Trade Terms
Before selecting trade terms, parties should fully analyze their trade modes to find 
the term suitable for the transaction purpose and minimize their own risks and 
obligations through the study of the Incoterms documents. For example, under 
current shipping conditions, goods are generally delivered to carriers in container 
yards in contracts with cargo shipment. The seller, if choosing the FOB term, 
may be still liable for the risks of cargo damage or loss even in a certain period 
time after it loses control over the goods, so the choice of FCA term is more 
appropriate. Another example is that the Incoterms 2010 recommends the FCA, 
CPT and CIP terms for chain sales rather than the CIF term normally used since 
the former can avoid the seller’s risks after delivering goods to the carrier and 
before loading goods aboard. In light of the frequency of use of the terms, when 
selecting the most used FOB and CIF terms, parties should be more cautious since 
such terms apply to sea and inland waterway transport only.
Furthermore, there is always a party that needs to sign a transport contract with 
the carrier in order to perform the trade contract. Such transport contract, though 
having no content directly related to the buyer or seller’s rights and obligations, 
constitutes an integral part of the transaction. Therefore, it is recommended that 
parties, when entering into transport contracts, consider the impact of trade terms 
on the contract stipulations.
8
In international trade contracts, parties’ agreements prevail over the Incoterms. It 
is found in the study that some parties made no specific agreement on the delivery 
8 For more details, see ICC Guide on Transport and the Incoterms
® 2010 Rules, ICC No. 775 E Publication.


86
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
of goods, taking of delivery and vessel notification, etc. The Incoterms, though 
contain stipulations on these matters, are far from being the specific operational 
guidelines in business practice. For example, there is no detailed provision on the 
time for FOB buyers to inform sellers of the vessel collecting goods in advance, 
the time for sellers to raise objections regarding the tonnage and navigability 
of vessels or the time for sellers to inform buyers that goods are ready. A large 
number of disputes may have been avoided if detailed agreements were made 
thereon.
Similarly, the Incoterms, though provides for the transfer of goods risks, contain 
no detailed stipulation for the right of objection concerning qualities or quantities. 
It is impossible to solve all the problems with the Incoterms only. Therefore, 
it is recommended that parties reach more detailed agreement on matters such 
as the time for the seller to raise objections regarding qualities and quantities 
after receiving goods, the necessity and way of appointing third-party inspection 
institutions, the possibility of unilateral appointment by sellers, the inspection 
methods, the time for inspection after receiving goods, the place of inspection 
either in a port or inland, etc.
2) Specific Agreement on the Applicable Law of International Trade 
Contracts and Ascertainment of Foreign Law
It is shown through analysis that the tribunals of the 97 selected cases tended to 
apply Chinese laws under the closest connection doctrine when the parties failed 
to agree on either the applicable law or the application of the CISG. However, 
Chinese parties and parties with Chinese backgrounds (such as foreign companies 


87
CHAPTER 2
actually controlled by Chinese capital) cannot expect tribunals to determine China 
as the most closely connected country in any case based on the sole ground that 
the chosen arbitration institution is in China and one of the parties has Chinese 
backgrounds. Therefore, it is recommended that parties agree expressly on the 
applicable law in contracts to avoid uncertainty.
3) More Possibilities of Adverse Consequence for Absence from Arbitration 
Proceedings
As mentioned above, most parties absent from the arbitration proceedings are 
foreign ones. In practice, there may be a misunderstanding among parties that 
there is no need to participate in arbitration proceedings actively, but to wait till 
the winning parties apply for enforcement of awards to object. Some parties think 
such method of subsistence can resolve risks of losing in arbitration at a low cost. 
However, they should be aware that China is a contracting party to the 1958 New 
York Convention and awards rendered in China can be recognized and enforced 
in other 156 contracting states of the Convention.
9 If the losing party has property 
outside its home country which is a contracting state, the winning party may apply 
for enforcement there. Then the losing party cannot rely on its local advantage to 
obstruct the enforcement.
For parties whose places of residence are in China, there will be more risks if 
absent from arbitration proceedings. The winning parties, after obtaining winning 
awards, may apply for enforcement directly before the court with jurisdiction. 
9 As of 14 August 2017, a total of 157 States parties had acceded to the 1958 New York Convention. See 
http://www.uncitral.org/uncitral/en/uncitral_texts/arbitration/NYConvention_status.html


88
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Therefore, it is recommended that parties should actively participate in arbitration 
proceedings so as to avoid unnecessary risks and loss for being absent from 
arbitration proceedings. 
The incoterms, due to its long history and continuous updates, will take an 
important place in international trade for a long time. Under current international 
trade circumstances, more new trading modes, transport ways and payment 
methods will occur along with the implementation and expansion of the Belt and 
Road Initiatives. There may be more cases involving the Incoterms in China’s 
international commercial arbitration practices. Arbitrators in China’s international 
commercial arbitration have been very professional in understanding and 
applying the Incoterms, and can deal with all kinds of relevant disputes and apply 
international conventions, international practice and domestic laws properly. It 
is believed that the above summary can better advise participants in international 
trade to design their trading modes reasonably, apply the Incoterms correctly, 
minimize legal risks and safeguard their legitimate rights and interests to the 
largest extent. 


89
CHAPTER 3
Chapter Three Judicial Supervision 
of International Commercial 
Arbitration in China
Through the collection of judgments published on China Judgment Online, the 
Replies of the SPC 4
th Civil Division contained in the Trial Guidance for Foreign-
related Commercial and Maritime Cases and other data from the Internet, 
comprehensive analysis and review of legal issues involved in the judicial review 
cases are made in this chapter over China’s international commercial arbitration, 
or HMT-related and foreign-related arbitration. 
I. Determination of Validity of Foreign-related and HMT-
related Arbitration Agreement
1. Determination of Validity of "Arbitration or Litigation" Clause 
with Foreign Law as the Applicable Law
In Hong Kong Spingwater Co., Ltd. v. Hongbai Electrical Appliances (Shenzhen) 
Co., Ltd. concerning confirmation of validity of an arbitration clause,
1 the parties 
had agreed to submit disputes to the state court of Las Angeles, California or the 
federal court of the U.S., and if necessary and appropriate, to a sole arbitrator to 
arbitrate in Las Angeles, California, U.S. under the applicable laws of California 
and the AAA Rules. Concerning this "litigation or arbitration" clause, the court 
1 (2015) Shen Zhong Fa She Wai Zhong Zi No. 91 Civil Ruling by Shenzhen Intermediate People’s Court (on 
3 March 2016).


90
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
ascertained that as the parties had expressly chosen the laws of California, U.S. 
as the applicable law of the arbitration agreement and the state law of California 
comprises statutory laws as well as case precedents, the U.S. Federal Arbitration 
Law, the California Civil Procedure Law and the precedents of the U.S. Federal 
Court and the California State Court should apply to determine the validity of the 
clause. In view of the parties’ different understanding of the laws of California, 
the court, for the first time, entrusted Benchmark Chambers International, a 
foreign law discerning base in Shenzhen, to identify the U.S. laws. The court 
found in the end that the U.S. statutes, though containing no direct stipulation 
on the determination of validity of "litigation or arbitration" clauses, expressly 
supported the validity, irrevocability and enforceability of arbitration agreements 
unless mandatory grounds for contract revocation existed. The U.S. Supreme 
Court established the principle favoring arbitration in its precedent applying the 
Federal Arbitration Law. Though the validity of the "litigation or arbitration" 
clause was denied in a Utah District Court precedent, it was not applicable to 
the arbitral clause signed by the parties in the present case due to the substantial 
differences in the agreements. Thus, the arbitration agreement of the case was 
valid.  
2. Determination of Validity of Ad Hoc Arbitration Clause under 
the Law of the Seat of Arbitration
In COFCO Wines & Spirits Co., Ltd. v. Gloriavino Co. Ltd. concerning 
confirmation of the validity of an arbitral clause,
2 the applicant alleged the arbitral 
2 (2014) San Zhong Min (Shang) Te Zi No. 9333 Civil Ruling by Beijing Third Intermediate People’s 


91
CHAPTER 3
clause in the Sales Contract between the parties void since the parties had agreed 
to submit their disputes to arbitration in Switzerland without mentioning the 
arbitral institution, which resulted in unclear agreement on the place of arbitration. 
The court held that though the Sales Contract failed to specify the applicable law, 
but the parties had agreed to arbitrate in Switzerland, the Swiss law at the place of 
arbitration should be applied in determining the validity of the arbitration clause. 
It is stated in Chapter 12 of the Swiss Federal Code of Private International Law 
that parties, when reaching no agreement on how to form tribunals, may refer 
to Article 179 and apply for the appointment of arbitrators by the court at the 
place of arbitration, which means ad hoc arbitration is allowed under the Swiss 
law. Thus, the arbitral clause involved in this case did not violate the mandatory 
provisions of the Swiss Federal Code of Private International Law and should be 
deemed as valid.
3. Interpretation of Choice of Arbitration Institution in Arbitration 
Clause
1) Interpretation on the Name Change of Arbitration Institution 
In Shanghai Hongye International Trade Co., Ltd. v. Hard Home Steel Aluminum 
Container Factroty concerning confirmation of the validity of an arbitral clause,
3 
the applicant alleged that the arbitral clause could not show the parties true intent 
in choosing the arbitration institution when signing the contract in 2013 because 
Court (on 28 December 2016).
3 (2016) Jing 04 Min Te No. 10 Civil Ruling by Beijing Fourth Intermediate People’s Court (on 8 
November 2016).


92
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
the Chinese translation of the English name of the arbitration institution in the 
contract, i.e. Foreign Trade Arbitration Commission Within the China Council 
For the Promotion of International Trade, had been changed to China International 
Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission in 1988 while the corresponding 
Provisional Arbitration Rules had ceased to be effective. The court held that it 
was stipulated in Article 1 of the 2015 CIETAC Arbitration Rules that "(1).The 
China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission (CIETAC), 
originally named the Foreign Trade Arbitration Commission of the China Council 
for the Promotion of International Trade and later renamed the Foreign Economic 
and Trade Arbitration Commission of the China Council for the Promotion of 
International Trade, concurrently uses as its name the 'Arbitration Institute of the 
China Chamber of International Commerce'. (2) Where an arbitration agreement 
provides for arbitration by the China Council for the Promotion of International 
Trade/China Chamber of International Commerce, or by the Arbitration 
Commission or the Arbitration Institute of the China Council for the Promotion 
of International Trade/China Chamber of International Commerce, or refers to 
CIETAC’s previous names, it shall be deemed that the parties have agreed to 
arbitration by CIETAC." According to the above provision, the arbitration clause 
in the contract between the parties was valid with a clear intent by the parties to 
arbitrate and a specified arbitration institution because when the parties designated 
CIETAC in its former name in the contract, it should be deemed that the parties 
intended to submit their disputes to CIETAC.
2) Interpretation on Two Arbitration Institutions in One City


93
CHAPTER 3
In Avin, L.L.C. v. Shenzhen Zhaori Caiyang Electronics Co., Ltd. concerning 
confirmation of validity of an arbitral clause,
4 the designated arbitration 
commission in the arbitration agreement was ‘Shenzhen International Arbitration 
Commission’. There are two arbitration commissions in Shenzhen, i.e. Shenzhen 
Arbitration Commission and Shenzhen Court of International Arbitration. Based 
on Article 3 of the SPC Interpretation concerning Some Issues on Application 
of the PRC Arbitration Law that "Where the name of an arbitration institution as 
stipulated in the agreement for arbitration is inaccurate, but the specific arbitration 
institution can be determined, it shall be ascertained that the arbitration institution 
has been selected", the court ascertained that the arbitration agreement was valid 
since the designated arbitration commission in the arbitration agreement could 
be determined as the Shenzhen Court of International Arbitration considering the 
outstanding difference between the names of the two commissions, i.e. the word 
"international", and the existence thereof in the designated arbitration institution 
name. 
4. Arbitration Agreement Reached by Conduct of Parties in 
Arbitration Proceedings.
In Peng Qiuzhen v. PICC Property and Casualty Co., Ltd. concerning 
confirmation of validity of an arbitration clause,
5 the applicant alleged the 
arbitration agreement void since the defendant had not explained the contract 
4 (2016) Yue 03 Min Chu No.1177 Civil Ruling by Guangdong Province Shenzhen City Intermediate 
People’s Court (on 27 September 2016).
5 (2014) Zhe Hang Zhong Que Zi No.5 Civil Ruling by Zhejiang Province Hangzhou City Intermediate 
People’s Court (on 13 June 2016).


94
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
clauses in detail and signed all the insurance related contracts on behalf of the 
applicant without his permission, agreeing to submit disputes to Hangzhou 
Arbitration Commission with no authorization. The Zhejiang Higher People’s 
Court reported the case to the SPC since it involved the determination of the 
validity of an arbitration agreement over non-signatories. The SPC replied and 
approved the confirmation of validity.
6 The SPC ascertained that though the 
insurance policy had not been signed by the applicant himself but had been 
issued by the defendant unilaterally, the applicant, after receiving the insurance 
policy and being aware of the arbitration clause therein, submitted disputes to 
the Hanghzou Arbitration Commission according to the arbitration clause, which 
showed his willingness to be bound by the arbitral clause. Thus, the arbitration 
agreement had been reached between the two parties through the special conduct 
during the arbitration proceeding. Such agreement was legal and valid as per 
Article 16 of the PRC Arbitration Law. The applicant’s withdrawal of the 
application for arbitration after the oral hearing did not result in the invalidity of 
the arbitration agreement. 
5. Arbitrability of Monopoly Disputes
In Yulong Computer Communication Technology Co., Ltd. v. Ericsson Co., Ltd. 
concerning objection to jurisdiction over monopoly disputes,
7 the defendant raised 
jurisdiction objection and requested the Chinese court to dismiss the case since 
6 The SPC’s Reply regarding Peng Qiuzhen v. PICC Property and Casualty Co., Ltd. concerning 
Confirmation of Validity of Arbitral Clause [(2016) Zui Gao Fa Min Ta No.40].
7 (2015) Shen Zhong Fa Zhi Min Chu Zi No.1089 Civil Ruling by Guangdong Province Shenzhen City 
Intermediate People’s Court (on 1 April 2016).


95
CHAPTER 3
the parties had agreed to arbitration in Singapore. The court ascertained that it had 
jurisdiction over the case according to Article 50 of the PRC Anti-Monopoly Law 
and Articles 1, 2 and 3 of the SPC Provisions on Several Issues concerning the 
Law Application in the Trial of Civil Disputes Caused by Monopoly Acts which 
stipulated that the people’s courts should accept cases over civil disputes caused 
by monopoly acts if the plaintiff directly brought a civil action. In Nanjing Songxu 
Co., Ltd. v. Samsung China Co., Ltd. concerning jurisdiction objection over 
monopoly disputes,
8 the applicant sued against the defendant for its monopoly 
actions such as selling products at unreasonably high prices, forcing conditional 
sales and splitting sales market with vertical monopoly agreements. The 
defendant raised objection to the court’s jurisdiction on the ground that the parties 
had reached arbitration agreement on the disputes. The Nanjing Intermediate 
People’s Court for the first instance held that though anti-monopoly disputes were 
arbitrable under the Arbitration Law, the arbitration agreement was invalid since 
the parties had reached no agreement on the arbitration commission with two 
distribution agreements concerning the monopoly actions involved in this case 
referring both CIETAC and the Beijing Arbitration Commission for arbitration. 
Upon appealing by the defendant, the Jiangsu Higher People’s Court held that 
China currently had explicit legal stipulation on arbitrating monopoly disputes 
which had been classified as non-arbitral in various nations for long due to its 
strong nature of public policy. The SPC Provisions on Several Issues concerning 
the Law Application in the Trial of Civil Disputes Caused by Monopoly Acts only 
stipulated on resolution through civil litigation and on courts with jurisdiction 
8 (2015) Su Zhi Min Xia Zhong Zi No. 00072 Civil Ruling by Jiangsu Higher People’s Court (on 29 
August 2016).


96
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
especially. This case involved public interest, influencing not only the relationship 
between the defendant and its distributors but also all the customers using 
Samsung products. The privity of contract was broken. Thus, the disputes could 
not be solved through arbitration according to the arbitration agreement.
The features shown by cases in the 2016 concerning determination of the validity 
of foreign-related and HMT-related arbitration agreements are as follows. First, 
the people’s courts follow the way of determining the applicable law of foreign-
related arbitration agreements before determining both the form and substance 
validity of the arbitration agreements under the applicable law, which is highly 
consistent with the judicial review situation in 2015. Secondly, the people’s 
courts concluded a number of cases with foreign laws as the applicable law of 
the arbitration agreements and ensured proper application of such laws through 
foreign law proof by the parties’ evidence, court’s own ascertainment and foreign 
law identifying institutions. It can also be seen that Chinese courts have made 
initial achievements in constructing foreign law identifying platforms. Thirdly, 
the courts, when interpreting arbitration agreements, tried their best to confirm 
the validity of the agreements, realizing parties’ arbitration intent to the most. 
Fourthly, the courts emphasized parties’ good faith and the principle of estoppel. 
Specific behavior in arbitration proceedings may be presumed as parties’ 
arbitration agreement in the absence of a written one. Fifthly, there were different 
views on the arbitrability of new-type disputes involving public interest such as 
monopoly disputes. The courts made certain policy consideration on retaining 
the importance of domestic courts’ hearing disputes involving public interest and 


97
CHAPTER 3
facilitating the ADR resolution of commercial disputes. Legislative and judicial 
propositions for setting explicit and detailed judicial review standards concerning 
the arbitrability of monopoly disputes were put forward as well. 
From the results of the 2016 cases concerning determination of the validity of 
foreign-related and HMT-related arbitration agreements, reasons other than lack 
of arbitrability that led to the invalidity of the arbitration agreements include the 
following: When the applicable law of the arbitration agreement was PRC law and 
two or more arbitration institutions existed at the chosen place of arbitration, there 
was no clearly designated arbitration commission in the arbitration agreement.
9 
The arbitration clause in the charter party was not explicitly incorporated into the 
bill of lading while the standard terms of transport conditions on the back of the 
bill of lading could not constitute as the effective incorporation of such clause.
10
II. Annulment and Non-enforcement of Foreign-Related 
or HMT-Related Arbitral Awards
1. Determination of Foreign-related Elements
In Beijing Capital Co., Ltd. v. Microsoft Mobile (China) Investment Co., Ltd. 
concerning the application for revocation of an arbitral award,
11 the defendant, a 
9 The SPC Reply concerning the Confirmation of Validity of the Arbitral Clause in Hong Kong Bai Teng 
Trade Co, Ltd. v. Yunnan Huijia Import and Export Trade Co., Ltd. on the Request of Jiangsu Higer 
People’s Court [(2016) Zui Gao Fa Min Ta No. 10, 25 May 2016].
10 The SPC Reply concerning the Confirmation of Validity of the Arbitral Clause in Shangdong Provincial 
Light Industry Supply & Marketing General Corp. v. Laredo Shipping Company [(2016) Zui Gao Fa Min 
Ta No. 20, 15 March 2016.
11 (2015) Er Zhong Min Te Zi No. 13516 Civil Ruling by Beijing Second Intermediate People’s Court (on 
16 February 2016).


98
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
wholly foreign-invested company engaged in direct investment in China, argued 
that Article 70 of the Arbitration Law and other legal provisions on foreign-related 
arbitration should apply in the judicial review since foreign-related elements 
were involved in this case. Referring to Article 522 of the SPC Interpretation 
on the Application of the PRC Civil Procedure Law that "[U]nder any of the 
following circumstances, the people's court may determine a case as a foreign-
related civil case: (1) Either party or both parties are foreigners, stateless persons, 
foreign enterprises or organizations. (2) The habitual residence of either party 
or both parties is located outside the territory of the People's Republic of China. 
(3) The subject matter is outside the territory of the People's Republic of China. 
(4) The legal fact that leads to the establishment, change or termination of civil 
relationship occurs outside the territory of the People's Republic of China. (5) Any 
other circumstance under which a case may be determined as a foreign-related 
civil case," the court, considering that both parties were Chinese legal persons 
while the main legal relationship and relevant legal facts all occurred in the 
territory of the PRC, ascertained that the judicial review should be in accordance 
with Article 58 of the Arbitration Law since this case involved no foreign-related 
element and was concerning the application for revocation of a domestic arbitral 
award.
2. Scope of Judicial Review of Arbitration
In Yunnan Yuntianhua Guoji Chemical Ltd. v. Bangladesh M/Smosharaf Brothers 
concerning the application for revocation of an arbitral award,
12 the applicant 
12 (2016) Jing 04 Min Te No.32 Civil Ruling by Beijing Fourth Intermediate People’s Court (on 25 August 


99
CHAPTER 3
claimed that the factfinding and award were completely wrong due to the 
serious procedural defect resulted from the tribunal’s failure in determining the 
identity of Director Z of the third party M/Sunionmer Cantile Ltd. In addition, 
the tribunal seriously breached the arbitration rules in rejecting its judicial 
authentication application and evidence production application, resulting in 
unclear fact finding and a wrong award. The court ascertained that the first 
ground of the applicant was not a procedural issue for the courts to review over 
foreign-related arbitration cases, but a substantive issue in hearing the case. The 
second ground was not within the scope of judicial review either as it was within 
the scope of the tribunal’s power in hearing the arbitration case while both the 
judicial authentication application and the evidence production application were 
substantive issues of the case and the tribunals may decide whether to accept 
judicial authentication applications or evidence production applications under the 
applicable arbitration rules.
3. Issues of Arbitration Procedures
1) Effective Service
In U.S. Pepsi Kai International Co., Ltd. v. Anhui Handfull International Trading 
(Group) Co., Ltd. concerning the application for revocation of an arbitral 
award,
13 the applicant alleged violation by the defendant of Article 8 of the 2012 
CIETAC Arbitration Rules regarding service procedure since the defendant had 
2016).
13 (2015) Si Zhong Min (Shang) Te Zi No.146 Civil Ruling by Beijing Fourth Intermediate People’s Court 
(on 18 April 2016).


100
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
intentionally concealed the applicant’s address, resulting in the CIETAC’s failure 
in taking reasonable measures such as inquiring its registered address, enquiring 
the defendant’s representing attorney in the litigation against the applicant in 
U.S. or contacting the U.S. court for service, and thus leading to the unsuccessful 
service of the documents. The court ascertained that No.9831 was the service 
address agreed on by the parties in the contract. The applicant, after changing 
its administrative office address, business address and postal address, had not 
informed the defendant of the changes. It was shown in the testimony of the 
U.S. attorney Richaid Lubetzky and in the proof from the U.S. post office that 
the No.9831 postal address and mailing address of the applicant had not been 
changed at the post office. Even if the applicant had applied for the change of 
postal address and mailing address in October 2013, the original address would 
have remained effective within 18 months after the post office received the 
application under relevant postal service laws of the U.S. Therefore, No.9831 was 
still an effective service address when the CIETAC sent the arbitration documents 
to the applicant in September 2014. According to Article 8 of the 2012 CIETAC 
Arbitration Rules, any arbitration correspondence to a party shall be deemed to 
have been properly served on the party if sent to its place of business, place of 
registration, domicile, habitual residence or mailing address. It was stated in the 
contract that No.9831 was the applicant’s address. Therefore, the CIETAC’s 
correspondence to the applicant should be deemed to have been properly served. 
The applicant had no sufficient ground for its application of setting aside the 
arbitral award for the alleged illegal service procedure. 


101
CHAPTER 3
2) Handling of Counterclaims by the Tribunal
In Shenyang Minxiang Technology Co., Ltd. v. Hanyu Information Technology 
Co., Ltd. & MPC Co., Ltd. (MPC) concerning the application for revocation 
of an arbitral award,
14 the applicant alleged that the CIETAC’s acceptance of 
MPC’s counterclaims was not in accordance with the 2012 CIETAC Arbitration 
Rules since MPC had filed counterclaims beyond the specified time period and 
failed to pay the arbitration fee within the specified time. The court held that 
the applicant, as the claimant in the arbitration case, amended its claims on 24 
December 2014, 4 months after the delivery of the arbitration documents to both 
parties on 18 August 2014. For the sake of fairness, MPC, as the respondent, 
should be entitled to submit new defense or file counterclaims against the changed 
claims. Otherwise, MPC would have been deprived of the procedural right to 
submit counterclaims against the amended claims. Furthermore, the arbitration 
commission had the power to examine whether the procedural requirements had 
been met or to make decisions on the acceptance of the counterclaims. In this case, 
the arbitration commission decided to accept MPC’s counterclaims and notified 
the parties thereof after MPC had paid the arbitration fee for its counterclaims 
within the specified time, thus equally protecting the parties’ procedural rights. 
The applicant had no sufficient legal or factual ground for its allegation of the 
tribunal’s violation of legal procedure for accepting counterclaims. It also failed 
to prove that it had raised any objection thereto during the arbitration proceeding. 
Therefore, the application for revocation of the arbitral award was dismissed. 
14 (2016) Jing 04 Min Te No. 26 Civil Ruling by Beijing Fourth Intermediate People’s Court (22 December 
2016).


102
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
3) Application of Other Arbitration Rules 
In Beijing Capital Co., Ltd. v. Microsoft Mobile (China) Investment Co., Ltd. 
concerning the application for revocation of an arbitral award,
15 the applicant 
alleged that the arbitration proceeding was illegal since CIETAC applied the 
1998 ICC Rules, which was against the party autonomy and Article 4 of the 2005 
CIETAC Arbitration Rules, had ignored the parties’ agreement on mediation 
rules, which was against the PRC mandatory laws and contradictory to the 
application condition of the 1998 ICC Rules, had wrongfully replaced the ICC 
Arbitration Court and its staff with CIETAC and its staff, and had failed to submit 
the terms of reference and award to the ICC Arbitration Court for scrutiny. The 
court ascertained that the parties had agreed to submit disputes to CIETAC to 
be heard by a tribunal formed by three arbitrators (excluding Finland or Chinese 
citizens) under the ICC Mediation and Arbitration Rules in Beijing for a final 
award in the Equity Transfer Agreement in November 2005. CIETAC sent notices 
of arbitration to both parties. The applicant replied to CIETAC, requesting for the 
application of the current CIETAC Arbitration Rules since the ICC Mediation and 
Arbitration Rules had lost its efficacy. The defendant stated in its response that 
CIETAC should apply the 1998 ICC Arbitration Rules but it should also apply the 
1988 ICC Mediation and Arbitration Rules if so decided by CIETAC. CIETAC 
decided to apply the 1998 ICC Arbitration Rules in 2011, deeming that the agreed 
arbitration rules in the contract did not refer to the ICC Mediation and Arbitration 
Rules since it was not the effective rules at the time of contract execution while 
15 (2015) Er Zhong Min Te Zi No. 13516 Civil Ruling by Beijing Second Intermediate People’s Court (on 
16 February 2016).


103
CHAPTER 3
the reference to the ICC Mediation and Arbitration Rules was in conflict with 
the agreement on the application of "the effective arbitration rules at the time" 
concerning the appointment of arbitrators. The 1998 ICC Arbitration Rules 
effective at the time of contract execution should apply to this case except certain 
parts which were non-applicable or inconsistent with the PRC mandatory laws 
with reference to Article 6 thereof. The duties of the ICC Court of Arbitration, the 
Chairman thereof, the Vice-Chairman, the Secretary-General, and the Secretariat 
should be fulfilled by CIETAC, CIETAC Chairman, the Vice-Chairman, the 
Secretary-General and the Secretariat respectively. The court ascertained that 
both parties recognized the 1988 ICC Mediation and Arbitration Rules had lost its 
efficacy at the time of contract execution and the current effective ICC rules was 
the 1998 ICC Arbitration Rules. It is stipulated in Article 4.2 of the 2005 CIETAC 
Arbitration Rules that "[W]here the parties have agreed to refer their dispute 
to CIETAC for arbitration, they shall be deemed to have agreed to arbitration 
in accordance with these Rules. Where the parties agree to refer their dispute 
to CIETAC for arbitration but have agreed on a modification of these Rules or 
have agreed on the application of other arbitration rules, the parties’ agreement 
shall prevail unless such agreement is inoperative or in conflict with a mandatory 
provision of the law applicable to the arbitral proceedings’. CIETAC had the right 
to decide on the understanding and application of the arbitration rules designated 
in the arbitral clause since the parties had both accepted the jurisdiction of 
CIETAC but argued over the applicable arbitration rules and could not reach any 
new agreement thereon. In this case, CIETAC’s discretion over such application 
was not illegal. Both parties had confirmed receiving CIETAC decision on the 


104
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
application of the 1998 ICC Arbitration Rules and the parties expressly chosen 
CIETAC as the arbitration institution for dispute resolution. No matter which 
arbitration rules was applied in the case, CIETAC’s administration over the case 
as the sole arbitration institution should not be influenced. Therefore, CIETAC’s 
collecting arbitration fees and scrutinizing the award were not illegal. The 
applicant’s allegation of CIETAC’s wrong application of arbitration rules and 
illegal procedure was dismissed.  
4) Arbitrator’s Obligation of Disclosure of Conflict of Interest
In Nexthill Investments Limits v. Beijing Huihong Rea Estate Development Co., 
Ltd. & Beijing Zhaotai Group Co., Ltd. concerning the application for setting 
aside an arbitral award,
16 the applicant alleged that the arbitrator co-appointed 
by the respondents should have disclosed the fact that he had been appointed by 
each defendant in two previous arbitration cases which were closely connected to 
the present case. Finding that it is stipulated in Article 5 of the CIETAC Code of 
Conduct for Arbitrators that "[I]f an arbitrator believes that he or she has a stake or 
other interests in a case that may prevent the case from being heard in an impartial 
manner, the arbitrator shall disclose his or her relations with the party in question, 
for instance, immediate family member, debt relationship, property and monetary 
relations, and business or commercial cooperation relations, and shall request for 
withdraw voluntarily," and considering that the arbitrator had no relation with 
the defendants including immediate family member, debt relationship, property 
16 (2016) Jing 04 Min Te No.40 Civil Ruling by Beijing Fourth Intermediate People’s Court (on 29 
September 2016).


105
CHAPTER 3
and monetary relations, and business or commercial cooperation relations, the 
court held that the arbitrator did not need to make the disclosure or withdraw 
from the case. The two previous appointments in other cases by the defendant 
were result of the defendants’ exercising their rights under the Arbitration Rules, 
which did not prohibit parties from appointing the same arbitrator or arbitrators 
from accepting the same party’s appointment for different cases. Therefore, the 
applicant had no sufficient factual or legal ground for its application to set aside 
the arbitral award.
In IPC Laboratories Ltd. v. Huatai Property (an Indian company) & Casualty 
Insurance Co. Ltd. Chongqing Branch concerning the application for setting aside 
an arbitral award,
17 the applicant alleged that the presiding arbitrator, Li, violated 
Article 29 of the 2012 CIETAC Arbitration Rules for not disclosing what he 
should have disclosed. The defendant argued that Li’s practice in the insurance 
industry had no impact on the arbitration proceeding. The court held that the 
applicant had no sufficient evidence to prove that there existed conflict of interest 
between the presiding arbitrator and the defendant, and dismissed the application 
for setting aside the arbitral award. 
5) Multi-party Arbitration
In Finland Varo Co., Ltd. v. Beijing Kunding International Investment Co., Ltd. 
concerning the application for revocation of an arbitral award,
18 the applicant 
17 (2016) Jing 04 Min Te No.15 Civil Ruling by Beijing Fourth Intermediate People’s Court (on 30 March 
2016).
18 (2016) Jing 04 Min Te No.9 Civil Ruling by Beijing Fourth Intermediate People’s Court (on 10 January 
2016).


106
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
alleged that the tribunal had violated legal procedure by consolidating arbitrations 
without the consent of the parties when three independent arbitration agreements 
were signed by the defendant respectively with the applicant, Guangzhou Savcor 
Co., Ltd. and Beijing Savcor Co., Ltd., and when the 2012 CIETAC Arbitration 
Rules stipulated that consolidation of arbitrations shall be made either upon the 
parties’ request or by the tribunals with all the parties’ agreement. The court held 
that as there was a CIETAC arbitration clause in each of the three contracts, i.e. 
the House and Land Cooperation Framework Agreement between the defendant 
and Beijing Savcor Co., Ltd. and the Letters of Guarantee issued by the applicant 
and Guangzhou Savcor Co., Ltd., CIETAC did not violate the Civil Procedure 
Law or the Arbitration Law in taking the three agreements as a whole and 
consolidating arbitrations in one procedure for resolution of the disputes between 
the parties based on the close connection between the principal contract and 
accessory contracts and the inseparability of the facts and legal relations therein. 
6) Appointment of Arbitrators
In Finland Varo Co., Ltd. v. Beijing Kunding International Investment Co., 
Ltd. concerning the application for revocation of an arbitral award,
19 another 
application ground made by the above same applicant was that there had been no 
foreign arbitrator appointed to protect the procedural rights of the applicant as it 
was stipulated in Article 28 of the 2012 CIETAC Arbitration Rules that "[W]hen 
appointing arbitrators pursuant to these Rules, the Chairman of CIETAC shall 
19 (2016) Jing 04 Min Te No.9 Civil Ruling by Beijing Fourth Intermediate People’s Court (on 10 January 
2016).


107
CHAPTER 3
take into consideration the law applicable to the dispute, the place of arbitration, 
the language of arbitration, the nationalities of the parties, and any other factor(s) 
the Chairman considers relevant," and the tribunal was formed by three Chinese 
arbitrators, which resulted in non-conformity of the procedure with the arbitration 
rules and violation of legal procedure. The court held that the provision of Article 
28 of the CIETAC Rules was regarding the elements for consideration in the 
appointment of arbitrators. The place of arbitration of this case was Beijing where 
CIETAC is located in, the applicable law was the PRC law, and the arbitration 
language was Chinese, while the places of registration of the parties except 
the applicant were in the PRC territory. The applicant had neither appointed 
an arbitrator within the specified time period, nor participated in the hearing to 
express its opinion regarding the appointment of arbitrators. The procedure for the 
appointment of arbitrators was appropriate and the hearing of the case by the three 
Chinese arbitrators did not constitute violation of the CIETAC Arbitration Rules. 
4. Awards beyond Scope of Arbitration
In U.S. GCC Group v. Yonghua Petrochemical Col, Ltd. concerning the 
application for revocation of an arbitral award,
20 the applicant alleged that the 
award was rendered beyond the scope of arbitration since Item 4 in the award 
involved legal relationship outside the case, i.e., a disputes arising out of the 
Drilling Project Construction Contract signed by and between the defendant 
and Yonggang International Co., Ltd. which should had been submitted to the 
20 (2016) Jing 04 Min Te No.36 Civil Ruling by Beijing Fourth Intermediate People’s Court (on 20 
October 2016).


108
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Guangzhou Arbitration Commission as agreed in the Contract. The court held 
that Item 4 in the award was made on the defendant’s counterclaim. The tribunal 
had determined the nature of both the drilling project costs paid by the defendant 
to the third party Yonggang International Co., Ltd. and the fines paid by the 
defendant to the Republic of Congo government as loss occurred in the ex-
regional exploration and development project. The tribunal’s award on splitting 
such loss in the ratio of 3:7 between the parties based on Article 7.4.2 and Article 
10 of the "Warrant of Defects" of the two Technical Service Contracts was within 
the scope of the disputes arising out of the performances of the two contracts. The 
award was neither beyond the defendant’s counterclaim nor beyond the scope 
of arbitration under the arbitration agreement. Therefore, the application for 
revocation of the arbitral award was dismissed.
In Dongcheng International Trade Co., Ltd. v. Swiss Gault Group Co., Ltd. 
concerning the application for revocation of an arbitral award,
21 the applicant 
alleged that the award on the demurrage and attorney fee was beyond the scope of 
arbitration since there was no agreement thereon in the Sales Contract involved 
in this case. The court held that the parties had agreed in the Sales Contract that 
all disputes relevant thereto should be submitted to the CIETAC if no settlement 
could be made through negotiation, which showed the consensus of the parties 
of submitting all disputes relevant to the contract to arbitration. The demurrage 
occurred due to the buyer’s breach of contract for its delay in accepting the goods 
during the contract performance. Thus, the demurrage dispute was relevant to 
21 (2016) Jing 04 Min Te No.13 Civil Ruling by Beijing Fourth Intermediate People’s Court (on 18 July 
2016).


109
CHAPTER 3
the contract. According to Article 50.2 of the Arbitration Rules of CIETAC, the 
arbitral tribunal has the power to decide in the arbitral award, having regard to the 
circumstances of the case, that the losing party shall compensate the winning party 
for the expenses reasonably incurred by it in pursuing the case. Thus, the decision 
over the attorney fee was within the tribunal’s power. The tribunal’s award on 
demurrage and attorney fee was in accordance with the contractual provision and 
the arbitration rules, and within the scope of the arbitration agreement. 
5. Offsetting Defence in Enforcement Proceedings
In Calorifer AG v. Shuangliang Eco-energy Systems Co., Ltd. concerning the 
application for enforcement of a foreign-related arbitral award,
22 the defendant’s 
ground for non-enforcement was that the applicant had due monetary debt to 
the defendant under the award. It is stipulated in Article 99 of the PRC Contract 
Law that ‘[W]here the parties are liable to one another for obligations that are 
due, and if the type and nature of the subject matter of such obligations are the 
same, any party may offset its own obligation against the obligation of the other 
party’. Llinks Law Offices had sent the applicant a lawyer’s letter on behalf of 
the defendant regarding the offset. As to the remaining debt after offsetting, the 
defendant had initiated arbitration which was still in progress. Therefore, the 
defendant should not make payment to the applicant. The court held that the offset 
alleged by the defendant was not non-enforcement defence but rather a defence on 
the completion of the payment of the debt. After the defendant sent the lawyer’s 
22 (2016) Su 02 Min Te No.138 Civil Ruling by Jiangsu Province Wuxi City Intermediate People’s Court (on 
2 November 2016).


110
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
letter regarding offset on 22 April 2016, the applicant applied for the enforcement 
of the arbitral award on 13 June 2016, showing the applicant’s dissent to the 
defendant’s debt offsetting notice. Therefore, the determination on the offset of 
the defendant’s debt under the award could only be made through substantive 
trial. This case involved judicial review over a foreign-related arbitral award 
and the court could not review substantial issues regarding the debt offsetting 
but could only review procedural issues to decide whether the award should be 
enforced. Thus, the defendant’s defence was dismissed. The court ruled to enforce 
the arbitral award since there was neither non-enforcement situation as stipulated 
in Article 274 of the PRC Civil Procedure Law nor violation of public interest. 
6. Re-Arbitration
In the case concerning application for revocation of an arbitral award by Liu 
X and Zhang X,
23 the award was beyond the scope of arbitration under Article 
274.1.4 of the PRC Civil Procedure Law since the tribunal had determined and 
awarded on the liquidation of the joint venture and the assets after liquidation. 
The SPC approved the Beijing Higher People’s Court’s request for notifying 
the tribunal to re-arbitrate according to Article 61 of the Arbitration Law, which 
stipulated that ‘[I]f, after accepting an application for setting aside an arbitration 
award, the people's court considers that the case may be re-arbitrated by the 
arbitration tribunal, it shall notify the tribunal that it shall re-arbitrate the case 
within a certain time limit and shall rule to stay the setting-aside procedure. If the 
23 The SPC Reply on Beijing Higher People’s Court’s Request regarding the Case concerning the 
Application for Revocation of an Arbitral Award by Liu X and Zhang X [(2016) Zui Gao Fa Min Ta No. 
29, 8 April 2016].


111
CHAPTER 3
arbitration tribunal refuses to re-arbitrate the case, the people's court shall rule to 
resume the setting-aside procedure’.
It can be seen through the cases in 2016 concerning application for revocation or 
non-enforcement of foreign-related or HMT-related arbitral awards that the main 
grounds for revocation or non-enforcement are still the common ones such as 
the violation of the arbitration rules, awards beyond the scope of arbitration, etc. 
Attention needs to be paid to issues such as the interpretation of the arbitration 
rules, the appointment of arbitrators, the arbitrators’ obligation in disclosing 
conflicts of interest and the consolidation of arbitrations with multi-parties, etc. 
Furthermore, the court’s practice of allowing certain arbitral awards with defects 
to be re-arbitrated reflects the value orientation of the court in handling judicial 
review flexibly, avoiding waste of dispute resolution resources so as to reduce the 
burden of lawsuit for the parties. 
III. Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign and HMT 
Arbitral Awards
1. Scope of Review and Burden of Proof under Article V of New 
York Convention
In Noble Resources Co., Ltd. v. Hubei Qinghe Textile Joint Stock Co., Ltd. 
concerning the application for recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitral 
award,
24 the defendant, having no objection to the facts alleged by the applicant, 
24 (2015) E Yichang Zhong Min Ren Zi No.00001 Civil Ruling by Hubei Province Yichang City 
Intermediate People’s Court (on 5 July 2016).


112
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
alleged that it could not perform the award since it had been bankrupted and 
liquidated. The Hubei Higher People’s Court reported its decision to refuse the 
recognition and enforcement of part of the award on the ground that it was beyond 
the scope of arbitration. The SPC replied that, in accordance with Article V of 
the New York Convention, when reviewing arbitral awards for the circumstances 
of non-recognition or non-enforcement under Article V(1) thereof, the people’s 
court should only make the review upon the party’s request and no review should 
be made for matters not requested by the party while review can be made on the 
court’s own initiative for circumstances regarding violation of arbitrability or 
public policy under Article V(2). In this case, as the defendant had not alleged for 
non-recognition or non-enforcement circumstances under Article V(1) of the New 
York Convention, the court lacked legal grounds for making the reviewing on its 
own initiative and for non-recognition and non-enforcement of part of the award.
25 
Subsequently, the Intermediate People’s Court of Yichang, Hubei Province ruled 
to recognize and enforce the arbitral award rendered by the International Cotton 
Association (the ICA).  
In Yuancheng Wireless Information Technology Co., Ltd. v. Beijing Guangxin 
Jiashi Technology Co., Ltd. & Detai (China) Group Co., Ltd,
26 the court held that 
parties should request and bear the burden of proof for the five circumstances of 
non-recognition or non-enforcement of arbitral awards under Article V(1) of the 
New York Convention while the court should review on its own initiative over the 
25 (2016) Zui Gao Fa Min Ta No.12 Reply by the SPC on 20 May 2016.
26 (2014) San Zhong Min (Shang) Te Zi No.12398 Civil Ruling by Beijing Third Intermediate People’s 
Court (on 28 April 2016).


113
CHAPTER 3
two circumstances for non-recognition and non-enforcement of arbitral awards 
under Article V(2) thereof. Thus, the burden of proof for the existence of the 
circumstances for non-recognition and non-enforcement under Article V(1) of the 
New York Convention in this case rested on the defendant. The defendant should 
bear the legal consequence for failing its burden of proof since it had been legally 
summoned by the court but failed to participate in the hearing or submitting its 
statement of defense. The court ruled to recognize and enforce the arbitral award. 
2. Validity of Arbitration Agreements
In ECOM Agroindustrial Co., Ltd. v. Shenzhen Guotaihua Investment Co., Ltd. 
concerning the application for recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitral 
award,
27 the defendant alleged that the recognition or enforcement application 
should be rejected under Article V(1)(e) of the New York Convention since the 
arbitration agreement was invalid and the applicant was incapable of signing 
the cotton sales contract. The court held that Chinese laws should apply to the 
applicant’s capacity under jus sanguinis. It is stipulated in Article 36 of the 
PRC General Principles of the Civil Law that ‘[A] legal person's capacity for 
civil rights and capacity for civil conduct shall begin when the legal person is 
established and shall end when the legal person terminates’. Thus, the applicant 
was capable of engaging in civil activities such as signing the sales contract, the 
sales confirmation and the arbitration agreement. The sales contract was signed 
on 3 May 2012, providing for arbitration under the ICA Bylaws and Rules. The 
27 (2014) Shen Zhong Fa She Wai Chu Zi No.60 Civil Ruling by Shenzhen Intermediate People’s Court (on 
25 May 2016).


114
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
arbitration agreement was valid since it was in accordance with Article 6 of the 
1996 U.K. Arbitration Act while U.K. laws were applicable thereto. Meanwhile, 
the validity of the arbitration agreement should not be influenced by the validity 
of the sales contract or the sales confirmation under Article 7 of the 1996 U.K. 
Arbitration Act regarding the independence of arbitration agreements. Thus, the 
defendant’s defence against the tribunal’s jurisdiction could not be established.
In Compass Cotton Co., Ltd. v. Shangdong Yanggu Shunda Textile Co., Ltd. 
concerning the application for recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitral 
award,
28 the defendant alleged that the arbitration agreement was invalid because 
there was no agreed arbitration institution but only agreed rules and laws 
applicable to the arbitration in the sales contract of the case. The court held that 
the parties agreed in the arbitration clause of the contract that the ICA’s effective 
Bylaws and Rules should be regarded as part of the contract, disputes should 
be settled through friendly negotiation or arbitration under the ICA Bylaws and 
Rules of association, and U.K. laws should be applicable thereto. The parties 
had reached arbitration agreement under Article 6.2 of the 1996 Arbitration Act 
stipulating that ‘[T]he reference in an agreement to a written form of arbitration 
clause or to a document containing an arbitration clause constitutes an arbitration 
agreement if the reference is such as to make that clause part of the agreement’. 
There were clear stipulations on arbitration and arbitration procedures in the ICA 
Bylaws and Rules. Thus, the ICA should be the arbitration institution of this case. 
The defendant’s allegation that the arbitration agreement was invalid because 
28 (2014) Liao Min Wu Chu Zi No.4 Civil Ruling by Shangdong Province Liaocheng City Intermediate 
People’s Court (on 7 July 2016).


115
CHAPTER 3
there had been no agreed arbitration institution was groundless. 
In Olam International Ltd. v. Wuxi Natural Textile Industrial Co., Ltd. concerning 
the application for recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitral award,
29 the 
court held that the applicant had submitted the notarized sales contract, the notice 
for contract amendments, the contract amendment agreement and corresponding 
translation. These documents showed that QC Company and the defendant signed 
3 cotton sales contracts on 9 and 17 December 2010, agreeing to submit all 
relevant disputes to arbitration under the ICA Bylaws and Rules for final awards. 
Thereafter, the applicant, as the holding company of QC Company, replaced it as 
the seller and sent the notice for contract amendments and the amended contracts 
to the defendant. Though the defendant had not signed the notice or the amended 
contracts, the defendant and the applicant amended certain parts of the contracts 
and signed the contract amendment agreement on 26 July 2012, confirming 
the execution of the above contracts and the status of performance, amending 
stipulations on the letter of credit, the shipment time and the price, and agreeing 
that, if the defendant failed to perform the agreement, the applicant would be 
entitled to submit the dispute to the ICA. Thus, the court found the parties had 
entered into a valid arbitration agreement.
3. Appropriate Notification in Arbitration Proceedings
In Glencore International Co., Ltd. v. Zhejiang Qiying Energy & Chemical Co., 
Ltd. concerning the application for recognition and enforcement of a foreign 
29 (2015) Xi Shang Wai Zhong Shen Zi No.4 Civil Ruling by Jiangsu Province Wuxi City Intermediate 
People’s Court (on 15 March 2016).


116
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
arbitral award,
30 the defendant alleged the arbitration procedure violated the 
arbitration rules since it did not have a chance to defend itself when it was not 
properly notified regarding the appointment of arbitrators and the arbitration 
procedure, furthermore, the tribunal had contacted the parties directly. The court 
held that the parties had agreed in the contract that all notifications, requests or 
other contacts according to or relevant to the contract from either the buyer or 
the seller should be made in English in writing and sent to the addresses stated 
in the introduction of the contract by fax or email and/or registered mail or 
correspondent. The tribunal had notified the defendant of the formation of tribunal 
and other procedural matters by fax, email and other ways. Other procedural 
documents including the notice of conference meeting and the submission of 
defence had been serviced not only by email but also by post to the defendant’s 
actual business address. The defendant had made no express indication that 
its email address was not in use during the arbitration process. In addition, the 
tribunal, being made aware that the contract address was not the business address 
of the defendant, serviced the documents to its actual business address after 
verification thereof. The foregoing showed that the tribunal had exhausted all 
reasonable means of liaison and service and performed its due diligent notification 
obligation. The defence by the defendant of not being notified of the appointment 
of arbitrators and the arbitration procedure was not sustained.
In ECOM Agroindustrial Co., Ltd. v. Shenzhen Guotaihua Investment Co., Ltd. 
concerning the application for recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitral 
30 (2014) Zhe Yong Zhong Que Zi No.1 Civil Ruling by Zhejiang Province Ningbo City Intermediate 
People’s Court (on 24 June 2016).


117
CHAPTER 3
award,
31 the defendant alleged that it did not have a chance to make a defence 
due to the tribunal’s failure of sending the notices of appointment of arbitrators 
and the formation of tribunal to it according to the U.K. laws and the arbitration 
rules. The court held that the arbitration notices and documents had been sent 
to the defendant’s registered address in Shenzhen, China by email or courier. 
Under Article 76 of the U.K. 1996 Arbitration Act, parties are free to agree on the 
manner of service of any notice or document, and in absence of any agreement, 
arbitration notices or documents may be serviced by any effective means, 
including by post to the registered office. It is stipulated in the ICA Bylaws 
and Rules that notices, documents and any other forms of correspondence may 
be delivered by mail, prepaid postage or any other internationally recognized 
delivery method, or by email. Accordingly, this case involved no circumstance 
for non-recognition and non-enforcement under Article V(1)(b) of the New York 
Convention. 
In Joint Embossed Egypt Cotton Exporting Company v. Wuxi Natural Green 
Fibre Technology Co., Ltd. concerning the application for recognition and 
enforcement of a foreign arbitral award,
32 the defendant alleged that it had not 
been appropriately notified of the appointment of arbitrators. The Jiangsu Higher 
People’s Court stated in its request for the SPC’s reply that the recognition and 
enforcement should be refused under Article V(1)(b) of the New York Convention 
since the procedural rights of the defendant had been influenced for not being 
31 (2014)Shen Zhong Fa She Wai Chu Zi No.60 Civil Ruling by Guangdong Province Shenzhen City 
Intermediate People’s Court (on 25 May 2016).
32 (2013)Xi Shang Wai Zhong Shen Zi No.0005 Civil Ruling by Jiangsu Province Wuxi City Intermediate 
People’s Court (on 9 November 2016).


118
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
able to challenge the appointed arbitrators after Alexander Exporter’s Association 
had appointed arbitrators but failed to inform the defendant thereof. The SPC 
replied
33 that the formation of the tribunal and other procedural matters should 
be in line with the internal regulations of the Association because the parties had 
agreed in the contract on the application of the Association’s internal regulations. 
It is stipulated in Article 100 of the Association’s internal regulations that the 
director shall appoint three arbitrators from the management committee members 
randomly, avoiding any conflict of interest. The New York Convention, though 
containing mandatory provisions on the appropriate notification for appointment 
of arbitrators, does not refer to the situation under which the parties are not 
entitled to appoint arbitrators under the chosen arbitration rules. In this case, the 
defendant had raised no objection to the formation of the tribunal and submitted 
the statement of defence, which showed its implied acceptance of the tribunal 
formation. Thus, the defendant’s ground for non-recognition and non-enforcement 
could not be established. Subsequently, the Intermediate People’s Court of Wuxi, 
Jiangsu Province ruled to recognize and enforce the Association’s award. 
4. Qualification of Arbitration Agents
In Xcoal Energy and Resources Limited Partnership v. Zhongneng Binhai 
Electric Power Fuel Tianjin Co.,Ltd.,
34 the defendant alleged the tribunal’s invalid 
service of arbitration documents on Ms. Yang mentioned in the arbitral award on 
33 The SPC Reply on the Request for Joint Embossed Egypt Cotton Exporting Company v. Wuxi Natural 
Green Fibre Technology Co., Ltd. concerning the Application for Recognition and Enforcement of a 
Foreign Arbitral Award [(2016) Zui Gao Fa Min Ta No.32, 27 June 2016].
34 (2016)Jin 02 Xie Wai Ren No.4 Civil Ruling by Tianjin 2nd Intermediate People’s Court (on 26 
December 2016).


119
CHAPTER 3
the ground that though Yang was an employee of the defendant, she had no right 
to represent it in the arbitration proceeding. The court held that according to the 
statement in the award, Brandt Chan & Partners, the law firm entrusted by the 
defendant, notified the tribunal and the parties in December 2013 that it would 
no longer represent the defendant in handling matters relating to the arbitration 
case while Samantha Yang, i.e. Ms. Yang, would be the new contact appointed 
by the defendant. The tribunal had requested Ms. Samantha Yang to confirm 
her authorization from the defendant to handle the liaison and whether she had 
possessed a complete set of documents submitted by the parties to the tribunal 
previously. Meanwhile, the tribunal had requested the defendant to confirm 
whether there were persons other than Ms. Samantha Yang being authorized by 
the defendant for the liaison and whether it had entrusted other external legal 
consultants. The defendant, in its statement of defence in Chinese, had raised no 
objection to the identity of Ms. Yang. Thus, the defendant lacked factual basis for 
its allegation that Ms. Yang had no authorization to represent it in the arbitration 
case.
In Compass Cotton Co., Ltd. v. Shangdong Yanggu Shunda Textiles Co., Ltd.,
35 the 
defendant alleged that the application submitted by the applicant had only been 
signed by the applicant’s agent but not been sealed or signed by the applicant, 
which was not in accordance with the requirements on legal documents. The 
court ascertained that according to the notarized and certified power of attorney 
submitted by the applicant’s agent, the agent’s authority included applying for 
35 (2014)Liao Min Wu Chu Zi No.4 Civil Ruling by Shangdong Province Liaocheng City Intermediate 
People’s Court (on 7 July2016).


120
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards, draft, transferring or 
signing legal documents on behalf of the applicant, etc. Thus, the agent was 
entitled to submit the application for recognition of a foreign arbitral award on 
behalf of the applicant.
5. Arbitrability
In Tajco Co., Ltd. v. Yan Yan concerning the application for recognition 
and enforcement of a foreign arbitral award,
36 the defendant requested non-
recognition and non-enforcement of the award since the labour contract disputes 
involved could not be referred to commercial arbitration under the PRC laws. 
The court held that according to Article 2 of the SPC Notice on Implementing 
the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards 
Acceded to by China, China would apply the Convention only to disputes arising 
out of legal relationships, whether contractual or not, which are considered 
commercial under the national law of the PRC. The economic right and obligation 
relationship under the contract for the appointment of the general manager signed 
by the parties was commercial relationship mentioned in the Notice. Thus, the 
court ruled to recognize the award rendered in Denmark.
6. Awards Beyond Scope of Arbitration
In FSG Automotive Holding AG v. Wuhan Fanzhou Machinery Manufacturing 
Co., Ltd. concerning the application for recognition and enforcement of a foreign 
36 (2015)Shen Zhong Min Si Te Zi No.29 Civil Ruling by Liaoning Province Shenyang City Intermediate 
People’s Court (on 9 May 2016).


121
CHAPTER 3
arbitral award,
37 the defendant requested non-enforcement of the award since the 
award was rendered beyond the scope of arbitration, i.e. part of the award was 
beyond the arbitration claims as being against the claimant and the joint venture, 
while the termination of the joint venture contract and the dissolution of the joint 
venture were against the public policy of China. In addition, the defendant had 
no obligation of payment thereunder, so the award, with no specific and clear 
execution objectives, should not be enforced. The SPC confirmed to refuse the 
recognition and enforcement of part of the award in its reply at the Hubei Higher 
People’s Court’s request.
38 Accordingly, the Hubei Province Wuhan Intermediate 
People’s Court ruled that the arbitration matters agreed in Article 27.3 of the 
joint venture contract, i.e. the arbitration clause, included any disputes arising 
out of or relevant to the contract. First, the joint venture disputes included the 
parties’ differences and disputes in performing the articles of association. Thus, 
the confirmation of the validity of the joint venture articles of association in the 
award was not beyond the scope of arbitration. Secondly, the technology licencing 
contract was attached to the joint venture contract as per Articles 18 and 31 of the 
latter. If the joint venture seriously breached the former before the expiration of 
the contract term, the applicant may terminate the joint venture contract before 
its expiration. Thus, the confirmation of the validity of the technology licensing 
contract in the award was not beyond the scope of arbitration. Thirdly, Articles 
37 (2014) E Wu Han Zhong Min Shang Wai Chu Zi No.0005 Civil Ruling by Hubei Province Wuhan City 
Intermediate People’s Court (on 25 January 2016).
38 The SPC Reply on Request for FSG Automotive Holding AG v. Wuhan Fanzhou Machinery 
Manufacturing Co., Ltd. concerning the Application for Recognition and Enforcement of No. SCH-5239 
Award Rendered by Arbitral Centre of the Austrian Federal Economic Chamber [(2015) Min Si Ta Zi 
No.46, 24 December 2015].


122
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
29.1 and 29.2 of the joint venture contract stipulated the shareholders’ obligation 
to cooperate with each other in good faith to fulfil the obligations under the 
contract, including making the best effort to urge employees to fulfil relevant 
provisions of the contract. Items 5 (i), (ii) and (iii) of the award were regarding the 
defendant’s obligation of urging its representatives in the joint venture to comply 
with the joint venture contract and articles of association, involving disputes under 
Articles 29.1 and 29.2. The subject under such obligation was not the joint venture 
but the defendant. Thus, such disputes were joint venture disputes. Fourthly, Item 
5(iv) of the award resolved the receivables dispute between the applicant and the 
joint venture. Such disputes were not disputes over the joint venture but involved 
the joint venture which was not a party of the arbitration agreement. Thus, it 
was beyond the scope of arbitration. Item 9 of the award was on the defendant’s 
obligation of completing the necessary procedure for the application of dissolution 
through its representatives in the joint venture and nominating members of the 
liquidation team. Such dissolution or liquidation disputes were not within the 
scope of the arbitral clause in the joint venture contract. According to Article 90 
of the Regulation on the Implementation of the PRC Law on Chinese-Foreign 
Equity Joint Ventures, if a joint venture contract is terminated due to a party’s 
fundamental breach of contract, the party performing the contract shall submit 
the application for dissolution to the authority for approval. The dissolution of the 
joint venture in the event of breach of contract does not involve the shareholders’ 
obligation in assisting the application for approval. Considering the separability of 
the afore-mentioned items beyond the scope of arbitration and other award items, 


123
CHAPTER 3
the court refused to recognize and enforce Items 5(iv) and 9 of the award.
7. Public Policy
In Kema Group Co., Ltd. v. Jiangsu Textile Industry (Group) Import and Export 
Co., Ltd. concerning the application for recognition and enforcement of a foreign 
arbitral award,
39 the defendant alleged violation of China’s public policy since the 
contract relied on in the arbitral award was against the PRC laws and involved 
illegal transactions. The court ascertained that the parties had agreed in the 
contract to interpret the contract according to Singapore laws. The defendant 
failed to provide sufficient evidence to prove the violation of China’s public 
policy in the recognition and enforcement of the award involved in this case. 
Thus, the court ruled to recognize and enforce the SIAC award. 
In Olam International Ltd. v. Zibo Yinhua Cotton & Linen Co., Ltd.40 and Ecom 
Agroindustrial Co., Ltd. v. Shenzhen Guotai Investment Co., Ltd., which all 
concerning the application for recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitral 
award,
41 both courts held that whether a Chinese company had the state-owned 
trading business qualification for importing and exporting cotton or the import 
quota did not constitute a violation of public policy under Article V(2)(b) of the 
New York Convention.
39 (2016) Su 01 Xie Wai Ren No.4 Civil Ruling by Jiangsu Province Nanjing City Intermediate People’s 
Court (on 12 December 2016).
40 (2015) Zi Min Te Zi No.1 Civil Ruling by Shandong Province Zibo City Intermediate People’s Court (on 
19 January 2016).
41 (2014) Shen Zhong Fa She Wai Chu Zi No.60 Civil Ruling by Guangdong Province Shenzhen City 
Intermediate People’s Court (on 25 May 2016).


124
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
In J & DIB Co., Ltd. v. Tian Kuixiang & Tian Hao concerning the application for 
recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitral award,
42 the defendants alleged 
that the guarantee contract was invalid since loan among enterprises was invalid 
under the PRC laws. Furthermore, the failure of obtaining ex-territorial guarantee 
approval and registration in the State Administration of Foreign Exchanges for 
the guarantee contract constituted a violation of public policy of China. The Jilin 
Higher People’s Court held that the defendants’ exterritorial guarantee violated 
China’s mandatory foreign exchange administration policy and fell within the 
circumstances for non-recognition and non-enforcement under Article V(2)(b) 
of the New York Convention. The SPC stated in its reply
43 that the defendants’ 
exterritorial guarantee was not against mandatory provisions under the PRC 
laws and administrative regulations. The recognition and enforcement of the 
award should not be deemed as against China’s public policy. Subsequently, the 
Intermediate People’s Court of Yanbian, Jilin Province ruled to recognize the 
award rendered by Korean Commercial Arbitration Board.
In 2016, there was one case of non-enforcement of a Hong Kong arbitral award 
on the ground of public policy in 2016. In Swiss Ricor Holding AG v. Taizhou 
Haopu Investment Co., Ltd. concerning the application for recognition and 
enforcement of a Hong Kong arbitral Award,
44 the defendant alleged that the ICC 
42 (2015) Yan Zhong Min San Chu Zi No.858 Civil Ruling by Jilin Province Yanbian Korean Autonomous 
Prefecture Intermediate People’s Court (on 9 September 2016).
43 The SPC Reply on Request for J & DIB Co., Ltd. v. Tian Kuixiang & Tian Hao concerning the 
Application for Recognition and Enforcement of a Foreign Arbitral Award [(2016) Zui Gao Fa min Ta 
No.38, 27 May 2016].
44 (2015) Tai Zhong Shang Zhong Shen Zi No.00004 Civil Ruling by Jiangsu Province Taizhou City 
Intermediate People’s Court (on 2 June 2016).


125
CHAPTER 3
Court of Arbitration damaged the judicial sovereignty of Mainland China for 
rendering an award confirming the validity of the arbitration agreement which had 
been legally determined void by the people’s court in China. The SPC supported 
the Jiangsu Higher People’s Court’s request in the Reply for Non-enforcement of 
No.18925/CYK Arbitral Award by ICC Court of Arbitration.
45 The SPC held that 
the ruling that the arbitration clause was invalid by the Jiangsu Higher People’s 
Court, when hearing another dispute between the parties under the same contract 
on 11 December 2012 had taken legal effect. However, the arbitral award of the 
present case had been rendered by the arbitrators taking the arbitration clause as 
valid. The enforcement of such award in Mainland China would conflict with 
the above effective ruling of the people’s court and result in the violation of 
Mainland China’s public interest. The people’s courts could refuse to enforce the 
award involved in this case according to Article 7.1.3 of the SPC Arrangements 
on the Mutual Enforcement of Arbitral Awards between the Mainland and the 
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (the Arrangements). Subsequently, the 
Intermediate People’s Court of Taizhou, Jiangsu Province ruled not to enforce the 
award rendered by the ICC Court of Arbitration in Hong Kong according to the 
Arrangements. 
8. First Case Recognizing an Award by CIETAC Hong Kong 
Arbitration Centre 
In Ennead Architects International LLP v. Fuli Nanjing Real Estate Development 
45 (2016) Zui Gao Fa Min Ta No.8, the original case No. (2015) Su Shang Wai Zhong Shen Zi No.0002.


126
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Co., Ltd.,
46 concerning an application for the enforcement of an arbitral award 
rendered by the CIETAC Hong Kong Arbitration Centre, the defendant had no 
objection to the award and had fulfilled the obligation of paying the principal of 
the designing fee determined therein but failed to pay the interest. It intended 
to reach a settlement agreement with the applicant. The court, after reviewing 
the case, ruled to enforce the arbitral award according to Articles 1 and 7 of the 
Arrangements. 
This is the first case that involves enforcement by a Mainland court of an arbitral 
award rendered by an overseas branch of a Mainland arbitration commission. It 
is of great significance to the international development of Chinese arbitration 
commissions and the Belt and Road dispute-resolution initiative. It is clearly 
stated in the introduction of the Arrangements that ‘the courts of the Hong Kong 
SAR agree to enforce the arbitral awards made by mainland arbitral institutions 
in accordance with the Arbitration Law of the People's Republic of China, and 
the people's courts in the Mainland agree to enforce the arbitral awards made 
in the Hong Kong SAR in accordance with the Arbitration Ordinance of the 
Hong Kong SAR’. The PRC Arbitration Law has no stipulation on the nature 
or nationality of awards rendered by overseas branches of Chinese arbitration 
commissions. Thus, it is controversial whether awards rendered by Hong Kong 
branches of Mainland Chinese arbitration commissions are Hong Kong awards. 
The SPC Notice on Issues concerning the Execution of Hong Kong Arbitral 
46 (2016) Su 01 Ren Gang No.1 Civil Ruling by Jiangsu Province Nanjing City Intermediate People’s 
Court (on 13 December 2016).


127
CHAPTER 3
Awards in the Mainland[Fa (2009) No.415] stipulates that "[W]here a party 
applies to the people's court for executing a temporary arbitral award made in 
the Hong Kong Special Administration Region or an arbitral award made by the 
Arbitration Tribunal of the International Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong, 
the people's court should examine the application under the provisions of the 
Arrangements. Where the arbitral award does not fall under the circumstances as 
prescribed by Article 7 of the Arrangements, it may be executed in the Mainland." 
The Notice does not specify that awards rendered by Hong Kong branches of 
Mainland arbitration commissions shall be enforced under the Arrangements. 
The court applied the Arrangement in the enforcement of the award rendered by 
the CIETAC Hong Kong Arbitration Centre and determined such a award as a 
Hong Kong award in this case, which is in accordance with the introduction of 
the Arrangements and is undoubtedly correct. It not only establishes a practical 
basis for the introduction of the place of arbitration standard in determining the 
nature of arbitral awards rendered by overseas branches of Mainland arbitration 
commissions, but also effectively avoids conflicts between Hong Kong courts 
and Mainland courts over the supervision jurisdiction of such awards. It can be 
seen through the recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards in 2016 
that the people’s courts accurately applied the New York Convention, grasped the 
principle of the Convention in favouring award enforcement, made high-quality 
rulings on issues such as the validity of arbitration awards, appropriate notification 
in arbitration proceedings, the interpretation of arbitration rules, the determination 
of the scope of arbitration, arbitrability and public policy, and greatly enriched 


128
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
the case resources for the application of the Convention. In the enforcement of the 
Hong Kong awards, the People's court has an accurate understanding of the scope 
of the awards to which the Arrangements is applicable, and creates a favourable 
legal environment for the international development of Mainland arbitration 
commissions.  


129
CHAPTER 4
Chapter IV Development of 
China’s International Commercial 
Arbitration in Specific Sectors-
Promotion of Resolving Intellectual 
Property Disputes through 
Arbitration
With the deepening of China’s reform and opening up, the Communist Party 
and the Chinese government have attached great importance to the healthy and 
orderly development of the knowledge economy and issued important documents 
including the Outline of the National Intellectual Property Strategy, Several 
Opinions on Deepening the Reform of Systems and Mechanisms to Accelerate 
the Implementation of Innovation-driven Development Strategies and the Plan 
for the Implementation of Deepening the Science and Technology System 
Reform. On 17 July 2017, Xi Jinping, General Secretary of the Communist Party, 
presided over the 16
th Central Financial Leading Group Meeting, pointing out in 
particular that property protection, especially intellectual property protection, is 
an important aspect of shaping a sound business environment and the construction 
of intellectual property protection system for emerging undertakings and types of 
business should be accelerated.
1
1 Xi Jinping Presided over the 16th Central Financial Leading Group Meeting, Emphasizing the 
Establishment of a Stable, Fair and Transparent Business Environment and Facilitation of the Construction 
of New Systems for Developing an Open Economy , published on China court website http://www.


130
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
In recent years, China’s intellectual property disputes have seen a spurt of 
growth. As shown in the SPC data, the number of newly accepted intellectual 
property civil first trial cases by the people’s courts in 2014, 2015 and 2016 
were 96,000, 109,000 and 136,000 respectively, increased respectively by 7.8%, 
14.5% and 24.7% as compared to the previous year. The pressure for the trial 
of intellectual property cases has increased for the people’s courts at all levels, 
and the contradictions of ‘more cases but fewer judges’ has become increasingly 
prominent. Therefore, it is necessary to find an ADR resolution system according 
to the characteristics of intellectual property disputes and to rationalize the 
diversion of intellectual property cases. Arbitration has become an important way 
to resolve intellectual property disputes. 
This Chapter, based on the basic theories and legal regulations of intellectual 
property disputes arbitration and intellectual property arbitration cases handled 
by the CIETAC in recent years, analyzes the status of China’s intellectual 
property disputes arbitration practice, explores the solutions of related problems, 
and suggests reasonably on the promotion of resolving intellectual property 
disputes through arbitration. It is of great significance for the healthy and orderly 
development of China’s knowledge economy and the transformation of China into 
a powerful intellectual property country to accelerate the deepening development 
of intellectual property arbitration and alleviate the tremendous load on the normal 
market order caused by the big number of intellectual property cases. 
I. Theoretical Basis and Legal Regulations for Intellectual 
chinacourt.org/article/detail/2017/07/id/2923504.shtml (last visited on 18 July 2017).


131
CHAPTER 4
Property Arbitration in China
1. Need for More Professional and Flexible Dispute Resolution 
Mechanism for Intellectual Property Disputes with Special Features
1) Urgency, Professionalism, Confidentiality, Efficiency and 
Internationalization of Intellectual Property Dispute Resolution
First, there is a clear timeliness in the profit cycle of intellectual property. 
Intellectual achievements, as the object of intellectual property rights, have short 
market elimination cycle due to the quick upgrading of relevant products and 
technology. In other words, the effective profit period of intellectual property is 
very limited. Failure to quickly resolve disputes would surely affect the effective 
profit per unit time of intellectual property. Thus, the dispute resolution must meet 
the need of urgency.
Secondly, the technicality of intellectual property objects requires professional 
dispute resolution. Technical issues in intellectual property disputes are usually 
very complicated while determination of these issues is crucial for dispute 
resolution. Thus, adjudicators’ legal professionalism and special knowledge 
therein are required.
Thirdly, the resolution of intellectual property disputes places more emphasis on 
mutual benefit and win-win from economic aspects rather than absolute fairness 
from legal aspects. This requirement of market-oriented dispute resolution in 
pursuit of maximized benefits is different from normal property disputes, which 


132
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
is determined by the intangibleness of intellectual property objects and the 
timeliness of the existence of rights. For example, a considerable number of 
parties in the CIETAC cases choose to sign settlement agreements before or after 
the initiation of arbitration and obtain consent awards thereafter. 
Finally, as the world economic connections are getting closer, the transformation 
and utilization of intellectual property are bound to bes globalized. The increasing 
cross-border movements of intellectual property rights and frequent occurrence of 
transnational intellectual property disputes require the dispute resolution outcomes 
be recognized internationally and enforced effectively worldwide.
2) Intellectual property arbitration has the advantages of speediness, 
professionalism, confidentiality, flexibility and internationality. Arbitration, 
with both contractual and judicial features and strong adaptability and 
limberness, can meet parties’ expectations to a great extent in both the form 
and effect of dispute resolution.
First, compared with lengthy and complicated litigation proceedings, arbitration 
emphasizes more on the pursuit of efficiency. The design of the system of 
‘finality’ of arbitral awards fully meets the need of parties to intellectual property 
disputes to resolve their disputes quickly and finally. For example, summary 
procedure was applied in 67% of the CIETAC cases in 2015. By analyzing all 
the cases concluded in 2015 by the CIETAC, it is found that the median time for 
case conclusion was 143 days after the formation of tribunal while the average 


133
CHAPTER 4
conclusion time of summary procedure cases was 104 days.
2
Secondly, the strict selection criteria guarantee the professionalism of the 
arbitrators. Objectively, professionally experienced arbitrators can accurately 
determine professional issues of the disputes while subjectively, awards rendered 
by professional arbitrators may gain the trust and support of the parties more 
easily. For example, complicated technical issues such as software source codes, 
real-time operating systems, customer support systems were involved in one 
CIETAC case in 2016 over computer software copyright licensing contract 
disputes. The final award contained more than 13,800 words with over 5,000 
words for the analysis of technical issues, showing the profound professionalism 
of the arbitrators. 
Thirdly, arbitration avoids the rigid legal determination of ‘right or wrong’ and 
its feature of flexibility practically meets the needs of parties of intellectual 
property disputes in their pursuit of the maximum benefits. Compared with 
litigation, arbitration can better reflect party autonomy. The hearing modes are 
very flexible and individualized mode with deep compatibility with intellectual 
property disputes may be created. It avoids lengthy and costly dispute resolution 
in complicated and modeled litigation proceedings and ensures that the needs of 
the parties are met to the greatest extent.
Finally, arbitration awards, as the intellectual property dispute resolution result, 
2 The CIETAC, the 2015 Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China, published on 
the CIETAC website http://www.cietac.org/Uploads/201612/58678e45783ae.pdf (last visited on 20 July 
2017).


134
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
have more universal validity and enforceability. The occurrence and settlement of 
intellectual property disputes are no longer within a single country. For example, 
most of the CIETAC intellectual property dispute cases are foreign-related and 
one single case may involve parties from various foreign countries, which requires 
that the dispute resolution result be recognized and enforced in many countries. 
The New York Convention fully guarantees the recognition and enforcement of 
arbitral awards worldwide. 
2. Application Scope and Legal Provisions of Arbitrability of 
Intellectual Property Disputes
1) Application Scope of Arbitrability of Intellectual Property Disputes
Arbitrability usually refers to what disputes may be resolved by arbitration 
according to the laws at the place of arbitration and whether awards may be 
recognized and enforced by courts at the place of enforcement.
3 The definition of 
arbitrability is essentially the determination of the scope of party autonomy and 
is used to clarify the jurisdiction boundary between litigation and ADR including 
arbitration. 
The arbitrability of intellectual property disputes should be determined according 
to the specific types of the disputes. Although intellectual achievements, the object 
of intellectual property, are invisible, it is still necessary to check the effectiveness 
of established rights. At the same time, intellectual achievements, having risks in 
3 Zhang Aiqing, Research on Arbitrability of Public Policy Matters in International Commercial 
Arbitration, 6 Law Review (2007). 


135
CHAPTER 4
use and circulation, will inevitably encounter contract and infringement issues. 
Therefore, intellectual property disputes can be divided into three main categories 
under the standard of dispute nature: validity disputes, contract disputes and 
infringement disputes.  
According to Article 2 of the Arbitration Law, intellectual property contract 
disputes and infringement disputes are contractual disputes and other disputes 
over rights and interests in property between citizens that are equal subjects 
and may be arbitrated. It is controversial whether intellectual property validity 
disputes may be arbitrated in China. The main reasons for opposing arbitration 
of validity disputes are as follows. First, intellectual property rights are granted 
by the state. Second, there are special authorities to review the validity of 
intellectual property right. Third, awards are unpredictable and contradictory 
awards may result in the loss of public interest.
4 Another view is that intellectual 
property rights fundamentally come from the property rights and personal rights 
of individuals through the creation of intellectual achievements. The examination 
and registration by the state are mainly administrative rather than legal actions. 
First, awards have relative binding effect. The determination by the tribunal on 
the validity of the intellectual property rights is for specific cases and binds only 
the parties of the cases with no impact on the public effects of administrative 
registration or public interest out of the reflective effects of the awards. Second, 
there are excellent examples of resolving intellectual property validity disputes 
by arbitration worldwide, such as Switzerland,
5 indicating the feasibility of such 
4 Ni Jing, Discussion on Arbitrability of Patent Effectiveness Disputes, 3 Intellectual Property (2013).
5 It is stipulated in Article 128 of Switzerland’s Federal Code on Private International Law that all cases of 


136
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
practice. In theory, all disputes on intellectual property rights as private rights can 
be submitted to arbitration.    
2) Legal Provisions on Arbitrability of Intellectual Property Disputes
China has the Arbitration Law and the Contract Law as the legal basis for the 
intellectual property arbitration. However, it is up to special laws such as the 
Copyright Law, the Patent Law and the Trademark Law whether different types 
of intellectual property disputes can be arbitrated. 
According to Article 2 of the Arbitration Law, contractual disputes and other 
disputes over rights and interests in property between equal subjects may 
be arbitrated. Exceptions are listed in Article 3 thereof, mainly including 
disputes over personal relationship and disputes that should be handled by the 
administrative authorities. According to the provisions in the Arbitration Law, 
China does not explicitly prohibit intellectual property arbitration, which provides 
a legal space for China to carry out and promote intellectual property arbitration.
Article 128 of the Contract Law stipulates that ‘[T]he parties may resolve a 
contractual dispute through settlement or mediation. Where the parties do not 
wish to, or are unable to, resolve such dispute through settlement or mediation, 
the dispute may be submitted to the relevant arbitration institution for arbitration 
in accordance with the arbitration agreement between the parties. Parties to a 
foreign-related contract may apply to a Chinese arbitration institution or another 
arbitration institution for arbitration’. This stipulation makes it clear that disputes 
a property nature may be subject to arbitration.


137
CHAPTER 4
over intellectual property contracts, including contracts of copyright, trademarks 
and patents, can be referred to arbitration. In practice, most intellectual property 
cases accepted by the vast majority of arbitration institutions involve contract 
disputes. 
Article 55.1 of the Copyright Law stipulates that ‘[A] dispute over copyright may 
be settled by mediation or be submitted for arbitration to a copyright arbitration 
institution under a written arbitration agreement concluded between the parties 
concerned, or under the arbitration clause in the copyright contract’. As authors 
automatically obtain copyrights upon completion of works, copyright validity 
arbitration is not involved. It may be inferred from wording of this article that 
copyright disputes include contract disputes and infringement disputes, both of 
which can be submitted to arbitration.
Article 45 of the Patent Law stipulates that ‘[W]here, as of the announcement 
of the granting of the patent by the patent administrative department of the State 
Council, any entity or individual considers that the granting of the said patent does 
not conform to the relevant provisions of this Law, it or he may request the Board 
of Patent Appeals and Interferences to invalidate the patent right’. It can be seen 
from the article that patent validity is determined by the administrative authorities 
and parties can not submit relevant disputes to arbitration.
Article 46 of the Trademark Law stipulates that ‘ [W]here, upon expiry of the 
statutory time limit, the party concerned fails to apply for a review of a decision 
of the Trademark Office to declare invalidation of a registered trademark or fails 


138
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
to institute an action in a people's court against the Trademark Appeal Board's 
decision upon review or ruling to sustain a registered trademark or declare 
invalidation of a registered trademark, the decision of the Trademark Office or 
the Trademark Appeal Board's decision upon review or ruling shall take effect’. 
It can be seen through analyzing this article that the stipulation on administrative 
procedures is mandatory and trademark validity is for the administrative 
authorities to review. Though this article mentions that parties may bring lawsuits 
to courts, such lawsuits are administrative rather than civil and only involves 
the determination of lawfulness of the administrative authorities’ administrative 
actions. The validity of trademarks will still be determined by the administrative 
authorities. Article 35.1 of the Regulations on Computers Software Protection 
stipulates that ‘[A] dispute over software copyright infringement may be settled 
by mediation. A dispute over a software copyright contract may be submitted to 
an arbitration institution for arbitration under an arbitration clause in the copyright 
contract or under a written arbitration agreement concluded later between the 
parties’. Thus, software copyright contract disputes may be mediated or submitted 
directly to arbitration by the parties.
It is obvious that there are big differences among stipulations on the arbitrability 
of various types of intellectual property disputes in China. The intellectual 
property disputes which may be arbitrated under clear legal stipulations are 
copyright contract disputes or infringement disputes, technology contract disputes 
and software copyright contract disputes. However, disputes over patent or 
trademark validity should be handled by the relevant administrative authorities 


139
CHAPTER 4
according to law. Under current PRC laws, intellectual property contract and 
infringement disputes may be submitted to arbitration while there are certain 
difficulties in submitting validity disputes to arbitration.
II. Status and Main Issues in China’s Intellectual 
Property Arbitration Practice
1. Basic Status of China’s Intellectual Property Arbitration 
1) Small Caseload of Intellectual Property Arbitration
Compared with the caseload and growth rate of intellectual property litigation, 
the increase in the caseload and growth rate of intellectual property arbitration is 
not obvious. For example, the number of intellectual property cases accepted by 
the CIETAC in 2014 accounts for 1.77% of the total number of foreign-related 
cases and 4.1% thereof in 2015.
6 The BAC accepted 43 intellectual property 
cases in 2014, accounting for 2.11% of the total caseload, accepted 26 such 
cases in 2015, accounting for 0.88% of the total caseload, and accepted 47 such 
cases in 2016, accounting for 1.56% of the total caseload.
7 It is shown that the 
intellectual property cases accepted by comprehensive arbitration commissions 
are small in both quantity and proportion of the total caseload. The caseload of 
6 The CIETAC, the 2014 Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China and 
the 2015 Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China, published on the 
CIETAC website http://www.cietac.org/Uploads/201610/57fc0d50a1742.pdf、http://www.cietac.org/
Uploads/201612/58678e45783ae.pdf(last visited on 20 July 2017).
7 The BAC, the 2014 Work Report and the 2015 Work Report, published on the BAC website http://www.
bjac.org.cn/page/gybh/2014zj.html、http://www.bjac.org.cn/news/view?id=2692、http://www.bjac.org.cn/
news/view?id=2909 (last visited on 20 July 2017).


140
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
specialized intellectual property arbitration institutions is on the low side as well. 
Except Shanghai Intellectual Property Arbitration Court which has accepted over 
100 cases since establishment, the specialized intellectual property arbitration 
institutions in Xiamen, Guangzhou, Wuhan and Chongqing accept about 20 to 
50 cases each.
8 The low caseload reflects to a certain extent people’s insufficient 
understanding and knowledge and low willingness to participate in intellectual 
property arbitration. 
2) Single Type of Intellectual Property Arbitration Cases
The intellectual property cases accepted by comprehensive arbitration 
commissions involve contract disputes for the vast majority, infringement 
disputes for a small amount and validity disputes for the rare. For example, the 
contract dispute cases account for 87.5% of the CIETAC’s intellectual property 
caseload from 2014 to 2016. The contract dispute cases account for 50% of the 
cases accepted by specialized intellectual property arbitration institutions. Some 
arbitration institutions even directly limit the scope of intellectual property cases 
to intellectual property contract disputes. Take the Shanghai Intellectual Property 
Arbitration Court as an example, the case acceptance scope is clearly stipulated 
as ‘specialized in handling arbitration cases involving intellectual property 
contract disputes’. The Arbitration Court accepted 117 intellectual property 
cases in 2014, among which 82 involved franchise contract disputes, 18 involved 
technical service contract disputes, 11 involved technology development contract 
disputes, 2 involved technology transfer contract disputes, 2 involved technical 
8 Ni Jing, Research on Intellectual Property Arbitration Mechanism, Xiamen University Press (2013), p.273.


141
CHAPTER 4
consultation contract disputes, 1 involved copyright contract disputes and 1 
involved publishing contract disputes.
9 The single type of intellectual property 
cases actually reflects the cautious attitude of the arbitration institutions in case 
acceptance. 
2.Main Issues Affecting Development of China’s Intellectual 
Property Arbitration
1) Legislative Blank in Arbitrability of Intellectual Property Validity 
Disputes
There are differences among countries in the degree of openness to the 
arbitrability of intellectual property disputes which often involves public policy 
issues.  American scholars have conducted investigations on the arbitrability of 
intellectual property validity disputes among practitioners and researchers of 
various nations. It is widely recognized in France, Germany, Austria, Portugal, 
Greece, Argentina and Japan that all kinds of intellectual property disputes, 
including intellectual property validity disputes, may be submitted to arbitration 
while it is reckoned in Russia, Ireland, Colombia, Chile, India, South Korea and 
China that there is uncertainty in the arbitrability of intellectual property validity 
disputes in these countries.
10
9 Shanghai Intellectual Property Arbitration Court, the 2014 Report on Cases Accepted by Shanghai 
Intellectual Property Arbitration Court, published on the website of Shanghai Intellectual Property 
Arbitration Court http://zscq.accsh.org/index.php?m=content&c=index&a=show&catid=45&id=26&me
nu=379-45-(last visited on 21 July 2017).
10 Trevor Cook, Alejandro Garcia, International Intellectual Property Arbitration, Kluwer Law 
International, 2010, p.52.


142
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Chinese laws lack clear stipulation on the arbitrability of intellectual property 
validity disputes in Chinese laws and there is big controversy on the issue in the 
theoretical circle. In fact, validity disputes are seldom submitted to arbitration 
alone, but often brought as a defense strategy in contract or infringement dispute 
cases. Fundamental defense based on the validity ground will directly affect 
the finality of awards in such cases. For example, in a CIETAC foreign-related 
trademark transfer contract dispute case, the respondent, a foreign company, 
requested to determine an Indian trademark value in analogy to the trademark 
price under the North America Trademark Transfer Agreement. The Claimant, 
a Chinese company, defended that the American trademark was not legal itself. 
The tribunal rejected the defendant’s defense. Therefore, it is necessary to further 
strengthen the research on the arbitrability of intellectual property validity 
disputes and make it clear as soon as possible under clear legal statutes.  
2) Too Simple Provisions on Interim Measures
Interim measures, as an adjunct measure to facilitate or promote arbitration, are 
of great significance to the safeguarding of the legitimate rights and interests 
of parties, advancing smooth arbitration procedures and guaranteeing the final 
enforcement of arbitral awards. Interim measures involve property preservation, 
evidence preservation, behavior preservation and other regulatory measures. 
The specific functions include: preventing parties from destroying evidence 
or avoiding possible adverse awards in the future through delay in submitting 
documents, avoiding impossibility of realizing creditors’ rights of winning 
parties, preventing parties from hiding, transferring or selling property by way of 


143
CHAPTER 4
impounding, sealing up or freezing property, or requesting one party to provide 
security for expenses, etc., and avoiding more damage caused by the change 
of status due to parties’ acts or omissions.
11 In fact, interim measures largely 
determine the ultimate validity of arbitral awards and affect the confidence and 
choice of arbitration by parties of intellectual property dispute cases, especially 
infringement dispute cases. 
In current Chinese procedural laws, Articles 28 and 46 of the Arbitration Law 
stipulate the property preservation and evidence preservation in domestic 
arbitration respectively. Article 68 of the Arbitration Law and Article 258 of the 
Civil Procedure Law stipulate the property preservation and evidence preservation 
in foreign-related arbitration respectively. In substantive laws, Articles 50 and 51 
of the Copyright Law, Articles 66 and 67 of the Patent Law and Articles 65 and 
66 of the Trademark Law also stipulate on preservation measures, but are all for 
litigation. The provisions on interim measures in arbitration in Chinese laws are 
abstract and simple with many imperfections. 
An analysis of the above stipulations on interim measures in arbitration in China 
shows the following problems: relatively simple type of interim measures, no 
definite stipulation whether behavior preservation is applicable to arbitration, 
no specific criteria for applying for interim measures, making the application 
outcome unpredictable,
12 no clear stipulation on applicants of pre-arbitration 
11 Zhou Lixia, Discussion on Exterritorial Enforcement of Interim Measures in International Commercial 
Arbitration, 6 Hebei Law Science 2011.
12 Zhang Shengcui, Discussion on Reconstruction of China’s Interim Measure Mechanism, 2 Journal of 
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics 2016.


144
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
interim measures or parties’ direct application to courts therefor, lack of legal 
provision on interim measures during the period from case acceptance to tribunal 
formation, no stipulation on the conditions for terminating or cancelling interim 
measures either by tribunals on their own initiatives or upon request of the party, 
no stipulation on the duration of pre-arbitration interim measures after parties’ 
application for arbitration within the statutory time limit, no clear stipulation on 
the enforcement of interim measures decided by overseas arbitral tribunals, etc. 
3) Low Efficiency in Dispute Resolution Caused by Litigious Arbitration 
One of the important reasons for the birth and development of arbitration lies 
in that parties abandon the long and complicated litigation mechanism and try 
to set up a more convenient and efficient dispute resolution mechanism other 
than litigation. However, with the continuous development of arbitration and as 
disputes becoming more complex and dispute amounts increasing continuously, 
arbitration proceedings begin to be more procedural and formalized, resulting in 
the tendency of litigious arbitration. This change is both for the more cautious 
safeguard of parties’ rights and fairness of cases and an important way to ensure 
the stability of arbitration institutions in increasing risks. But the cost is the 
complexity of dispute resolution process, decrease in dispute resolution efficiency 
and increase in dispute resolution cost. 
The trend of litigious arbitration has led to the gradual loss of the traditional 
advantages of efficient dispute resolution, and especially in highly specialized 
cases such as complicated intellectual property dispute cases. The time used 


145
CHAPTER 4
in resolving the dispute may be as long as that of same-type litigation cases. 
For intellectual property rights with limited profit cycles, the most important 
need of the parties is to resolve the disputes quickly to achieve a smooth profit. 
The attractiveness of arbitration to intellectual dispute parties will be greatly 
influenced by its capability of meeting their urgency demand. 
III. Proposals for Promotion of In-depth Development of 
China’s Intellectual Property Arbitration
At present, China’s intellectual property arbitration is still in its infancy. It is 
necessary to give full play to the advantages of arbitration in intellectual property 
dispute resolution through a series of measures so as to ease the enormous 
caseload caused by frequent intellectual property disputes on the normal market 
order, expand the social influence of arbitration, and promote further development 
of intellectual property arbitration.
1.Reasonable Expanding of the Jurisdiction for Intellectual 
Property Arbitration
According to relevant provisions in the Arbitration Law, the most controversial 
issue in practice regarding the jurisdiction of the arbitration commission is the 
understanding of the expression ‘contractual disputes and other disputes over 
rights and interests in property’. In accordance with the commercial reservation 
declaration made by China upon its accession to the New York Convention, China 
will apply the Convention only to differences arising out of legal relationships, 
whether contractual or not, which are considered commercial under the national 


146
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
law of the PRC.  "Legal relationships, whether contractual or not, which are 
considered commercial" means the economic rights and obligations arising from 
contracts, torts or relevant legal provisions, such as purchase and sale of goods, 
lease of property, project contracting, processing, technology transfer, equity or 
contractual joint adventure, exploration and development of natural resources, 
insurance, credit, labor service, agency, consultation service, marine, civil 
aviation, railway or road passenger and cargo transportation, product liability, 
environment pollution, marine accident, and ownership disputes, except disputes 
between foreign investors and the host government. Obviously, the connotation and 
denotation of ‘disputes over rights and interests in property’ as defined in China 
are relatively narrow in comparison with the concept of ‘non-contractual disputes’ 
in the New York Convention.
13 In practice, Chinese courts face difficulties and 
uncertainties in judging the arbitrability of disputed matters. Therefore, it is 
necessary to clarify and rationally expand the jurisdiction for intellectual property 
arbitration.
2. Assisting Parties to Accelerate Intellectual Property Arbitration 
Proceedings
Arbitration, with party autonomy as the leading principle, has proceedings 
different from the strict legal proceedings of litigation. Parties may control 
the approximate time and specific steps of arbitration proceedings through 
communication and negotiation. In fact, the speed and efficiency of arbitration are 
13 Liu Xiaohong, Discussion on Theoretical and Practical Basis of Intellectual Property Arbitration, 
Contemporary International Law (Volume 6), Law Press, 2006, p.219.


147
CHAPTER 4
up to the arrangements of the parties over each step of arbitration proceedings in 
many cases. In certain degree, parties may individualize arbitration proceedings 
and rules in full accordance with their own will and special needs of each case 
just like permutating and combining numbers. 
In general, parties may choose the following three ways to accelerate arbitration 
proceedings. First, parties may negotiate and set limitation on the time required 
for each step of arbitration proceedings by signing agreements or memorandums. 
Secondly, parties may individualize the arbitration rules, including but not limited 
to amending, simplifying or omitting certain unnecessary steps in the rules.
14 
Thirdly, major international arbitration institutions generally offer special sets of 
expedited or summary arbitration rules in addition to the general ones. Parties, 
if agreeing thereon, may directly apply such special rules. For example, under 
the WIPO Expedited Arbitration Rules, sole-arbitrator tribunals are appointed to 
save the time for tribunal discussion, oral hearing time is cut short to less than 3 
days, hearing time is limited to within 3 months while the time for rendering final 
awards is less than 1 month. Each step is compressed to save time, which results 
in great acceleration of the entire arbitration process.
The procedural uniqueness of intellectual property arbitration should be 
manifested in the particularity of arbitration rules. In order to meet the urgency 
demand in intellectual property dispute resolution, intellectual property arbitration 
mechanism should be timely adjusted. Arbitration commissions may assist 
14 Zhang Weibin, Comparison and Experience in Fast Track Arbitration Rules, 6 Journal of Political 
Science and Law 2016.


148
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
intellectual property dispute parties by tailoring the arbitration rules according 
to the characteristics of each case so as shorten the arbitration time, accelerate 
arbitration proceedings, cut arbitration cost and realize the purpose of resolving 
disputes efficiently. Chinese arbitration institutions generally have similar special 
rules. For example, the 2015 CIETAC Rules contains detailed provisions on 
‘summary procedure’ including the dispute amount, the formation of tribunals, the 
hearing mode and the time limit for awards, etc. in the 9 articles of Chapter IV. 
Summary procedure is adopted in a large proportion of the CIETAC intellectual 
property cases with the average case concluding time of 4.5 months from the 
initiation of arbitration to rendering the final awards.
3. Improving Provisions on Interim Measures in Intellectual 
Property Arbitration
The current interim measure mechanism of arbitration cannot meet the relief 
requirements in fast changing intellectual property dispute cases. A diversified and 
open mechanism should be established to satisfy the complex practical demands. 
Meanwhile, mandatory interim measures of arbitration may have a negative 
impact on the rights and interests of respondents. Therefore, detailed and careful 
provisions on the application conditions are required to avoid possible abuse and 
adverse consequences.
Interim measures in intellectual property arbitration may be improved from the 
following aspects. First, more types of interim measures of arbitration need to 
be provided. According to Article 26.2 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules as 


149
CHAPTER 4
adopted in 2013, ‘[A]n interim measure is any temporary measure by which, at 
any time prior to the issuance of the award by which the dispute is finally decided, 
the arbitral tribunal orders a party…’ There are only two types of interim measures 
of arbitration in China, i.e. property preservation and evidence preservation. The 
relatively narrow scope of the measures could hardly meet the practical needs. An 
expansion is needed to provide more types of interim measures of arbitration with 
more detailed contents. Secondly, the application conditions for interim measures 
of arbitration need to be regulated. China lacks specific provisions on such 
conditions. The application conditions should be specified with unified review 
standards to avoid uncertainty in the application results. The following factors 
may be considered for decisions on interim measures of arbitration with reference 
to Article 26.3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: Emergency circumstances 
of the cases, irreversible potential consequences, balance of parties’ interests and 
appropriate security by the applicants as the pre-condition thereof to reduce abuse 
risks. Furthermore, tribunals should be empowered to decide on interim measures. 
There is a clear difference between the exclusive decision on interim measures by 
courts in China and the international mainstream practice allowing the tribunal 
to decide thereon. The arbitration laws of U.S., U.K., Germany, Switzerland, 
Singapore, the Netherlands, South Korea and Brazil clearly provide for the 
‘dual track’ approach, empowering both courts and tribunals to issue interim 
measures.
15 Therefore, certain jurisdiction over interim measures should be given 
to tribunals to ensure the convenience and smoothness of arbitration proceedings. 
15 Fang Mo, Interim Measures before Formation of Tribunals-from the Perspective of SIAC Rules, 6 Social 
Scientists 2013.


150
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Under the circumstances that the amendments on the Arbitration Law has not been 
put on the agenda of the legislature yet, some arbitration commissions, represented 
by the CIETAC, have tried certain reform and innovation on the tribunals’ power 
of deciding interim measures in their rules to meet practical demands, follow the 
latest trends of arbitration development and enhance international competitiveness. 
Both the 2012 and 2015 CIETAC Rules have adopted the general international 
practice of allocating powers in deciding interim measures, stipulating that ‘[A]
t the request of a party, the arbitral tribunal may decide to order or award any 
interim measure it deems necessary or proper in accordance with the applicable 
law or the agreement of the parties and may require the requesting party to 
provide appropriate security in connection with the measure’. Article 23 of the 
2015 CIETAC Rules is titled ‘Conservatory and Interim Measures’, stipulating 
on the tribunal’s power to take interim measures according to the applicable law 
of the case. The concepts of ‘conservatory measures’ and ‘interim measures’ are 
respectively adopted and the emergency arbitrator procedure is included. The two 
concepts are distinguished in the provision to meet the practical needs in domestic 
and international arbitration.


151
SUMMARY OF THE YEAR
Summary of the Year
At present, the global economic structure is undergoing radical changes and 
globalization of economy is having in-depth development. China has become the 
second largest economy and the largest trading nation in the world, and is now 
at a crucial stage of transform from a major trading nation to a trading power. 
Along with the continuous increase of Chinese enterprises’ investment and trade 
activities in the Belt and Road countries, Chinese enterprises are facing higher 
legal risks and having more and higher demands on dispute resolution services. 
The year of 2016 marks the CIETAC’s 60th anniversary. Over the past 60 years, 
the CIETAC has enjoyed fame both at home and abroad with its independent, 
impartial and efficient arbitration services and made positive contributions to the 
development of China’s international commercial arbitration. 
In retrospect of the year 2016, the development of China’s international 
commercial arbitration can be summarized from the following five aspects.
First, the number of China’s international commercial arbitration cases has 
increased steadily. Since the implementation of the PRC Arbitration Law in 
1995, Chinese arbitration commissions have maintained the increase in caseloads 
and dispute amounts for more than 20 consecutive years with an average annual 
growth rate of over 30%. Altogether, over 1.2 million civil and commercial 
disputes have been handled and the total dispute amount is over RMB 2,260 
billion. In 2016, 251 arbitration commissions in China accepted a total of 208,545 


152
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
cases, 71,621 cases more and an increase of 52% as compared to 2015. The total 
dispute amount was RMB 469.5 billion, with an increase of RMB 58.3 billion 
at an increase rate of 14% as compared with 2015. Among them, 62 arbitration 
commissions accepted 3.141 foreign-related, HMT-related cases, accounting 
for 1.5% of the national total caseload. The development of the 62 arbitration 
commissions concerning the handling of international commercial arbitration 
cases is very unbalanced.
Second, China’s legal system of international commercial arbitration is improving. 
Compared with the 2015 SPC Interpretation on the Civil Procedure Law covering 
almost all aspects of judicial supervision over arbitration, judicial interpretations 
and opinions of the SPC in 2016 were more specialized, stipulating on various 
puzzling judicial practice issues in property preservation, clarifying the status and 
role of arbitration in the ADR mechanism, and attaching importance to the role of 
arbitration in implementing the Belt and Road Initiatives and constructing pilot 
FTZs, which will have a profound impact on China’s international commercial 
arbitration.
Third, party autonomy is fully respected in China’s international commercial 
arbitration. Tribunals are professional in understanding and applying the 
Incoterms. The development and level of China’s international commercial 
arbitration are shown in the tribunal’s comprehensive discussion of the Incoterms 
contents, applicable laws, specific contractual provisions, contract performance 
of parties and trade practices in the awards on the Incoterms-related disputes with 
combination of the Incoterms and trade practices. Under the current international 


153
SUMMARY OF THE YEAR
trade environment, the launch and implementation of the Belt and Road 
Initiatives will lead to more new-type transaction modes and transport or payment 
methods. In China’s international commercial arbitration practice, the number 
of the Incoterms-related cases may increase as well. It is necessary to remind 
international trade participants to rationally design the trade modes, correctly 
apply the Incoterms, minimize legal risks and safeguard their legitimate rights and 
interests.
Fourth, the fundamental principle of “pro-arbitration” is reflected in the judicial 
supervision of China’s international commercial arbitration. The people’s courts 
fully respect the finality of arbitral awards and strictly follow the principle of 
judicial review over issues stipulated in laws and insist on the trial mode of 
determining applicable laws for foreign-related arbitration agreements first and 
then determining the form and substantive validity of arbitration agreements 
accordingly. The people’s courts accurately grasp the main theme of the New 
York Convention favoring the enforcement of awards, make high-quality rulings 
on issues regarding the validity of arbitration agreements, appropriate notification 
in arbitration proceedings, interpretation of arbitration rules, arbitrability and 
public policy, and greatly enrich the case resources for the application of the 
New York Convention. The People’s Court’s ruling on enforcing the award by 
the CIETAC Hong Kong Arbitration Centre is the first case for the enforcement 
of awards rendered by overseas branches of Mainland arbitration commissions. 
It is of great significance to the international development of Chinese arbitration 
commissions and the Belt and Road dispute resolution.


154
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Fifth, the intellectual property arbitration mechanism has basically taken shape 
and will be further developed under the background of China’s transformation 
into an intellectual property power. Arbitration, with its flexible hearing 
modes, has strong potential and individualized hearing modes corresponding to 
intellectual property disputes may be formed to avoid time and cost consuming 
dispute resolution in complicated and modelled litigation proceedings and to meet 
parties’ individual needs to the greatest extent. Major arbitration commissions 
such as the CIETAC try to meet the special needs in intellectual property dispute 
resolution through reasonable classification of arbitrators’ professions, case-based 
adjustments to arbitration rules and other ways. It is necessary to give full play to 
the advantages of arbitration in intellectual property dispute resolution through a 
series of measures, including reasonably expanding the case acceptance scope of 
intellectual property arbitration, assisting parties to accelerate intellectual property 
arbitration proceedings and improving relevant provisions on interim measures in 
intellectual property arbitration so as to push forward the in-depth development of 
intellectual property arbitration.
The Fourth Plenary Session of the 18th Central Committee of the Communist 
Party of China made an important plan for the development of foreign-related 
legal services and put forward specific requirements. The Ministry of Justice, 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Commerce and the Legislative 
Affairs Office of the State Council jointly issued the Opinion on the Development 
of Foreign-related Legal Services on 8 January 2017, clearly pointing out that 
the development of foreign-related legal services is for the purpose of meeting 


155
SUMMARY OF THE YEAR
demands in the economic globalization process, forming a new system of opening 
up to the outside world and responding to new challenges in maintaining national 
security and stability, and of great significance in safeguarding legitimate rights 
and interests of Chinese citizens and enterprises outside China and those of 
foreign citizens and enterprises in China. With the implementation and promotion 
of the Belt and Road Initiatives, the CIETAC will strive to play a more active role 
in the research and construction of the Belt and Road ADR mechanism. From 
carrying out the research on the Belt and Road arbitration system to enhancing 
exchanges with dispute resolution institutions in the Belt and Road countries and 
regions, from the training of internationalized arbitrators to the overall layout of 
branches in different industries and regions, the CIETAC will make full use of 
the development opportunities for dispute resolution under current international 
situation and promote international economic and trade cooperation and 
development with efficient, independent and impartial arbitration services. 


156
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
the Summit
Glimpse of China Arbitration 
Summit 2016 
China Arbitration Summit 2016 was held in Beijing from 28 to 29 September 
2016. Themed ‘Inheritance, innovation and harmonization’, the Summit reviewed 
the 60 year history of China’s foreign-related arbitration, discussed new trends 
and cutting-edge hot issues in the development of international arbitration and 
Chinese arbitration, proposed countermeasures, shared development achievements 
and promoted the development of arbitration. The Summit was co-hosted by the 


157
APPENDIX
SPC, the China Council for the Promotion of International Trade (the CCPIT) and 
the CIETAC, with Renmin University of China, All China Lawyers Association, 
Beijing Bar Association and the UNCITRAL Regional Centre for Asia and the 
Pacific as co-organizers.
Mr. Wan E-Xiang, Vice Chairman of the NPC Standing Committee, sent a 
congratulatory letter to the Summit and the CIETAC’s 60th Anniversary, 
pointing out that the Fourth Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee 
had proposed to ‘improve the arbitration system and enhance the credibility of 
arbitration’, indicating the clear direction for further development of Chinese 
arbitration. He hoped the CIETAC would take the 60th anniversary as a new 
starting point to follow the correct direction of serving the socialist market 
economy with Chinese characteristics with foreign-related arbitration, carry 
forward the fine tradition of foreign-related arbitration, never forget the beginning, 
keep moving forward, seize the opportunities, accelerate the development, 
improve the system and mechanism, innovate the service means, constantly 
enhance the credibility and international competitiveness of China’s foreign-
related arbitration and strive to build an international brand of arbitration in 
China so as to make new and greater contribution to the development of Chinese 
arbitration and the construction of rule of law in China.


158
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
H.E. Mr. Zhou Qiang, the SPC President, addressed the opening ceremony
H.E. Mr. Zhou Qiang, President of the SPC, attended the opening ceremony 
and delivered a speech. He pointed out that new requirements have been set 
for the development of international arbitration and new challenges have been 
brought about along with the in-depth development of economic globalization, 
the continuous promotion of social informationization and the profound changes 
in global governance system. China attaches great importance to the promotion 
of rule of law in arbitration. In recent years, the SPC has actively pushed 
forward the reform on the ADR mechanism. It promulgated the Opinions on 
Further Deepening the Reform of the ADR mechanism, calling for courts’ better 
connection with arbitration institutions, active supporting the reform of the 
arbitration system and fully embodying Chinese courts’ positive attitude and 
firm stand of favoring arbitration. He said that China’s opening-up was in a new 
historical period. Chinese arbitration industry should cherish the unprecedented 
historical opportunities, pioneer and innovate, act actively and build China into 
an internationally recognized arbitration center with great influence as soon 
as possible. He emphasized that it was necessary to strengthen the study of 


159
APPENDIX
Mr. Jiang Zengwei, the CCPIT Chairman, attended the Summit and delivered a 
speech
arbitration theories, vigorously push forward the development of arbitration, 
take active measures to further improve the system of judicial review over 
arbitration in China, continue to innovate arbitration concepts and continuously 
promote the reform of Chinese arbitration system and mechanism. He expressed 
the hope that all the honored guests of the Summit would learn from each other, 
build consensus, strengthen exchanges and deepen cooperation to promote the 
development of arbitration and make greater contribution to the progress of 
judicial justice and the rule of law civilization in the world.
Mr. Jiang Zengwei, the CCPIT Chairman, attended the Summit and delivered 
a speech, pointing out that President Xi Jinping, in the just concluded G20 
Hangzhou Summit, had put forward the initiative of building an open world 


160
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
economy and continuing to promote trade and investment liberalization and 
facilitation. It could be foreseen that with the deepening of economic globalization 
and the ever-closer economic and trade exchanges and cooperation among 
various countries, trade frictions and disputes would be inevitable. International 
commercial arbitration, as an important measure to handle international economic 
and trade disputes, would play an increasingly important role in China’s opening-
up and the development of international economy and trade. He said that over 
the past 60 years, Chinese arbitration had made tremendous progress, won good 
reputation internationally and made positive contributions to the development of 
China’s foreign trade and economic cooperation and maintaining the international 
economic and trade order. Chairman Jiang pointed out that, for the further 
development of Chinese arbitration, arbitration commissions represented by the 
CIETAC should actively push forward the improvement of the arbitration legal 
system, establish a judicial environment conductive to international arbitration, 
vigorously promote their own construction, strengthen training and cultural 
construction of Chinese arbitration, actively participate in the formulation of 
international arbitration rules, deeply integrate into the governance of international 
arbitration and continuously improve the international status and influence. The 
CIETAC would continue to give full play to its advantages, blaze new trails in a 
pioneering spirit, never forget the beginning and keep moving forward. Chairman 
Jiang said that the CIETAC would work with friends from arbitration circles both 
at home and abroad to enhance communication and cooperation, strive to improve 
credibility of arbitration and continue to make new and greater contributions to 
the sustained healthy and stable development of the global economy.


161
APPENDIX
Mr. Zhang Wei, Vice Chairman of the 
CCPIT, pointed out in his speech at 
the opening ceremony that China had 
become the second largest economy 
and largest trading nation of goods in 
the world. For the first time, China’s 
outward direct investment ranked the 
second in the world in 2016. China was 
also the largest trading partner of more 
than 130 countries. Along with the 
steady implementation of the Belt and 
Road Initiative, Chinese enterprises had 
accelerated their ‘going-out’ gradually. 
As the largest developing country in the world, China had a great potential 
for economic development with ample space and a bright future. He believed 
that the prosperity and development of China’s economy and society could not 
be separated from the support and guarantee of the rule of law. Commercial 
arbitration, as an important part of the rule of law construction in China, would 
play an active and important role in economic development under the new 
situation of promoting the rule of law in an all-round way. He said the CCPIT 
was willing to work together with the national legislative and judicial authorities 
and all social sectors to continuously promote more friendly environment for 
arbitration, actively promote transforming China into an international arbitration 
center and make the utmost efforts for the development of arbitration in China.
Mr. Zhang Wei, Vice Chairman of the 
CCPIT, delivered a speech


162
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Mr. Reno Soli, Secretary General 
of the United Nations Commission 
on International Trade Law (the 
UNCITRAL), mentioned in his 
speech that this year marked the 
60th anniversary of the CIETAC 
and the 50th anniversary of the 
UNCITRAL. The UNCITRAL, since 
its establishment, had been committed 
to promoting the development of 
international commercial arbitration, 
enhancing the unified application 
of the 1958 New York Convention 
and popularizing the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial 
Arbitration. He fully affirmed the positive contribution by Chinese legislature 
in creating a favorable legal environment for the modernization of commercial 
arbitration in China and highly value the UNCITRAL’s cooperation with the 
SPC, the Ministry of Commerce and Chinese arbitration circles represented by 
the CIETAC. He deemed that China, as an active participant in the UNCITRAL 
and various working groups, was playing a more and more important role. The 
UNCITRAL and the CIETAC would lay foundation for further cooperation in 
more aspects through co-hosting conferences and other ways. 
Mr. Reno Soli, the UNCITRAL Secretary 
General, addressed the opening ceremony


163
APPENDIX
Mr. Donald Donovan, President of the 
International Council for Commercial 
Arbitration (the ICCA), delivered a 
video address to the Summit, saying 
that for the past 55 years, the ICCA 
had benefited a lot from suggestions 
and opinions of experts from the 
CIETAC and other Chinese arbitration 
commissions. He believed that the 
source of the development of many 
international arbitration institutions 
was rooted in the area and legal culture 
where they are located. The CIETAC, 
in its practices, had shown the rich 
traditions of Chinese laws and dispute resolution ways while continuously 
increasing the participation of non-Chinese arbitrators and lawyers in order 
to better fulfill its mission as an international arbitration institution. The good 
adaptability of international arbitration allowed for a diversity of legal practices 
with different legal and cultural backgrounds. He firmly believed that international 
commercial arbitration could enhance economic and trade activities, seek benefits 
for humankind and make contributions to world peace. He congratulated the 60th 
anniversary of the CIETAC.
Donald Donovan, Chairman of the 
International Federation of Commercial 
Arbitration Institutions (the IFCAI) delivered 
a video address


164
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Ms. He Rong, Vice President of the SPC, made a keynote speech
Ms. He Rong, Vice President of the SPC, attended the opening ceremony and 
made a keynote speech, pointing out that China was working with other countries 
to jointly push forward the Belt and Road construction and continue to make 
major achievements in international economic cooperation such as the Asian 
Development Bank and the Silk Road Fund. The exchanges among various 
countries were getting closer and the world economy was deeply integrated. The 
participation of Chinese parties and arbitration commissions in international 
arbitration cases was rapidly increasing. The stage for the international 
development of Chinese arbitration and the development of international 
arbitration in China were more extensive. She said that justice had always been a 
strong supporter and facilitator of arbitration. Smooth arbitration proceedings and 
the enforcement of arbitration agreements and arbitral awards were inseparable 
from the strong judicial support. The SPC had attached great importance to the 
status and role of commercial arbitration in dispute resolution, fully respected 


165
APPENDIX
party autonomy, fulfilled the support and supervision function of judicial review 
over arbitration in accordance with law and achieved remarkable results. She 
believed that China’s commercial arbitration had entered a completely new 
development stage with the deepening of China’s opening-up, the rapid growth 
of Chinese economy and the proposal of ‘improving the arbitration system and 
enhancing the credibility of arbitration’ in the Fourth Plenary Session of the 
18th CPC Central Committee. The SPC was carrying out some explorations and 
attempts in building a new pattern for the judicial review over arbitration. First, 
it was constructing a general pattern of judicial support for arbitration in the Belt 
and Road construction. Second, it was vigorously promoting the specialization of 
arbitration judicial review. Third, it was further improving the arbitration judicial 
review mechanism. Fourth, it was relying on information technology to promote 
judicial openness. Fifth, it was actively cultivating specialized arbitration judicial 
review teams. She said that in the new historical period, judiciary and arbitration 
should uphold the spirit of openness and tolerance, strengthen their interaction 
and cooperation at domestic and international levels with diverse and mutually-
beneficial thinking, and work together to promote social fairness and justice. 
Chinese courts would continue to support the development of arbitration with a 
broader international perspective and a more open judicial concept. The judicial 
review system would be improved continuously to safeguard and promote the 
development of arbitration and create a sound rule-of-law environment for ADR.
Mr. Lu Pengqi, Vice Chairman of the CCPIT and the CIETAC, presided over the 
opening ceremony.


166
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Mr. Lu Pengqi, Vice Chairman of the CCPIT and the CIETAC, presided over the opening 
ceremony
Mr. Wang Shengming, Vice Chairman of the NPC Internal Affairs 
Judicial Committee, Ms. Anna Lindstedt, Swedish Ambassador to China, 
representatives of the SPC, the Ministry of Commerce, Taiwan Affairs Office, 
HKSAR Government Beijing Office, participants from home and abroad and 
representatives of the older generation arbitrators of the CIETAC were invited to 
the Summit. 
This Summit also invited Prof. Dr. Kaj Hobér, President, Arbitration Institute 
of the SCC, Mr. Johan Gernandt, Former Chairman of the SCC, Prof. Doug 
Jones AO, Immediate-Past President, Australian Centre for International 
Commercial Arbitration (the ACICA), Dr. Nikolaus Pikkowitz, Vice President, 
Vienna International Arbitration Center (the VIAC), Ms. India Johnson, 
President of International Center for Dispute Resolution (the ICDR), American 
Arbitration Association (AAA), Mr. José Ricardo Feris, Deputy Sectary General, 


167
APPENDIX
International Court of Arbitration of the ICC Court, Prof. Dr. Marcelo Huck, 
Member of Superior Council, Chamber of Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration 
of the Center of Industries of the State  of São Paulo/Federation of Industries of 
the State of São Paulo (the CIESP/FIESP), Brazil, Mr. Ko-Yung Tung, Former 
Secretary General, International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes 
(the ICSID), Mr. Robert Davidson, Executive Director of Arbitration Practice, 
Judicial Arbitration and Mediation Services, Inc. (the JAMS), Justice Steven 
Chong, Justice, Supreme Court, Singapore, Datuk Professor Sundra Rajoo, 
Director, Kuala Lumpur Regional Centre for Arbitration (the KLRCA), Mr. 
Thomas Weimann, Member of the Board, Chinese European Arbitration Center 
GmbH, Ms. Ndanga Kamau, Registrar, LCIA-MIAC Arbitration Center, the HMT 
arbitration experts and other directors of leading international institutions from 14 
countries and regions in Asia, Africa, Latin America, the Americas and Oceania 
as the speakers. More than 600 representatives from major arbitration institutions 
in over 40 countries and regions, as well as judges, experts, arbitrators, lawyers 
and business people from over 40 countries attended the conference, of which 160 
were from abroad.


168
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Mr. Wang Chengjie, Vice Chairman and Secretary General of the CIETAC, 
presided over the closing ceremony
43 speakers had in-depth discussions in 5 sessions on issues including the trends 
of internationalization and localization in arbitration, hot topics in international 
arbitration, achievements and prospects of Chinese arbitration, judicial practice 
supporting arbitration in the Belt and Road countries and arbitration in the eyes of 
general legal counsels in the one and half days of the Summit.


169
APPENDIX
01. Justice Steven Chong, Justice, Supreme Court, 
Singapore
02. Mr. Ko-Yung Tung, Former Secretary General, the 
ICSID
03. Mr. Johan Gernandt, Former Chairman of the SCC
04. Prof. Doug Jones AO, Immediate-Past President, the 
ACICA
05. Datuk Professor Sundra Rajoo, Director, the KLRCA 
01
02
04
03
05


170
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Mr. Philip Yang, International 
Arbitrator
Mr. Thomas Weimann, Member of the 
Board, Chinese Europan Arbitration 
Center GmbH
Ms. Ndanga Kamau, Registrar, LCIA-
MIAC Arbitration Center
Mr. Emmanuel Jacomy, partner in 
Shearman & Sterling


171
APPENDIX
Speakers
At present, the development of international commercial arbitration is showing 
the coexistence of internationalization and localization. On the one hand, many 
countries or regions have recently amended the arbitration laws and major 
international arbitration institutions have updated the arbitration rules one after 
another, showing the convergence of rules in the trend of internationalization of 
arbitration. On the other hand, countries or regions and arbitration institutions have 
paid attention to local situation of arbitration and demands of main arbitration 
users and developed systems and practices with their own characteristics. Under 
the theme of the trends of internationalization and localization in arbitration, 
the keynote speakers discussed new changes in arbitration legal system around 
the world, new development of arbitration rules and practice, how arbitration 
institutions handle issues in the internationalization and localization of arbitration 
and how to balance the relationship between the two.
After nearly two centuries of development, especially after World War II, a 
complete system of international commercial arbitration has been established 
in the world. Commercial arbitration is widely used in today’s international 


172
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
speakers
exchange and economic activities and has shown unprecedented prosperity with 
new topics emerging continuously. To promote Chinese arbitration in line with 
international standards, lawyers from well-known international law firms and 
international arbitrators delivered speeches on cutting-edge topics in international 
arbitration such as investment arbitration, parallel procedure issues in arbitration, 
application of interim measures and third-party funding.
With the Government Administration Council’s approval in 1954 for setting 
up the CCPIT Foreign Trade Arbitration Commission as the symbol, the 
modern commercial arbitration system in China was established. After 60 years 
development, especially after the promulgation of the PRC Arbitration Law, 
Chinese arbitration has made great progress in a relatively short period of time. 
In order to review the past and look forward into the future, the keynote speakers 
reviewed the achievements and experience of Chinese arbitration in the past 60 
years, discussed the role and status of arbitrators and lawyers in arbitration, and 
had in-depth exchanges on issues such as measures to enhance the attractiveness 
of Chinese arbitration and the international competitiveness of Chinese arbitration 
commissions, the prospect of amending the PRC Arbitration Law and the future 


173
APPENDIX
direction of Chinese arbitration.
The Belt and Road is a major cooperation initiative proposed by President 
Xi Jinping. It is a Chinese proposal for promoting global cooperation and 
development and the top-level design for China’s opening-up and economic 
diplomacy in the new era. With the deepening implementation of the initiative, 
the enthusiasm of Chinese enterprises to participate therein has been on the rise. 
However, they also face many difficulties in trade and investment cooperation 
with other countries along the Belt and Road. The lack of comprehensive and 
effective legal service support is quite outstanding. In particular, the Summit 
set the session of judicial practice supporting arbitration in the Belt and Road 
countries, focusing on the enforcement of arbitral awards, especially foreign ones, 
in China, Chinese courts’ support to arbitration, frontier issues and prospects of 
judicial supervision over international commercial arbitration in China, judicial 
practices concerning the determination of validity of arbitration agreements, 
interim measures and enforcement of arbitral awards in the Belt and Road 
countries and the enforcement of Chinese arbitral awards in the Belt and Road 
countries, so as to give impetus to the proper resolution of civil and commercial 
disputes among enterprises in the Belt and Road countries and Chinese arbitration 
commissions to grasp the historic development opportunities. 


174
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Wang Liming, Vice Chairman of the CIETAC, Executive Vice President of Renmin University 
of China, made a special speech
Mr. Zhang Yongjian, Chief of Fourth Civil Division of the 
SPC, made a keynote speech
Mr. Yu Jianlong, Vice Chairman of the 
CIETAC, Secretary General of China 
Chamber of International Commerce, made 
a keynote speech 


175
APPENDIX
Mr. Liu Jingdong, Deputy Chief, Fourth Civil Division of the SPC, presided over 
the Fourth Session
Dr. Li Hu, Vice President of the CIETAC Court of Arbitration, made a keynote 
speech 
Mr. Ren Xuefeng, Presiding Judge, Fourth Civil Division of the SPC, delivered a 
keynote speech


176
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
The Summit also invited keynote speakers from business circles to discuss how to 
strengthen risk control management, set up perfect dispute resolution mechanism, 
handle disputes properly and defend their own legitimate rights and interest, 
what to consider when drafting arbitral clauses, selecting places of arbitration, 
arbitration institutions, arbitrators, arbitration language, arbitration rules and 
substantive laws as well as arbitration fees if arbitration is adopted, what role 
corporate legal counsels played in arbitration, what challenges Chinese enterprises 
faced in oversears arbitration, such as different legal and social systems, cultures 
and languages and how to deal with them, what experiences and lessons Chinese 


177
APPENDIX
The Summit
enterprises learned in overseas arbitration and suggestions for ‘going-out’ 
enterprises, etc. from the perspective of business practices and in light of their 
own systems and experiences.
In recognition of their significant contribution and great achievements in the 60-
year development of the CIETAC, the Summit presented Special Contribution 
Award to Mr. Ren Jianxin, former President of the SPC and Honorary Chairman 
of the CIETAC, and Prof. Tang Houzhi, consultant of the CIETAC and Mr. 
Fei Zongyi, former Judicial Committee Member of the SPC, and Lifetime 
Achievement Award to Mr. Johan Gernandt, Former Chairman of the SCC.


178
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)
Ms. Niu Lizhi, Wife of Mr. Ren Jianxin, former President of the SPC and Honorary 
Chairman of the CIETAC, received the award on behalf of Mr. Ren
Mr. Wang Shengming, Vice Chairman of the NPC Internal Affairs Judicial Committee 
presented the award to Prof. Tang Houzhi, consultant of the CIETAC


179
APPENDIX
Mr. Yu Jianlong, Vice Chairman of the CIETAC, Secretary General of China 
Chamber of International Commerce presented the award to Mr. Fei Zongyi, former 
Judicial Committee Member of the SPC
Mr. Wang Chengjie, the CIETAC Vice Chairman and Secretary General presented the 
award to Mr. Johan Gernandt, Former Chairman of the SCC


180
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)


181
APPENDIX


182
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)


183
APPENDIX


184
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2016)


2017
地址：北京市西城区桦皮厂胡同2号国际商会大厦6层
邮编：100035
电话：（86 10）82217788
传真：（86 10）82217766 / 64643500
网址：http://www.cietac.org
中国国际经济贸易仲裁委员会
China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission
Annual Report on 
International Commercial 
Arbitration in China


Preface................................................................................................................................ 5
Chapter 1　Overview of China's International Commercial Arbitration Development 
in 2017............................................................................................................................... 9
	
I. Data Analysis of International Commercial Arbitration Cases in China........................9
	
	
i. Overview of Cases Accepted by Arbitration Commissions Nationwide ................9
	
	
ii. Comparison of International Commercial Arbitration Practice in China...........17
	
II. Legislative Practice of International Commercial Arbitration in China......................29
	
	
i. About Legislative Amendments to Qualifications of Arbitrators.
.........................29
	
	
ii. About Judicial Supervision of Arbitration..........................................................30
	
	
iii. About the Arbitration Rules.............................................................................43
	
III. Theoretical Research on International Commercial Arbitration in China.
.................45
	
	
i. About the "Belt and Road" Dispute Resolution Mechanism ..............................45
	
	
ii. About Ad Hoc Arbitration .
................................................................................46
	
	
iii. Police Powers Doctrine in the Context of International Investment 
	
	
Arbitration .
...........................................................................................................47
Chapter 2　Observation on PPP-Related Arbitration Practice  in China.
........................ 49
	
I. Observation on the Track of PPP Development .........................................................49
	
	
i. Basic Concept of PPP ........................................................................................49
Table of Contents


	
	
ii. Development History of PPP Mode in China...................................................53
	
	
iii. Fields of Application of PPP Mode .
.................................................................58
	
II. Observation on Fundamental Legal Issues of PPP Projects .
.......................................61
	
	
i. The Current PPP-Related Legal Framework.
.......................................................61
	
	
ii. Legal Entities Involved in PPP Projects .
............................................................65
	
	
iii. Legal Relationships Involved in PPP .
...............................................................68
	
III. Observation on Hot Legal Issues of PPP Projects .
....................................................70
	
	
i. Legal Disputes on PPP Projects .........................................................................70
	
	
ii. Arbitrability of PPP-Related Disputes .
..............................................................74
	
	
iii. Advantages of Resolving PPP-Related Disputes through Arbitration .
...............78
	
	
iv. Service Features and Strengths of the CIETAC PPP Arbitration Center............80
	
IV. Observation on Typical Arbitration Cases Relating to PPP Projects .........................81
	
	
i. Characteristics of CIETAC Arbitration Cases Involving PPP Projects .
...............81
	
	
ii. Analysis of Typical PPP-Related CIETAC Cases Concluded 
	
	
from 2005 to 2016 ...............................................................................................82
	
V. Conclusion .
.............................................................................................................101
Chapter 3　International Investment Arbitration Practice and Survey.......................... 103
	
I. Overview of International Investment and Resolution of International 
	
Investment Disputes .
...................................................................................................103
	
	
i. Overview of International Direct Investment.
...................................................103
	
	
ii. Overview of Resolution of International Investment Disputes.........................108
	
II. Legal Framework of Protection of International Investments ..................................119
	
	
i. Overview..........................................................................................................119
	
	
ii. Multilateral Investment Conventions .
.............................................................122


	
	
iii. Free Trade Agreements .
..................................................................................125
	
	
iv. Bilateral Investment Treaties .
..........................................................................128
	
III. Practice and Exploration of International Investment Disputes..............................130
	
	
i. Amicus Curiae..................................................................................................130
	
	
ii. Annulment and Court Review of Awards........................................................131
	
	
iii. Identification of Loss .....................................................................................134
	
	
iv. Third-Party Funding ......................................................................................134
	
	
v. State-to-State Dispute Settlement (SSDS) .......................................................137
	
IV. New Development of International Investment Arbitration in China.....................139
	
	
i. Overview .........................................................................................................139
	
	
ii. CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules .
.....................................139
	
V. Conclusion  .
............................................................................................................149
Chapter 4　Judicial Review of International Commercial Arbitration in China ........... 169
	
I. Confirmation of Validity of Foreign-Related and HMT-Related 
	
Arbitration Agreements................................................................................................169
	
	
i. Interpretation of Arbitration Institutions Agreed in Arbitration Clauses...........169
	
	
ii. Decision on Validity by Arbitration or Court..................................................171
	
	
iii. Matters about the Scope of Judicial Review of Arbitration.
.............................172
	
	
iv. Whether to be Bound by the Arbitration Clauses ...........................................173
	
	
v. The Issue of Agency .
........................................................................................175
	
	
vi. Validity of Arbitration Clauses in the Bill of Lading .
......................................177
	
	
vii. Conclusion ...................................................................................................179
	
II. Annulment and Non-Enforcement of Foreign-Related and 
	
HMT-Related Arbitral Awards.
.....................................................................................180


	
	
i. Scope of Judicial Review of Arbitration............................................................180
	
	
ii. Problems about Arbitration Proceedings .........................................................182
	
	
iii. Whether the Parties Can Apply for Setting Aside the Arbitral Awards 
	
	
on the Ground of "Wrong Application of Laws" .
................................................184
	
	
iv. Conclusion .
....................................................................................................186
	
III. Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign-Related and HMT-Related 
	
Arbitral Awards ...........................................................................................................187
	
	
i. About the Jurisdiction......................................................................................187
	
	
ii. About the Validity of Arbitration Clauses .......................................................188
	
	
iii. About the Scope of Courts' Review ...............................................................191
	
	
iv. About the Notice on Arbitration ....................................................................193
	
	
v. About the Composition of the Arbitral Tribunal .............................................194
	
	
vi. Which One Shall Prevail in Case of Inconsistency between Arbitration Clauses 
	
	
and Arbitration Rules .........................................................................................196
	
	
vii. About the Awards beyond the Scope of Arbitration Agreement .
....................198
	
	
viii. About the Identification of Recognition or Enforcement of Arbitral 
	
	
Awards Contrary to the Public Policies ...............................................................201
	
	
ix. Application of the Expedited Procedure Rules .
...............................................205
	
	
x. Interpretation of "Disputes Incapable of Being Resolved through 
	
	
Arbitration" ........................................................................................................207
	
	
xi. Conclusion ....................................................................................................208
Summary of the Year....................................................................................................... 211


5
PREFACE
Preface
The Fourth Plenary Session of the 18
th Central Committee of the Communist Party 
of China (CPC) put forth the guiding principles of "Perfecting the arbitration 
system and enhancing the credibility of arbitration" and the Report at the 19
th 
National Congress of the CPC further specified that the law-based governance 
was an essential requirement and important guarantee for socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, which points out the direction and raises requirements for the 
development of China’s arbitration cause. As the most representative permanent 
international arbitration institution in China, China International Economic and 
Trade Arbitration Commission (CIETAC) has long been committed to pushing the 
development of international commercial arbitration, thus accumulating distinctive 
advantages and abundant experience in this regard. In recent years, CIETAC has been 
ranking among the top international arbitration institutions in terms of caseload, the 
total dispute amount, the universality of nationality of parties involved, and so forth. 
With a group of internationalized arbitrators proficient in the international trade 
and investment laws and specialized in cross-border economic and trade disputes, 
CIETAC has strong capacity and abundant resources to resolve disputes arising from 
international economic and trade activities in a professional and efficient way. 
CIETAC released the Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in 
China (2014) in Beijing on 22 September 2015, which was the first annual summary 
ever released in China on the development of China’s international commercial 
arbitration (normally called "foreign-related arbitration in China"). Moreover, the 
release of the Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China in 


6
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
both Chinese and English for the years of 2014, 2015 and 2016 attracted extensive 
attention of domestic and foreign arbitration scholars and practitioners. Therefore, 
CIETAC decides to move on to the preparation and publication of the Annual Report 
on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017) (2017 Annual Report) to 
further sum up the construction of the legal system of international commercial 
arbitration in China, promote the improvement of China’s international commercial 
arbitration system, the development of arbitration cause and the exchange of 
information, enhance the voice and influence of China in international commercial 
arbitration arena and provide references for further development of international 
commercial arbitration cause in China. 
Combining empirical analysis with theoretical research, the 2017 Annual Report 
reflects the highlights in the development of international commercial arbitration in 
China. Specifically, based on the analysis of international commercial arbitration cases 
in 2017, the 2017 Annual Report follows up the development of the legal system of 
international commercial arbitration in China, discusses judicial review in this field, 
analyzes the resolution of international investment disputes and current situation and 
prospect of investment arbitration in China, makes special observation on China’s 
arbitration practice of PPP-related projects and takes them as the development of 
international commercial arbitration in China of the year. 
Apart from the Preface and Summary of the Year, the 2017 Annual Report comprises 
four chapters. Chapter 1 Overview of International Commercial Arbitration 
Development in China summarizes the development of international commercial 
arbitration nationwide, and the theoretical research on China’s international 
commercial arbitration in 2017. Chapter 2 Observation on Arbitration Practice of 


7
PREFACE
PPP-related Projects in China, on the basis of analyzing the development track, scope 
of application, legal framework and legal relationship, makes a special observation 
of the dispute type of PPP projects and arbitrative issues thereof, in particular 
advantages and distinctive services of CIETAC in solving PPP-related disputes 
through arbitration. Chapter 3 International Investment Arbitration Practice and 
Observation in China sets forth the legal framework for resolution of international 
investment disputes for the first time, actively explores the way to resolve 
international investment disputes, and takes the CIETAC Investment Arbitration 
Rules as an example to introduce the new development of international investment 
arbitration practice in China. Chapter 4 Judicial Review of International Commercial 
Arbitration in China focuses on discussing judicial review over the confirmation 
of the validity of arbitration agreements involving foreign countries, Hong Kong, 
Macao and Taiwan, the revocation and non-enforcement of foreign-related and Hong 
Kong-related, Macao-related and Taiwan-related (HMT-related) arbitral awards, as 
well as recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards made in foreign countries, 
Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan. 
The 2017 Annual Report was prepared by the Research Team of Renmin University 
of China, led by Professor Du Huanfang, Vice President and Deputy Party Secretary 
of the Law School of Renmin University of China, and Ms. Li Bing, Director of the 
Arbitration Research Institute of CIETAC. Main members of the Research Team 
include Song Lianbin, Professor and Tutor to PhD students of the International Law 
School of China University of Political Science and Law, Ms. Liao Yuyi, postdoctoral 
researcher of The Research Office of Application of Law of the Supreme People’s 
Court (SPC), Mr. Dong Xiao, Partner of Anjie Law Firm, Ms. Yue Jie, lawyer of 


8
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Beijing Zhengxin Law Firm, and Mr. Tang Gongyuan, the former Senior Legal 
Advisor of IBM Corporation and lawyer of JunZeJun Law Offices. Their respective 
duties are as follows: Preface and Summary of the Year were prepared by Professor 
Du Huanfang. Chapter 1 was jointly prepared by Mr. Song Lianbin, Ms. Liao Yuyi 
and Mr. Dong Xiao, Chapter 2 was compiled by Mr. Dong Xiao and Ms. Yue Jie, 
Chapter 3 was prepared by Ms. Liao Yuyi, and Chapter 4 was prepared by Ms. Liao 
Yuyi. After the initial draft was completed at the beginning of this year, Ms. Shen 
Hongyu, Chief Judge of the Civil Adjudication Tribunal of the SPC and Judge of the 
International Commercial Court, reviewed and finalized Chapter 4, Professor Du 
Huanfang and Ms. Li Bing finally compiled and edited this Report, and Mr. Wang 
Chengjie, Deputy Director and Secretary-General of CIETAC, Mr. Li Hu, Party 
Secretary and Vice Secretary-General of CIETAC, and Mr. Zhao Jian, Vice President 
of the Arbitration Court of CIETAC reviewed the draft. 
We hereby acknowledge substantial support and generous assistance from the Civil 
Adjudication Tribunal No. 4 of the SPC, Renmin University of China, China 
University of Political Science and Law, Anjie Law Firm, JunZeJun Law Offices, 
etc. in providing information, draft compilation and interim review. We also extend 
our gratitude to the Arbitration Research Institute of CIETAC for great efforts in 
information collection, proofreading, typesetting and printing of this Report. 
Research Team of the Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China 
(2017)
30 July 2018


9
CHAPTER 1
Chapter 1　Overview of China's 
International Commercial Arbitration 
Development in 2017
Chinese arbitration institutions underwent a continuous sharp increase in terms 
of caseload in 2017. The legislature made amendments regarding the qualification 
of arbitrators to the Arbitration Law of the People’s Republic of China (the 
Arbitration Law) that came into force in 1995. The Supreme People’s Court (SPC) 
vigorously supported arbitration as usual and released multiple important judicial 
interpretations. Investment arbitration, arbitration of third-party funding, interim 
measures and the "Belt and Road" dispute resolution mechanism are major concerns 
of researchers in international commercial arbitration this year.
I. Data Analysis of International Commercial Arbitration 
Cases in China
1
i. Overview of Cases Accepted by Arbitration Commissions Nationwide 
1. Caseload and Dispute Amount
In 2017, 253 arbitration commissions across China accepted a total of 239,360 cases, 
an increase of 30,815 cases with the growth rate of 15% compared with 2016. The 
dispute amount of these cases totaled  RMB533.8 billion, growing by RMB64.3 
billion with the growth rate of 14% compared with 2016. Moreover, 6 arbitration 
1　Source of figures: Details of Caseload of Arbitration Commissions in China throughout 2017 provided by the 
Department for Government Legislation of the Ministry of Justice


10
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
commissions handled a total of 85,399 cases by online arbitration, accounting for 
36% of the total cases nationwide.
 
Figure 1-1
 


11
CHAPTER 1
Figure 1-3
Figure 1-2


12
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
 
Figure 1-4
In 2017, the 3 arbitration institutions under the  China Chamber of International 
Commerce (CCOIC) accepted a total of 2,370 cases, occupying 1% of the total 
cases. The dispute amount of these cases added up to RMB72.9 billion, accounting 
for 14% of the total amount. China International Economic and Trade Arbitration 
Commission (CIETAC) alone has accepted 2,298 cases, involving a total dispute 
amount of RMB71.888 billion.
The 5 arbitration institutions established by the municipalities directly under the 
central government accepted a total of 12,221 cases, accounting for 5% of the total 
cases; the dispute amount of these cases added up to RMB92.4 billion, occupying 
17% of the total amount.


13
CHAPTER 1
The 27 arbitration institutions established by the cities where the people's 
governments of provinces and autonomous regions are located accepted a total of 
127,970 cases, accounting for 54% of the total cases; the dispute amount of these 
cases added up to RMB149 billion, accounting for 28% of the total amount.
A total of 219 arbitration institutions established by other cities accepted 95,588 
cases altogether, accounting for 40% of the total cases. The dispute amount of these 
cases reached  RMB220.6 billion, occupying 41% of the total amount. 
 
Figure 1-5


14
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
 
Figure 1-6
2. Types of Major Cases 
In 2017, the types of cases accepted by arbitration institutions in China were 
sequenced as follows by quantity: 35,427 real-estate cases accounting for 14.8% of 
the total cases; 25,677 financial cases accounting for 10.73%; 23,696 traffic accident 
and compensation cases occupying 9.9%; 16,350 purchase and sales cases accounting 
for 6.83%; 9,412 construction project cases occupying 3.93%; 8,414 property cases 
accounting for 3.52%; 7,384 leasing cases accounting for 3.08%; 4,331 insurance 
cases occupying 1.81%; 1,825 equity transfer cases accounting for 0.76%; 809 


15
CHAPTER 1
land transaction cases occupying 0.34%; 316 medical dispute cases accounting for 
0.13%; 302 agricultural production and operation cases occupying 0.13%, and 261 
e-commerce cases accounting for 0.11%.
The dispute amounts of the said types of cases were ranked as follows: financial cases 
involved RMB155.8 billion, taking up to 29.18% of the total amount; construction 
project cases amounted to RMB76.2 billion, accounting for 14.27%; equity transfer 
cases involved RMB56.2 billion, occupying 10.5%; purchase and sale cases amounted 
to RMB46.2 billion, accounting for 8.64%; real-estate cases involved RMB40.8 
billion, taking up to 7.64%; land transaction cases amounted to RMB36.2 billion, 
accounting for 6.79%; leasing cases involved RMB13.9 billion, occupying 2.6%; 
e-commerce cases amounted to RMB4.2 billion, accounting for 0.79%; insurance 
cases involved  RMB3.2 billion, occupying 0.61%; traffic accident and compensation 
cases involved RMB1.3 billion, taking up to 0.25%; property cases amounted 
to RMB1.1 billion, accounting for 0.2%; agricultural production and operation 
cases amounted to RMB200 million, occupying 0.04%; and medical dispute and 
compensation cases involved RMB100 million, accounting for 0.02%.
3. Handling of Cases on Average 
The 253 arbitration commissions across China accepted  946 cases on average in 
2017, up by 115 cases with the growth rate of 14% compared with 2016. The dispute 
amount of these cases was RMB2.1 billion on average, increasing by RMB200 
million with the growth rate of 11% compared with 2016. 
4. Conciliation and Judicial Supervision 


16
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
In 2017, 69,450 cases were concluded by conciliation, taking up to 29% of the total 
caseload, dropping by 52,077 cases and 29% compared with 121,527 cases resolved 
through conciliation (with the conciliation rate of 58%) in 2016. 
In 2017, Chinese people’s courts ruled to set aside arbitral awards rendered by 
Chinese arbitration institutions in 186 cases, accounting for 0.07% of the total 
cases and falling by 0.04% compared with 0.11% (232 cases) in 2016, and refused 
to enforce arbitral awards in 100 cases, accounting for 0.04% of the total cases, a 
decrease of 0.01% compared with 0.03% (63 cases) in 2016.
 
Figure 1-7
5. Acceptance of Foreign-Related and HMT-Related cases 


17
CHAPTER 1
A total of 60 Chinese arbitration institutions accepted 3,188 cases involving foreign 
countries (foreign-related), Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan (HMT-related) in 2017, 
accounting for 1.3% of the total cases and remaining basically the same as that of 
2016. Among these cases, 1,405 ones involved Hong Kong and Macao, 307 ones 
were related to Macao, 308 ones were related to Taiwan, and the remaining 1,168 
cases were foreign-related.
ii. Comparison of International Commercial Arbitration Practice in 
China
Considering that China’s international commercial arbitration is institutional 
arbitration in the sense of both legislation and practice, this Chapter focuses 
on analyzing the features, the latest trend and development direction of China’s 
international commercial arbitration practice mainly through longitudinal 
comparison based on the 2017 annual reports and case statistics published by the 
major international arbitration institutions on their websites or through other official 
channels.
1. Caseloads
CIETAC accepted a total of 2,298 cases in 2017, up by 5.36% compared with 2016, 
including 476 foreign-related and HMT-related cases which accounted for 20.7% 
of its total caseload. Among these cases, there were 288 involving one overseas party, 
42 with both parties coming from abroad, and 146 in  which both parties were from 
mainland China, but the places where the contracts were signed or performed or 
where the subject matters of contract is located were outside mainland China.


18
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
The International Court of Arbitration of International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) 
accepted a total of 810 cases throughout 2017, a slight decline compared with its 
historical highest record in 2016.
The London Court of International Arbitration (LCIA) accepted 285 cases in 2017, 
a slight decrease compared with 2016. Among them, 233 cases were administered 
by the LCIA in accordance with its LCIA Arbitration Rules, and for the remaining 
50 cases, the LCIA either acted as the appointing authority or provided other 
administrative services for cases where the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (the 
UNCITRAL Rules) applied, or functioned as the fund trustee in such cases and other 
ad hoc arbitration cases.
The Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (SCC) accepted 
200 cases in 2017, ranking third in its record since its establishment in 1917. Among 
them, 96 were Swedish domestic cases and 104 were international arbitration cases. 
The SCC Arbitration Rules were applied in 108 cases, and the SCC Rules for Expedited 
Arbitration were applied in 72 cases, while emergency arbitrators were appointed for 
3 cases.
The Singapore International Arbitration Centre (SIAC) accepted a total of 452 cases 
in 2017, involving a total amount of USD4.07 billion (SGD5.44 billion), 421 of 
which were administered by the SIAC, accounting for 93%, while the average dispute 
amount per case was USD15.82 million (about SGD21.14 million).
The Hong Kong International Arbitration Centre (HKIAC) accepted 532 cases 
in 2017, an increase of 15.7% compared with 2016. Among them, 297 were the 
arbitration cases, 15 cases were resolved through conciliation and 220 involved 


19
CHAPTER 1
domain name disputes. Among the arbitration cases, 156 were administered by 
the HKIAC according to its arbitration rules or the UNCITRAL Rules, increasing 
by 66% compared with the previous year. Caseloads of the aforesaid arbitration 
institutions in 2017 are illustrated in Figure 1-8. 
 
Figure 1-8
2. Parties Involved in Cases 
The internationalization of the parties involved in the international commercial 
arbitration cases may reflect the extent of recognition of an arbitration institution in 
international arbitration. According to the data published by the major international 
arbitration institutions, parties involved in 2017 cases were from the following 


20
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
countries or regions:
Parties in CIETAC cases were from 60 countries and regions, including the USA, 
Canada, Brazil, Mexico, Germany, the UK, France, Italy, Austria, the Netherlands, 
South Africa, Russia, Australia, India, Japan, South Korea, Singapore and Hong 
Kong, etc.
Figure 1-9
In 2017, the top five countries or regions with the most parties involved in the 810 
cases accepted by the ICC were the USA, Germany, France, Brazil and Spain. China 
(including Hong Kong) took the seventh place. 
More than 80% of the parties of the cases accepted by the LCIA in 2017 came from 


21
CHAPTER 1
countries other than the UK in 2017, which was basically the same as that in 2016. 
Most of the parties were from the west Europe, accounting for 19.3%, and parties 
from the USA kept soaring.
Parties of the cases accepted by the SCC in 2017 were from 40 countries or regions, 
and there were 137 parties from Sweden, ranking atop. The rest top 6 countries or 
regions with the most parties involved were Russia, Germany, the UK, Norway and 
Turkey.
Parties of the cases accepted by the SIAC in 2017 came from 58 jurisdictions, and the 
majority of parties (176) were from India, closely followed by China and Sweden (77 
and 72 parties, respectively). The top 10 countries or regions with the most parties 
involved were the USA, Germany, Hong Kong, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), 
Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia and the UK.
In 2017, the majority of the arbitration cases accepted by the HKIAC were 
international ones, 73.1% of the cases involved at least one party from outside Hong 
Kong, 72.3% of the institutional arbitration cases were international cases, 40.8% of 
the cases had no connection with Hong Kong, and 5.2% of the cases had no relation 
to Asia. Parties of the cases accepted by the HKIAC in 2017 were from 39 countries 
or regions. The top 10 countries or regions with the most parties involved were Hong 
Kong, mainland China, Singapore, the British Virgin Islands (BVI), the Cayman 
Islands, the USA, South Korea, Thailand, Macao and the UK.
3. Types of Disputes 
Cases accepted by CIETAC in 2017 involved 18 types, remaining basically the 


22
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
same as those in 2016. Among these cases, 446 involved disputes arising from sale 
of goods, ranking atop. Cases relating to service contracts were 100 more than that 
of the previous year, up to 337 cases. Cases in connection with equity investment 
and share transfer increased slightly up to 219. The numbers of cases involving 
electro-mechanical equipment, construction, decoration, contracting, real estate 
development, housing, land and real estate, and entrusted contract remained high, 
reaching up to 265, 172, 127 and 91, respectively. 
Figure 1-10


23
CHAPTER 1
In the 810 cases accepted by the ICC in 2017, the top 5 types of disputes involved 
construction project (186 cases accounting for 23.0%), energy (155 cases accounting 
for 19.1%), transport (accounting for 6.8%), telecommunication and proprietary 
technology (accounting for 6.2%) and industrial equipment (accounting for 5.9%). 
According to the annual report of the LCIA, cases accepted by the LCIA in 2017 
were mainly concerned with the following sectors: banking and financial sector 
(24%), mineral and energy (24%), consulting and other professional services (11%), 
transport and commodities (11%), construction project (7%), etc. To be specific, 
the cases involving disputes arising from the banking and financial sector, mineral 
and energy remained as the main types of cases of the LCIA. Cases in the following 
two sectors have undergone the biggest change in the proportion since the beginning 
of 2017, i.e., professional services arbitration (soaring from 5% to 10%) and 
construction and infrastructure arbitration (dropping from 15% to 7%).
According to the data published by the SCC, main types of disputes involved in the 
200 cases accepted by the SCC in 2017 were as follows: carriage contract disputes (43 
cases), service agreement disputes (43 cases), disputes of mergers and acquisitions (29 
cases), shareholder agreement disputes (19 cases), construction project disputes (16 
cases), and employment agreement disputes (12 cases).
Main types of disputes involved in the cases accepted by the SIAC were trade disputes 
(accounting for 31% of the total caseload), commercial affairs disputes (including 
agency, distribution, franchising and licensing, etc., accounting for 22%), transport/
maritime disputes (accounting for 20%), company disputes (accounting for 14%) 
and construction/project disputes (accounting for 9%).


24
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Main types of disputes involved in the cases accepted by the HKIAC in 2017 were: 
international trade disputes (accounting for 31.9%), construction project disputes 
(accounting for 19.2%), company disputes (accounting for 13.5%), maritime 
disputes (accounting for 8.8%), professional services (accounting for 8.1%), 
banking and financial disputes (accounting for 6.2%), intellectual property disputes 
(accounting for 4.6%), energy disputes (accounting for 1.9%), insurance disputes 
(accounting for 1.2%) and other disputes (accounting for 4.6%).
4. Place of Arbitration
Mainland China remained as the place of arbitration for the majority of the cases 
accepted by CIETAC in 2017. Parties, when drafting arbitral clauses, normally 
agreed to choose major cities in mainland China, including Shanghai, Shenzhen, 
Guangzhou, Chongqing, etc., which are usually regarded as the parties’ agreement on 
the place of oral hearing.
Cases accepted by the ICC were arbitrated widely in 104 cities of 63 countries. The 
top 5 places of arbitration were as follows: France (121 cases), Switzerland (90 cases), 
the UK (73 ones), the USA (51 ones) and Singapore (38 cases). 
In the cases accepted by the LCIA, London was chosen or designated as the place of 
arbitration in 218 cases, accounting for 94% of the total caseload, while the UAE 
ranked 2
nd with 3 cases and the USA ranked 3
rd with 2 cases.
The places of arbitration of the cases accepted by the SCC in 2017 were diverse, 
Stockholm was chosen in 73% of the cases while Goteborg and Malmo, located at 
the southern end of Sweden, ranked 2
nd. 


25
CHAPTER 1
Hong Kong was the only place of arbitration in the cases accepted by the HKIAC in 
2017.
5. Arbitrators
A total of 47 arbitrators from outside mainland China participated in the hearing of 
71 foreign-related cases accepted by CIETAC in 2017. There are 1,437 arbitrators in 
the new CIETAC Panel of Arbitrators effective as from 1 May 2017. Among them, 
405 are from 65 countries and regions, accounting for 28.2% of the total arbitrators, 
an increase of 24 countries than previously, and the number of "Belt and Road" 
countries also increased from 15 to 28, which provides more choices for the parties 
when choosing the arbitrators.
Arbitrators from 85 countries were appointed by the ICC for the hearing of cases 
in 2017. The top 6 countries with the most arbitrators were the same as those in 
2016, i.e., the UK (219), France (141), Switzerland (116), the USA (100), Germany 
(99) and Brazil (77), respectively. Among them, there were 249 female arbitrators, 
accounting for 16.7% of the total arbitrators. 
In 2017, the LCIA made 412 appointments of arbitrators in 2017, whereby 241 
arbitrators were appointed. Although the majority of the arbitrators listed the UK as 
their first nationality, there were a considerable number of arbitrators coming from 
the USA, Europe and Asia. The parties of 26% cases and the arbitrators of 20% 
cases chose arbitrators from countries other than the UK, and the LCIA appointed 
arbitrators from countries other than the UK for 52% cases. Besides, 24% of the 
arbitrators who participated in the hearing of cases were female, a growth of 3% 
compared with 2016. 


26
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
the SCC appointed a total of 254 arbitrators in 2017, 82% of them were male and 
18% were female. the SCC preferred arbitrators from Europe and appointed a total 
of 231 European arbitrators, followed by those from Australia and North America (5 
were appointed respectively). 
The SIAC appointed a total of 145 arbitrators for 114 sole arbitrator tribunals 
and 31 three-arbitrator tribunals. These arbitrators came from Australia, Canada, 
China, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New 
Zealand, Portugal, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, the UK and the USA. The 
statistics shows that the SIAC and the parties preferred arbitrators from Singapore (112 
arbitrators), the UK (64 arbitrators) and the USA (15 arbitrators). 
The HKIAC appointed 97 arbitrators in 2017, with 16.5% female arbitrators. 32% 
of the arbitrators were appointed for the first time over the past 3 years. The top 4 
countries of the arbitrators’ origin were the UK, Hong Kong, Canada and Australia.
6. Dispute Amount 
In 2017, the total dispute amount of 2,298 cases accepted by CIETAC was 
RMB71.888 billion (about USD10.444 billion), jumping by 22.55% compared 
with 2016. The average dispute amount was RMB31.2829 million per case, hitting 
a record high. The dispute amount of foreign-related and HMT-related cases reached 
RMB35.02408 billion, soaring by RMB19.60256 billion with the growth rate of 
127.11%, and the average dispute amount of foreign-related and HMT-related cases 
reached RMB73.58 million. 
The average dispute amount of cases accepted by the ICC was about USD137 


27
CHAPTER 1
million in 2017, and cases involving the dispute amount of USD2 million took up 
60.4% of the total cases, and those lower than USD2 million were about 31.7%.
Cases accepted by the LCIA in 2017 that involved a large dispute amount 
continuously increased, and 31% of the cases recorded the dispute amount of 
USD20 million, higher than those in 2016 and 2015 (28% and 18% respectively). 
The total dispute amount of the cases accepted by the SCC in 2017 exceeded 
EUR1.5 billion (about USD1.75 billion). The dispute amount of cases where 
SCC Rules for Expedited Arbitration applied was EUR31 million (about USD36.16 
million), and those where the general rules applied involved an amount of EUR1.4 
billion (about USD1.63 billion).
The total dispute amount of cases accepted by the SIAC in 2017 was SGD5.44 
billion (about USD4.07 billion). The highest dispute amount involved in a case was 
SGD8.035 billion (about USD6.0103 billion), while the average dispute amount per 
case was SGD193.4 million (about USD144.7 million).
The total dispute amount of the cases accepted by the HKIAC in 2017 was about 
HKD3.93 billion (about USD5 billion), surging by 100% compared with 2016.
7. Conclusion 
The following basic conclusion may be drawn from the aforesaid statistics and 
analyses of the annual reports and case data released by relevant major international 
commercial arbitration institutions:
Firstly, the caseloads of major international commercial arbitration institutions 


28
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
varied in their changes and development trends. The caseloads of the ICC and the 
LCIA declined slightly. In contrast, the caseloads of CIETAC, the HKIAC, the SIAC 
and other arbitration institutions in the Asia-Pacific Region increased sharply and 
boomed with great potential. In terms of the total caseload, CIETAC continued to 
take the lead among international arbitration institutions.
Secondly, regarding the internationalization, complexity and diversity of the parties 
involved in the ICC cases, the range of nationalities thereof (142 countries and 
regions) and the distribution of places of arbitration (104 cities in 63 countries) were 
significantly higher or wider than those of other international arbitration institutions 
established in a specific country or region. Cases accepted by arbitration institutions 
other than the ICC had a high proportion of cases involving domestic parties, and 
the cases involving foreign parties covered about 50 countries and regions averagely. 
Meanwhile, the places of arbitration were mainly in the host countries or neighboring 
ones. As the "Belt and Road" Initiative is implemented in an all-round way and 
the SPC's International Commercial Court was established, the exchange and 
cooperation between China's international commercial arbitration and the arbitration 
communities of other countries were deepened, and the international commercial 
arbitration in China was further increased. 
Thirdly, regarding the diversification of the composition of the arbitral tribunals, 
China’s international commercial institutions were slightly lagged behind other 
international arbitration institutions, due to the restrictions on the arbitrator panel 
system, languages and others. However, CIETAC provides the parties with more 
choices in the appointment of international arbitrators along with the increase in the 
number of its foreign arbitrators and China’s gradual relaxation of restrictions on the 


29
CHAPTER 1
arbitrator panel system. Fourthly, there was an apparent increase in the total dispute 
amount of all the international arbitration institutions in 2017. The dispute amount 
of cases accepted by CIETAC was RMB71.888 billion (about USD10.444 billion), 
jumping by 22.55% compared with 2016, hitting a record high and also taking the 
lead among the major international arbitration institutions.
In summary, the international commercial arbitration institutions in China, 
represented by CIETAC, have sped up the pace of internationalization in 2017. 
With China’s strong support for arbitration and its accelerated opening-up, Chinese 
arbitration institutions will gradually "go global" while international commercial 
arbitration institutions will be gradually "invited in", so as to enrich the practice of 
China’s international commercial arbitration to a greater extent.
II. Legislative Practice of International Commercial 
Arbitration in China
Compared with the previous year, the development of China’s arbitration legal 
system in 2017 focused more on judicial supervision, as well as the positive role 
of arbitration in the implementation of the "Belt and Road" Initiative from the 
perspective of alternative dispute resolution. As time goes on, these measures will 
have a profound impact on the international commercial arbitration in China.
i. About Legislative Amendments to Qualifications of Arbitrators
The amendment and improvement of the Arbitration Law have been a focus of 
concern for many years. The 29
th Session of the Standing Committee of the 12
th 
National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China held on 1 September 


30
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
2017 adopted the Decision of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress 
on Amending Eight Laws including the Judges Law of the People's Republic of China
2, 
which came into force as from 1 January, 2018. Pursuant to the Decision, Article 
13.2(1) of the Arbitration Law was amended from "have at least eight years of 
working experience in arbitration" to "passed national uniform legal professional 
qualification examination and obtained the legal professional qualification certificate, 
and have at least eight years of working experience in arbitration". Article 13.2(3) 
thereof was amended from "served as senior judges for at least eight years" to be 
"served as judges for at least eight years". It can be seen that, to respond to the reform 
from the judicial examination system to the national uniform legal professional 
qualification examination system, this amendment of the Arbitration Law only 
addresses the qualifications of arbitrators, regulates and raises entry conditions of legal 
arbitrators and lowers the threshold for non-incumbent judges to serve as arbitrators. 
 
ii. About Judicial Supervision of Arbitration
Since the mid of 2017, the SPC has released in succession the Notice on Some Issues 
Concerning the Centralized Handling of Cases Involving Judicial Review of Arbitration 
(F [2017] No. 152 released on 22 May), Relevant Provisions on Issues Concerning 
Application for Verification of Cases Involving Judicial Review of Arbitration (FS [2017] 
No. 21 issued on 26 December), the Provisions on Several Issues Concerning Trial 
of Cases Involving Judicial Review of Arbitration (FS [2017] No. 22 released on 26 
December), and in principle adopted the Provisions on Several Issues Concerning 
the Handling of Arbitral Award Enforcement Cases by the People's Courts, which 
2　See the Release Upon Authorization: Decision of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress on 
Amending Eight Laws including the Judges Law of the People's Republic of China through http://www.xinhuanet.
com/2017-09/02/c_1121588527.htm, the latest visit on 17 July, 2018. 


31
CHAPTER 1
was officially released on 23 February 2018. This is the greatest innovation in the 
arbitration regime of judicial supervision after the release of the Interpretation of 
Some Issues Concerning the Application of the Arbitration Law of the People's Republic of 
China (FS [2006] No.7) in 2005.
1. Centralized Handling of Cases Involving Judicial Review of Arbitration
For the purpose of the Notice on Some Issues Concerning the Centralized Handling 
of Cases Involving Judicial Review of Arbitration (the Centralized Handling Notice), 
"centralized handling" means: (1) Acting as specialized trial divisions, tribunals 
(collegial panels) of courts hearing the foreign-related commercial cases at various 
levels shall be responsible for handling the cases involving judicial review of 
arbitration. (2) Cases in which any party concerned applies for confirming the 
validity of an arbitration agreement, setting aside an arbitral award made by an 
arbitral institution in mainland China, or applies for recognition and enforcement of 
an arbitral award made in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR), Macao 
SAR and Taiwan, or applies for recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitral 
award, shall be handled by the specialized trial divisions of courts at various levels. 
After a review, if a specialized trial division rules to recognize and enforce an arbitral 
award made in Hong Kong SAR, Macao SAR and Taiwan, or recognize and enforce 
a foreign arbitral award, the relevant cases shall be transferred to the corresponding 
division for enforcement. It should be noted that arbitral awards made by arbitral 
institutions in mainland China shall be enforced by the enforcement division of 
the competent court, without being subject to the Centralized Handling Notice. (3) 
Cases that any party concerned is dissatisfied with the ruling on refusal of acceptance, 
dismissal of the litigation or on objection to jurisdiction related to the effect of an 


32
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
arbitration agreement ruled by the court of first instance, and thus files an appeal, 
shall be handled by the specialized trial division of the people’s court of second 
instance.
Objectively speaking, centralized handling is conductive to improving the standards 
for judgment of cases involving judicial review of arbitration, as well as the quality 
and efficiency of judicial supervision over arbitration, and then the development of 
arbitration. It is worth special noticing that, the Centralized Handling Notice also 
stipulates that courts at various levels shall establish the centralized information 
management platform for cases involving judicial review of arbitration, so as to 
strengthen the information-based management and data analysis of relevant cases 
involving judicial review of arbitration and guarantee the accuracy of application of 
laws and the unification of judgment standards.
2. Reporting and Approval System for Judicial Review of Arbitration
The reporting and approval system for judicial review of arbitration derives from the 
reporting system for foreign-related arbitration. The Notice of the SPC on Disposal of 
Relevant Issues Concerning Foreign-related Arbitration and Foreign Arbitral Matters by 
People's Courts (FF No. 18 [1995] released on 29 August 1995) first established the 
reporting system, which was further refined through the Notice on Relevant Matters 
about Revoking Foreign-related Arbitral Awards by People's Courts (F [1998] No. 40 
released on 23 April 1998) and the Provisions on Issues Concerning Charges and Review 
Term for Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (FS [1998] No. 28 
released on 21 October 1998). In contrast, Relevant Provisions on Issues concerning 
Reporting for Approval of Cases Involving Judicial Review of Arbitration (the Provisions 


33
CHAPTER 1
on Reporting for Approval) amended the "reporting" to be "reporting for approval", 
and extended to purely domestic arbitration cases. The main contents are as follows:
(1) On the basis of introducing the reporting system, the Provisions on Reporting 
for Approval extends the reporting and approval system to the judicial supervision 
over purely domestic arbitration cases. Pursuant to Article 2.2 of the Provisions on 
Reporting for Approval, when handling arbitration cases under judicial review which 
do not involve foreign countries, Hong Kong, Macao or Taiwan, if an intermediate 
people's court or special people's court intends to make decision upon review to 
hold the arbitration agreement invalid or not to enforce or to annul the arbitral 
award rendered by an arbitration institution in mainland China, it shall report the 
decision to the high people's court in its jurisdiction for approval; the decision shall 
be made based on the  opinion of the high people's court after examination and 
review by the high people's court. This is principally because enormous arbitration 
cases occur in China (up to 208,000 cases in 2016) each year, and reporting all the 
foreign-related cases involving judicial review of arbitration to the SPC will greatly 
increase its workload, and will influence the functions of the supreme judicial organ 
and also lower the efficiency of judicial review. However, it shall still report the same 
to the SPC for approval and shall make decision based on the SPC's opinion upon 
examination and review under any of the following circumstances: where the places 
of domicile of the parties to the cases involving judicial review of arbitration are in 
different provincial administrative regions, where the arbitral award rendered by an 
arbitration institution in mainland China is to be refused of enforcement or annulled 
on the ground of violation of public interest. It is clear that the Provisions on Reporting 
for Approval aim at smashing the local protectionism of cases involving judicial review 


34
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
of arbitration, and also represents the SPC's consistent position of keeping prudent 
in applying the public interest clause.
(2) The reporting and approval system was further regulated in the form of judicial 
interpretation, which is manifested as follows: (A) Clarifying the scope of cases 
involving judicial review of arbitration: Cases involving application for confirming 
the validity of arbitration agreements, cases involving application for annulment of 
the arbitral awards rendered by arbitration institutions of mainland China, cases 
involving application for enforcement of arbitral awards rendered by arbitration 
institutions of mainland China; Cases involving application for recognition and 
enforcement of arbitral awards rendered in Hong Kong SAR, Macao SAR and 
Taiwan, cases involving recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards; and 
other cases involving judicial review of arbitration. (B) Balancing the relationship 
between supporting arbitration and reducing judicial burden: as noted above, only 
foreign-related cases or some domestic cases involving judicial review of arbitration 
can be reported to the SPC. Where, in a civil litigation, the party concerned files an 
appeal due to dissatisfaction with a ruling involving the validity of the arbitration 
agreement as rendered by the people's court for non-acceptance, rejection of the 
lawsuit or objection to jurisdiction, the court of second instance shall report the 
decision level by level for approval. (C) When reporting for approval, a people's court 
at lower level shall submit a written report and the case files. (D) Where the people's 
court at higher level thinks that relevant facts of the case are unclear upon receipt of 
the reporting of the people's court at lower level for approval, it may make inquiry of 
the parties concerned or return the case to the people's court at lower level for further 
ascertaining the facts before reporting again.


35
CHAPTER 1
The Provisions on Reporting for Approval narrow the gap between foreign-related 
arbitration and domestic arbitration in terms of judicial review procedures, which is 
conducive to improving the domestic arbitration environment. Furthermore, used 
as internal management measures, the Provisions expand the scope of the original 
reporting system, and also become an attempt of litigation reform made by the SPC 
from the perspective of openness, transparency and regularity of judicial review and 
the procedural guarantee of  the parties’ rights.
3. Improvement of Arbitration Judicial Review Rules
The Provisions on Several Issues Concerning Trial of Cases Involving Judicial Review 
of Arbitration (the Provisions on Cases Involving Judicial Review of Arbitration) are 
applicable to the subjects same as those of the reporting and approval system, but 
with richer contents. On the basis of summarizing the current judicial practices, the 
Provisions on Cases Involving Judicial Review of Arbitration make further clarification 
on the relevant stipulations of the Arbitration Law and the Civil Procedure Law of the 
People's Republic of China (the Civil Procedure Law).
(1) Jurisdiction of cases involving judicial review of arbitration. Two new points are 
advanced therein: Firstly, cases where an application is submitted for confirming 
the validity of the arbitration agreement shall be subject to the jurisdiction of 
the intermediate people's court or special people's court in the place where the 
arbitration institution specified in the arbitration agreement is located, the place 
where an arbitration agreement is signed, the place of the domicile of the applicant or 
the place of the domicile of the respondent. Secondly, where a foreign arbitral award 
is related to a case tried by a people's court, neither the place of the domicile of the 


36
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
respondent nor the place where the property of the respondent is located in mainland 
China, and the applicant applies for recognition of the foreign arbitral award, the 
people's court accepting the related case shall have jurisdiction. If the people's court 
accepting the related case is a basic-level people's court, the people's court at the 
next higher level of the basic-level people's court shall have jurisdiction in the case 
of application for recognition of the foreign arbitral award. If the people's court 
accepting the related case is a high people's court or the SPC, the court shall decide 
whether to conduct the review itself or appoint and intermediate people's court for 
review. Where a foreign arbitral award is related to a case tried by an arbitration 
institution in mainland China and neither the place of domicile of the respondent 
nor the place of the location of the property of the respondent is in mainland China, 
the case involving the application by the applicant for recognition of the foreign 
arbitral award shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the intermediate people's court at 
the place where the arbitration institution accepting the related case is located.
(2) Finality and appealability of the ruling involving judicial review of arbitration. 
The ruling rendered by the people's court in a case involving judicial review of 
arbitration shall take legal effect upon service thereof. The people's court shall 
not accept the application for review, appeal or application for retrial filed by the 
party concerned, unless otherwise stipulated by the laws or judicial interpretations. 
However, the applicant may file an appeal if unsatisfied with the ruling for refusal to 
accept, for dismissal of application rendered by the people's court or if the respondent 
is unsatisfied with the ruling for objection to jurisdiction rendered by the people's 
court.
(3) Applicable law of foreign-related arbitration agreements. It mainly specifies three 


37
CHAPTER 1
circumstances: firstly, where the parties concerned make choice of the law applicable 
in confirming the validity of the foreign-related arbitration agreement through 
consultation, they shall do so by express expression of intention and the agreement 
on the law applicable to the contract alone cannot serve as the agreement on the 
law applicable for confirming the validity of the arbitration clause in the contract. 
Secondly, where, in determining the law applicable to the confirmation of the validity 
of a foreign-related arbitration agreement by the people's court in accordance with 
Article 18 of the Law of the People's Republic of China on Choice of Law for Foreign-
related Civil Relationships (the Law for Foreign-related Civil Relationships), the parties 
have not made choice of the applicable law, and the application of the law of the 
place where the arbitration institution is located and the application of the law of 
the place of arbitration lead to different decisions on the validity of the arbitration 
agreement, the people's court shall apply the law that confirms the arbitration 
agreement to be valid. Therefore, where the arbitration agreement fails to specify the 
arbitration institution or the place of arbitration but the arbitration institution or the 
place of arbitration can be determined in accordance with the applicable arbitration 
rules stipulated in the arbitration agreement, such arbitration institution or place 
of arbitration shall be determined as the arbitration institution or the place of 
arbitration prescribed in Article 18 of the Law for Foreign-related Civil Relationships. 
Thirdly, where, in reviewing the case involving the application by the party concerned 
for recognition and enforcement of the arbitral award conducted by the people's 
court by applying the New York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of 
Foreign Arbitral Awards (i.e., the New York Convention), the respondent makes defense 
on the ground that the arbitration agreement is invalid, the people's court shall 
determine the law applicable to the confirmation of the validity of the arbitration 


38
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
agreement in accordance with Article V:1(a) of the Convention.
(4) Basis for judicial review of arbitration. The double-track system will be used. The 
judicial review of foreign-related and domestic arbitration rendered by an arbitration 
institution in mainland China shall be applicable to Article 274 and Article 237 of 
the Civil Procedure Law respectively. For "acts of arbitrator to seek or accept bribes, 
commit malpractices for personal benefits or pervert the law in the arbitration of 
cases" as stipulated in Article 237.2(6) of the Civil Procedure Law and Article 58.1(6) 
of the Arbitration Law, the SPC made restrictive interpretation, i.e., these acts 
refer to the acts that have been confirmed by effective criminal legal instruments or 
disciplinary sanction decisions.
In summary, the Provisions on Cases Involving Judicial Review of Arbitration further 
show the SPC's consistent position of supporting arbitration in terms of the judicial 
review of arbitration.
4. Reform of Arbitral Award Enforcement Rules
The enforcement of arbitral awards has always been the top concern of judicial 
supervision over arbitration. The Provisions on Several Issues Concerning the Handling 
of Arbitral Award Enforcement Cases by the People's Courts (the Provisions on Arbitral 
Award Enforcement) are rich in contents, with key points as follows:
(1) Introducing the system of application for non-enforcement by a party not 
involved in the arbitration case (non-involved-party). To deal with the situations 
of vicious arbitration, fictitious arbitration, undermining rights and interests of the 
non-involved-party or prejudicing social credibility of arbitration and judicature, 


39
CHAPTER 1
the Provisions on Arbitral Award Enforcement expanded the subject scope of non-
enforcement application of relevant arbitral award and granted the right to a non-
involved-party to apply for non-enforcement of the arbitral award. Article 9 hereof 
stipulates a non-involved-party may apply for non-enforcement of the  relevant 
arbitral award or arbitration conciliation statement if it satisfies the following 
conditions: (A) Where there is evidence proving that parties to the arbitration 
case have maliciously applied for arbitration or engaged in fictitious arbitration, 
undermining the legitimate rights and interests of the non-involved-party; (B) Where 
the subject matter for enforcement involving the legitimate rights and interests of the 
non-involved-party has not been fully enforced; and (C) Where the non-involved-
party submits its application within 30 days after it comes to know or should have 
known that the people's court has taken enforcement measures against the said 
subject matter. Article 18 hereof stipulates that the application submitted by a party 
not concerned in accordance with the aforesaid Article 9 shall be upheld upon 
satisfaction of the following conditions: (a) Where the applicant is a party enjoying 
relevant rights or interests; (b) Where the rights or interests claimed by the applicant 
are lawful and truthful; (c) Where the parties to the arbitration case have fabricated 
legal relationship and facts of the case; and (d) Where the outcome of the disposal of 
the civil rights and obligations of the parties concerned in the main texts of relevant 
arbitral award or arbitration conciliation statement is partially or entirely erroneous, 
prejudicing the applicant's legitimate rights and interests. Regarding the ruling on 
the application for non-enforcement of arbitral award by a non-involved-party, either 
the parties to the arbitration case or the non-involved-party may apply for review to 
the people's court at the higher level within 10 days after receiving the said ruling.


40
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
(2) Clarifying the linkage between annulment and enforcement proceedings 
(including non-enforcement). Pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Arbitration 
Law and the Civil Procedure Law, the application for annulment of an arbitral award 
can be compatible with the application of non-enforcement of such arbitral award. 
To further improve the efficiency of judicial review of arbitration, the Provisions on 
Arbitral Award Enforcement further detailed the linkage between the application 
for annulment and for non-enforcement of an arbitral award based on the unified 
stipulations on the grounds for annulment and non-enforcement of the Civil 
Procedure Law. (A) The competent people's court shall not uphold an application 
for non-enforcement of an arbitral award submitted by a party concerned during the 
enforcement proceedings based on the same grounds raised in its previous application 
for annulment of the arbitral award which has been dismissed by the people's court. 
The competent people's court shall not uphold an application for annulment of an 
arbitral award submitted by a party concerned based on the same grounds relied 
upon in its previous application for non-enforcement of the arbitral award which 
has been dismissed by the people's court. (B) During the period when a case for 
non-enforcement of an arbitral award is being reviewed, if a party concerned applies 
for annulment of the arbitral award to the competent people's court and the said 
application is accepted, the people's court shall render a ruling to suspend the review 
of the application for non-enforcement; where the arbitral award is annulled or 
where re-arbitration is decided, the people's court shall render a ruling to terminate 
enforcement and the review of the application for non-enforcement; where the 
application for annulment of an arbitral award is dismissed or the applicant for 
enforcement withdraws the application for annulment of the arbitral award, the 
people's court shall resume the review of the application for non-enforcement; and, 


41
CHAPTER 1
where the party against whom the enforcement is sought withdraws the application 
for annulment of the arbitral award, the people's court shall render a ruling to 
terminate the review of the application for non-enforcement, unless a non-involved-
party applies for non-enforcement of the arbitral award. (C) Where a people's court 
renders a ruling to dismiss an application for annulment of an arbitral award or an 
application for non-enforcement of an arbitral award or arbitration conciliation 
statement, the relevant court of enforcement shall resume enforcement. These 
measures can effectively prevent the party against whom the enforcement is sought 
from hindering the enforcement by abusing the procedures and can help minimize 
waste of judicial resources caused by repeated reviews.
(3) Maintaining the party autonomy and advocating good faith arbitration. Article 
14.3 of the Provisions on Arbitral Award Enforcement, i.e., "clause of waiving 
objections", becomes law for the first time in China: Where special reminders 
have been made with regard to the arbitration procedures or rules of arbitration 
applied, and a party concerned still chooses to participate or continue to participate 
in arbitration proceedings and raises no objection although it knows or should 
have known that statutory arbitration procedures or the rules of arbitration chosen 
have not been followed, after an arbitral award is rendered, the competent people's 
court shall not uphold the application by the party concerned for non-enforcement 
of the arbitral award on the ground that the arbitral award is against statutory 
procedures. Besides, the Provisions on Arbitral Award Enforcement also emphasizes the 
requirements for party autonomy and good faith arbitration for many times: Where 
the party against whom the enforcement is sought applies for non-enforcement 
of the relevant arbitral award, multiple grounds for non-enforcement of the same 


42
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
arbitral award shall be raised together. A people's court shall review a case for non-
enforcement of an arbitral award by focusing on the grounds raised by the party 
against whom the enforcement is sought in its application or the application 
submitted by a party not involved in the said arbitration. The people's court shall not 
examine any ground not raised by the party against whom the enforcement is sought 
in its application, unless the arbitral award may be against public interest. Where the 
party against whom the enforcement is sought applies for non-enforcement of the 
relevant arbitration conciliation statement or the arbitral award rendered according 
to the conciliation agreement or mediation agreement between the parties concerned, 
the competent people's court shall not uphold the application, unless the arbitration 
conciliation statement or arbitral award is against public interest.
(4) Defining the review standards for several grounds for non-enforcement of 
arbitral awards. The Civil Procedure Law specifies the grounds for non-enforcement 
of arbitral awards, which, however, need to be further detailed and interpreted. To 
unify the review standards, the Provisions on Arbitral Award Enforcement further 
clarify the grounds for non-enforcement of arbitral awards, and specify the meaning 
of "beyond the arbitral jurisdiction", "in violation of statutory procedures", "forging 
evidence" and "concealing evidence", making the provisions more feasible and 
operable. Taking the circumstances of "concealing evidence" that are often disputed 
in practice as an example, Article 16 hereof identifies the circumstances meeting the 
following conditions as "concealing evidence": (A) Where the evidence serves as the 
major evidence to ascertain basic facts of the case at hand; (B) Where the evidence is 
under the sole control of the other party, and is not submitted to the relevant arbitral 
tribunal; and (C) Where the existence of the evidence is known during the arbitration 


43
CHAPTER 1
proceedings, and the other party is required to produce the evidence or the arbitral 
tribunal is requested to order the other party to submit the evidence, but the other 
party fails to produce or submit the evidence without any justifiable reason. Where 
one party concerned conceals the evidence it holds during arbitration proceedings, 
after an arbitration award has been rendered, the competent people's court shall 
not uphold the application by the party concerned for non-enforcement of the 
arbitration award on the ground that the evidence concealed thereby is sufficient to 
affect impartial arbitration.
The Provisions on Arbitral Award Enforcement principally clarify several significant 
ambiguities in practice, which is certainly the fundamental purpose of judicial 
interpretation. However, the new provisions that the application submitted by a 
non-involved-party for non-enforcement of the arbitral award may give rise to new 
concerns and problems in practice.
iii. About the Arbitration Rules
The arbitration institutions in mainland China has made beneficial exploration in 
the Chinese arbitration regime through the arbitration rules in the past year, with the 
most remarkable achievements in the following two aspects:
1. Investment Arbitration Rules
CIETAC published the China International Economic and Trade Arbitration 
Commission International Investment Arbitration Rules on 19 September 2017, 
filling up a blank in the international investment arbitration rules of China. The 
Rules summed up the experience of ICSID, the ICC and the SCC in international 


44
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
investment, carefully researched the investment treaties of the USA and the European 
Union (EU), deeply examined the bilateral investment treaty (BIT) practice in China, 
fully absorbed and drew upon the most advanced concepts and practice in procedure 
design, public hearing, panel of arbitrators, place of arbitration, jurisdiction of 
arbitral tribunals, consolidated arbitration, third-party funding and transparency of 
arbitration proceedings, and introduced abundant experience in Chinese arbitration, 
e.g., absorbing the experience of CIETAC in combining arbitration with conciliation, 
following up traditional practice of China in establishing the panel of arbitrators, 
thereby making the Rules with features of openness, inclusiveness and mutual 
learning, representing not only the feature of internationalization but also meeting 
actual demand of investment arbitration in China.
2. Establishing the Framework of Ad Hoc Arbitration System
After the SPC released its Opinions on Providing Judicial Guarantee for the Building of 
Pilot Free Trade Zones, the arbitration circle in China explored on ad hoc arbitration 
or specific arbitration. Zhuhai Hengqin New Area Management Committee and 
Zhuhai Arbitration Commission jointly issued the Ad Hoc Arbitration Rules of 
Hengqin Pilot Free Trade Zone on 23 March 2017, CIETAC adopted the Rules 
for CIETAC Hong Kong Arbitration Center to Serve as the Appointing Authority on 
27 April, and published the Guidelines for Third-Party Funding for Arbitration in 
succession, Shijiazhuang Arbitration Commission published the Arbitration Rules 
of Shijiazhuang Arbitration Commission on 2 June, defining ad hoc arbitration 
as mentioned in the said judicial opinions, China Internet Arbitration Alliance 
released the Rule for Bridging Ad Hoc Arbitration and Institutional Arbitration on 19 


45
CHAPTER 1
September, and Guangzhou Arbitration Commission amended its arbitration rules 
accordingly, indicating its recognition and acceptance of the aforementioned Rules for 
Bridging. So far, arbitration institutions in China have made many useful attempts in 
the ad hoc arbitration rules.
III. Theoretical Research on International Commercial 
Arbitration in China
In 2017, some compelling topics appeared in the research field of international and 
domestic commercial arbitration. Introduction and comments thereof are as follows:
i. About the "Belt and Road" Dispute Resolution Mechanism 
With continuous implementation of the "Belt and Road" Initiative, China shall 
establish a fair and efficient dispute resolution mechanism to ensure its smooth 
implementation and actively innovate the resolution mechanism for civil and 
commercial disputes in connection with the "Belt and Road" construction. This has 
been the great concern of domestic academic circle in recent years. Some scholars 
pointed out that China shall resolve the said disputes from the three layers of 
conciliation arbitration and litigation. Regarding conciliation, focus shall be placed 
on enhancing the enforcement of conciliation agreements, promoting combination of 
arbitration and conciliation, pushing ahead the construction of platform connecting 
litigation and conciliation and the judicial confirmation of conciliation agreements. 
Regarding arbitration, efforts shall be made to improve the Arbitration Law, so as to 
make arbitration more professional and refined and make innovations in the design 
of arbitration rules. Regarding litigation, advanced international experience shall be 


46
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
drawn on to explore the establishment of "Belt and Road" international commercial 
court, so as to resolve cross-border civil and commercial disputes arising from the 
construction of the "Belt and Road" in an efficient and convenient way
3.
ii. About Ad Hoc Arbitration 
The Arbitration Law does not recognize the validity of ad hoc arbitration. As the "Belt 
and Road" Initiative is further implemented, ad hoc arbitration has attracted much 
attention from the domestic academic community. Many scholars hold the view that 
China should establish the ad hoc arbitration system. In his paper titled The Thought 
of Establishing Ad Hoc Arbitration System in Chinese Pilot Free Trade Zone, Zhang 
Xianda stated that China should establish the ad hoc arbitration system in an all-
around way. The Arbitration Law does not recognize ad hoc arbitration, which is not 
in line with the international practice and causes many problems of unfairness and 
inequality. The paper stated that China should give full play to its demonstrative role 
of FTZ as a pioneer to the greatest extent, take the initiative in actively establishing 
the ad hoc system in FTZs to gain experience for the nationwide adoption and 
promotion thereof, and finally establish the ad hoc arbitration system for the whole 
nation.
4
The Significance and Methods on Establishing Ad Hoc Arbitration System in China's 
Pilot Free Trade Zones, jointly written by Zhang Chaohan and Ding Tongming, 
specified that the absence of the ad hoc arbitration system in China restricts China's 
3　See Qi Tong and Rui Xinyue, The Innovation of Civil and Commercial Dispute Settlement Mechanisms along 
the "Belt and Road", 5 Chinese Review of International Law (2016).
4　See Zhang Xianda, The Thought of Establishing Ad Hoc Arbitration System in Chinese Pilot Free Trade Zone, 3 
Journal of National Prosecutors College (2017).


47
CHAPTER 1
adherence to the principles of equality and mutual benefit during the international 
exchanges, and is not good for safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests 
of commercial entities in China. The article stated that FTZ was a fundamental 
platform and important node for China to implement the "Belt and Road" Initiative, 
and China should establish the ad hoc arbitration system for FTZs at an appropriate 
time, so as to resolve the civil and commercial disputes between enterprises, as well 
as investment disputes between investors and host countries, in a timely and efficient 
manner. The arbitration system that focuses on ad hoc arbitration and supplemented 
by the intervention of arbitration institutions and judicial organs as stipulated in 
the Ad Hoc Arbitration Rules of Hengqin Pilot Free Trade Zone will be a significant 
reference for other FTZs.
5
iii. Police Powers Doctrine in the Context of International Investment 
Arbitration 
Property loss caused by the police powers doctrine under the jurisdiction of a 
country does not constitute indirect expropriation, therefore, such country will not 
be responsible for compensating the loss incurred therefrom. Though a country's 
police power is subject to its police force, they are not totally coterminous. As Adam 
Smith pertinently remarked in his 1763 Lectures on Justice, Police, Revenue and Arms, 
the word "police" is originally derived from the Greek "πολιτεία [politeia]", which 
properly signified the policy of civil government. Ms. Catharine Titi, a Professor 
of Université Paris 2 Panthéon-Assas, explored the police powers doctrine in 
5　See Zhang Chaohan and Ding Tongming, The Significance and Methods on Establishing Ad Hoc Arbitration 
System in China's Pilot Free Trade Zones, 8 Academic Journal of Zhongzhou (2017).


48
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
international investment law and its legal status, as well as inquiring into its status 
as a general principle of law, a customary international law, a concept displaying a 
different kind of timbre, or "an eminently interpretative operation" that belongs to 
the sphere of arbitral discretion.
6
6　See Catharine Titi, Police Powers Doctrine and International Investment Law in Filippo Fontanelli, Andrea 
Gattini and Attila Tanzi (eds), General Principles of Law and International Investment Arbitration, 323-343 (Brill, 
2018), at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3050417.


49
CHAPTER 2
Chapter 2　Observation on PPP-
Related Arbitration Practice  in China
PPP
, as the abbreviation of "Public-Private Partnership", is translated as " 政府和
社会资本合作"
1 in Chinese, which is a project operating mode for the public 
infrastructure. Under this mode, private enterprises, private capital and government 
departments work together to engage in the infrastructure construction. Projects that 
are operated through the PPP mode are always known as "PPP projects". 
With the prosperity of the PPP industry in China, legal disputes on PPP projects 
are surging. PPP projects always involve two subjects with unequal status, i.e., 
government capital and social capital. Therefore, arbitration is regarded as an 
appropriate choice to resolve disputes arising therefrom. 
I. Observation on the Track of PPP Development 
i. Basic Concept of PPP 
PPP is translated into many different expressions in China, e.g., "public-private 
partnership", "public-private partnership mode", "partnership between public bodies 
and private institutions:, "private capital in the public service area", "public-private 
cooperation system", etc. Organizations and institutions defined PPP in different 
ways in practice. The table below itemizes the definitions made by some countries 
(regions) and international organizations for PPP
. At present, no authoritative 
1　Please refer to the information as published in the official website of the World Bank Group by accessing to: 
https://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-partnership/%E6%94%BF%E5%BA%9C%E5% 92%8C%E7%A4
%BE%E4%BC%9A%E8%B5%84%E6%9C%AC%E5%90%88%E4%BD%9C-0.


50
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
explanation about the concept of PPP is available around the world
2. 
No.
Organization
Definition
Remark
1
World Bank 
PPP: A long-term contract between a private party 
and a government entity, for providing a public 
asset or service, in which the private party bears 
significant risk and management responsibility, and 
remuneration is linked to performance. 
Source of the 
definition: 
PPP Reference 
Guide Version 
2.0 
2
United Nations 
Development 
Programme 
(UNDP)
PPP is a form of cooperative relationship among 
governments, profit-making enterprises and 
nonprofit organizations for a certain project. 
Defined in 
1998 
3
The Canadian 
Council for 
Public Private 
Partnerships 
(CCPPP) 
PPP is a cooperative venture between the public 
and private sectors, built on the expertise of each 
partner, which best meets clearly defined public 
needs through the appropriate allocation of 
resources, risks and rewards.
 
4
Australian 
Council for 
Infrastructure 
Development 
(AusCID)
PPP is a method that both the public and private 
sectors work together and make their best efforts 
to render services, in which the private sector is 
principally responsible for design, construction, 
operation, maintenance, financing and risk 
management, while the public sector is chiefly 
responsible for working out and developing the 
strategy plan, and providing the consumption 
protection service for core businesses. 
 
2　See Lv Hanyang, PPP Mode: Full-Process Guidance and Case Analysis, China Legal Publishing House, 2017, p. 
3.


51
CHAPTER 2
5
The National 
Council for PPP 
USA (NCPPP)
PPP is a kind of method that falls between the 
outsourcing and the privatization and integrates 
the characteristics of the said two ways to provide 
public products. It makes full use of private 
resources to design, build, invest in, operate and 
maintain public infrastructure and renders relevant 
services to meet public demands. 
 
6
Efficient Unit, 
Hong Kong
PPP is an arrangement where the public and private 
sectors both bring their complementary skills to 
a project, with varying levels of involvement and 
responsibility, for the purpose of providing public 
services or projects. 
 
7
Institute for 
Public-Private 
Partnerships 
(IP3)
PPP mode is an agreement between private entity 
and governmental department whereby the private 
entity is invited to render anticipative services 
and assume the associated risks. As the return for 
rendering of services, the private entity can charge 
the service fee and taxation to obtain the benefits 
generating therefrom according to the service 
standards and contractual clauses. The government 
department will move out of the obsession of 
providing funds for services and management, 
but reserve the right to oversee and regulate the 
operation of private entity.
 
8
HM Treasury
PPP is a long-term cooperation mode through 
which the private and public sectors work together 
to seek for common interests. It mainly involves 
three regards: all or part of privatization, Private 
Finance Initiative (PFI) and rendering of public 
services together with private enterprises.
 


52
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
9
Commission of 
Public Private 
Partnership 
(CPPP)
PPP mode is a risk sharing relationship between 
public sector and private sector based upon a shared 
aspiration to bring about a desired public policy. 
Some government bodies, especially education and 
labor departments, think that outsourcing service is 
a form of PPP
.
 
10
European 
Commission 
(EC)
PPP is a cooperative relationship between public 
sector and private sector with the objectives of 
offering public projects and services that are 
traditionally provided by the public sector.
China has released lots of policies and documents about PPP projects, most of which 
are formulated by the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and the National Development 
and Reform Commission (NDRC). However, due to their different duties and 
perspectives about PPP projects, the concept of PPP in policies and documents 
released by them varies to some extent. The MOF always stresses the division of 
responsibilities of government and social capitals and the charge mechanism for 
projects from the perspective of fiscal expenditure. In contrast, the NDRC places 
an emphasis on the way of cooperation between government capital and social 
capital. Among policies and documents available in China at the current moment, 
the concept of PPP as stated in the Notice of the General Office of the State Council on 
Forwarding the Guiding Opinions of the Ministry of Finance, the National Development 
and Reform Commission and the People's Bank of China on Promoting the Public-
Private Partnership Mode in Public Service Field (GBF [2015] No. 42) is the least 
controversial and is extensively accepted by the public
3.
3　See Legal Affairs Department of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Ltd. (ed.) and Qin 
Yuxiu (chief editor), The Practice of PPP Full-Process Operation - Illustration of Key Points and Analysis of Knotty 


53
CHAPTER 2
The said document (GBF [2015] No. 42) was jointly formulated by the MOF, 
the NDRC and the People's Bank of China (PBC) and forwarded by the General 
Office of the State Council. According to the document, PPP is defined as "the 
government uses the competitive method to conduct merit-based selection of social 
capital with investment and operation management capability, and both parties enter 
into a contract upon the principle of equal consultation to specify their rights and 
obligations, namely, the social capital provides public services and the government 
makes corresponding payment to the social capital pursuant to the performance 
evaluation of public services so as to guarantee fair return of social capital." This 
definition specifies such main factors as competitive selection method, conclusion 
of contract on the principle of equal consultation, delivery of services by the social 
capital, the government’s payment of consideration, performance evaluation and 
guarantee of fair return of social capital necessary for the PPP
, conciliating the dispute 
of documents released by different ministries and commissions about the concept of 
PPP
.
ii. Development History of PPP Mode in China
4
The concept of PPP in China may be traced back to the Sunning Railway that 
was first built in June 1906. This is the first private railway in China, of which the 
preparation, design, construction, operation and management were accomplished by 
Sunning Railway Company. Moreover, the costs of construction were raised by Chin 
Gee Hee, a Chinese living in the USA for a long term, from the overseas Chinese. 
Meanwhile, the construction of railway was supported by the government, and the 
Problems, China Legal Publishing House, 2017, p. 2.
4　See Chen Zhimin et al., China's PPP Practice: Development, Models, Problems and Solutions, 4 International 
Economic Review (2015).


54
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Government of the Qing Dynasty even conferred the "imperial sword" to Mr. Chan, 
allowing to kill the people obstructing the construction of the railway first and report 
afterwards. The way of cooperation has shown the characteristics of public-private 
cooperation and can be deemed as the earliest PPP project in China. 
China introduced the PPP project for the first time in the 1980s after the founding 
of the People's Republic of China. PPP projects have experienced such four stages as 
exploration and pilot (1984-2002), gradual promotion (2003-2008), adjustment and 
fluctuations (2009-2013) and regulation and development (2014-present). Collecting 
the data of PPP projects of the MOF and the NDRC in the database, the figure 
below shows the development history of PPP projects in China in an intuitive way.  
1. Exploration and Pilot Stage (1984-2002)
China needed to attract foreign investment to promote the economic development 
since the reform and opening up in 1978. Foreign direct investment became the 
primary driving force of PPP projects at this stage. In 1994, the Chinese Government 


55
CHAPTER 2
selected five Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) projects as the pilot ones, which involved 
the construction of water treatment plant, power plant and other infrastructure. 
Typical projects at this stage include Shenzhen Shajiao Power Plant B, Chengdu 
No. 6 Tap Water Supply Plant, BOT Project of Dachang Water Treatment Plant, 
Guangzhou–Shenzhen Highway, BOT Project of Beijing No. 10 Water Supply Plant, 
BOT Project of Dalian Road Tunnel, etc. All of them adopted the BOT mode and 
involved the investment amount up to RMB100 million on average, and the average 
franchising period of these projects was more than 15 years. Each of these projects 
received the foreign investment, and the capital from Hong Kong was relatively 
active. It is not difficult to find that PPP projects at this stage mainly involved 
the foreign investment, and the participation of foreign investors and the input 
of internationalized capital also contributed to introduction of new technologies. 
Moreover, most of the projects involve the transportation, energy, water affairs, 
etc. Amid the early period of reform and opening up, PPP projects relatively had 
technical barriers, long term of planning and investment invitation and high costs, 
which restricted the large-scale promotion and application of PPP projects to some 
extent.
2. Gradual Promotion Stage (2003-2008) 
The 16
th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) held in 2002 
stressed the market economy. Afterwards, the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural 
Development (MOHURD) released in succession relevant documents to regulate 
and promote the application of PPP mode, which greatly encouraged the investors 
both at home and abroad to invest in sewage treatment, water supply, heat supply, 
public transportation and other public utilities. At this stage, PPP projects became 


56
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
booming across China because of promotion by the Chinese government. 
Typical projects at this stage mainly involved the municipal public utilities (including 
water supply, transportation, garbage treatment, etc.) projects, e.g., Beijing 
National Stadium (Bird's Nest), Nanjing Yangtze River No. 2 Bridge, Hefei Wang 
Xiaoying Sewage Treatment Plant, Hangzhou City Beltway, Beijing Subway Line 4, 
Zhangjiagang Domestic Garbage Incineration and Power Generation Plant. These 
projects are chiefly funded by private enterprises and state-owned enterprises, which 
constitutes the main change in PPP projects at this stage, i.e., shifting from being 
dominated by foreign-funded enterprises to be funded by state-owned enterprises 
and private enterprises. Besides, most of these projects selected the investors in the 
form of public tendering, which effectively reduced the expenses and increased the 
benefits, as well enhanced the transparency of tendering and safeguarded the public 
interest. Based on the development at the stage of exploration and pilot, PPP projects 
at this stage were relatively sophisticated in the implementation process, contractual 
text and operating mode, greatly helping the promotion and implementation of PPP 
projects. 
3. Adjustment and Fluctuations Stage (2009-2013) 
Influenced by the financial crisis in 2008, the development of PPP mode also 
suffered fluctuations in China at this stage. To cope with the crisis, the Chinese 
government announced the investment plan involving an amount of RMB4 trillion. 
The investment of huge national capital drove massive fiscal fund and credit loans to 
flow into the field of infrastructure construction and squeezed the private capital out 
of many PPP projects, and the PPP mode at the previous stages thus directly shifted 


57
CHAPTER 2
to be the government-dominated investment, which had a certain impact on the 
development of PPP projects. 
Typical projects at this stage include Mentougou Domestic Garbage Incineration 
and Power Generation Plant, TOT (Transfer-Operate-Transfer ) Project of Lanzhou 
Qilihe Anning Sewage Treatment Plant, BOT Project of Taiyuan Domestic Garbage 
Incineration and Power Generation Plant, BOT Project of Xi'an No. 2 Sewage 
Treatment Plant (Phase II), Daozhen-Weng'an Highway in Guizhou Province, etc., 
all of which were funded by domestic capital, reflecting the characteristics of PPP 
projects in the context of financial crisis. Because the state-owned enterprises are 
of strong strength and good credit standing and are supported by the government 
resources, they are highly welcomed by local governments. 
4. Regulation and Development Stage (2014-Present)
The MOF and the NDRC have published a series of significant policies to drive and 
regulate PPP projects since the end of 2013. PPP projects thus gradually step into the 
stage of regulation and development in China. At this stage, lots of policies relating 
to PPP projects are successively issued, providing the policy guarantee for regularized 
development of the PPP industry. Meanwhile, PPP projects obtain an unprecedented 
encouragement and support, which, however, breeds some false PPP projects and the 
investment and financing under the guise of PPP
. Typical projects at this stage include 
Investment Invitation Project of Beijing New Airport Express, Changzhou Urban 
Area Sewage Treatment and Municipal Drainage PPP Project, PPP Project of Anqing 
Outer Ring Road (N) Engineering, PPP Project of Liupanshui Underground Trunk 
Network, PPP Project of Qian'an Sponge City Construction, PPP Project of Kaifeng 


58
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Sport Centre, PPP Project of Xingyang People's Hospital Overall Construction, PPP 
Project of Wuhu Rail Traffic Line 1 and Line 2 (Phase I), Xuzhou Chengbei Auto 
Passenger Transportation Station (Phase I), PPP projects of other urban passenger 
transportation functional complex, etc. 
iii. Fields of Application of PPP Mode 
As stated above, PPP mode is widely used in the fields of public works, transportation 
and infrastructure, as well as agricultural construction. Therefore, consideration 
must be given to conclude and define the scope of application of PPP mode when 
discussing the development of PPP projects. 
1. Requirements for Fields of Application of PPP Mode 
The Chinese government issued multiple normative documents to guide the 
application of PPP mode at the State level. Through the Guiding Opinions of the 
State Council on Innovating in Investment and Financing Mechanism and Encouraging 
Social Investment in Key Fields (GF [2014] No. 60) (the Guiding Opinions of the State 
Council), the State Council gives guiding opinions on the scope of application of PPP 
mode and encourages further use of the PPP mode in public service, resources and 
environment, ecological construction, infrastructures and other key fields, mainly 
involving the forest administration and ecological and environmental protection, 
agriculture and water conservancy projects, municipal infrastructures, railway and 
road transportation, power construction, power grids and energy infrastructure, 
information and civil space infrastructure, education, health care, old-age service, 
sports, fitness, cultural facilities and social undertakings. 


59
CHAPTER 2
The Notice of the General Office of the State Council on Forwarding the Guiding 
Opinions of the Ministry of Finance, the National Development and Reform Commission 
and the People's Bank of China on Promoting the Public-Private Partnership Mode 
in Public Service Field (GBF [2015] No. 42) stipulates that PPP mode is chiefly 
applicable to energy, transportation, water conservancy, environmental protection, 
agriculture, forestry, science and technology, affordable housing project, medical, 
health care, elderly care, education and public services. 
In the Guiding Opinions of the National Development and Reform Commission on 
Work Relating to Public-Private Partnership (FGTZ [2014] No. 2724), the NDPC 
states that PPP mode is mainly applicable to the projects of public services or 
infrastructures that the government is responsible for supplying and that are suitable 
for market-based operation. To be specific, PPP mode shall be given priority for 
application in the new municipal projects and the pilot projects of new urbanization, 
including municipal facilities such as gas, power supply, water supply, heat supply as 
well as sewage and garbage disposal, transport facilities such as road, railway, airport 
and urban rail transportation, public service projects such as medical treatment, 
tourism, education and training, and health and elderly services, as well as water 
conservancy and resources, environment and ecological protection projects. 
Other department criteria also specify the scope of application of PPP mode. 
The Notice on Issues Concerning the Promotion and Application of Public-Private 
Partnership (CJ [2014] No. 76) and the Operational Guide to PPP Mode (For Trial 
Implementation) (CJ [2014] No. 113) state that PPP mode is applicable to the 
infrastructures and public service projects featuring a large scale of investment, long-
term stable demands, flexible price adjustment mechanism and relatively high degree 


60
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
of marketization. The Notice on Regulating the Management of Integrated Information 
Platform Project Library of Public-Private Partnership (CBJ [2017] No. 92) stipulates 
that PPP mode is unsuitable for the projects involving the national security or 
significant social public interest. 
2. Fields of Application of PPP Mode at Present 
According to the data from the "National PPP Integrated Information Platform 
Project Library" of China Public Private Partnerships Centre (CPPPC), 7,253 PPP 
projects have been registered with the MOF as of 27 April, 2018, involving an 
amount of RMB11,415.247 billion. 
The distribution of PPP projects in the different fields of application is illustrated 


61
CHAPTER 2
below
5:
It is easy to see from the figure above that municipal projects enjoy an absolute 
advantage among PPP projects, and a great many PPP projects involve the 
construction of municipal projects. A few number of PPP projects involve forestry 
and social security. However, such situation reveals that focus may be placed on the 
construction of projects in these two fields in the future development of PPP projects. 
In fact, the Guiding Opinions of the State Council also gives priority to encouraging 
PPP projects in the ecological construction, especially the forestry. 
II. Observation on Fundamental Legal Issues of PPP 
Projects 
Because of the PPP mode, the original two-way direct relationship between public 
sector and private sector turns into the multi-party legal relationship among public 
sector, private sector, consumers and other stakeholders, thereby making the legal 
entities and relationship involved in the PPP mode more complicated. Therefore, 
sorting out the fundamental legal issues of PPP projects is an important constituent 
of observation and research. Before doing so, it is very necessary to sum up the wide 
range of PPP-related laws and regulations. 
i. The Current PPP-Related Legal Framework
6
After years of development, PPP projects have stepped into the stage of stable 
5　Source: "Distribution of Region and Industry Registered Projects Nationwide in the Library (Management 
Library) (As at 31 January, 2018)" of the CPPPC, the PPP Project Library of the NDRC, accessing to http://
tzs.ndrc.gov.cn/zttp/PPPxmk/xmk/. 
6　Source: "Policies and Regulations" of CPPPC by accessing to http://www.cpppc.org/zh/pppzczd/index.
jhtml; PPP Column of the NDRC by accessing to http://tzs.ndrc.gov.cn/zttp/PPPxmk/. 


62
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
development, and there are numerous legal documents regulating PPP projects, 
including multilayer laws and regulations regulating PPP projects at the State 
level and policies and documents issued by local governments for adjusting PPP 
projects in a concrete manner. By effect, these documents can be divided into laws, 
administrative regulations, local regulations, bylaws (including bylaws issued by 
governmental departments and local governments), guiding opinions, etc. 
Overall, legal documents released by the Central Government focus on the overall 
layout to expand the application fields of PPP mode in the infrastructure construction 
through the investment and financing based on the innovation of mechanisms, so as 
to provide the complete legal guarantee means for fiscal policies, management system, 
legal regime and fiscal and taxation support and give a comprehensive guidance and 
guarantee for the contracts of governments and social capitals. 
Among them, some laws, including the Budget Law of the People's Republic of China, 
the Government Procurement Law of the People's Republic of China, the Tendering and 
Bidding Law of the People's Republic of China and the Administrative License Law of the 
People's Republic of China, contain articles about regulating PPP projects. 
Of the bylaws issued by governmental departments, the State Council, the MOF 
and the NDRC issued the most bylaws to regulate PPP projects, the MOHURD. 
The banking and insurance regulatory commissions, and the Ministry of Agriculture 
also issued some bylaws to regulate the development of PPP projects. Most of these 
bylaws are the framework documents and have different priorities due to different 
formulation bodies. Legal documents issued by State Council and relevant ministries 
and departments in recent years involving the PPP are as follows:


63
CHAPTER 2
The Guiding Opinions of the State Council released in 2014 bring forward general 
guiding opinions on the PPP
, provide for the establishment and improvement of 
PPP mechanism, regulate key fields for cooperation between social and government 
capitals, stress the driving role of the government investment and specify that 
innovative financing methods can be applied in PPP projects. 
The Notice on Issues Concerning the Promotion and Application of Public-Private 
Partnership (CJ [2014] No. 76) issued by the MOF in 2014 is the first official 
document since its promotion of PPP, which regulates the identification, 
demonstration and procurement, financing arrangement, monitoring over operating 
performance of PPP projects, as well as division of responsibilities and operation of 
governments and social capitals. 
The Notice of the Ministry of Finance on Issuing the Operational Guide to PPP Mode 
(Trial) (CJ [2014] No. 113) regulates general outline and implementation process 
of PPP projects, as well as the operating flows of identifying, preparing, purchasing, 
executing, handing over PPP projects in an all-around manner. But the Notice is valid 
for only 3 years as from the date of issuance. 
Together with the Notice on Regulating the Administration of PPP Contracts (CJ [2014] 
No. 56) issued in 2014, the MOF issued the Guide to Contracts of PPP Projects (Trial), 
specifying the notes and requirements for the formulation of contracts. 
The Guiding Opinions of the National Development and Reform Commission on 
Work Relating to Public-Private Partnership (FGTZ [2014] No. 2724) specify main 
principles for the application of PPP projects, as well as the scope of projects, mode 
administration and exit mechanism for social capital. Together with the said Guiding 


64
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Opinions, the Guide to General Contracts for PPP Projects was issued, which specifies 
the notes and requirements for the preparation of contracts from the regards of 
allocation of rights and duties and risk sharing of parties thereto, handling of default 
behaviors, government supervision, performance guarantee, etc. 
The Administrative Measures for Infrastructure and Public Utility Concession (Order 
No.25 promulgated by 6 commissions and ministries, including the NDRC) 
specify the principles for infrastructure and public utility concession, supervision 
and administration, resolution of disputes, legal liabilities, execution, performance, 
amendment and termination of concession agreement. 
In addition, the Law of Public-Private Partnerships of the People's Republic of China 
(Exposure Draft), the Notice on Regulating the Administration of PPP Contracts and 
other relevant documents explain the legal relationship, operation and supervision of 
PPP
. 
PPP projects witnessed substantial development because of being encouraged and 
supported by a wide range of policies, which, however, gave rise to many problems 
accordingly. To address the phenomena contrary to the policies or original intention, 
relevant ministries and commissions have started to promulgate in succession the 
policies to regulate and rectify the PPP market. These policies are as follows: 
Pursuant to the Notice on Regulating the Management of Integrated Information 
Platform Project Library of Public-Private Partnership (CBJ [2017] No. 92) issued by 
the MOF, PPP projects can be included into the library in strict accordance with 
the new standards, and local governments shall sort out the existing projects in the 
library in a collective way before 31 March, 2018. 


65
CHAPTER 2
The Notice on Further Strengthening Regulation and Management of PPP Demonstration 
Projects (CJ [2018) No. 54) issued by the MOF on 24 April, 2018, specifies that great 
efforts shall be spared to strengthen the regulation and management of PPP projects, 
intensify the information disclosure and establish the long-acting management 
mechanism. 
In addition, local governments also released lots of local regulations and bylaws to 
regulate and encourage the development of PPP projects. 
ii. Legal Entities Involved in PPP Projects 
1. Governments 
Governments are one of the main participants of PPP projects. The local people's 
governments above the level of county (inclusive) can initiate and participate in PPP 
projects in the capacity of governments. Pursuant to Article 10 of the Operational 
Guide to PPP Mode (the MOF Operational Guide), "the local people's governments 
at the level of county (inclusive) are able to establish the specialized coordination 
mechanism to take charge of project review and evaluation, organize and coordinate 
the inspection and supervision, so as to realize the purposes of simplifying the 
approval flow and the working efficiency. Governments or their functional 
departments or nonprofit institutions may act as the project implementation bodies 
to take charge of the preparation, procurement, supervision and handover of PPP 
projects." 
For the PPP projects, a government simultaneously plays two roles: Firstly, as an 
administrator of public affairs, the government performs the administrative functions 


66
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
of PPP projects, like planning, procurement, management and supervision, thus 
forming the legal and administrative relationship with social capital. Secondly, as a 
purchaser of public products or services, the government exercises due rights and 
performs due obligations to the extent of equal civil subject relationship with the 
social capital in accordance with the PPP project contracts. 
2. Social Capitals
Social capitals actually mean the enterprises in cooperation with the governments 
in PPP projects, which always derive from domestic and abroad and engage in the 
design, construction, operation and maintenance of public infrastructures and 
services. Social capital may be sourced from domestic and abroad, and state-owned 
enterprises, private enterprises and foreign capitals can all engage in the national 
PPP projects in China. However, the government financing vehicle affiliated to a 
government and other state-owned enterprises (except for the listed companies) 
controlled by such vehicle cannot participate in the PPP projects as the social capital 
under the jurisdiction of the government. 
3. Project Companies 
Project companies are the companies particularly established by social capitals for 
the implementation of PPP projects. PPP project companies directly undertake the 
PPP projects, and obtain the concession from the governments or their authorized 
agencies to take charge of the full process, including financing, design, construction, 
operation and handover, of PPP projects. Because project companies are established 
particularly for the implementation of projects, they shall start the operation as from 
the date of registration, and transfer the right of management and ownership as from 


67
CHAPTER 2
the expiration of the franchise period, and shall be then liquidated and dissolved in 
a timely manner. A project company may be exclusively funded and established by 
the social capital, or may be jointly established by governments and social capitals, 
or an institution designated by the government may become a shareholder of the 
project company established by the social capital. Where the government injects the 
equity to the project company upon or after its establishment, the government shall 
own no more than 50% of the shares and can have neither de facto control right nor 
management right. 
4. Financial Institutions 
Financial institutions are the intermediaries engaged in the financial services for 
PPP projects, and those involved in the PPP projects include banks, insurers, trust 
agencies and fund institutions. Financial institutions can participate in the PPP 
projects through three ways: Firstly, they may directly cooperate with the government 
as social capitals. Secondly, they may participate in the projects in joint with other 
social capitals, and then exit from the projects in the form of equity transferring or 
equity repurchase of other social capitals upon the maturity of agreed period. Thirdly, 
they may serve as financing institutions to provide funds for project companies, 
including project loans, trust loans, income bonds, etc. 
5. Other Entities
7
Other entities include contractors, operators, material suppliers, project service 
buyers, etc. 
7　See [US] E.S. Savas (author), Zhou Zhiren et al. (translators), Privatization and Public-Private Partnerships, 
China Renmin University Press, 2002.


68
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
iii. Legal Relationships Involved in PPP 
1. Legal Relationship between Public Sector and Social Capital 
At the early stage of a project, government and social capitals will always enter into 
the letter of intent, memorandum or framework agreement, to specify their intent of 
cooperation and rights and obligations thereof. If both parties decide to incorporate 
a project company to facilitate the PPP project, the government will generally sign 
the PPP project contract with the project company after its establishment. If both 
parties decide not to establish a project company, the government will generally 
sign an official PPP project contract with the social capital. The contract will always 
specify that the social capital shall assume the responsibility of raising the fund and 
performing other duties. 
2. Legal Relationship between Social Capital and Project Company 
The social capital is the shareholder of a project company, so they both establish the 


69
CHAPTER 2
relationship between shareholder and company. By signing a shareholder agreement 
for the purpose of establishing the project company, the social capital builds up the 
long-term cooperative relationship with binding force between shareholders. Besides, 
material suppliers, operators, financing parties and other entities in the hope of 
participating in the project may also become the shareholders of the project company. 
3. Legal Relationship between the Government and Project Company
The PPP project contract entered into by and between the government and the 
project company constitutes the core of PPP contract system, and also the basis 
of other contracts. Terms and conditions of the PPP project contract will directly 
influence not only the contents of agreement between shareholders of the project 
company, and the financing contract between the project company and the financing 
party, and the insurance contract between the project company and the insurer as 
well. 
4. Legal Relationship between Financing Parties of PPP Projects 
The loan contract is the most essential financing contract for a PPP project. For the 
purpose of the security of loans, the financing party will generally ask the project 
company to convey its property or other rights and interest as mortgage or pledge 
on loans, or ask its parent company to provide the guarantee in whatever form, or 
ask the government to make a certain commitment. These guarantee measures will 
be specified in the guarantee contract, direct intervention agreement or PPP project 
contract. 


70
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
5. Legal Relationships during the Implementation of PPP Projects
8
At the stage of construction and operation of a PPP project, the project company 
needs to sign the project contracting contract, operation service contract, material 
supply contract, product or service sales contract with the project contractor, 
operator, material supplier and product or service provider, respectively, so as to drive 
smooth progress of the PPP project. 
Besides, to guarantee the quality, progress and safety, the project company shall 
employ a supervision agency in accordance with relevant laws and regulations, 
and shall then sign a professional supervision service contract. Moreover, the 
relationships generating from the contract on the type of supervision service and 
contracts on consulting services reached with other professional intermediaries about 
investment, laws, technologies, financial affairs and taxation are also the possible legal 
relationships during the execution of a PPP project. 
III. Observation on Hot Legal Issues of PPP Projects 
i. Legal Disputes on PPP Projects 
After more than two decades of exploration, China has embraced a great many 
successful examples that use the PPP mode to drive the construction of public 
projects, and a certain quantity of projects were involved in the legal disputes 
accordingly. The experience or lessons learned therefrom are important references 
for China to facilitate the construction of PPP projects in the future and make the 
practice and construction of PPP projects more feasible. 
8　See Zhou Lanping, Brief Analysis of Basic Legal Relationships Involved in PPP Projects, 18 Construction and 
Architecture (2016), pp. 48-49.


71
CHAPTER 2
In the practice of PPP projects nationwide, the types of dispute on PPP projects 
mainly include the ones stated below. These types of dispute can be found frequently 
in 37 typical cases relating to PPP projects provided by CIETAC. 
1. Disputes Arising from Rights and Obligations Involved in PPP Contracts 
Because most of the PPP projects involve a large scope, complex work and 
relationship between participants in terms of rights and obligations, a PPP project 
always, apart from a master contract, needs a series of transaction contracts, including 
the letter of intent, contracts on project construction, contracts on project operation 
and management, supply contracts, contracts on product or service sale and financing 
contract, etc. Anyway, a PPP project always involves a great many contracts that are 
complicated in the setting of terms and conditions, and raise high requirements for 
participants to coordinate terms and conditions in these contracts. Therefore, any 
participant who does not have design knowledge or professional legal knowledge of 
PPP projects is easy to make the loopholes in designing the contract, thus being likely 
to get involved in the legal disputes arising from the loopholes or conflicts during the 
performance of contracts. The most common types of dispute include the disputes 
arising from the invalidity of contracts due to its violation of mandatory laws, 
disputes arising from objection to the identification of nature of contracts, or unclear 
specification of contractual rights and obligations, as well as the conflicts between 
terms and conditions in different contracts for the same project. 
2. Disputes Arising from Review and Approval, Supervision and Management, 
Administrative Punishment and Financing Arrangement of PPP Projects
9
9　See Li Wei et al., Legal and Operational Risks of PPP Mode, 11 Qinghai Finance (2015), pp. 30-34.


72
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
The first type of disputes arises from unstable operating procedures for selection of 
the investors for PPP projects. The applicable laws and regulations conflict and have 
fade zone in the procedures for selection of investors for PPP projects. For example, 
the Tendering and Bidding Law of the People's Republic of China fails to specify the 
ways of authorization to PPP projects. But in practice, concession to PPP projects 
may be granted through tendering and bidding, auction, competitive negotiation, 
even direct authorization and other multiple ways. Disputes arising from the parties' 
objection to unstable and irregular procedures for selection of investors for PPP 
projects are very common. 
The second type of disputes arises from the establishment, approval and acceptance 
testing procedures of PPP projects. In practice, government tenderees could probably 
exaggerate their working achievements obtained from the early stage at the stage of 
project establishment, so as to attract more investors. No law specifies the way to 
guarantee the quality of early work and the tenderee's liabilities for commitments 
they made in the tendering documents. It will be easy to trigger a dispute in case of a 
big gap between the commitments and the actuality. Furthermore, no law is available 
to specify the acceptance testing of PPP projects, like the relationship between 
primary acceptance testing of PPP projects upon completion and final acceptance 
testing, sequence of accepting testing upon completion and primary acceptance 
testing, delayed acceptance testing due to intervention of the public sector, which 
incurs frequent disputes. 
The third type of disputes is in connection with the establishment of project 
companies and the way of capital contribution. After winning the bid, the private 
investor will establish a limited liability company (special purpose vehicle, SPV) to 


73
CHAPTER 2
participate in the PPP project as social capital. However, the applicable laws and 
regulations fail to specify the way and proportion of capital contribution for SPV 
established by the investor. Therefore, public and private sector may suffer from the 
conflict of interest of the SPV in many forms. 
The fourth type of disputes arises from the conflict between the structure of PPP 
projects and the Land Administration Law of the People's Republic of China and other 
laws and regulations. For example, when granting the concession, the government 
cannot ensure that the concessionaire will definitely obtain the land use right 
necessary for the project. In case of failing to obtain such right, the concessionaire 
will raise the objection and dispute against the government. 
The fifth type of disputes arises from unclear ownership of PPP projects during 
the construction and operation. These disputes are always caused by the conflicts 
between the applicable laws and regulations in the ownership of PPP projects during 
their construction and operation, or the concession agreements of different PPP 
projects vary greatly in the way to specify the ownership of PPP projects during their 
construction and operation. 
The sixth type of disputes arises from the financing methods of PPP projects. No 
method appropriate to the financing of PPP projects is found through the legal 
and financial practices in China at present. Therefore, apart from the loans from 
commercial banks, project owners have to use other innovative ways to raise the 
fund, which are, however, always immature and irregular, and fail to closely link with 
the financial regulation policies and are open to the legal risk. 
The seventh type of disputes arises from the risk sharing mechanism of PPP projects. 


74
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
PPP projects always span a long term and involve lots of participants with complex 
relationships, and also incur various risks throughout the total process. Unclear 
risk sharing mechanism or the mechanism failing to balance the public interest or 
legitimate rights and interest of investors will easily give rise to the legal risk and 
trigger the disputes accordingly. 
Based on the comprehensive analysis of the aforesaid legal disputes, we can easily 
find that possible legal disputes arising out of the PPP projects have the following 
characteristics: diverse types of dispute involve complex legal relationships and huge 
dispute amounts, almost all of which are counted by the unit of RMB100 million, 
disputes shift forwards the projects, and more disputes happen at the stage of 
procurement. One cause of dispute may trigger a series of cases involving multiple 
entities, causing the domino effect. Therefore, project participants must be prudent 
and cautious about making the decision and considering risks arising from the project 
financing plan, financial review, solvency, way of guarantee, prospect of the industry, 
policy background and other steps, so as to guarantee smooth implementation of 
PPP projects. 
ii. Arbitrability of PPP-Related Disputes 
The key of operating a PPP project is the PPP contract, namely the contract entered 
into by and between government capital and social capital, and there are many 
disputes on the nature of PPP project contracts both in theory and in practice. In 
practice, the nature of contracts has significant impact on the compliance of basic 
legal principles, application of concrete rules and methods of dispute resolution. 
Internationally, the determination of nature of PPP contracts largely depends on the 


75
CHAPTER 2
corresponding legal system. In the countries adopting the continental legal system, 
the government acts are strictly constrained by the administrative laws, so PPP 
contracts to which the governments are the parties shall apply the administrative laws. 
This is different for the countries adopting the legal regimes of the UK and the US. 
Taking the UK as an example, it launched the private finance initiative (PFI) projects 
in 1992 and sorted out problems of the PFI mode in 2012, thereby launching the 
PF2. The UK Government focuses on the purchase of public services rather than 
the infrastructure, and generally recognizes the contracts between both parties as the 
purchase and sale contracts
10. Disputes in connections with PPP contracts in the UK 
are always resolved through litigation or arbitration. However, the legal regime of 
France is relatively special, specifying that parties thereof may use the arbitration to 
resolve disputes arising out of PPP contracts. 
China has not formulated the laws about regulating PPP projects yet, and most 
of the related legal provisions are scattered in administrative regulations and 
department bylaws. At the legal level, Article 12.11 of the Administrative Litigation 
Law of the People's Republic of China (the Administrative Litigation Law) specifies 
the determination of nature of PPP contracts, reading "the people's courts shall 
accept the following suits brought by citizens, legal persons or other organizations: 
11. Cases where an administrative organ is considered to have failed to perform 
in accordance with the law or as agreed or modify or terminate the government 
concession operation agreements, land or housing expropriation and compensation 
agreements or other relevant agreements in violation of laws." Article 11 of the 
Interpretation of the Supreme People's Court on Several Issues Concerning the Application 
of the Administrative Litigation Law of the People's Republic of China further specifies 
10　See Hu Jiani, Brief Analysis on the Arbitrability of PPP Contract, 8 Northern Economy and Trade (2016).


76
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
that agreements with the rights and obligations in the sense of administrative law 
reached by and between administrative organs with citizens, legal persons or other 
organizations for the purposes of realizing the public interest or administration 
objectives shall be considered as administrative agreements as stipulated hereof, 
including government concession agreements. The competent courts for cases for 
litigation involving the administrative agreements shall be identified in accordance 
with the Administrative Litigation Law and its judicial interpretation. 
Both civil legal relationship and administrative legal relationship coexist in the 
concession between government capital and social capital. Moreover, the current 
judicial practices are also inconsistent. For example, in the case of Changchun Huijin 
Co., Ltd. v. Changchun Municipal People's Government, both parties entered into 
a cooperative agreement for the drainage and sewage disposal of Changchun City, 
but the project finally failed after years of operation. The Government thus decided 
to terminate the cooperation, and Huijin Company lodged an administrative lawsuit 
against the government acts and won the lawsuit. This case is an example that PPP-
related dispute thereof was resolved through the administrative lawsuit, and also an 
litigation case that identifies the concession agreement as the civil and commercial 
agreement. For another example, the case of "Henan Xinling Roadway Construction 
Co., Ltd. v. Huixian Municipal People's Government" heard by the Supreme People's 
Court (SPC)
11 indicates that it could not identify the "concession agreement" as an 
administrative agreement depending on the situation that a party to the agreement 
is a government body, and comprehensive consideration to specific contents of the 
agreement is needed, including whether the market entities enjoy the positions 
equal to that of the government when signing the concession agreement, whether 
11　Judgment (MYZZ [2015] No. 244) made by the Supreme People's Court. 


77
CHAPTER 2
the parties thereto enjoy the full autonomy without being forced by the government 
acts, and whether the execution of the agreement upon the principles of equality, 
equal value exchange and mutual consultation. For one more example, in the case of 
confirming the validity of arbitration agreement about the concession agreement on 
one highway
12, Beijing No. 2 Intermediate People’s Court dismissed the ruling made 
by a local government in Sichuan Province about the invalidity of the arbitration 
agreement and ascertained that arbitration clauses in the concession agreement on 
BOT Project of such highway were valid. Through comprehensive consideration of 
the purpose of agreement, the parties concerned, duties and responsibilities, rights 
and obligations of both parties, Beijing No. 2 Intermediate People’s Court held 
that the concession agreement had obvious characteristics of civil and commercial 
legal relationships, thus ruling that the concession agreement has the nature of 
civil and commercial contract. In addition, Beijing No. 2 Intermediate People’s 
Court stated that because the concession agreement was the civil and commercial 
agreement, the arbitration clauses thereof fell out of the circumstances of "The agreed 
matters for arbitration exceed the range of arbitrable matters as specified by law" as 
stipulated in Article 17.1 of the Arbitration Law of the People's Republic of China (the 
Arbitration Law), so that the arbitration clauses thereof were valid, but Beijing No. 
2 Intermediate People’s Court did not rule whether the "government concession 
agreement" belonging to the "administrative agreement" could be subject to the 
arbitration. 
According to the above judicial cases, it can be tentatively summarized that Article 
11 of the concession agreements as stated in the Interpretation of the Administrative 
12　See Liu Yuwu et al., Whether "Concession Agreements" can be Arbitrated?, published on 16 March 2017, 
available at: http://www.kwm.com/zh/cn/knowledge/insights/disputes-over-the-franchise-agreement-can-turn-
to-dr-or-not-20170316.　


78
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Litigation Law can be defined as an administrative agreement with "rights and 
obligations in the sense of administrative law". Therefore, only disputes arising out 
the agreements or contractual terms without involving the government supervision, 
approval, permission and other acts can be resolved through the agreed arbitration. 
iii. Advantages of Resolving PPP-Related Disputes through Arbitration 
Resolving PPP-related disputes through arbitration has the following advantages: 
Firstly, resolving PPP-Related disputes needs professional knowledge and experience. 
The parties concerned may select the professionals of the PPP industry on their own 
initiatives to form the arbitral tribunal to rule the cases, thereby guaranteeing fair and 
efficient resolution of disputes. 
Secondly, arbitration institutions are free from hierarchical structure, which assures 
the neutrality and independence of the arbitral award, and avoids the influence from 
administrative intervention and local protectionism. 
Thirdly, the efficiency of arbitration guarantees that PPP-related disputes can be 
resolved within a short time, saving the costs of government and social capitals. 
Fourthly, the confidentiality of arbitration can protect the information security of 
government and social capitals to the greatest extent and avoid the expansion of 
dispute scope and prevent the occurrence of problems from causing social instability. 
Fifthly, resolving the PPP-related disputes through arbitration has a favorable effect 
on "going global" of Chinese enterprises, "inviting in" foreign investment and driving 
the implementation of the "Belt and Road" Initiative. As the national policy in the 


79
CHAPTER 2
new era of China, the "Belt and Road" Initiative will involve many infrastructure 
projects undertaken by Chinese enterprises in the countries along the "Belt and 
Road", so contracts on these projects are all basically the concession agreements. 
More and more PPP projects engaged by Chinese enterprise will go international. If 
it is unable to properly resolve the arbitrable problems in the PPP contracts, it will 
have an adverse impact on the arbitration by Chinese institution as agreed in the 
international cooperation. In case of any disputes between Chinese enterprises and 
foreign governments or enterprises, it is very hard for Chinese enterprises to safeguard 
their due rights and interests through arbitration in local courts or through local 
administrative proceedings on account of various complex factors. This has already 
become an undeniable fact. Moreover, many Chinese enterprises use the Washington 
Convention and the New York Convention as legal guarantees for enforcing the 
ruling, hoping to resolve the disputes through arbitration due to its neutrality, 
professionalism, independence and other advantages. If the Chinese laws prohibit 
the disputes in connection with concession agreements (PPP contracts) from being 
submitted for arbitration, and Article V:2 of the New York Convention specifies that 
one of the reasons for refusal of enforcement of an arbitral award is that the dispute 
cannot be settled by arbitration, but the standard for a dispute capable of settlement 
by arbitration is the national standard of the place of arbitration, it will definitely 
make the arbitral award made by Chinese and foreign arbitration institutions about 
disputes on the concession agreements relating to the "Belt and Road" become 
unable to be enforced. Moreover, the requirements of Chinese enterprises for 
including the arbitration clauses are difficult to be accepted by local governments. 
China's expectation and hope of resolving the numerous disputes arising out of the 
concession agreements through the arbitration mechanism to be established under 


80
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
the ongoing diversified dispute resolution mechanism are difficult to be realized. On 
the contrary, if the laws and judicial practices of China recognize the arbitrability 
of PPP-Related disputes, many "going global" Chinese enterprises and "inviting 
in" foreign enterprises will decidedly select the arbitration because of its advantages 
mentioned above, providing a legal guarantee for the fulfillment of the "Belt and 
Road" Initiative. Resolving of the PPP-related disputes is of positive significance from 
both regards of encouraging the investment and increasing efficiency and effect of 
dispute resolution. 
iv. Service Features and Strengths of the CIETAC PPP Arbitration 
Center
13
In the context of pushing the construction of the "Belt and Road" and in response 
to the demands of transformation and upgrading of national economy and the 
construction of the "Belt and Road", the CIETAC PPP Arbitration Center (PPP 
Arbitration Center), the first arbitration center ever established in China to resolve 
disputes arising from PPP-related projects through arbitration, has been established 
by CIETAC. The opening ceremony of the PPP Arbitration Center was held on 16 
May 2017 in Beijing.
The CIETAC PPP Arbitration Center is of independence, professionalism and 
efficiency. Also, it has the following features:
Totally independent of administrative organs, the PPP Arbitration Center is free 
from interference by administrative organs when hearing cases. The PPP Arbitration 
13　See Sun Haozhe and Yin Shaocheng, Arbitration is a Sound Mechanism to Resolve PPP-Related Disputes, 
Economic Information Daily, published on 7 November 2017 (008).


81
CHAPTER 2
Center has the same list of CIETAC arbitrators that come from nationwide and 
worldwide, and arbitrators handling the disputes do not represent any of the parties 
concerned and must be independent and fair. 
Relying upon a team of expert arbitrators with professional quality and capacity, the 
PPP Arbitration Center can guarantee the professionalism in resolution of disputes 
in connection with PPP projects. The PPP Arbitration Center currently has nearly 
100 expert arbitrators specializing in resolving disputes related to PPP projects, 
construction and project management, including 24 foreign experts. 
The PPP Arbitration Center applies the same CIETAC Arbitration Rules. It pushes 
ahead the proceeding management of cases in high quality and efficiency by virtue 
of experience and talent of CIETAC through years of resolution of disputes on 
concession agreements. 
IV. Observation on Typical Arbitration Cases Relating to 
PPP Projects 
i. Characteristics of CIETAC Arbitration Cases Involving PPP Projects 
CIETAC has accepted a large quantity of BOT, BOOT and other disputes involving 
PPP projects since the 1990s. According to incomplete statistics, CIETAC has 
resolved more than 300 disputes, involving an amount of tens of billions of RMB, 
which covers a wide range including highway construction, tolls, water supply 
projects, sewage disposal, shanty town reconstruction, environmental treatment, 
government procurement, disputes on joint venture and partnership of project 
companies, concession of Olympics venues and other industries. The parties involved 


82
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
therein are from the governments at various levels (province, city, county, township) 
and the governmental departments across China. 
The CIETAC cases involving PPP projects have the following characteristics: 
From the aspect of the parties involved in the cases, it is not only very common to see 
governments or government departments or PPP project companies as the parties, 
but  also frequent to encounter disputes over joint venture and partnership arising 
out of the changes in partnership cooperation and China's policy for foreign fund. 
In the cases of dispute over PPP projects, one cause of dispute may trigger a series of 
cases involving multiple entities, causing the domino effect. The process of arbitration 
shall be of independence and confidentiality, and also involve the coordination and 
consistency of overall handling of cases, which raises very stringent requirements for 
professional quality and case control capacity of the arbitral tribunal. 
From the aspect of the disputes, the dispute amounts are relatively huge, almost 
all of which are more than RMB100 million. Although the disputes may involve 
administrative orders or concrete administrative acts, they are actually economic 
disputes caused by administrative orders or concrete administrative acts, i.e., these 
disputes are between equal entities over civil and commercial contracts rather than 
over concrete administrative acts. Some disputes change along with the development 
in BOT, BOOT, PPP concession mode and policies of China. Diverse types of 
dispute involving complex legal relationships are found. 
ii. Analysis of Typical PPP-Related CIETAC Cases Concluded from 
2005 to 2016 


83
CHAPTER 2
Through observation of the 37 sample cases concluded from 2005 to 2016 provided 
by CIETAC, it can be found that legal disputes arising out of PPP projects mainly 
center on the following points. The observation results also are in line with the 
summary of the aforesaid types of disputes relating to PPP projects. 
1. Disputes Arising out of Imprecise Contract Design of Series Contracts of PPP 
Projects 
For a PPP project, all parties establish and adjust the right and obligation 
relationships among them by entering into a series of contracts, including PPP 
project contract and shareholder agreement, performance contracts (including 
project contracting contract, operation and service contract, material supply contract, 
product or service purchase contract, etc.), financing contract and insurance contract, 
which consists of the contract system of the PPP project. It could be said that project 
contract and series contracts are the charter of the PPP project, which are the starting 
point of project implementation and also the approach to resolve disputes arising 
therefrom, therefore, stable and clear contents thereof are very important. Any 
confusion, ambiguity and omission in contents and understanding of these contracts, 
or conflicts between the PPP project contract and other series contracts or between 
different clauses of the same contract are easy to give rise to legal disputes, and even 
cause the overall suspension of the PPP project. 
Case 1
In the case on "a concession agreement on BOT highway", the Department of 
Transportation of A (the Claimant), identified that the First Respondent was the 
builder of two highways (Highway X and Highway Y), in the form of tendering 


84
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
in 2005. The total investment in such BOT project was about RMB1.03 billion. 
Afterwards, all parties signed the X Concession Contract, agreeing that Hong Kong 
A Construction Limited, the First Respondent, obtained the right to construct and 
operate the project in the form of BOT, and B Department of Transportation should 
be responsible for reporting the project for approval. Also, the Contract specifies that 
the First Respondent shall establish a project company (i.e., the Second Respondent) 
within the territory of China to take charge of the project operation. The project 
company shall inject the initial registered capital within 60 days upon receipt of 
the business license, otherwise, the Claimant shall reserve the right to unilaterally 
terminate the Contract. However, soon after the performance of the Contract, the 
certificate of land use right was not obtained due to the government party's illegal 
reporting of Project Y, thereby influencing the First Respondents to obtain the bank 
loans and failing to inject the registered capital to Project X in a timely manner. 
Afterwards, the Claimant and the First Respondent prepared a Minutes of Meeting 
through mutual negotiation, specifying that the government agrees to give some 
"grace period" for the capital injection, postponing to 20 May, 2008. However, the 
Respondent failed to inject sufficient registered capital after the maturity of grace 
period, so the Claimant exercised its right to unilaterally terminate the Contract by 
issuing a notice on contract termination in accordance with relevant provisions. 
Both parties had a considerable dispute over the "grace period" as stated in the 
Minutes of Meeting. The First Respondent alleged that the "grace period" was the 
intention of both parties for updating and amendments to the Concession Contract. 
Assumptions in the Contract have changed greatly, therefore, the right enjoyed by the 
party to unilaterally terminate the Contract has been automatically eliminated, which 
cannot be exercised. However, the Claimant claimed that the core of the Minutes 


85
CHAPTER 2
of Meeting was to grant the "grace period", rather than its waiver of the right of 
unilateral termination. The arbitral tribunal held that the right enjoyed by the party 
to unilaterally terminate the Contract was not deprived due to the execution of the 
Minutes of Meeting. 
Case 2 
In the case of "Concession Agreement on Operation of Such-and-Such Olympics 
Venue", X Swimming Co., Ltd.(the Claimant) and Y Science and Trade Co., Ltd. (the 
Respondent) entered into a Concession Contract on Operation of Such-and-Such Venue 
(III), specifying that the Claimant will grant the concession to the Respondent for 
exclusively producing and selling the "Electrolyzed Water System of Such Venue" and 
also specifying the calculation and payment of concession expenses. However, the 
Claimant submitted to CIETAC for arbitration of the Respondent's failure to pay 
the concession expenses during the contract performance. 
The Claimant of this case has clear claims and the case facts are relatively clear, so 
it should be a simple case. However, the parties of this case failed to provide any 
evidence for the filing of the contract concerned. Trademark license contracts, patent 
exploitation license contracts and franchise contracts shall be submitted to the 
relevant authority for filing in accordance with Article 40 of the Trademark Law of 
the People's Republic of China, Article 14 of the Implementing Rules for the Patent Law 
of the People's Republic of China and Article 8 of the Regulations on the Administration 
of Commercial Franchises. Therefore, the arbitral tribunal devoted relatively great 
efforts to ascertain the nature and effect of the Concession Contract concerned, so as to 
confirm whether the contract remains in force. Out of consideration of the stability 


86
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
of contracts, though Article 52(5) of the Contract Law of the People's Republic China 
(the Contract Law) reads that "Contracts violating the mandatory provisions of laws 
and administrative regulations shall be null and void", Article 14 of the Interpretation 
II of the Supreme People's Court of Several Issues Concerning the Application of the 
Contract Law of the People's Republic of China specifies that "The term 'mandatory 
provisions' set forth in Article 52(5) of the Contract Law refers to the mandatory 
provisions on validity" . Besides, the Guiding Opinions on Several Issues Concerning 
the Trial of Cases of Disputes over Civil and Commercial Contracts in the Current 
Situations released by the SPC on 7 July, 2009, stipulate that "The people's courts 
shall distinguish the mandatory provisions on validity from those on administration 
in accordance with the provisions. In case any mandatory provisions on validity are 
violated, the people's courts shall hold the contract invalid; in case any mandatory 
provisions on administration are violated, the people's courts shall recognize its 
validity according to specific situations." Therefore, after considering comprehensive 
factors, the arbitral tribunal thinks that "the said recordation shall center on the 
administration and aim at regulating the behaviors of participants in the market 
activities, but without denying the transaction results. Violation of the provisions 
will not necessarily cause the impairment of the State interest or public interest. 
Moreover, relevant laws and administrative regulations failed to specify that violation 
of the provisions will make the contracts invalid." The arbitral tribunal held that the 
contract involved in this case is valid on the ground of "considering the principles of 
encouraging the transactions and observing the contracts and the filing of contract 
falls out of the scope of dispute hereof". In fact, this dispute may be avoidable if the 
parties gain a clear understanding of the nature of contract and comply with relevant 
laws and regulations in devising and performing the Contract. 


87
CHAPTER 2
Case 3
The case of "Framework Contract on the Construction with Funds" also involves the 
dispute on the validity of contract. In this case, a Chinese company (the Claimant), 
a US Company Y (the First Respondent) and a Chinese Company Z (the Second 
Respondent) signed the Framework Contract on General Contracting with Funds of the 
Construction of Plaza B in Country A in 2008. The Second Respondent shall assume 
joint and several guarantee liabilities for the debt borne by the First Respondent, and 
three parties thus entered into the Guarantee Contract. After accepting the dispute 
case, the arbitral tribunal of CIETAC ascertains that the Second Respondent, as a 
domestic legal person registered in accordance with the laws of China, provides the 
guarantee for a corporation registered at abroad, which actually falls within the scope 
of external guarantee. However, pursuant to the Regulations of the People's Republic of 
China on Foreign Exchange Control, providing of external guaranty must be reported 
to relevant foreign exchange control organs for approval. Therefore, the execution of 
the contract involved herein must be registered with relevant foreign exchange control 
organ. In this case, the Second Respondent failed to report its external guarantee 
for approval and registration, which violates the laws, administrative regulations 
and mandatory provisions of validity as stated by the judicial interpretation, so the 
arbitral tribunal held that the contract involved herein is invalid. 
Case 4
In the case involving "Rail Transit Elevator Purchase and Sale Contract", X Elevator 
Co., Ltd. (the Claimant) and Metro Line Y Investment Co., Ltd.(the Respondent) 
signed the Contract on Escalators for Line Z Project, specifying that the Respondent 


88
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
will provide the Claimant with escalators. During the contract performance, the 
Respondent asked the Claimant to pay the annual inspection fee of escalators during 
the warranty period, but the Claimant disagreed to do so and have the fee deducted 
from the construction cost receivable. The contract reached by and between both 
parties did not specify the bearing of annual inspection fee, on which both parties 
had dispute. 
The Claimant claimed that all the contracts it signed with the Respondent on the 
escalator for Line Z Project had never specified whether the annual inspection fee of 
escalators during the warranty period (i.e., defect notification period) would be borne 
by the Claimant. However, the Respondent argued that provisions therein on price, 
equipment and services rendered by the Claimant, defect notification period, etc. 
could be deemed that the Claimant had agreed on the payment of annual inspection 
fee during the warranty period. 
After investigation, the arbitral tribunal found that the elevator and escalator 
contracts and supplementary contracts thereto indeed contained no sentence of "The 
annual inspection fee during the warranty period shall be borne by the Claimant". 
The arbitral tribunal thus gave comprehensive consideration of evidence presented 
by both parties. First of all, the arbitral tribunal held that the "scope of contracting" 
as stated in the Contract Agreement had specified that the Claimant was responsible 
for rendering such services as maintenance, repairing and defect correction during 
the defect notification period. Secondly, the Contract has clearly specified that the 
Claimant should render the service of repairing the facilities, including elevators, 
during the defect notification period. Finally, the specification of owner requirements 
set forth in the contractual documents stated that the equipment and services 


89
CHAPTER 2
provided by the Claimant included the payment for obtaining relevant governmental 
approval (including the certificate of safety inspection). Furthermore, the Special 
Contractual Terms and Conditions read that "the Claimant shall bear all costs, 
expenses and taxes generating from the rendering of services during the warranty 
period (i.e., defect notification period) and the performance of the subject matter 
herein." Therefore, in the absence of provisions on disputed matters in the master 
contract and series contracts, the arbitral tribunal ruled that the annual inspection fee 
generating from the warranty period should be borne by the Claimant. 
The said four cases all involve the design of series contracts of PPP projects, and the 
dispute of Case 1 is highly typical among the PPP projects in practice. Because a PPP 
project always involves a wide scope and fields, a series of contracts will be executed 
after the signing of a master contract, or the supplementary contracts or amendments 
may be signed. Under this circumstance, inconsistency between clauses in these 
contracts or unclear provisions therein could easily give rise to the disputes. Secondly, 
three of the said cases involve the nature of contracts. Case 3 is fairly typical. The 
contracts involved therein specified in detail the project and provided a huge amount 
of guaranty for the master contract. However, such external guaranty was confirmed 
to be invalid due to its violation of the national mandatory provisions, delivering a 
heavy impact on the rights and obligations of the parties. For Case 4, both parties 
have signed the Contract on Escalators for Line Z Project, the Supplementary Contract, 
the Owner Requirements and many other contracts, but all of these contractual 
documents failed to specify the party who should bear the annual inspection fee 
of elevators during the warranty period, which makes both parties suspend the 
transaction due to the payment of inspection fee (about RMB80,000). Moreover, the 


90
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Claimant claimed that the "the annual inspection fee of elevators shall be borne by 
the Respondent according to the industry practice". The Claimant should have been 
exempted from paying the fee if the industry practice is described in words. 
2. Disputes Arising out of Illegal Reporting of PPP Projects for Approval, Illegal 
Tendering and Other Illegal Behaviors of PPP Projects 
Some large PPP projects such as those about construction of highway and 
infrastructure have to go through complex approval formalities. During the 
implementation of these projects, some factors, like irregular decision-making 
procedures of the government, inexperience and incapacity of the participants and 
poor preparation at the early stage and absence of information, could easily cause 
illegal reporting and tendering of the projects, as well as erroneous decision making 
and lengthy process, thereby triggering the legal risks and disputes over PPP projects. 
Case 1
In the aforesaid case on "a concession agreement on BOT highway", the Respondent's 
delay in capital injection to Project X has something to do with the approval action 
of the government to a certain extent. In the case, Hong Kong A Construction 
Limited, the First Respondent, undertakes Highway X and Highway Y in the form 
of BOT, and states that they are of "mutual independence and constraint". The First 
Respondent responded that the government party split Project Y into two sections 
for reporting without notifying the First Respondent and spent about 6 months 
in reporting for approval, thereby making its investment of RMB120 million idle 
away on Project Y for half a year and causing a huge loss to the First Respondent. 
Meanwhile, the government party failed to obtain the certificate of construction 


91
CHAPTER 2
land use right for Project Y, directly causing the First Respondent's failure to meet 
the conditions for loan granting and obtain the bank loan. Due to insufficient fund, 
Project Y has to be suspended under the circumstances of completing 40% of the 
civil work and investing more than RMB500 million, thereby influencing the overall 
operation of the Group's fund and delaying the capital injection to the associated 
Project X. The First Respondent stressed many times that the "government party has 
been remiss in performance of its duties and obligations for due cooperation". 
However, main point of dispute of this case is the First Respondent's delay in 
injecting the capital to Project X. The fact that the First Respondent's delay in the 
capital injection is clear, so the arbitral tribunal judged that the First Respondent 
failed to inject the initial registered capital as scheduled in accordance with the 
corresponding contract, and the First Respondent shall be deemed to have broken the 
contract. 
Case 2
In the case over "Cooperation of Hebei BK Highway Co., Ltd.", BK Co., Ltd. 
(the Claimant), as the builder, signed the Contract on Incorporating a Chinese-
Foreign Cooperative Joint Venture Named Hebei BK Highway Co., Ltd. between BK 
Highway Co., Ltd. and BK Company with BK Highway Development Co., Ltd. (the 
Respondent), specifying that both parties shall cooperate in building, operating, 
managing and maintaining a certain segment of Some Project of Such-and-Such 
Highway. The total investment amounts up to RMB230 million. 
In performing the contract, the Claimant established nine subsidiaries and reached 
an agreement with the Respondent to divide the highway, the section involved in 


92
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
the case, into nine segments for reporting, in order to avoid the approval by the 
NDRC, the Ministry of Commerce and other departments. However, the State 
Council rigorously investigated the illegal behaviors of reporting by segment for 
approval later and criticized the wrongful practice of breaking down a large project 
into smaller ones for approval. The project of this case was forcedly suspended due to 
illegal reporting. Both parties accordingly had a great many disputes over the capital 
contribution, handover of the completed work, interpretation of relevant contracts 
and other matters. 
Case 3
In the case of "Subcontracting and Construction Contract of Sufficient and 
Comprehensive Resource-Oriented Utilization of Residues Project", X Co., Ltd. 
(the Claimant) and Anhui Y Co., Ltd. (the Respondent) entered into an agreement, 
whereby the Claimant agreed upon the construction of sufficient and comprehensive 
resource-oriented utilization of Z residues of the Respondent. The contract price 
aggregated up to RMB480 million. However, the Claimant was actually ineligible for 
and incapable of completing the contracting project as a whole. It was deemed to be 
disqualified for contracting the project by the local construction and administration 
organ, and ordered to cease the illegal contracting. The Respondent was always aware 
of the Claimant's disqualification for construction. After the project was terminated, 
the Claimant went to an arbitration and asked to arbitrate the Respondent to pay the 
expenses of RMB30 million, including costs of prefabricated houses, office building 
and dormitory building. 
The arbitral tribunal held that X Co., Ltd. did not meet the mandatory provisions 


93
CHAPTER 2
set forth in the Construction Law of the People's Republic of China, i.e., "The unit 
undertaking a contract for a construction project shall have the legal certificate 
of qualification and undertake the projects within the scope specified for the 
qualification grade certificate it holds." Therefore, the contract involved herein was 
invalid. Nevertheless, because the Claimant contracted the project without due 
qualification and the Respondent was aware of the Claimant's disqualification, under 
this circumstances, both parties shall bear the liabilities of contracting fault for the 
invalidity of the contract, and also the losses so incurred. 
The said three cases all incurred illegal tendering and reporting for approval. For 
PPP projects, credit deficiency, wrong decision, redundant and complicated approval 
formalities, illegal tendering of the government parties, etc. are common risky factors, 
which could probably cause the damage to normal construction and operation of 
the PPP projects, and even cause the termination and failure of the projects. This is a 
reminder to all of the participants of PPP projects that scrupulous attention shall be 
paid to the compliance of the entire process of the projects. That is to say, both public 
sector and private sector shall conduct thorough market survey and market forecast 
and gain a clear understanding of laws, regulations and policies, so as to create the 
good investment and financing environment and stable political environment. 
3. Disputes Arising out of Unclear Provisions for Establishment, Reporting for 
Approval, Acceptance Testing and Other Steps of PPP Projects 
As stressed above, clear provision shall be specified for establishment, approval, 
acceptance testing and other key steps of PPP projects due to their particular 
characteristics. Clear provisions can create stable cooperation environment for and 


94
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
ensure smooth fulfillment of PPP projects, 
Case 1
In the case over "Gold Mine Project Contracting Contract", both parties of the 
project disputed unclear provisions on delayed completion and standards for 
acceptance testing. 
The Claimant, also the contractor, and the Respondent as the employer signed the 
Contract on Installation and Commissioning of Civil Work, Facilities and Process Pipes of 
Crushing Screening Station of XXX Gold Mine, involving the construction cost of more 
than RMB100 million, on 20 June, 2008. But the project was delayed on account 
of the Respondent, and both parties thus agreed on a new construction period by 
signing a supplementary agreement. The Claimant completed all the construction 
work as scheduled on 18 August, 2009 and deemed the completion of construction. 
However, the Respondent refused to carry out the acceptance testing for various 
reasons and delayed in the settlement upon completion. The Claimant thus filed 
arbitration to CIETAC and claimed that the Respondent should pay the construction 
cost and assume the liabilities for breach. However, the Respondent alleged that 
the project completion was delayed because the Claimant refused to provide the 
Application Report on Acceptance testing upon Completion, four sets of completion 
drawings as stipulated in the contract and other materials for completion. Moreover, 
the Claimant burned the Respondent's important equipment, refused to go through 
the procedures for supervision and inspection of special-purpose equipment, was 
incapable of providing sand gravel, machinery and other materials and committed 
other serious default behaviors. So the Respondent claimed that the project made by 


95
CHAPTER 2
the Claimant did not meet the "conditions for delivery after acceptance testing upon 
completion". Both parties conducted several rounds of debates on the completion 
and standards for acceptance testing and presented lots of evidence. 
The project involved therein spans a wide range of construction and diverse types of 
work, and both parties have a considerable difference in the figures of settlement of 
construction cost. After giving consideration to the standards for acceptance testing 
set forth in the contract involved herein and the Management Specification of Housing 
Construction Engineering Documentation of the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, 
citing the clauses thereof and referring to the Interpretation of the Supreme People's 
Court on Issues Concerning the Application of Law for the Trial of Cases of Dispute over 
Contracts on Construction Engineering Projects, the arbitral tribunal finally ascertained 
the date of completion and standards for acceptance testing, and ruled that "the 
arbitral tribunal does not uphold the Respondent's claims that the project was not 
completed and tested for acceptance testing yet on the ground that the project has 
been completed and the Respondent has it put into operation for more than 5 years".
Case 2
In the case involving "Procurement Contract on Trunk Canal of Taohe River Water 
Diversion and Supply Project (Phase I)", Joint Z (the Buyer) consisting of X Heavy 
Machinery Group Co., Ltd. (the Claimant), France XX Company (the Seller), Y 
Water Conservancy and Hydropower Co. Ltd. (the First Respondent) and Italy YY 
Company (the Second Respondent) jointly entered into the Contract on Procurement 
of Trunk Canal and Tunnel TBM for A Certain Water Diversion and Supply Project (Phase 
I). Pursuant to the said contract, the Seller sold a large-sized complicated TBM 


96
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
system to the Buyer. "Soundness of the quality and performance of such TBM system 
mainly depend on the availability rate, and this figure shall be no lower than 90%", 
as stipulated in the contract. 
The Seller held that the availability rate of its TBM system was 92.99% upon its 
being delivered to the Buyer, which exceeded the agreed figure and satisfied the 
conditions for acceptance testing as stated in the contract. Therefore, the TBM 
system complied with the contractual provisions upon its delivery and the Seller 
has performed its obligation of goods supply. However, the Buyer held that the 
equipment provided by the Seller was found to have many problems after being put 
into operation despite that its availability rate met the requirements, which had a 
strong impact on the tunnel boring. So the Buyer did not sign the Certificate of Final 
Acceptance testing or make the residual goods payment. The Seller thus went to the 
arbitration. 
Pursuant to the contractual provisions, the arbitral tribunal held that "whether the 
evaluation indicator used for the boring meets the contractual provisions is the 
only and one standard to judge if the equipment delivered by the Claimant comes 
up to the quality standards". Therefore, the arbitral tribunal cannot uphold the 
Respondent's claim that the equipment involved herein suffers the quality deficiency. 
For Case 1 above, the dispute is attributed to the participant's unclear provisions 
of two key links of the project, i.e., completion and acceptance testing. Such 
legal dispute may be avoided if both parties can clearly specify the standards for 
completion and acceptance testing, implementation party and aftermaths in the 
contract. For Case 2, the Claimant advisably specified the standards for goods 


97
CHAPTER 2
acceptance testing and delivery in advance in a very precise way, specifying that "The 
only and one standard for inspecting the quality and performance of the TBM system 
is the availability rate, and this figure shall be no lower than 90%". With such clear 
provisions in the contract, the arbitral tribunal can hold that the Seller has performed 
its obligation of goods delivery, though the Buyer claimed that the goods were of 
poor quality after the delivery and dragged down the construction. 
4. Disputes Arising out of Unclear or Extremely Complicated Provisions for Capital 
Contribution and Ownership during the Construction and Operation of PPP 
Projects 
Through the observation of the CIETAC cases, we can find that some disputes arise 
from key issues, e.g., facility construction, capital contribution and ownership of PPP 
projects, apart from illegal and noncompliant behaviors of the participants. In view 
of balancing the benefits, introducing additional provisions afterwards or for other 
reasons, participants leave a blank for these key issues or fail to give clear provisions, 
or devise extremely complicated clauses for the sake of distributing the high yield 
reasonably and realizing fair setting of rights, which may give rise to disputes in 
practice. 
In the case over "Cooperation in the Construction of Highway", X Roadway 
Development Co., Ltd. (the Claimant) and Y Co., Ltd. (the Respondent) signed the 
Contract on Cooperative Operation of XX Highway Co., Ltd. and the supplementary 
contract, specifying a roadway development joint venture called "Z Highway Co., 
Ltd." will be established in XX. For the joint venture, both parties agreed that "the 
Claimant subscribes the registered capital of RMB45.585 million, accounting for 


98
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
44.7% of the total registered capital. The Respondent subscribes the registered 
capital of RMB56.395 million, occupying 55.3% of the total registered capital. The 
difference between the total investment and the registered capital will be injected 
to Company Z in the form of interest-free loan. The Claimant provides the loan 
totaling up to RMB68.378 million, and the Respondent offers RMB84.592 million". 
Both the Claimant and the Respondent performed their due obligation of capital 
contribution and offer of shareholder loans afterwards. On the shareholder loan, 
Company Z entered into the loan agreement with the Claimant and the Respondent, 
respectively. 
In addition, both parties set up complicated provisions for the repayment of loans 
and distribution of profits: 
In allocating the loan resources (including repayment of loan, distribution of profits 
or allocation of loan in other forms) to the investors of both parties each time, 
Company Z must comply with the following principles: Article 42(1) of the contract 
obviously specifies the three ways of allocating the loan resources to the investors: i.e., 
① repaying the loan; ② distributing the profits; and ③ allocating the loan resources 
in other forms.
Article 42(2) reads that: "i) Before Party B (i.e., the Respondent of the Case, noted 
by the arbitral tribunal) receives the amount accumulating up to RMB124.2 million 
from the joint venture, 90% of the distributable amount shall be owned by Party B 
and 10% shall be possessed by Party A (i.e., the Claimant of the Case, noted by the 
arbitral tribunal, the same below). During the period commencing from the date 
when Party B receives an accumulative amount of RMB124.2 million and ending 


99
CHAPTER 2
on the date when Party B receives an accumulative amount of RMB100.37 million 
from the joint venture, 50% of the distributable amount shall be owned by Party A 
and Party B, respectively. After then, the distributable amount must be distributed in 
proportion to the registered capital contributed by each party." Besides, Article 42(2)
(ii) reads that: "a) For the amount of repayment of loan that should be received by 
each party each time, the distributable amount refers to the amount that is distributed 
to each party in the form of repaying the loan through the Board of Directors. b) For 
the profit that should be distributed to Party B in each fiscal year, the distributable 
amount during the 5 years commencing from the first profit-making year means the 
operating profit after deduction of (1) various funds reserved by the joint venture in 
accordance with the laws; (2) various compensations payable, liquidated damages, 
late fee, penalty and fine; and (3) makeup for the loss of the previous years (collectively 
called the amount deductible). In the coming 5 years thereafter, the distributable 
amount means the amount that the operating profits from which 9% of the operating 
profits and other amount deductible are deducted. c) For the profits that should be 
distributed to Party A in each fiscal year, the distributable amount during the first 
10 fiscal years (including the first profit-making year) commencing from the first 
profit-making year means the amount of the after-tax profit from which the amounts 
deductible are deducted." 
After Company Z repaid the Respondent's shareholder loans in full amount, both 
parties disputed on the distribution of the amount of the Respondent to Company 
Z. The Respondent stated that Company Z should distribute the aggregate of after-
tax profits and the amount of depreciation according to the proportion as stated in 
42(2)(i) of the Contract and then make classification to facilitate proper adjustment, 


100
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
and distributing the profits to the Respondent shall be deemed as the distribution 
of profit to the Respondent in the form of debt to the Respondent, i.e., obtaining 
the distribution of amount of depreciation by Company Z after obtaining the 
distribution of profits made by Company Z in the given proportion. However, 
the Claimant had different understanding of the article, stating that Article 42 
specified the distributable amount after the repayment of loans and the distribution 
of profits on the whole. Therefore, the Respondent lost its capacity as the joint 
venture's creditor when repaying all of the loans, having no right to participate in 
the distribution of the amount obtained through the repayment of loans. When all 
of the loans have been paid off, the "distributable amount" would not include the 
amount of repayment of the loans thereof. Meanwhile, as soon as the Respondent 
paid off the loans, "50% of the distributable amount shall be owned by Party B" set 
forth in Article 42(2).i could be restrictively explained that 50% of the distributable 
profit was occupied by the Respondent. Also, both parties initiated multiple rounds 
of debates over many details of the articles of the Contract. 
This complicated case involves a huge amount. After serious survey and analysis 
of the contracts involved herein and amendments thereto, as well as the approval 
documents of the Foreign Economic and Trade Department of XX Province for 
these contracts and amendments, the Loan Agreement signed by and between the 
Claimant and the Respondent and the joint venture, the Audit Report of the Project, 
the project proposal and the feasibility study report and many other documents 
involved herein, the arbitral tribunal held that the aforesaid articles had specified 
i) the principle of distributing the amount to both parties in different proportions 
at three different stages, and ii) the distributable amount of the repayment of loans 


101
CHAPTER 2
and the distribution of profit, other than the overall distribution of the amount. 
Meanwhile, after analyzing the definition of distributable amount and the calculation 
method, the arbitral tribunal ascertained that the Respondent had the right to 
obtain the distributable amount (excluding the net cash flow generating from the 
depreciation of fixed assets of the joint venture) of the distribution of profits by the 
proportion of 50% as agreed upon in the Contract at the second stage after the joint 
venture paid off the shareholder loans of the Respondent, but had no right to obtain 
the distribution of amount from the joint venture in the form of repaying the loans. 
Moreover, the arbitral tribunal did not adjudicate the situation that the joint venture 
repaid the shareholder loans of the Respondent through the amount of depreciation. 
In this case, X Roadway Development Co., Ltd. and Y Co., Ltd. devised extremely 
complicated clauses for the distribution of profits, repayment of loans and other 
matters, and the complication of the Contract made both parties have different 
understanding of these clauses and trigger the unnecessary legal dispute during the 
performance, which could be avoided provided that both parties can design simple 
and clear clauses, or sort out these complicated clauses to guarantee consistent 
understanding of both parties. 
V. Conclusion 
The PPP mode has been extensively used in the fields of international infrastructure 
construction and public services. It was first introduced to China in the 1980s, 
thereby breeding a wide range of PPP projects in the fields of infrastructure and 
public utilities. After experiencing the stages of exploration and pilot, gradual 
promotion, adjustment and fluctuations, regulation and development, PPP projects 


102
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
in China have tended towards the regular and benign development. 
Indeed, the development of PPP projects is not all plain sailing due to their 
characteristics and for many reasons, and is exposed to many risks from defficiency of 
laws and regulations, unsound and unprofessional contractual terms and conditions. 
These deficiencies and risks have caught great attention and fierce debates in recent 
years. This Report attempts to sort out and sum up these deficiencies and risks from 
the perspective of commercial arbitration, so as to provide thoughts and reference for 
the resolution of legal disputes over PPP projects. 
However, we also understand that summing up the problems is not enough, and 
a heap of tasks, e.g., accelerating the legislation of the PPP mode, accelerating the 
regulation and implementation of PPP projects and solving the arbitrability concern 
of disputes arising out of the PPP-related contracts, need to be completed. 


103
CHAPTER 3
Chapter 3　International Investment 
Arbitration Practice and Survey
I. Overview of International Investment and Resolution of 
International Investment Disputes 
i. Overview of International Direct Investment
1. Figures of International Direct Investment 
Global foreign direct investment (FDI) showed a downward trend in 2017. According 
to the World Investment Report 2018 issued by the United Nations Conference on 
Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the cross-border investment across the globe 
was depressed in 2017, and the global FDI flows fell by 23% to USD1.43 trillion, 
which was caused mainly by a 22% decrease in the value of cross-border mergers 
and acquisitions. The Report also indicates that the global average return on foreign 
investment was at 6.7% in 2017, down from 8.1% in 2012. Apart from the decline 
in the global return on investment, the value of announced greenfield investment
1 
also decreased by 14% in 2017 due to the decrease of significant mergers and 
acquisitions. According to the Report, the decline in the global return on investment 
may affect the longer-term prospects of cross-border investment
2.
1　It refers to an enterprise established by a multinational company and other investment subjects in a host 
country in accordance with laws of such host country and the ownership of all or part of assets thereof is in the 
possession of foreign investors. 
2　Excerpt from the official website of UNCTAD: http://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/wir2018_
overview_en.pdf, the latest visit on 14 June, 2018. 


104
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
The US remained as the world largest recipient of FDI in 2017, closely followed by 
Japan and China. However, outflows from China declined for the first time (down 
36% to USD125 billion compared with that in 2016) in recent years. The Report 
states that China remained as the largest recipient and investor of FDI among 
developing countries. China moved up one place (compared with 2016) to rank 2
nd 
only to the US, in attracting the global FDI in 2017
3. 
The Report states that projections for cross-border investment in 2018 show fragile 
growth. Global flows are forecast to grow about 5%, by up to 10%, but remain below 
the average over the past 10 years
4. 
According to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD)
5, FDI dropped by 18% in 2017 as corporate mergers and acquisitions 
reduced. In the fourth quarter of 2017, FDI flows reached their lowest level since 
2013 (USD280 billion).
 
3　Excerpt from the official website of UNCTAD: http://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/wir2018_
overview_en.pdf, the latest visit on 14 June, 2018.
4　Excerpt from the official website of UNCTAD: http://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/wir2018_
overview_en.pdf, the latest visit on 14 June, 2018.
5　Excerpt from the official website of OECD: FDI IN FIGURE, April 2018, http://www.oecd.org/daf/inv/
investment-policy/FDI-in-Figures-April-2018.pdf, the latest visit on 14 June, 2018. 


105
CHAPTER 3
Figures above indicate that global FDI presented a downslide trend and is not 
expected to improve much in 2018. Generally, investment scale and investment 
environment supplement each other: a host country could probably adjust its 
investment policies and strategies amid a sharp decline in the investment scale, which 
may cause changes in the investment environment and give the long-term impact on 
foreign investment in turn. Special Update on Investor-State Dispute Resolution: Facts 
and Figures of UNCTAD cited in the following part indicate that the majority of 
international investment agreements (IIAs) invoked in 2017 date back to the 1990s. 
Therefore, the evolvement of global FDI and changes so incurred, and investment 
disputes between investors and host countries are worth great attention. 
2. Figures of China's Direct Investment 
China keeps relatively large overseas investment scale despite that global FDI 
continues decline. According to the Ministry of Commerce (MOC), China's 


106
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
domestic investors conducted direct investments amounting to USD120.08 billion 
in non-financial sectors of 6,236 enterprises in 174 countries and regions around the 
world. Chinese enterprises concluded a total of 341 mergers and acquisitions in 49 
countries and regions throughout 2017, and these mergers and acquisitions involved 
18 industries with the total transaction amount of USD96.2 billion, including direct 
investment of USD21.2 billion accounting for 22% of the total transaction amount, 
and overseas financing of USD75 billion accounting for the actual transaction 
amount of 78%
6.
According to the China's Foreign Investment Report published by the National 
Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) in November 2017: China's 
foreign investment has maintained a swift growth since the Chinese governmental 
departments published the figures of foreign investment in 2003, the foreign 
investments in 2016 surged up to USD1,357.39 billion, and China climbed to the 
6th place
7 in 2016 from the 25th place in 2002 in the FDI stock. 
 
6　Official website of MOC: http://www.mofcom.gov.cn/article/i/jyjl/m/201801/20180102701507.shtml, the 
latest visit on 14 June, 2018. 
7　Official website of NDRC: http://www.ndrc.gov.cn/gzdt/201711/W020171130400470019984.pdf, the 
latest visit on 15 June, 2018.


107
CHAPTER 3
By the end of 2016, Chinese domestic investors had established some 37,200 FDI 
enterprises investing a total of USD5 trillion in 190 countries (regions), covering 
more than 80% countries (regions). At present, China's foreign investments 
have covered 18 industries of national economic activities. In addition to leasing 
and commercial services, wholesale and retail, manufacturing, transportation, 
warehousing and postal service, financial sector, agriculture, forestry, fishery and 
husbandry, mining and other traditional industries, scientific research and technical 
service industry, information transmission and information technology services, 
education, medical and social public facilities also witnessed a rapid growth of 
investment, and the structure of foreign investment was thus optimized
8. 
8　Official website of NDRC: http://www.ndrc.gov.cn/gzdt/201711/W020171130400470019984.pdf, the 
latest visit on 15 June, 2018.
Source: Official website of NDRC 
China's Direct Investment Flow, 2002 - 2016 (Unit: USD100 million)


108
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
In the process that China becomes a big capital exporter, investment disputes 
between Chinese investors and host countries are of great concern of the Chinese 
government and enterprises. 
ii. Overview of Resolution of International Investment Disputes
1. Figures of Resolution of Investment Disputes of the United Nations in 2017 
According to the Special Update on Investor-State Dispute Resolution: Facts and Figures
9 
published by UNCTAD in November 2017: 
During the first 7 months of this year, investors initiated at least 35 treaty-based 
investor–State dispute resolution (ISDS) cases, bringing the total number of known 
cases to 817, and 114 countries have been respondents to one or more known ISDS 
claims. The figure below illustrates trends in known treaty-based ISDS cases from 
1987 to 31 July, 2017. 2015 is the year with the highest number of cases filed: 
 
9　The following contents, figures and pictures are excerpted from the official website of UNCTAD:http://
unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/diaepcb2017d7_en.pdf, the latest visit on 14 June, 2018. 


109
CHAPTER 3
Developed-country investors brought about two thirds of the 35 known cases in 
2017, of which five cases were initiated by investors from Spain, and investors from 
Italy, Turkey and the US claimed 3 cases each. Overall, the three most frequent home 
States of claimants were the US, the Netherlands and the UK. 
 


110
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
The new ISDS cases in 2017 involved 32 countries. 5 countries and economies, i.e., 
Bahrain, Benin, Iraq, Kuwait and Taiwan Province of China, faced their first known 
ISDS claims. With known cases in 2017, Algeria, Chile and Iraq were involved 
in two cases, respectively. Looking at the overall trend, the three most frequent 
respondent States were Argentina, Venezuela and Spain. 
 


111
CHAPTER 3
About 80% of investment arbitration in 2017 were brought under bilateral 
investment treaties (BITs), and the remaining 20% were based on treaties with 
investment provisions (TIPs). The Energy Charter Treaty (ECT) was the most 
frequently invoked IIAs in 2017 (with three cases).
As at 31 July, 2017, about 530 ISDS proceedings had been concluded. About one 
third of concluded cases were decided in favor of the State (claims were dismissed 
either on jurisdictional grounds or on the merits), and about one quarter were 
decided in favor of the investor. A quarter of cases were settled. In the remaining 
proceedings, the cases were either discontinued or the tribunal found a treaty breach 
but did not award monetary compensation. Of the tried cases, about 60% were 


112
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
decided in favor of the investor and 40% in favor of the State. 
As at 31 July, 2017, 61% of all known cases were filed with the International Centre 
for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), either under the ICSID Convention 
or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules. The Arbitration Rules of the United Nations 
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) were the second most used 
procedural basis, followed by the Arbitration Rules of the Stockholm Chamber of 
Commerce (SCC) Arbitration Institute (SCC). 
 


113
CHAPTER 3
2. Figures of Resolution of Investment Disputes of ICSID in 2017
ICSID is an international investment arbitration institution funded by the World 
Bank Group. ICSID accepted a total of 53 cases involving the investment dispute 
in 2017. As at 31 December, 2017, ICSID had registered an accumulation of 650 
cases
10.
10　Excerpt from the official website of ICSID: https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Documents/resources/
ICSID%20Web%20Stats%202018-1(English).pdf, the latest visit on 15 June, 2018. 


114
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Nearly 70% of the cases accepted by ICSID in 2017 derived from the BITs
11. 
 
11　Excerpt from the official website of ICSID:https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Documents/resources/
ICSID%20Web%20Stats%202018-1(English).pdf#search=State%2DState%20Dispute, the latest visit on 20 
June, 2018. 
Source: Official website of ICSID 


115
CHAPTER 3
3. Figures of resolution of investment disputes of the SCC in 2017
12
Established in 1917, the SCC has become the world’s second largest institution for 
investment disputes. In at least 120 of the current BITs, Sweden or the SCC is cited 
as the forum for resolving disputes between investors and host countries. According 
to the statistics, the SCC has accepted 100 investment treaty disputes, of which 74% 
were administered under the SCC Rules from 1993 to 2017. Most of these investment 
disputes arose from the BITs and the Energy Charter Treaty. In 2017, the SCC 
accepted 8 cases involving the investment dispute, 75% of which were administered 
12　Excerpt from the official website of the SCC: http://www.sccinstitute.com/statistics/investment-
disputes-2017/, the latest visit on 15 June, 2018. 
Source: Official website of ICSID


116
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
under the SCC Arbitration Rules. 
Source: Official website of the SCC


117
CHAPTER 3
4. Figures of Resolution of Investment Disputes of the ICC in 2017
Formally founded in 1920, the ICC serves as the third-party consulting institution 
of the United Nations and other inter-government organizations and provides global 
enterprises and associations with commercial services, including the resolution 
of disputes. the ICC set up the International Court of Arbitration in 1923, and 
amended the arbitration rules in 2012, specifying the country-related arbitration 
rules. At present, about 10% of the ICC arbitration involves a state or a state entity, 
and the cases involving the countries Sub-Saharan Africa, Central and West Asia, 
Source: Official website of the SCC


118
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
and Central and Eastern Europe account for 80% of the total arbitration of the 
ICC. About 18% of the BITs allow for the possibility of using the ICC Rules of 
Arbitration
13.
5. Figures of Cases of Investment Disputes involving China in 2017
Chinese investors have started to lodge the investment disputes with host countries 
to ICSID since 2007, to seek after the legal remedy. There are 6 cases of investment 
arbitration claimed by the Chinese investors so far. The typical one is the case 
of Sanum Investments Limited
14 (a Macao-based company) v. the Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic in 2017 in accordance with the Agreement Concerning the 
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments entered into by and between the 
Government of the People's Republic of China and the Government of the Lao People's 
Democratic Republic in 1993. Sanum alleged that the Lao government revoked the 
business license and imposed unfair and discriminatory taxes on its hotel, gaming 
and hospitality complex in Laos and thus commenced the arbitration proceedings. 
The case is being tried. 
13　Excerpt from the ICC Commission Report: https://cdn.iccwbo.org/content/uploads/sites/3/2016/10/ICC-
Arbitration-Commission-Report-on-Arbitration-Involving-States-and-State-Entities.pdf, the latest visit on 17 
June, 2018. 
14　Laos Holdings N.V., funded by the American John Baldwin funded and established in the Netherlands 
Antilles, incorporated a subsidiary named Sanum Investments Ltd. in Macao in accordance with the laws of 
Macao Special Administrative Region. 


119
CHAPTER 3
Case No.
Claimant(s)
Respondent(s)
Status
ADHOC/17/1
Sanum Investments Limited
Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic
Pending
ARB/15/41
Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) 
Limited
United Republic of 
Tanzania
Pending
ARB/14/30
Beijing Urban Construction Group Co. 
Ltd.
Republic of Yemen
Pending
ARB/12/29
Ping An Life Insurance Company of 
China, Limited and Ping An Insurance 
(Group) Company of China, Limited
Kingdom of Belgium
Concluded
ARB/10/20
Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) 
Limited
Tanzania Electric Supply 
Company Limited
Pending
ARB/07/6
Tza Yap Shum 
Republic of Peru 
Concluded
Statistics of Investment Arbitration Initiated by Chinese Claimants to ICSID
15
II. Legal Framework of Protection of International 
Investments 
i. Overview
At present, investment protection rules for foreign investors mainly consist of: 
international investment protection conventions, regional investment protection 
treaties or investment protection clause in the multilateral trading treaties, bilateral 
investment protection treaties between countries or investment protection provisions 
in the BITs, investment protection laws of host countries for foreign investors, 
15　International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes, https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/cases/
AdvancedSearch.aspx, 15 April, 2018. 


120
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
investment agreements between investors and host countries, etc. 
Of the aforesaid rules, international conventions, multilateral treaties and bilateral 
investment protection treaties are the most important investment protection rules. 
According to UNCTAD, there are a total of 2,963 bilateral investment protection 
treaties around the globe, 2,369 of them are in force, 380 of them contain the 
investment provisions and 310 ones are in force
16. 
Of the said conventions, treaties or agreements, the following types of investment 
protection provisions (IPPs) are relatively common and are major bases for the 
claimants to claim the protection of their rights: 
(1) Protection from Expropriation specifies the conditions for host countries to 
legally expropriate assets of foreign investors. 
(2) Fair and Equitable Treatment (FET). Each BIT specifies different FET clause, of 
which the most investment disputes occurred. 
(3) National Treatment. Treatment given by host countries to foreign investors 
and their investments are no less than that granted to local investors and their 
investments. Foreign investors thus enjoy competitive opportunities equivalent to 
those for local citizens and enterprises. Therefore, host countries could neither give 
differential treatment nor take a position unfavorable to foreign investors when 
formulating laws and policies. 
(4) Most-Favored-Nation Treatment (MFN). Treatment given by host countries to 
16　Official website of UNCTAD: http://investmentpolicyhub.unctad.org/IIA, the latest visit on 14 June, 
2018. 


121
CHAPTER 3
investors of contracting states and their investments is not less than that granted 
to investors of other countries and their investments, so that treatment enjoyed by 
investors of contracting states equals to that to investors of other countries. 
(5) Freedom to Transfer Means and Funds. Investments and returns thereon are 
allowed for entering and leaving the country freely. 
(6) Full Protection and Security. Host countries must provide the security protection 
service. 
(7) Umbrella clause. It refers to the clause of commitments to investors in the 
investment treaty that contracting parties should abide by. 
According to the Report of UNCTA
17, claimants alleged breaches of FET in about 
80% of ISDS cases for which such information was available, followed by indirect 
expropriation with 75% as at 31 July, 2017. Those are also the common grounds 
for the arbitration tribunal to make judgment in favor of investors in investment 
arbitration. 
 
17　The following contents, figures and pictures are excerpted from the official website of UNCTAD:http://
unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/diaepcb2017d7_en.pdf, the latest visit on 14 June, 2018.


122
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Besides, the Mauritius Convention on Transparency, as a fresh practice, came into 
force on 18 , 2017, which involves the contracting states of Mauritius, Canada and 
Switzerland. 
ii. Multilateral Investment Conventions 
At present, major international investment conventions include the Convention 
on the Resolution of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States 
(Washington Convention), the Energy Charter Treaty and the Convention Establishing 
the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (Seoul Convention).
1. Washington Convention
Subject to the Washington Convention, ICSID, the world's first arbitration institution 
that is devoted to the settlement of international investment disputes and provides 
the arbitration and conciliation services for investment disputes arising between 


123
CHAPTER 3
contracting states and investors of other countries was established. Washington 
Convention now has 154 contracting states and 8 signatory states (162 in total). 
China is also a contracting state with the reservation clause therein, i.e., the Chinese 
Government would only consider submitting to the jurisdiction of ICSID disputes 
over compensation from expropriation and nationalization. 
The investment dispute resolution mechanism of ICSID is pertinent to legal disputes 
arising directly out of investments, and is applicable to the ICSID Rules, and the 
parties concerned cannot agree to follow other arbitration rules. Where the parties 
concerned fail to specify the applicable laws, laws of the host country (including 
conflict rules) and the applicable international laws shall be applied. After an arbitral 
award rendered by ICSID comes into force, the prevailing investor may apply for 
compulsory enforcement agianst the losing country in any member state. 
ICSID released the ICSID Additional Facility Rules in 1978, specifying that the 
Secretariat of ICSID enjoys the authorization to administer certain categories of 
proceedings between States and foreign nationals in accordance with the Rules, these 
proceedings include: (1) Conciliation and arbitration proceedings for the settlement 
of legal disputes arising directly out of an investment which are not within the 
jurisdiction of the ICSID because either the state party to the dispute or the state 
whose national is a party to the dispute is not a contracting state of the Washington 
Convention; (2) Conciliation and arbitration proceedings for the settlement of legal 
disputes which are not within the jurisdiction of the ICSID because they do not arise 
directly out of an investment, provided that either the state party to the dispute or the 
state whose national is a party to the dispute is a contracting state of the Washington 
Convention; and (3) Fact-finding proceedings. 


124
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
The first case of investment dispute against the Chinese government accepted by 
ICSID is Ekran Berhad v. the People's Republic of China concerning the arts and 
culture facilities (ARB/11/15) in 2011, and the MOC led representatives of Chinese 
government to respond. The parties filed a request for the discontinuance of the 
proceeding in May 2013
18.
On 4 November, 2014, Ansung Housing Co., Ltd., a Korean-incorporated company, 
filed a request against China to ICSID regarding the real estate development project, 
and the MOC led representatives of Chinese government to respond (Ansung 
Housing Co., Ltd. v. the People’s Republic of China (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/25)). 
In an award dated 9 March, 2017, the arbitration tribunal dismissed the request for 
lack of temporal jurisdiction. 
The latest proceeding against the Chinese government was claimed by Hela Schwarz 
GmbH (ARB/17/19) under the PRC-Germany BIT on 21 June, 2017, and the case 
is pending. 
2. Energy Charter Treaty 
The Energy Charter Treaty (ECT) is a multilateral investment treaty in the energy 
industry. 53 countries and regions in the Eurasian Continent have signed the ECT. 
China became an observer to the energy charter conference in 2001. The ECT 
18　A Chinese subsidiary of Ekran Berhand, a Malaysia-based company, entered into the land leasing 
agreement with Hainan Provincial People’s Government, with the leasing term ranging from 1993 to 2063. In 
2004, Hainan Provincial People’s Government took back the right to use the land of which the construction 
thereon was not yet started in 2 years in accordance with the Real Estate Administration Law of the People's 
Republic of China and the Land Administration Rules of Hainan Province. Both parties had a dispute about 
the jurisdiction: Is the jurisdiction of ICSID only pertinent to the amount of compensation or taken as the 
government's expropriation? Official website of ICSID: https://icsid.worldbank.org/apps/ICSIDWEB/cases/
Pages/casedetail.aspx?CaseNo=ARB/11/15, the latest visit on 17 June, 2018.


125
CHAPTER 3
provides multiple channels for resolution of investment disputes between contracting 
states and investors, including going to arbitration in accordance with the ICSID 
Rules, the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, the UNCITRAL Rules of Ad hoc Arbitration 
and the SCC Rules. 
3. Seoul Convention
Subject to the Seoul Convention, the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
(MIGA) was established for the purpose of guaranteeing the investments in 
developing countries against a loss resulting from expropriation, government default, 
currency exchange and transfer risk, war and civil disturbance risk and other political 
risks. 
iii. Free Trade Agreements 
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), Central American Free Trade 
Agreement, ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement, ASEAN 
Comprehensive Investment Agreement, Japan-Mexico FTA, McGill Preferential Trade 
Agreements, Organization of American States (OAS) BITs, Organization of American 
States (OAS) FTAs, etc. all bear the clause of investor protection. 
China has signed the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement
19, a preferential trade agreement, 
and 16 bilateral or multilateral free trade agreements
20. 
19　Previously known as the Amendment to the First Agreement on Trade Negotiations Among Developing Member 
Countries of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (Bangkok Agreement). 
20　According to the official website of MOC, FTZ agreements under negotiation include the Regional 
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), Phase II negotiation on China - GCC, China and Japan and 
South Korea, China-Sri Lanka, China-Israel, China-Norway, China-Pakistan FTA, negotiations on upgrading 
the China-Singapore FTA, China-New Zealand, China-Mauritius and China-Moldova. 
FTAs under research include: joint research on upgrading the China-Colombia, China -Fiji, China-Nepal, 


126
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
The Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement was jointly formulated by China, Bangladesh, 
India, Laos, South Korea and Sri Lanka pursuant to decisions contained in the 
Kabul Declaration of the Council of Ministers on Asian Economic Co-operation and 
the New Delhi Declaration adopted at the 31
st session of the Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and the Pacific. The Agreement specifies the principles of overall 
reciprocity and mutuality of advantages, transparency, National Treatment and MFN, 
and makes arrangements for negotiations about tariffs, border charges, fees and non-
tariff measures and special concessions to the least developed participating states
21. 
16 bilateral or multilateral free trade agreements are
22: China-Maldives FTA, China-
Georgia FTA, China-Australia FTA, China-South Korea FTA, China-Switzerland 
FTA, China-Iceland FTA, China - Costa Rica FTA, China-Peru FTA, China-Singapore 
FTA, China-New Zealan FTA, China-Chile FTA, China-Pakistan FTA and relevant 
agreement, China-ASEAN Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Co-
operation and relevant agreements, Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement of 
Mainland and Hong Kong and Macao, China–ASEAN Free Trade Area(10+1), 
Amendment to Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on China- 
ASEAN Comprehensive Economic Co-operation, the Second Protocol to Agreement 
on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on China- ASEAN Comprehensive 
Economic Co-operation and a series of agreements, upgrading the China-Chile FTA (e.g., 
Supplementary Agreement to China-Chile FTA on Service Trade and Supplementary 
Agreement to China-Chile FTA on Investment). 
China-Papua New Guinea, China-Canada, China-Bangladesh, China-Panama, China-Palestine and China-Peru 
FTAs, joint research on upgrading the China-Switzerland FTA. 
21　Text of the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement: http://fta.mofcom.gov.cn/yatai/xieyiwenben.pdf, the latest visit 
on 14 June, 2018. 
22　Official website of MOC: http://fta.mofcom.gov.cn/, the latest visit on 14 June, 2018. 


127
CHAPTER 3
Some FTAs (e.g., China-Australia FTA, China-South Korea FTA, China-Peru FTA 
and China-New Zealand FTA) contain the "Investment" and expatiate on National 
Treatment, MFN, Fair and Equitable Treatment, compensation for expropriation, 
free transfer, subrogation and other rules, specifying the clause for resolution of 
disputes between investors and states. 
Taking the China–Australia FTA as an example, it reads that, in the event of an 
investment dispute, after 2 months since the occurrence of the measure or event 
giving rise to the dispute, the investor may deliver to the contracting state a written 
request for consultations, and both parties shall first attempt to resolve such 
dispute through amicable consultations
23. In the event that an investment dispute 
cannot be settled by consultations within 120 days after the date of receipt of the 
request for consultations, the investor may submit a claim or request for arbitration 
in accordance with the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Rules of Procedure for 
arbitration proceedings, the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, the UNCITRAL 
Arbitration Rules or the arbitration provisions agreed upon by both parties. Except 
where a claim is submitted to any other arbitration institution, the disputing parties 
shall request ICSID to provide administrative services for arbitration proceedings. 
For the arbitral award, the Agreement stipulates that "Within 3 years after the date 
of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall commence negotiations with a 
view to establishing an appellate mechanism to review awards rendered under Article 
22 of this Chapter in arbitration commenced after any such appellate mechanism is 
23　Measures of a contracting state that are non-discriminatory and for the legitimate public welfare objectives 
of public health, safety, the environment, public morals or public order shall not be the subject of a claim. The 
respondent may, within 30 days upon which it receives a request for consultations (as provided for in Paragraph 
1), state that it considers that a measure alleged to be in breach of an obligation is of the kind of measures, by 
delivering to the claimant and to the non-disputing party a notice specifying the basis for its position (a 'public 
welfare notice'). The dispute resolution procedure shall be automatically suspended for the 90-day period. 


128
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
established. Any such appellate mechanism would hear the appeals on issues of law". 
iv. Bilateral Investment Treaties 
Bilateral investment treaties (BITs) are one of the most important measures to protect 
international investments. According to the official website of MOC, China has 
signed a total of 104 BITs as at 12 December, 2016
24. By the end of 2016, China had 
signed BITs with 53 countries along the "Belt and Road"
25. 
Generally, a BIT principally contains the definitions of investment and investor, 
investment treatment, expropriation and compensation, transfer, performance 
requirements, dispute resolution mechanism, etc. 
However, each agreement specifies different provisions for the scope of arbitrable 
matters. Bilateral investment agreements concluded by China in the 1980s and 1990s 
allowed the disputes on the amount of expropriation to be arbitrated. However, the 
stipulation was used in different cases with different interpretations, e.g., the arbitral 
tribunal interpreted the clause in a broad sense in the cases of "Tza Yap Shum v. the 
Republic of Peru", "Sanum Investment v. The Lao People's Democratic Republic" and 
"Beijing Urban Construction Group v. The Republic of Yemen", and held that the 
"dispute involving the expropriation of amount of compensation" did pertain to not 
only the dispute, but also the occurrence of expropriation and whether the dispute is 
in compliance with the conditions as stipulated in BIT. However, the interpretations 
24　Official website of MOC: http://tfs.mofcom.gov.cn/article/Nocategory/201111/20111107819474.shtml, 
the latest visit on 14 June, 2018. 
25　Official website of MOC: Release the Building the Belt and Road: Concept, Practice and China’s Contribution 
upon authorization, http://www.mofcom.gov.cn/article/i/jyjl/j/201705/20170502573538.shtml, reproduced 
from Xinhua.net at 17:03 on 11 May, 2017, the latest visit on 14 June, 2018. 


129
CHAPTER 3
were not used and upheld in subsequent cases. In the case of China Heilongjiang 
International Economic and Technical Cooperative Corp., Beijing Shougang 
Mining Investment Company Ltd., and Qinhuangdaoshi Qinlong International 
Industrial Co. Ltd. ("the Claimant) v. the Mongolian People's Republic (International 
Economic and Technical Cooperative Corp. and others v. Republic of Mongolia) 
concerning the dispute of mineral dispute, the Claimant applied for establishing 
the ad hoc arbitral tribunal in accordance with the UNCITRAL Rules, and alleged 
that the cancellation of mining license by Mongolia had violated the Agreement 
between the Government of the People's Republic of China and the Government of the 
Mongolian People's Republic Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of 
Investments (China-Mongolia Investment Treaty) executed in 1991 and other foreign 
investment laws. In June 2017, the arbitral tribunal interpreted the restrictive clauses 
in the China-Mongolia Investment Treaty in a narrow sense, and held that Mongolian 
People's Republic agreed to lodge the "dispute involving the expropriation of amount 
of compensation" for arbitration, therefore, the dispute on whether the host country 
expropriated the amount illegally should be heard by the court of the host country, 
and the arbitral tribunal enjoyed no jurisdiction over the case and dismissed all claims 
of the Chinese investors
26. 
Because early BITs do not conform to the international development trend and 
trigger many disputes, China has expanded the scope of investment as from the 
1980s to 2008, e.g., free repatriation of investment and return on investment, 
allowing disputes between the host countries and investors of other countries to be 
filed for arbitration. 
26　Official website of UNCTAD: http://investmentpolicyhub.unctad.org/IIA/CountryBits/42#iiaInnerMenu, 
14 June, 2018. 


130
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Moreover, the new-generation BITs have introduced some additional restrictions 
since 2008, e.g., keeping the clause of MFN from being used as the basis of 
arbitration, narrowing the scope of investment, and refusing to provide the profit 
under the BIT for investor(s) having no entity in the host country. 
Early BITs of China agreed to take ad hoc arbitration as the major way to resolve 
disputes. After China joined in the Washington Convention in 1993, the majority of 
BITs stated that investors could submit the disputes to ICSID for arbitration. 
III. Practice and Exploration of International Investment 
Disputes
UNCTAD has launched its Reform Package for the International Investment Regime 
since 2017. The Package reflects latest developments in investment treaty practice 
and recent debates on the reform of the IIA regime
27. In the current international 
investment arbitration practice, some hotspot issues, like Amicus Curiae, annulment 
and court review of awards, identification of loss, arbitration of third-party funding, 
taxation and clause of regulatory stability, environment litigation, have attracted 
extensive attention and discussion. Some of them are briefly introduced as follows: 
i. Amicus Curiae
As a particular litigation system of the legal regimes of the UK and the US, Amicus 
Curiae interventions mean individuals or entities in the litigation case having no 
direct legal relationship actively request to provide the written report, or to do so 
upon the request of the court for the purpose of stating the facts to the court or 
27　https://mailchi.mp/italaw/foreign-investment-arbitration-weekly-news-wrap-14-november-2603069.


131
CHAPTER 3
clarify the intent of legislation, and helping the court make a ruling. At present, most 
of the arbitration institutions have introduced the Amicus Curiae. 
For example, Article 37(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules (2006 Version) reads: After 
consulting both parties, the Tribunal may allow a person or an entity that is not a 
party to the dispute to file a written submission with the Tribunal regarding a matter 
within the scope of the dispute. In determining whether to allow such a filing, the 
Tribunal shall consider the following factors greatly: (1) the non-disputing party 
could assist the Tribunal in the determination of a factual or legal issue related to the 
proceeding by bringing a perspective, particular knowledge or insight that is different 
from that of the disputing parties; (2) the non-disputing party could address a matter 
within the scope of the dispute; and (3)the non-disputing party has a significant 
interest in the proceeding
28.
ii. Annulment and Court Review of Awards
In the international investment arbitration area, annulment and court review of 
awards are subject to the applicable arbitration rules and provisions of arbitration 
institutions. In some ad hoc arbitration cases, investors applied for review and 
annulment of awards to courts. 
For example, ICSID does not set a standing appellate body. However, Article 51(1) 
of the Washington Convention specifies the system of award annulment, i.e., either 
party may request annulment of the award by an application in writing addressed to 
the Secretary-General on one or more of the following grounds: (1) that the Tribunal 
was not properly constituted; (2)that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers; 
28　http://icsidfiles.worldbank.org/icsid/icsid/staticfiles/basicdoc/partF-chap04.htm/.


132
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
(3)that a member of the Tribunal has any corruption behavior ; (4) that there has 
been a serious violation of the fundamental rule of procedure; or (5) that the award 
has failed to state the reasons on which it is based. 
According to the Report of UNCTAD
29, disputing parties initiated annulment 
proceedings in about 45% of concluded ISDS cases under the ICSID Convention (82 
cases) as at 31 July, 2017. About 25% of the annulment proceedings are currently 
pending, while another 25% were discontinued. In the remaining 44 proceedings, 
the annulment committee rendered a decision and upheld the original award in the 
majority of these cases. Outcome of decisions on these 44 proceedings made by the 
annulment committee is illustrated as follows:
 
Disputing parties initiated domestic set-aside proceedings in non-ICSID Convention 
cases in which one decision or award was rendered (71 cases). The original decisions 
or awards of 78% of the cases were upheld.
29　The following contents, figures and pictures are excerpted from the official website of UNCTAD:http://
unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/diaepcb2017d7_en.pdf, the latest visit on 14 June, 2018.


133
CHAPTER 3
On 14 August, 2017, Singapore High Court (SGHC) set aside the final jurisdiction 
and merits award of the case of Kingdom of Lesotho (Lesotho) v. Swissbourgh 
Diamond Mines (Pty) Limited and others, becoming the latest case that arbitral 
award of investment dispute was annulled. This is the first case in which the SGHC 
has set aside the final jurisdiction and merits award involving the international 
arbitration. 
In this case, investors obtained the mining lease. Later, Lesotho alleged that the 
mining lease was illegal because there had been no consultation with the local 
chiefs, and Lesotho thus enacted the legislation to take back the mines. Investors 
commenced an ad hoc arbitration in accordance with appendixes to the South 
African Development Community Tribunal Treaty, and the ad hoc arbitration tribunal 
supported the request of investors. After the award was rendered, Lesotho requested 
to the SGHC for setting aside the award. Following an exhaustive de novo review, the 
SGHC held that the dispute involved therein exceeded the scope of the arbitration 


134
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
agreement, so the arbitral award shall be set aside
30
iii. Identification of Loss 
According to the Report of UNCTAD
31, the average amount claimed in the cases 
decided in favor of the investor was USD1.35 billion as at July 31, 2017. On average, 
a successful claimant was awarded the amount of USD522 million, equivalent to 
about 40% of the amount claimed.
In December 2017, PWC updated its International Arbitration Damages Research 
(PWC Research). PWC Research reviewed 116 publicly available awards. Relevant 
findings are: Arbitral tribunals awarded on average 36% of the value of damages 
calculated by claimants’ experts; Respondents’ experts on average assess a loss at 
12% of the value calculated by claimants’ experts; In situations where respondents’ 
assessment result move closer to the claim value calculated by claimants’ experts, the 
arbitral tribunal’s award does the same
32. 
iv. Third-Party Funding 
Third-party Funding has become a mode in recent years and also a hot topic in 
the international arbitration area. In third-party funded arbitration, a third party 
offers the funds to the parties of arbitration case, and receives the profit in a certain 
30　Singapore Law Blog, Developing Singaporean Jurisprudence on Reviewing Investor-State Arbitral Awards: 
Kingdom of Lesotho v Swissbourgh Diamond Mines (Pty) Limited and others [2017] SGHC 195, http://www.
singaporelawblog.sg/blog/article/196, the latest visit on 18 June, 2016. 
31　The following contents and figures are excerpted from the official website of UNCTAD:http://unctad.org/
en/PublicationsLibrary/diaepcb2017d7_en.pdf, the latest visit on 14 June, 2018.
32　Felipe Sperandio (Clyde & Co. LLP), Arbitrating Fast and Slow: Strategy Behind Damages Valuations? 
http://arbitrationblog.kluwerarbitration.com/2018/02/28/booked-2/, the latest visit on 18 June, 2018. 


135
CHAPTER 3
proportion from a favorable judgment
33. 
At present, the international arbitration community passes different judgments 
on the third-party funding arbitration: "on one side, the commercial-oriented 
risk investment can help more parties 'approach the Justice'. On the other side, 
the impact of third-party funding on the original legal services and arbitration 
proceedings prompts many worries
34." Main doubts of the third-party funding 
include that the third-party funding could probably breed the abuse of litigations, 
affect the impartial arbitration, impede effective resolution of the disputes, etc. 
However, from the perspective of practice, the third-party funding embraces the vast 
market demand: Through research on cases after 2013, Global Arbitration Review 
(GAR) makes an empirical study and publishes an article, specifying that the costs 
of arbitration keep rising, the average cost of claimants is USD7.41 million and the 
cost of respondents is USD5.19 million on average. Before 2013, claimants spent 
USD4.43 million and respondents spent USD4.6 million on average for arbitration 
cases, jumping by 68% and 13%, respectively. The latest data in the research report 
indicates that claimants always need to bear more costs and expenses than those of 
respondents, principally because the claimants assume heavier burdens of proof than 
those of respondents and the respondents select the cost-driven practice
35. 
33　China Council for the Promotion of International Trade: Third-Party Funding: Gamblers' Nirvana or 
Investors Promising Land?, http://www.ccpit.org/Contents/Channel_4131/2017/1228/939060/content_939060.
htm, the latest visit on 18 June, 2018. 
34　China Council for the Promotion of International Trade: Third-Party Funding: Gamblers’ Nirvana or 
Investors Promising Land?, http://www.ccpit.org/Contents/Channel_4131/2017/1228/939060/content_939060.
htm, the latest visit on 18 June, 2018. 
35　Excerpt from Claimants Bear Heavy Burdens of Investment Arbitration, Third-Party Funding Plays a Big Role: 
http://www.ccpit.org/Contents/Channel_3466/2018/0112/948807/content_948807.htm published by China 
Council for the Promotion of International Trade, the latest visit on 18 June, 2018. 


136
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
On 11 January, 2017, the Parliament of Singapore allowed the third-party funding by 
adopting the Amendment to Civil Law Act, helping the claimants bear the expenses 
and share the compensation generating from favorable judgement. The Paris Bar 
came to a conclusion on the third-party funding in May 2017, and thought that the 
third-party funding did not violate the laws of France. On 14 June, 2017, HKSAR 
adopted the laws to allow the third-party funding for cases arbitrated and mediated 
in Hong Kong
36. 
When giving sufficient attention to the third-party funding, countries and major 
international institutions supervise the third-party funding to varying extent. 
Pursuant to the Civil Law (Third-Party Funding) Regulations 2017 of Singapore, 
the Third Party Funder has a paid up share capital of not less than SGD5 million. 
Besides, the Legal Profession (Professional Conduct) (Amendment) Rules 2017 also 
stipulate that the existence of any third party funding and the identity of any Third 
Party Funder must be disclosed to the court or arbitral tribunal. Different from this, 
the Legislative Council of HKSAR takes the "directive self-regulation" and other soft 
regulation modes to address the challenges caused by the third-party funding
37. 
On 1 September, 2017, CIETAC Hong Kong Arbitration Center published the 
Guidelines for Third-Party Funding for Arbitration. The third-party funding attracted 
attention of arbitration institutions and practitioners in mainland China
38. 
36　China Council for the Promotion of International Trade: Third-Party Funding: Gamblers' Nirvana or 
Investors Promising Land?, http://www.ccpit.org/Contents/Channel_4131/2017/1228/939060/content_939060.
htm, the latest visit on 18 June, 2018. 
37　China Council for the Promotion of International Trade: Third-Party Funding: Gamblers' Nirvana or 
Investors Promising Land?, http://www.ccpit.org/Contents/Channel_4131/2017/1228/939060/content_939060.
htm, the latest visit on 18 June, 2018. 
38　China Council for the Promotion of International Trade: Third-Party Funding: Gamblers' Nirvana or 
Investors Promising Land?, http://www.ccpit.org/Contents/Channel_4131/2017/1228/939060/content_939060.


137
CHAPTER 3
v. State-to-State Dispute Settlement (SSDS) 
It is worth mentioning that the disputes arising out of the investment treaty between 
countries, apart from the traditional investment disputes between investors and 
countries, gradually come into the view of international arbitration circle. 
SSDS provisions are relatively common in the bilateral or multilateral FTAs and 
BITs, and most of the disputes are resolved through the ad hoc arbitral tribunals. 
Moreover, ad hoc arbitral tribunals may formulate the applicable procedures on their 
own initiatives. Some BITs stipulate that the UNCITRAL Rules, the SCC Rules or 
others shall be followed. For the composition of an arbitral tribunal, each of the 
parties shall select an arbitrator, and the selected arbitrators will jointly nominate 
a presiding arbitrator from a third country. Provisions on the applicability of 
substantive law are different. The most common is that "The arbitral tribunal shall 
adjudicate in accordance with laws of the contracting state to the dispute accepting 
the investment (including its rules on the conflict of laws), the provisions of this 
Agreement as well as the generally recognized principle of international law accepted 
by both contracting states." 
For example, Chapter 15 Dispute Resolution of the China-Australia FTA stipulates 
that
39: Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter shall apply 
to the resolution of disputes between the Parties regarding the implementation, 
interpretation and application of this Agreement or wherever a Party considers that: 
The arbitral tribunal shall construe the treaty according to the practice of explaining 
international conventions, including the practice as stipulated in the Vienna 
htm, the latest visit on 18 June, 2018. 
39　http://fta.mofcom.gov.cn/Australia/annex/xdwb_15_cn.pdf.


138
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Convention on the Law of  Treaties that was published on 23 May, 1969. The arbitral 
tribunal shall also consider the explanation on ruling and recommendations given by 
the Dispute Resolution Body of WTO. 
For another example, Article 15 of the China-Canada FIPA provides for the disputes 
between both contracting parties: Any dispute between the contracting parties 
concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement shall, as far as possible, 
be settled by consultation through diplomatic channels. If a dispute cannot thus be 
settled within 6 months, it shall, upon the request of either Contracting Party, be 
submitted to an ad hoc arbitral tribunal.
In spite of the aforesaid provisions, there are not many SSDS cases. In recent years, 
cases mentioned included Peru v. Chile in 2007, Italy v. Cuba in 2008 (ad hoc arbitral 
tribunal), Ecuador v. the US in 2012 (Permanent Court of Arbitration), Southern 
Bluefin Tuna Case of Australia, and New Zealand v. Japan (ICSID) and the US v. 
Canada in 2006 in accordance with the Softwood Lumber Agreement (ICSID).
In view of the trend that countries participate in the arbitration as parties, the ICC 
added and updated some clauses in the 2012 ICC Rules and took into account 
the particularities of the ICC arbitration involving state entities, e.g., amending 
"provide the service of resolution of commercial disputes" to be "provide the service 
of resolution of disputes", thus covering the arbitration of disputes involving the 
investment treaty. Besides, the 2012 ICC Rules stipulate that the emergency arbitrator 
system is inapplicable to the investment disputes involving state entities. For further 
details, please refer to the ICC Commission Report
40. 
40　https://cdn.iccwbo.org/content/uploads/sites/3/2016/10/ICC-Arbitration-Commission-Report-on-
Arbitration-Involving-States-and-State-Entities.pdf, the latest visit on 17 June, 2018.


139
CHAPTER 3
IV. New Development of International Investment 
Arbitration in China
i. Overview 
China has carried out many new attempts in the field of arbitration in recent 
years. The most typical example is that the China International Economic and Trade 
Arbitration Commission CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules (For Trial 
Implementation) published by CIETAC in 2017 fills up a gap in the international 
investment arbitration area of China. 
ii. CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules 
41
1. Background Information
CIETAC published the China International Economic and Trade Arbitration 
Commission International Investment Arbitration Rules (For Trial Implementation) (the 
CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules) in 2017, which came into force as 
from 1 October, 2017. 
The CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules summed up the experience 
of ICSID, the ICC and the SCC in international investment, carefully researched 
the investment treaties of the US and the EU, conducted extensive survey of BIT 
practice in China, fully absorbed and drew on the practices in procedure design, 
public hearing, panel of arbitrators, place of arbitration, jurisdiction of arbitral 
tribunals, consolidated arbitration, third-party funding and transparency of 
41　Contents of this section are excerpted from the Explanation on and Text of Investment Arbitration Rules 
of CIETAC, official website of China Council for the Promotion of International Trade:http://www.ccpit.org/
Contents/Channel_4132/2017/0926/883777/content_883777.htm, the latest visit on 17 June, 2018. 


140
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
arbitration proceedings, and learned through abundant experience in arbitration of 
China, e.g., absorbing the Eastern wisdom of CIETAC in combining arbitration 
with conciliation, following up traditional practice of China in establishing the list 
of arbitrators and the professional panel of arbitrators system, thereby making the 
Rules have the features of openness, inclusiveness and mutual learning, representing 
not only the feature of internationalization but also meeting the actual demand of 
investment arbitration in China.
The CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules reflect the flexibility and 
efficiency of arbitration through the procedure design, e.g., flexibility of autonomy 
of the parties concerned and way determined by the arbitral tribunal on its own 
initiative to hear a case. Moreover, the CIETAC International Investment Arbitration 
Rules specify the period of arbitration proceedings, and stipulate that the arbitral 
tribunal shall render an arbitral award within 6 months from the date on which the 
proceedings are declared to be closed, the institution shall appoint a case secretary 
to help the arbitral tribunal administer the arbitration proceedings, which shows 
the efficiency of arbitration proceedings under the CIETAC International Investment 
Arbitration Rules. The parties bear less costs of arbitration while enjoying convenient 
and efficient arbitration services. Compared with other international arbitration 
institutions, CIETAC charges less, separates the administrative fee from fees and 
expenses of arbitrators and specifies reasonable, public and transparent charge 
standards, thereby reducing the costs of arbitration on the whole, stimulating the 
enthusiasm of arbitrators and showing the advantage of professional arbitration 
institution services. 
2. Introduction of the CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules 


141
CHAPTER 3
The CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules consist of the text and 
appendixes. Specifically, the text contains 58 articles under 6 chapters. 2 appendixes 
are CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Fees Schedule (the Fees Schedule) 
and CIETAC Emergency Arbitrator Procedures (the Emergency Arbitrator Procedures), 
respectively. Main contents are as follows: 
First, the scope and basis of jurisdiction. The CIETAC International Investment 
Arbitration Rules vary from the CIETAC Arbitration Rules in the scope of accepted 
cases. According to the CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules, 
CIETAC, subject to the arbitration agreement between the parties, accepts cases 
involving international investment disputes arising out of contracts, treaties, 
laws and regulations, or other instruments between an investor and a State, an 
intergovernmental organization, any other organ, agency or entity authorized by 
the government or any other organ, agency or entity of which the conducts are 
attributable to a State. The basis of jurisdiction is an arbitration agreement which 
may be stipulated in a contract, a treaty, a statute of law or regulation, or other 
instruments. An arbitration agreement shall be deemed to have been reached if one 
party manifests its intention to lodge the dispute to CIETAC or to settle the dispute 
by arbitration in accordance with the CIETAC International Investment Arbitration 
Rules through a contract, a treaty, a statute of law or regulation, or other instruments, 
and the other party manifests its consent, either by commencing an arbitration or by 
other means.
Second, the structure and duties of CIETAC. The CIETAC International Investment 
Arbitration Rules specify that CIETAC Beijing Investment Dispute Settlement 
Center (IDSC) and CIETAC Hong Kong Arbitration Center shall be responsible for 


142
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
handling the international investment arbitration disputes and other daily matters. 
Where the parties agree to refer an international investment dispute to CIETAC for 
arbitration, the IDSC Beijing shall accept the arbitration application and administer 
the case. Where the parties agree to designate Hong Kong as the place of arbitration, 
or to refer an international investment dispute to the CIETAC Hong Kong 
Arbitration Center, the CIETAC Hong Kong Arbitration Center shall accept the 
arbitration application and administer the case. Where the agreement is ambiguous, 
the IDSC shall accept the arbitration application and administer the case. In case of 
any dispute, CIETAC shall make a decision. 
Third, matters on commencement of arbitration. A party applying for arbitration 
shall submit a request for arbitration to the IDSC or CIETAC Hong Kong 
Arbitration Center that administers the case and send a carbon copy of the request to 
the respondent, and pay the registration fee in accordance with relevant provisions. 
The arbitration proceedings shall commence on the day when the IDSC or CIETAC 
Hong Kong Arbitration Center administering the case receives the request for 
arbitration. 
Fourth, response to the request for arbitration and counterclaim. Within 30 days 
upon receipt of the request for arbitration, the Respondent shall give a written 
response to the IDSC or CIETAC Hong Kong Arbitration Center administering the 
case, and send a carbon copy to the claimant. The response may include the contents 
of counterclaim. 
Fifth, composition of the arbitral tribunal. On the basis of fully respecting the 
autonomy of the parties concerned, the CIETAC International Investment Arbitration 


143
CHAPTER 3
Rules read that the parties may agree that the arbitral tribunal shall be composed of 
one, three or any other odd number of arbitrators. If the parties reach no agreement, 
the arbitral tribunal shall be composed of three arbitrators. Moreover, the CIETAC 
International Investment Arbitration Rules specify the scope of selecting arbitrators, i.e., 
the parties shall nominate arbitrators from the Panel of Arbitrators for International 
Investment Disputes provided by CIETAC. The parties may agree to nominate 
arbitrators from outside the said Panel of Arbitrators, subject to the confirmation by 
the Chairman of CIETAC.
Both parties shall nominate or entrust the Chairman of CIETAC to nominate a 
presiding arbitrator/sole arbitrator. If doing so, the Chairman of CIETAC shall 
nominate at least five candidates and provide them to the parties for selection. The 
CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules also specify the disclosure of, 
challenge to and replacement of arbitrators. 
Sixth, objection to jurisdiction and its ruling. A party having justifiable doubts about 
the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement, or the applicability of the 
CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules may challenge that arbitrator in 
writing, and the arbitral tribunal shall have the power to rule on its own jurisdiction. 
If any objection to jurisdiction is raised before constitution of the arbitral tribunal, 
CIETAC may make a decision on the jurisdictional issues based on prima facie 
evidence. 
Seventh, early dismissal. A party may apply to the arbitral tribunal in writing for early 
dismissal of a claim or counterclaim in whole or in part on the ground that such a 
claim or a counterclaim is manifestly without legal merit, or manifestly goes beyond 


144
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. The arbitral tribunal shall have the power to 
decide on whether to accept the said application after consulting the parties. In case 
of deciding to accept the application, the arbitral tribunal shall make a ruling and 
state the reasons. 
Eighth, third-party funding. For the purpose of the CIETAC International Investment 
Arbitration Rules, "third-party funding" means the situation where a natural person 
or an entity, who is not a party to the dispute, provides funds to a party of arbitration 
to cover all or part of that party’s costs for the arbitration proceedings, through an 
agreement with the party accepting the funding. The party accepting the funding 
shall be obligated to make disclosure and the arbitral tribunal shall be also entitled 
to order such party to disclose relevant information of the third party funding 
arrangement. When making a ruling on the costs of arbitration and other fees, the 
arbitral tribunal may take into account the existence of any third party funding 
arrangement, and the actuality about whether the party concerned performs the 
obligation of disclosure. 
Ninth, the place of arbitration. The place of arbitration is of important significance to 
the arbitration of IIAs. Pursuant to the CIETAC International Investment Arbitration 
Rules, the arbitral award shall be deemed as having been made at the place of 
arbitration. Where the parties have agreed on the place of arbitration, the parties’ 
agreement shall prevail. Where the parties have not agreed on the place of arbitration, 
the place of arbitration shall be the domicile of the IDSC or CIETAC Hong Kong 
Arbitration Center that administers the case. The arbitral tribunal may also choose 
another location as the place of arbitration having regard to the circumstances of the 
case, provided that such place is within the territory of a contracting member state to 


145
CHAPTER 3
the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards. 
Tenth, interim measures. To safeguard legitimate rights and interest of the parties 
and smooth enforcement of arbitral awards in a timely manner, the parties may 
apply for the emergency arbitrator procedures and apply to the arbitral tribunal 
for interim measures. A party may apply to the IDSC or CIETAC Hong Kong 
Arbitration Center that administers the case for emergency relief pursuant to the 
CIETAC Emergency Arbitrator Procedures. The emergency arbitrator may decide to 
order or award necessary or appropriate emergency interim measures. Any decision 
made by the emergency arbitrator is binding on both parties. Upon the request of a 
party, the arbitral tribunal may decide to take interim measures it deems necessary 
or appropriate. In doing so, the arbitral tribunal has the power to require the party 
concerned to provide appropriate security. The said procedures are not prejudiced to 
the parties’ right to apply to any competent court to order interim measures.
Eleventh, combination of conciliation with arbitration. Where both parties wish 
to conciliate, the arbitral tribunal may conciliate the dispute during the arbitration 
proceedings. Where the parties have reached a resolution agreement through 
conciliation by the arbitral tribunal or by themselves, they may withdraw their 
claim or counterclaim, or request the arbitral tribunal to render an arbitral award in 
accordance with terms and conditions of the resolution agreement.
Twelfth, non-disputing contracting party and its written submissions. In the 
arbitration cases raised on the basis of an investment treaty, a contracting party to 
the investment treaty other than the disputing parties (Non-disputing Contracting 
Party), may make written submissions to the arbitral tribunal on interpretation 


146
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
of the investment treaty relevant to the dispute. The arbitral tribunal may also, 
after considering the circumstances of the case, invite written submissions from a 
Non-disputing Contracting Party on the said matters. A person or an entity who 
is neither a party to the arbitration nor a Non-disputing Contracting Party to the 
investment treaty (Non-disputing Party), may make written submissions on matters 
within the scope of the dispute. The arbitral tribunal may also, after considering 
the circumstances of the case, invite written submissions from a Non-disputing 
Contracting Party or a Non-disputing Party on the said matters. The arbitral tribunal 
may refer to or rely on written submissions by a Non-disputing Contracting Party or 
Non-disputing Party in issuing orders, decisions or awards. 
Thirteenth, awards. The arbitral tribunal shall render an arbitral award within 6 
months from the date on which the proceedings are declared to be closed. The said 
time period may be extended. The arbitral tribunal shall submit its draft award to 
CIETAC for scrutiny. Given without affecting the arbitral tribunal’s independence 
in rendering the award, CIETAC may bring to the attention of the arbitral tribunal 
issues addressed in the award. The award shall be made in writing and shall state the 
reasons upon which it is based, and state the date on which and the place in which 
the award is made. The arbitral tribunal may first render a partial award on part of 
the claim before rendering the final award. The arbitral tribunal shall be entitled to 
make correction, interpretation and additional award to an arbitral award. 
Fourteenth, costs of arbitration. Costs of arbitration include fees and expenses of 
the arbitral tribunal; fees and expenses of emergency arbitrators; costs of any expert 
appointed by the arbitral tribunal and of any other assistance reasonably required 
by the arbitral tribunal; and registration fee of case, administrative fee and other 


147
CHAPTER 3
expenses. Given the circumstances of a case, CIETAC may determine the amount 
of advance payment of costs of arbitration. The claimant and the respondent 
shall respectively pay 50% of the advance payment of the costs of arbitration in 
accordance with relevant provisions. The arbitral tribunal shall specify in the award 
the total amount of costs of arbitration and determine the percentage of the costs of 
arbitration each party shall assume. 
Fifteenth, appendixes to the CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules. 
Appendix 1 Fees Schedule specifies the matters about the way of charge and charge 
standards of registration fee of arbitration case, administrative fee, fees and expenses 
of arbitrators. All fees and expenses shall be denominated in RMB. Where both 
parties reach a written agreement that fees and expenses of arbitrators are charged 
each hour, the parties’ agreement shall prevail. The fee rate per hour shall be 
published on the official website of CIETAC in a real-time manner. The Fees Schedule 
applies to the IDSC and CIETAC Hong Kong Arbitration Center. The Fees Schedule 
also specifies matters about other expenses. 
Appendix 2 Emergency Arbitrator Procedures specify the application and acceptance 
of emergency arbitrator procedures, appointment, disclosure of and challenge to, 
decision of emergency arbitrators, as well as payment of fees, etc. 
3. Comparison with Other Rules 
Compared with other investment arbitration rules, the CIETAC International 
Investment Arbitration Rules have the following characteristics: 
First, they are particular and professional in terms of application. The CIETAC 


148
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
International Investment Arbitration Rules specify that international investment 
disputes arising out of contracts, treaties, laws and regulations, or other instruments 
between investors and states or governmental organizations or entities. The CIETAC 
International Investment Arbitration Rules specify that the applicability of the Rules 
shall not impede the applicable mandatory laws and regulations. 
Second, the panel of arbitrators and stricter requirements of arbitrators are specified. 
Arbitration is as good as arbitrators. To guarantee high quality of arbitrators, the 
CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules set up the Panel of Arbitrators 
for resolving the international investment disputes, and specify that arbitrators shall 
be morally upright and have recognized competence in such professional fields as 
law and investment, and they are proficient in exercising independent judgement, 
without being subject to any administrative interventions. The parties may nominate 
arbitrators from outside the said Panel of Arbitrators, subject to the confirmation by 
the Chairman of CIETAC. 
Third, public hearing of arbitration cases is specified. Because investment arbitration 
usually involves the measures taken by host countries for safeguarding the public 
interest, the public is increasingly worried about the handling of such significant 
issues by private arbitral tribunal, which triggers the "legitimation crisis" of 
international investment arbitration system. To respond to the public's doubt about 
the privacy of arbitration proceedings, lots of recent investment treaties specify public 
hearing of arbitration cases. The Agreement between the Government of Canada and 
the Government of the People's Republic of China for the Promotion and Reciprocal 
Protection of Investments signed by China in 2012 recognizes the practice. In the 
meantime, China takes the initiative in participating in the formulation of the United 


149
CHAPTER 3
Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration. In 
view of the above, the CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules stipulate 
that the hearing shall be conducted in public, unless otherwise agreed by the parties 
or decided by the arbitral tribunal. Besides, the CIETAC International Investment 
Arbitration Rules permit the disclosure of arbitration materials by introducing the 
written opinions submitted by the non-disputing party and the disputing contracting 
party, thereby making the arbitration proceedings more transparent. The aforesaid 
provisions actively respond to the international community's query on the investment 
arbitration system, and help the CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules be 
extensively accepted by the international community. 
Fourth, the third-party funding is specified. The research of the International Council 
for Commercial Arbitration indicates that 60% of the ICSID cases involve the 
third-party funding. Because the third party will definitely share the benefit of the 
arbitration result if the third-party funding is introduced, which may have an impact 
on the arbitration proceedings, and the CIETAC International Investment Arbitration 
Rules thus specify the obligation of the funded party for disclosure, contents and 
objects of disclosure, time of disclosure, etc. In determining the costs of arbitration 
and other relevant expenses, the arbitral tribunal shall consider whether there is the 
third-party funding and whether the parties comply with relevant obligations. 
V. Conclusion  
As Chinese investment in foreign countries keeps growing, investment disputes 
between investors and host countries in other fields than the traditional commercial 
arbitration increase accordingly, the understanding and apprehension of international 


150
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
conventions, FTAs and bilateral or multilateral investment treaties become very 
important. Both policymakers and investors face some problems that cannot be 
ignored, e.g., how to introduce terms and conditions about protection of investors 
and resolution of disputes in the bilateral or multilateral treaty in the future, and 
how to make full and effective use of the existing investment dispute resolution 
mechanism. 
The release of the CIETAC International Investment Arbitration Rules by CIETAC is 
a proactive measure to refine the legal construction of arbitration in China, fills up 
a gap in the international investment arbitration area of China and also provides the 
system guarantee for Chinese enterprises to resolve the investment disputes between 
host countries, which deserve reference and use. 


151
CHAPTER 3
Appendixes
1
i. Bilateral Investment Treaties Signed by China 
1　Some forms are sourced from the official website of UNCITRAL:http://investmentpolicyhub.unctad.org/
IIA.
No.
Partners
Status
Date of 
signature
Date of entry 
into force
Text
1
Albania
In force
13 February, 
1993 
1 September, 
1995
Full text: en
2
Algeria
In force
17 October, 
1996
28 January, 
2003 
Full text: fr
3
Argentina
In force
5 November, 
1992 
1 August, 
1994 
Full text: en
4
Armenia
In force
4 July, 1992
18 March, 
1995
Full text: zh
5
Australia
In force
11 July, 1988 
11 July, 1988
Full text: en
6
Austria
In force
12 September, 
1985
11 October, 
1986 
Full text: de
7
Azerbaijan
In force
8 March, 
1994
1 April, 1995
Full text: en
8
Bahamas
Signed (not 
in force)
4 September, 
2009 
9
Bahrain
In force
17 June , 
1999 
27 April, 
2000 
Full text: en
10
Bangladesh
In force
12 September, 
1996
25 March, 
1997 
11
Barbados
In force
20 July , 1998
1 October, 
1999
Full text: en
12
Belarus
In force
11 January, 
1993
14 January, 
1995
Full text: zh


152
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
13
Benin
Signed (not 
in force)
18 February, 
2004 
Full text: en
14
BLEU (Belgium-
Luxembourg 
Economic Union)
Terminated
4 June, 1984
5 October, 
1986
Full text: en | fr
15
BLEU (Belgium-
Luxembourg 
Economic Union)
In force
6 June, 2005
1 December, 
2009
Full text: en | fr
16
Bolivia, Plurinational 
State of
In force
8 May, 1992
1 September, 
1996
Full text: en
17
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
In force
26 June, 2002 
1 January, 
2005
Full text: en
18
Botswana
Signed (not 
in force)
12 June, 2000
Full text: en
19
Brunei Darussalam
Signed (not 
in force)
17 November, 
2000
Full text: en
20
Bulgaria
In force
27 June, 1989 
21 August, 
1994
Full text: en
21
Cabo Verde
In force
21 April, 
1998
1 January, 
2001
Full text: en
22
Cambodia
In force
19 July, 1996
1 February, 
2000
Full text: en
23
Cameroon
In force
10 September, 
1997
24 July, 2014
24
Canada
In force
September 9, 
2012
1 October, 
2014
Full text: en
25
Chad
Signed (not 
in force)
April 26, 
2010 
26
Chile
In force
23 March, 
1994
1 August, 
1995
Full text: en


153
CHAPTER 3
27
Colombia
In force
22 November, 
2008 
2 July, 2013
Full text: en
28
Congo, Democratic 
Republic of the
Signed (not 
in force)
18 December, 
1997
29
Congo, Democratic 
Republic of the
Signed (not 
in force)
11 August, 
2011
30
Congo
In force
20 March, 
2000
1 July, 2015
Full text: fr
31
Costa Rica
Signed (not 
in force)
24 October, 
2007 
32
Côte d'Ivoire
Signed (not 
in force)
30 September, 
2002 
Full text: en
33
Croatia
In force
7 June, 1993
1 July, 1994
Full text: en
34
Cuba
In force
24 April, 
1995
1 August, 
1996
Full text: en
35
Cyprus
In force
15 January, 
2001
29 April, 
2002
Full text: en
36
Czech Republic
Terminated
4 December, 
1991
1 December, 
1992
Full text: en
37
Czech Republic
In force
8 December, 
2005
1 September, 
2009
Full text: en
38
Denmark
In force
29 April, 
1985
29 April, 
1985
Full text: en
39
Djibouti
Signed (not 
in force)
28 August, 
2003
Full text: en
40
Ecuador
In force
21 March, 
1994
1 July, 1997
Full text: es
41
Egypt
In force
21 April , 
1994
1 April, 1996
Full text: en
42
Equatorial Guinea
In force
20 October, 
2005
15 November, 
2006


154
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
43
Estonia
In force
2 September, 
1993
1 June, 1994
Full text: en
44
Ethiopia
In force
11 May, 1998
1 May, 2000
Full text: en
45
Finland
In force
15 November, 
2004
15 November, 
2006
Full text: en
46
Finland
Terminated
4 September, 
1984
26 January, 
1986
Full text: en | fr
47
France
Terminated
30 May, 1984
19 March, 
1985
Full text: fr
48
France
In force
26 November, 
2007
20 August, 
2010
Full text: fr
49
Gabon
In force
9 May, 1997
16 February, 
2009
50
Georgia
In force
3 June, 1993
1 March, 
1995
Full text: en
51
Germany
In force
1 December, 
2003
11 November, 
2005
Full text: en
52
Germany
Terminated
7 October, 
1983
18 March, 
1985
Full text: de | zh
53
Ghana
In force
12 October, 
1989
22 November, 
1990
Full text: en
54
Greece
In force
25 June, 1992
12 December, 
1993
Full text: en
55
Guinea
Signed (not 
in force)
18 November, 
2005
56
Guyana
In force
27 March, 
2003
26 October, 
2004
Full text: en
57
Hungary
In force
29 May, 1991
1 April, 1993
Full text: en
58
Iceland
In force
13, March 
1994
1 March, 
1997
Full text: en
59
India
Terminated
21 November, 
2006
1 August, 
2007
Full text: en


155
CHAPTER 3
60
Indonesia
Terminated
18 November, 
1994
1 April, 1995
Full text: en
61
Iran, Islamic 
Republic of
In force
1 June 2000 
1 July, 2005
Full text: en
62
Israel
In force
10 April, 
1995
13 January, 
2009
Full text: en
63
Italy
In force
28 January, 
1985
28 August, 
1987 
Full text: en
64
Jamaica
In force
26 October, 
1994
1 April, 1996
Full text: en
65
Japan
In force
27 August, 
1988
14 May, 1989
Full text: en
66
Jordan
Signed (not 
in force)
15 November, 
2001
Full text: en | ar
67
Kazakhstan
In force
10 August, 
1992
13 August, 
1994
Full text: ru
68
Kenya
Signed (not 
in force)
16 July, 2001
Full text: en
69
Korea, Dem. People's 
Rep. of
In force
22 March, 
2005
1 October, 
2014
Full text: en
70
Korea, Republic of
Terminated
30 September, 
1992
4 December, 
1992
Full text: en
71
Korea, Republic of
In force
7 September, 
2007
1 December, 
2007
Full text: en
72
Kuwait
In force
23 November, 
1985
24 December, 
1986
Full text: en
73
Kyrgyzstan
In force
14 May, 1992
8 September, 
1995
Full text: ru


156
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
74
Lao People's 
Democratic Republic
In force
31 January, 
1993
1 June, 1993
Full text: en
75
Latvia
In force
15 April, 
2004
1 February, 
2006
Full text: en
76
Lebanon
In force
13 June, 1996
10 July, 1997
Full text: en
77
Libya
Signed (not 
in force)
4 August, 
2010
78
Lithuania
In force
8 November, 
1993
1 June 1, 
1994
Full text: en
79
Macedonia, The 
former Yugoslav 
Republic of
In force
9 June, 1997
1 November, 
1997
Full text: en | zh
80
Madagascar
In force
21 November, 
2005
1 July, 2007
Full text: fr
81
Malaysia
In force
21 November, 
1988
31 March, 
1990
Full text: en
82
Mali
In force
12 February, 
2009
16 July, 2009
Full text: zh | fr
83
Malta
In force
22 February, 
2009
1 April, 2009
Full text: en
84
Mauritius
In force
4 May, 1996
8 June, 1997
Full text: en
85
Mexico
In force
11 July, 2008
6 June, 2009
Full text: en
86
Moldova, Republic 
of
In force
6, November 
1992
1 March, 
1995
87
Mongolia
In force
25, August 
1991
1 November, 
1993
Full text: en | zh


157
CHAPTER 3
88
Morocco
In force
27 March, 
1995
27 November, 
1999
Full text: fr
89
Mozambique
In force
10 July, 2001
26 February, 
2002
90
Myanmar
In force
12 December, 
2012
12 May, 2002
Full text: en
91
Namibia
Signed (not 
in force)
17 November, 
2005
92
Netherlands
In force
26 November, 
2001
1 August, 
2004
Full text: en
93
Netherlands
Terminated
17 June, 1985
February, 
1987
Full text: en
94
New Zealand
In force
22 November, 
1988
25 March, 
1989
Full text: en
95
Nigeria
Terminated
12 May, 1997
96
Nigeria
In force
27 August, 
2001
18 February, 
2010
Full text: en
97
Norway
In force
21 November, 
1984
10 July, 1985
Full text: en
98
Oman
In force
18 March, 
1995
1 August, 
1995
Full text: en | ar
99
Pakistan
In force
12 February, 
1989
30 September, 
1990
Full text: en
100
Papua New Guinea
In force
12 April, 
1991
12 February, 
1993
Full text: en
101
Peru
In force
9 June, 1994
1 February, 
1995
Full text: en | es


158
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
102
Philippines
In force
20 July, 1992
8 September, 
1995
Full text: en
103
Poland
In force
7 June, 1988
8 January, 
1989
Full text: en
104
Portugal
Terminated
3 February, 
1992
1 December, 
1992
Full text: en
105
Portugal
In force
9 December, 
2005
26 July, 2008
Full text: pt | en
106
Qatar
In force
9 April, 1999
1 April, 2000
Full text: en
107
Romania
In force
12 July, 1994
1 September, 
1995
Full text: en
108
Russian Federation
Terminated
21 July, 1990
26 July, 1991
109
Russian Federation
In force
9 November, 
2006
1 May, 2009
Full text: en | ru
110
Saudi Arabia
In force
29 February, 
1996
1 May, 1997
Full text: en
111
Serbia
In force
18 December, 
1995
12 September, 
1996
Full text: en
112
Seychelles
Signed (not 
in force)
10 February, 
2007
113
Sierra Leone
Signed (not 
in force)
16 May, 2001
114
Singapore
In force
21 November, 
1985
7 February, 
1986
Full text: en | fr 
| zh
115
Slovakia
In force
4 December, 
1991
1 December, 
1992
Full text: en


159
CHAPTER 3
116
Slovenia
In force
13 September, 
1993
1 January, 
1995
Full text: en
117
South Africa
In force
30 December, 
1997
1 April, 1998
Full text: en
118
Spain
Terminated
6 February, 
1992
1 May, 1993
Full text: es
119
Spain
In force
14 November, 
2005
1 July, 2008
Full text: en
120
Sri Lanka
In force
14 March 14, 
1986
25 March, 
1987
Full text: en
121
Sudan
In force
30 May, 1997
1 July, 1998
122
Sweden
In force
29 March, 
1982
29 March, 
1982
Full text: en
123
Switzerland
Terminated
12 November, 
1986
18 March, 
1987
Full text: fr
124
Switzerland
In force
27 January, 
2009
13 April, 
2010
Full text: fr | en
125
Syrian Arab Republic
In force
9 December, 
1996
11 November, 
2001
Full text: en
126
Tajikistan
In force
9 March, 
1993
20 January, 
1994
127
Tanzania, United 
Republic of
In force
24 March, 
2013
17 April, 
2014
Full text: en
128
Thailand
In force
12 March, 
1985
13 December, 
1985
Full text: en
129
Trinidad and Tobago
In force
22 July, 2002
7 December, 
2004
Full text: en


160
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
130
Tunisia
In force
21 June, 2004
1 July, 2006
Full text: en
131
Turkey
In force
13 November, 
1990
20 August, 
1994
Full text: en | zh 
| tr
132
Turkey
Signed (not 
in force)
29 July, 2015
133
Turkmenistan
In force
12 November, 
1992
4 June, 1994
134
Uganda
Signed (not 
in force)
27 May, 2004
Full text: en
135
Ukraine
In force
31 October, 
1992
29 May, 1993
136
United Arab 
Emirates
In force
1 July, 1993
28 September, 
1994
Full text: en | ar
137
United Kingdom
In force
15 May, 1986
15 May, 1986
Full text: en
138
Uruguay
In force
2 December, 
1993
1 December, 
1997
Full text: en
139
Uzbekistan
Terminated
13 March, 
1992
12 April, 
1994
140
Uzbekistan
In force
19 April, 
2011
1 September, 
2011
Full text: en
141
Vanuatu
Signed (not 
in force)
7 April, 2006
142
Viet Nam
In force
2 December, 
1992
1 September, 
1995
Full text: en
143
Yemen
In force
16 February, 
1998
10 April, 
2002
144
Zambia
Signed (not 
in force)
21 June, 1996
145
Zimbabwe
In force
21 May, 1996
1 March, 
1998
Full text: en


161
CHAPTER 3
ii. Free Trade Agreements of China 
No.
Short title
Parties
Date of 
signature
Date of entry 
into force
Text
1
China - Hong Kong 
CEPA Investment 
Agreement (2017)
Hong Kong, 
China SAR
28 June, 
2017
28 June, 
2017
Full text: en | 
zh
2
China-Georgia FTA
Georgia
13 May, 2017
Investment 
ch.: en
3
China - Macao 
Agreement on Trade in 
Services (2015)
Macao, China 
SAR
28 
November, 
2015
Full text: en
4
Australia - China FTA 
(2015)
Australia
17 June, 
2015
20 December, 
2015
Full text: en 
Investment 
ch.: en
5
China - Korea, 
Republic of FTA 
(2015)
Korea, 
Republic of
1 June, 2015
20 December, 
2015
Full text: en 
Investment 
ch.: en
6
China - Switzerland 
FTA (2013)
Switzerland
6 July, 2013
1 July, 2014
Full text: en
7
China - Iceland FTA 
(2013)
Iceland
15 April, 
2013
1 July, 2014
Full text: en


162
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
8
China - Japan - Korea, 
Republic of Trilateral 
Investment Agreement 
(2012)
Japan, Korea, 
Republic of
13 May, 2012
17 July, 2014
Full text: en
9
China - Taiwan 
Province of China 
Framework Agreement 
(2010)
Taiwan 
Province of 
China
29 June, 
2010
1 September, 
2010
Full text: en
10
China-Costa Rica FTA
Costa Rica
1 April, 2010
1 August, 
2011
Full text: en 
Investment 
ch.: en
11
APTA Investment 
Agreement (2009)
Bangladesh, 
Korea, 
Republic of, 
Lao People's 
Democratic 
Republic, Sri 
Lanka
15 December, 
2009
Full text: en
12
ASEAN-China 
Investment Agreement
ASEAN 
(Association 
of South-
East Asian 
Nations)
15 August, 
2009
1 January, 
2010
Full text: en
13
China-Peru FTA
Peru
28 April, 
2009
1 March, 
2010
Full text: en | 
es Investment 
ch.: en | es


163
CHAPTER 3
14
China-Singapore FTA
Singapore
23 October, 
2008
1 January, 
2009
Investment 
ch.: en
15
China-New Zealand 
FTA
New Zealand
7 April, 2008
1 October, 
2008
Full text: en 
Investment 
ch.: en
16
China-Pakistan FTA
Pakistan
24 
November, 
2006
1 July, 2007
Full text: en
17
Chile-China FTA
Chile
November 
18, 2005
1 October , 
2006
Full text: en
18
Australia-China 
Framework Agreement
Australia
24 October, 
2003
24 October, 
2003
Full text: en
19
China-Macao 
Partnership Agreement
Macao, China 
SAR
17 October, 
2003
1 January, 
2004
Full text: en
20
China - Hong Kong 
CEPA (2003)
Hong Kong, 
China SAR
29 June, 
2003
29 June, 
2003
Full text: en
21
ASEAN-China 
Framework Agreement
ASEAN 
(Association 
of South-
East Asian 
Nations)
4 November, 
2002
1 July, 2003


164
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
22
China-EC Trade 
and Cooperation 
Agreement
EU 
(European 
Union)
12 May, 1985
22 
September, 
1985
Full text: en
23
RCEP
ASEAN 
(Association 
of South-
East Asian 
Nations), 
Australia, 
India, Japan, 
Korea, 
Republic of, 
New Zealand


165
CHAPTER 3
iii. Investment-Related International Conventions Participated in by China
No.
Short title
Date of 
adoption
Level
Type
Files
1
Fifth Protocol to 
GATS
1997
Multilateral
Intergovernmental 
agreements
Full text: en | 
fr | es
2
Fourth Protocol 
to GATS
1997
Multilateral
Intergovernmental 
agreements
Full text: en | 
fr | es
3
TRIPS
1994
Multilateral
Intergovernmental 
agreements
Full text: en | 
fr | es
4
TRIMS
1994
Multilateral
Intergovernmental 
agreements
Full text: en | 
fr | es
5
GATS
1994
Multilateral
Intergovernmental 
agreements
Full text: en | 
fr | es
6
MIGA 
Convention
1985
Multilateral
Intergovernmental 
agreements
Full text: en | 
fr | es
7
ICSID 
Convention
1965
Multilateral
Intergovernmental 
agreements
Full text: en | 
fr | es


166
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
8
New York 
Convention
1958
Multilateral
Intergovernmental 
agreements
Full text: en | 
fr | es
9
UN Code of 
Conduct on 
Transnational 
Corporations
1983
Multilateral
Draft instruments
Full text: en | 
fr | es
10
UN Guiding 
Principles on 
Business and 
Human Rights
2011
Multilateral
Guidelines, 
principles, 
resolutions and 
similar
Full text: en
11
ILO Tripartite 
Declaration on 
Multinational 
Enterprises
2006
Multilateral
Guidelines, 
principles, 
resolutions and 
similar
Full text: en
12
Doha 
Declaration
2001
Multilateral
Guidelines, 
principles, 
resolutions and 
similar
Full text: en | 
fr | es
13
ILO Tripartite 
Declaration on 
Multinational 
Enterprises
2000
Multilateral
Guidelines, 
principles, 
resolutions and 
similar
Full text: en


167
CHAPTER 3
14
Singapore 
Ministerial 
Declaration
1996
Multilateral
Guidelines, 
principles, 
resolutions and 
similar
Full text: en | 
fr | es
15
Pacific Basin 
Investment 
Charter
1995
Non-
governmental
Guidelines, 
principles, 
resolutions and 
similar
Full text: en
16
APEC Non-
Binding 
Investment 
Principles
1994
Regional/
Plurilateral
Guidelines, 
principles, 
resolutions and 
similar
Full text: en
17
World Bank 
Investment 
Guidelines
1992
Multilateral
Guidelines, 
principles, 
resolutions and 
similar
Full text: en
18
ILO Tripartite 
Declaration on 
Multinational 
Enterprises
1977
Multilateral
Guidelines, 
principles, 
resolutions and 
similar
Full text: en | 
fr | es
19
New 
International 
Economic Order 
UN Resolution
1974
Multilateral
Guidelines, 
principles, 
resolutions and 
similar
Full text: en | 
fr | es


168
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
20
Charter of 
Economic Rights 
and Duties of 
States
1974
Multilateral
Guidelines, 
principles, 
resolutions and 
similar
Full text: en | 
fr | es
21
Permanent 
Sovereignty UN 
Resolution
1962
Multilateral
Guidelines, 
principles, 
resolutions and 
similar


169
CHAPTER 4
Chapter 4　Judicial Review of 
International Commercial Arbitration 
in China 
Through a survey of judgments published on China Judgements Online, the Replies of 
the Civil Adjudication Tribunal No. 4 of the Supreme People's Court (SPC) included 
in the Guide on Foreign-related Commercial and Maritime Trial and other data from 
the Internet, this Chapter makes comprehensive analysis of and comments on legal 
issues of the cases involving judicial review of China's international commercial 
arbitration or arbitration relating to foreign countries, Hong Kong, Macao and 
Taiwan (foreign-related and HMT-related).
I. Confirmation of Validity of Foreign-Related and HMT-
Related Arbitration Agreements
i. Interpretation of Arbitration Institutions Agreed in Arbitration 
Clauses
Regarding the application for confirming the validity of a HK-related arbitration 
agreement in the case
1 of Dalien International Limited (the Claimant or Dalien 
Limited) v. Hangzhou Madigeluo Garments Co., Ltd. (the Respondent or Madigeluo 
Company) , Dalien Limited alleged that there were "Shenzhen Arbitration 
Commission" and "Shenzhen Court of International Arbitration" (also known 
as "South China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission) in 
1　Civil Judgment (Y03 MC [2017] No. 877) issued by Shenzhen Intermediate People's Court on 27 
September, 2017. 


170
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Shenzhen, but not "Shenzhen Municipal Arbitration Commission". Article 13 of 
the Contract entered into by and between both parties stipulates that "Disputes 
shall be submitted to Shenzhen Municipal Arbitration Commission for arbitration 
in Shenzhen in line with its then current arbitration rules", which is precisely the 
circumstance that no or unclear provisions concerning the arbitration commission 
were specified as stated in Article 18 of the Arbitration Law of the People's Republic 
of China (the Arbitration Law). Article 3 of the Interpretation of the Supreme People's 
Court on Certain Issues Concerning the Application of the Arbitration Law of the 
People's Republic of China specifies that "If the name of the arbitration institution 
agreed upon in an arbitration agreement is not described in an accurate way, but 
the specific arbitration institution is determinable, it shall be deemed that the 
arbitration institution has been selected and identified". Thus, the court held that 
"Shenzhen Municipal Arbitration Commission" differs from "Shenzhen Arbitration 
Commission" in a mere word, but is distinct from South China International 
Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission (Shenzhen Court of International 
Arbitration). Although "Shenzhen Municipal Arbitration Commission" stated in 
the agreement thereof is not very accurate, Shenzhen Arbitration Commission is 
determinable, therefore, it shall be deemed that both parties have selected Shenzhen 
Arbitration Commission as the arbitration institution, and Dalien Limited had 
no sufficient factual or legal grounds for its application to claim the arbitration 
agreement is invalid. 
Regarding the application for confirming the validity of a foreign-related arbitration 
agreement in the case
2 of Hebei Poshing Electronic Technology Co., Ltd. (the 
2　Reply of the Supreme People's Court to the Request Raised by Hebei High People's Court for Instructions on 
Application for Confirming the Validity of an Arbitration Agreement in the Case of Hebei Poshing Electronic 
Technology Co., Ltd. v. CSD Epitaxy Asia Ltd. (ZGFMT [2017] No. 70) issued on 13 September, 2017. 


171
CHAPTER 4
Claimant or Poshing Company) v. CSD Epitaxy Asia Ltd. (the Respondent or CSD 
Limited), Poshing Company requested for confirming the invalidity of the arbitration 
agreement involved therein on the ground of ambiguous definition of an arbitration 
institution. Upon reporting of the High People's Court of Hebei Province, the SPC 
gave a reply, ascertaining that Article 3 of the Interpretation of the Supreme People's 
Court on Certain Issues Concerning the Application of the Arbitration Law of the 
People's Republic of China specifies that "If the name of the arbitration institution 
agreed upon in an arbitration agreement is not described in an accurate way, but the 
specific arbitration institution is determinable, it shall be deemed that the arbitration 
institution has been selected and identified". Both parties involved therein agreed in 
the arbitration agreement that arbitration arising therefrom shall be submitted to the 
Foreign Trade Arbitration Commission under China Council for the Promotion of 
International Trade, which was the former name of China International Economy 
and Trade Arbitration Commission, and it shall be thus deemed that both parties 
have selected China International Economy and Trade Arbitration Commission as 
the arbitration institution. 
ii. Decision on Validity by Arbitration or Court
Regarding the application for confirming the validity of a foreign-related arbitration 
agreement in the case
3 of Da Tang International (Hong Kong) Limited (the Claimant 
or Da Tang International) v. Sinosteel Group Shanxi Co., Ltd. (the Respondent 
or Sinosteel Shanxi) , Da Tang International alleged that it had raised objection 
to jurisdiction and claimed the nonexistence of an arbitration agreement between 
them after China International Economy and Trade Arbitration Commission 
3　Civil Judgment (J04 MT [2017] No. 21) issued by Beijing Municipal No. 4 Intermediate People’s Court on 
24 October, 2017.


172
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
(CIETAC) accepted the case. But the arbitration tribunal has not yet ascertained the 
validity of the arbitration agreement, thus it appealed to the court for identifying 
and ascertaining the validity of the arbitration agreement. Article 20.1 of the 
Arbitration Law reads that "If a party to an arbitration agreement challenges the 
validity of the arbitration agreement, he/she may request the arbitration commission 
to make a decision or apply to the people's court for a ruling. If one party requests 
the arbitration commission to make a decision but the other party applies to the 
people's court for a ruling, the people's court shall give a ruling." Therefore, the court 
held that, regarding a case involving the challenge of the validity of the arbitration 
agreement, a party concerned may request the arbitration commission to make a 
decision or may apply for the people's court for a ruling alternatively, which is an 
irreversible choice. Because Da Tang International has raised objection to jurisdiction 
to CIETAC, which has, in turn, authorized the arbitration tribunal to make a 
decision on jurisdiction, under this circumstances, Da Tang cannot request the same 
to the court. 
iii. Matters about the Scope of Judicial Review of Arbitration
Regarding the application for confirming the validity of a foreign-related arbitration 
agreement in the case
4 of Sil-Metropole Organisation Ltd. (the Claimant or Sil-
Metropole Organisation) v. Empower CICC Investment Management Co., Ltd. (the 
Respondent or Empower CICC Company) , Sil-Metropole Organisation claimed 
that the arbitration clause involved therein was invalid and the stipulations therein of 
arbitration institution and resolution of disputes were not its true intention, and it 
was suspicious of stamps and signatures of the contract. According to the court, Sil-
4　Civil Judgment (J04 MT [2017] No. 38) issued by Beijing Municipal No. 4 Intermediate People’s Court on 
22 November, 2017.


173
CHAPTER 4
Metropole Organisation alleged that the stipulations therein of arbitration institution 
and resolution of disputes were not its true intention and it was suspicious of 
stamps and signatures of the contract, which falls out of the circumstances of invalid 
arbitration agreement as stated in Article 17 of the Arbitration Law. Moreover, 
ascertaining the existence of an arbitration agreement went beyond the jurisdiction of 
people's courts for reviewing and confirming the validity of arbitration agreements. 
Furthermore, all the arbitration clauses as stipulated in five contracts, including 
the Cooperation Framework Agreement, involved therein, expressed the intention 
to apply for arbitration and contained the matters for arbitration and a designated 
arbitration commission, etc., so these contracts satisfied the requirements for 
arbitration agreements as stated in Article 16 of the Arbitration Law in the form and 
elements. 
iv. Whether to be Bound by the Arbitration Clauses 
In the case involving the dispute over contract of Wacai Internet Technology Co., 
Ltd. and Hangzhou Wacai Internet Finance Service Co., Ltd. v. Miao Lei and Wacai 
Holding Co., Ltd.
5, Miao Lei lodged a legal action to Hangzhou West Lake District 
People's Court, and the Court reviewed the case to ascertain whether it was bound 
by the arbitration clause. Upon request of Zhejiang High People's Court, the SPC 
gave a reply and ascertained that two pieces of the Certificate of Stock Options of Wacai 
Holding Co., Ltd. involved therein contained no arbitration clause. Moreover, the 
Notice on Option Award (2015 Stock Option Incentive Plan) takes Appendix 1 Option 
Agreement and Appendix 2 2015 Stock Option Incentive Plan thereto as its integral 
5　Reply of the Supreme People's Court to the Request for Instructions on Wacai Internet Technology Co., Ltd. and 
Hangzhou Wacai Internet Finance Service Co., Ltd. v Miao Lei and Wacai Holding Co., Ltd. (ZGFMT [2017] No. 
116) issued on 17 November, 2017. 


174
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
part. Appendix 2 2015 Stock Option Incentive Plan contains the arbitration clause, on 
which, however, Miao Lei did not sign. Existing evidence could not prove that Miao 
Lei has been aware of the arbitration clause in the 2015 Stock Option Incentive Plan 
and was bound by the arbitration clause. Thus, the arbitration clause in the 2015 
Stock Option Incentive Plan had no binding force on Miao Lei. Because the people's 
court in the place where two pieces of the Certificate of Stock Options of Wacai 
Holding Co., Ltd. were signed, Hangzhou West Lake District People's Court had the 
jurisdiction. 
Regarding the application for confirming the validity of a foreign-related arbitration 
agreement For the case of Guangzhou Huashangmao Real Estate Development Co., 
Ltd. (Guangzhou Huashangmao Company) v. Harvest Trade Investments Limited 
(Harvest Limited) , the SPC, upon request of Beijing Municipal High People’s 
Court, gave a reply
6 and ascertained that Guangzhou Huashangmao, Huashunda 
Real Estate Co., Ltd. and Harvest Limited had entered into the Agreement on 
Amendments to Loan Contract (Agreement No.: Z(W)Z No. 25042005, the "2005 
Agreement) , specifying that three parties agree to submit the disputes on loan matters 
to CIETAC for arbitration. Guangzhou Huashangmao Company challenged the 
authenticity of arbitration clause in the 2005 Agreement, but failed to provide prima 
facie evidence proving that the 2005 Agreement was faked or the 2005 Agreement 
was invalid in accordance with Article 17 and Article 18 of the Arbitration Law, 
from which we could not conclude that the 2005 Agreement contained no arbitration 
clause or the arbitration clause therein was invalid. After the 2005 Agreement was 
6　Reply of the Supreme People's Court to the Request of Beijing Municipal High People’s Court for Instructions 
on Application for Confirming the Validity of an Arbitration Agreement in the Case of Guangzhou Huashangmao 
Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. v. Harvest Trade Investments Limited (ZGFMT [2017] No. 78) issued on 17 
November, 2017. 


175
CHAPTER 4
executed, Guangzhou Huashangmao Company and Harvest Limited entered into the 
Agreement on Amendments to Loan Contract (2) (Agreement No.: Z (Z) No. 001, the 
"2006 Agreement) , specifying that disputes between both parties shall be submitted 
to Guangzhou Arbitration Commission for arbitration. Therefore, Guangzhou 
Huashangmao Company and Harvest Limited have reached a consensus on the 
arbitration institution for resolving disputes arising therefrom, though the 2005 
Agreement really exists. Because the arbitration clause in the 2005 Agreement has been 
replaced by that in the 2006 Agreement, it had no binding force on both parties. 
Thereafter, Beijing Municipal No. 4 Intermediate People’s Court ruled and affirmed 
that the arbitration clause in the Agreement on Amendments to Loan Contract signed 
on 26 April, 2005 had no binding force on Guangzhou Huashangmao Company and 
Harvest Limited
7. 
v. The Issue of Agency 
Regarding the application for confirming the validity of an arbitration agreement 
in the case
8 of Yantai Moon Co., Ltd. (the Claimant or Yantai Moon Company) 
v. Super Food Specialists (M) SDN BHD (the Respondent or Super Food BHD) 
and Moon (Hong Kong) Limited (the Third Party or Hong Kong Moon Limited), 
Yantai Moon Company applied to the court for confirming that the arbitration 
clause in the contract involved therein had no binding force upon it on the ground 
of nonexistence of an arbitration agreement between it and Super Food Company. 
The court held that parties to the System and Service Purchase Contract (No. 2011MY-
7　Civil Judgment (J04 MT [2016] No. 39) issued by Beijing Municipal No. 4 Intermediate People's Court on 
29 January, 2018.
8　Civil Judgment (YMSCZ [2015] No. 39) issued by Yantai Intermediate People's Court of Shandong 
Province on 24 July, 2017.


176
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
LJR-03A) were Hong Kong Moon Limited and Super Food BHD, Yantai Moon 
Company was not a party thereto, moreover, there was no evidence proving that 
Hong Kong Moon Limited had transferred its rights and obligations therein to Yantai 
Moon Company and both of them did recognize the existence of agency relationship. 
Therefore, existing evidence were unable to prove that Yantai Moon Company was 
the agent of Hong Kong Moon Limited. According to the aforesaid facts, the court 
affirmed that the arbitration clause in the contract involved therein had no binding 
force upon Yantai Moon Company, and both parties involved therein did not have a 
valid arbitration agreement. 
In the case
9 of Zhang Yongnian and Guan Qiwen (collectively the Claimant) v. 
Pan Zanyi, Guangzhou Yufeng Consultants Co., Ltd. (Yufeng Company) and Ou 
Zhihang (collectively called the Respondent), Zhang Yongnian and Guan Qiwen 
applied for confirming the invalidity of arbitration clauses set forth in the Stock 
Housing Purchase and Sale Contract (Contract No.: 70587) entered into by and 
between them (in the name of Ou Zhihang) and Pan Zanyi and Yufeng Company. 
The court held that Article 16 of the Stock Housing Purchase and Sale Contract read 
that "Any dispute arising out of the performance of this Contract shall be settled by 
both Parties through negotiation. Where such negotiation fails, both Parties agreed 
to submit the dispute to Guangzhou Arbitration Commission for arbitration". The 
contract was signed by and between Ou Zhihang in the name of Zhang Yongnian 
and Guan Qiwen, and Pan Zanyi and Yufeng Company. However, Ou Zhihang 
failed to obtain general or special authorization for signing the arbitration clauses set 
forth in the housing purchase and sale contract. After the contract was signed, neither 
9　Civil Judgment (SZFZYZ [2013] No. 50) issued by Guangzhou Intermediate People’s Court of Guangdong 
Province on 4 July, 2017.


177
CHAPTER 4
Zhang Yongnian nor Guan Qiwen further recognized the right of Ou Zhihang to 
go to the arbitration on his or her behalf. Moreover, according to the words and 
expressions of the Agreement and Receipt of Payment, neither Zhang Yongnian nor 
Guan Qiwen made further verification of the right to Ou Zhihang to go to an 
arbitration of disputes arising out of the contract on his or her behalf. According to 
the signing situation of the contract concerned, there was no evidence proving the 
existence of circumstance where Pan Zanyi had relied on to believe Ou Zhihang’s 
power of agency. Thus, Zhang Yongnian and Guan Qiwen were not the parties of 
the arbitration clauses thereof and these clauses had no binding force on them. The 
SPC particularly noted in its reply that the case apparently involved the judgment of 
the validity of arbitration clauses set forth in the contract. When judging the validity 
of arbitration clauses, the court shall avoid making judgment of binding force of 
the corresponding contract, so as to further avoid substantial handling of the case at 
the stage of dispute over jurisdiction. Therefore, the analysis of binding force of the 
arbitration clauses shall be limited to judging whether Ou Zhihang enjoyed the right 
to file an arbitration of relevant disputes on an agency basis
10. 
vi. Validity of Arbitration Clauses in the Bill of Lading 
In the case of China Animal Husbandry Industry Co., Ltd. (CAH Company) v. 
Palmer Shipping Co., Ltd. (Palmer Company) concerning the dispute over marine 
cargo contract
11, Palmer Company alleged that arbitration clauses and choice of law 
clauses on the back side of the bill of lading were binding upon the assignee, and the 
10　Reply of the Supreme People's Court to the Request for Instructions on Application for Confirming the Validity 
of an Arbitration Agreement by Zhang Yongnian and Guan Qiwen (ZGFMT [2017] No. 36) issued on 23 May, 
2017. 
11　Civil Judgment (YMX [2017] No. 857) issued by the High People's Court of Guangdong Province on 30 
January, 2018.


178
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
court enjoyed no jurisdiction over the case. The court held that the contents set forth 
in the bill of lading could not prove that the charter contract signed on 11 March, 
2015 in the standard terms in accordance with the North American Grain Charterparty 
1973 claimed by Palmer Company has been included in the bill of lading involved 
therein. Moreover, Palmer Company failed to present evidence proving that the 
whole set of originals of the bill of lading contained the charter contract. Thus, the 
claim raised by Palmer Company that the charter contract has been included into the 
bill of lading, and all terms and conditions of the charter contract and the appendixes 
thereto were applicable to the cargo involved therein, lacked factual grounds. Article 
8 of the bill of lading concerned reads that: "(a) New York. Any dispute arising out of 
the Contract shall be governed by the laws of the US and shall be arbitrated in New 
York. (b) London. Any dispute arising out of the Contract shall be governed by the 
laws of the UK and shall be arbitrated in London. Either (a) or (b) may be deleted 
on an as-needed basis." The provisions above indicated that this clause is optional 
and alternative. The bill of lading made no specification for the choice of the place 
of arbitration and the governing law as stated by the said article. Moreover, Palmer 
Company failed to provide evidence proving that the parties of the bill of lading had 
reached an agreement on the selection of the choice of the place of arbitration and 
the governing law mentioned above. Based on the findings, it could be judged that 
the bill of lading involved herein specified neither the place of arbitration nor the 
governing law. As analyzed above, the charter contract alleged by Palmer Company 
was not effectively included into the bill of lading concerned, therefore, the claims 
that the clauses of charter contract and the clauses on the back side thereof sufficed 
to confirm that the dispute over cargo should be governed by the laws of the UK and 
arbitrated in London, were untenable. Pursuant to Article 16 of the Interpretation 


179
CHAPTER 4
of the Supreme People's Court on Certain Issues Concerning the Application of the 
Arbitration Law of the People's Republic of China, the law of China shall be applied for 
confirming the validity of arbitration clauses set forth in the bill of lading. Pursuant 
to Article 5 of the Interpretation of the Supreme People's Court on Certain Issues 
Concerning the Application of the Arbitration Law of the People's Republic of China, 
the arbitration clauses on the back side of the bill of lading shall be deemed invalid 
because the parties concerned failed to have agreed upon an arbitration institution. 
vii. Conclusion 
Cases of confirming the validity of foreign-related and HMT-related arbitration 
agreements in 2017 present the characteristics as follows: 
Firstly, the interpretation of arbitration institutions as agreed upon in the arbitration 
clauses remains a frequent problem. Courts can basically apply Article 3 of the 
Interpretation of the Supreme People's Court on Certain Issues Concerning the Application 
of the Arbitration Law of the People's Republic of China, i.e., "If the name of the 
arbitration institution agreed upon in an arbitration agreement is not described 
in an accurate way, but the specific arbitration institution is determinable, it shall 
be deemed that the arbitration institution has been selected and identified", in an 
accurate way. Also, courts take a comprehensive approach, rather than depend on the 
words and expressions of the arbitration clauses, to identify the arbitration institution 
and reasonably explain the parties' true intention of selecting an arbitration 
institution. However, from the perspective of preventing the legal risk, this reminds 
the parties to accurately describe the name of arbitration institution and other 
matters when setting up the arbitration clauses, so as to avoid the dispute arising 


180
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
therefrom in the future and cause extra cost. 
Secondly, whether the arbitration clauses have the binding force on the parties is a 
focus for the courts to hear the cases. According to the existing cases, whether the 
parties have signed the legal instruments bearing the arbitration clauses and whether 
the preceding arbitration clauses have been superseded by new ones are important 
factors. Meanwhile, the burden of proof constitutes another key factor of such cases. 
Thirdly, the standards for judging the validity of the arbitration clauses in the bill 
of lading tend to be unified. Of the related cases, all the parties claim that the 
arbitration clauses on the back side of the bill of lading are binding upon the assignee 
thereof, but the courts always focus on whether the arbitration clauses set forth in the 
bill of lading have been included into the charter contract and whether the assignee 
of the bill of lading is aware of the clauses. If the existing evidence cannot prove this, 
it could not judge that the arbitration clause set forth in the bill of lading is binding 
on the assignee. 
II. Annulment and Non-Enforcement of Foreign-Related 
and HMT-Related Arbitral Awards
i. Scope of Judicial Review of Arbitration
For the case of Jinyingfeng Equity Investment Fund (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd (the 
Claimant or Jinyingfeng Company) v. Tishman Speyer China Fund (Barbados) SRL 
(the Respondent or Tishman Company)
12 concerning the application for annulment 
of foreign-related arbitral award, Jinfengying Company claimed that the arbitral 
12　Civil Judgment (J04 MT [2016] No. 52) issued by Beijing Municipal No. 4 Intermediate People's Court 
on 22 May 22, 2017.


181
CHAPTER 4
award went against the facts and legal provisions. The court stated that its review 
would be limited to particular matters explicitly stipulated by the laws regarding the 
setting-aside of foreign-related arbitral award. Other matters go beyond the scope 
of powers and responsibilities of the court, so the court had no right to review. The 
cause that Jinfengying Company claimed that the arbitral award rendered by the 
arbitral tribunal went against the facts and legal provisions was not the legal cause for 
a people's court to set aside the foreign-related arbitral awards, therefore, the cause 
presented by Jinyingfeng Company for setting aside the arbitral award was untenable.
In the case of Stabilo Corporation (the Claimant) v. Wuxi Delin Marine & Ocean 
Technology Co., Ltd. (the Respondent or Delin Company) concerning the 
application for setting aside the foreign-related arbitral award
13, the Respondent 
raised a defense to refuse to enforce the arbitral award. The court held that the 
people's court, for refusal to enforce the foreign-related arbitral awards, could be 
entitled to review the arbitration jurisdiction flaw, error in arbitration proceedings 
and other procedural problems, rather than whether the foreign-related arbitral 
awards suffered any error or other substantive issues, let alone whether the subject 
matter of the enforcement of foreign-related arbitral awards should be offset against 
the creditor's rights. That is to say, the review proceedings of refusal to enforce 
the foreign-related arbitral awards aim at ascertaining whether the enforcement 
proceedings of the arbitral awards could be initiated, rather than the enforcement 
itself of arbitral awards after the enforcement proceedings were initiated. Therefore, 
claims raised by Delin Company were out of the scope of legal grounds mentioned 
above, so the court should not touch upon these claims. 
13　Civil Judgment (S02 MT [2017] No. 105) issued by Wuxi Intermediate People's Court on 14 September, 
2017.


182
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
For the case of Henan Songyue Carbon Co., Ltd. (the Claimant or Songyue 
Company) v. Awot Global Express (HK) Limited (the Respondent or Awot Limited) 
concerning the application for setting-aside of arbitral award
14, the court held 
that the claim of Songyue Company of nonexistence of an arbitration agreement 
between it and Awot Limited lacked factual grounds and the cause of such claim 
was untenable. The court stated that the subject qualification of parties were the 
premise for ascertaining whether the arbitration clauses existed between the parties 
of this case, which, in turn, was the legal circumstance to judge whether the arbitral 
award was legal. Awot Limited accordingly thought that the ascertainment of subject 
qualification was merits of this case, rather than the legal ground for Songyue 
Company to apply for setting aside the arbitral award was untenable. On this basis, 
reviewing the subject qualification of the parties and ascertaining whether the 
contracting parties have agreed upon the arbitration clauses did not fall out of the 
jurisdiction of the court. 
ii. Problems about Arbitration Proceedings 
1. Inconsistency between Arbitration Proceedings and Arbitration Rules 
For the case of Li Binglin and Han Yongtian (collectively called "the Claimant) v. 
Jilin Jidian Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. (the Respondent) concerning the 
application for setting aside the Macao-related arbitral award
15, the court ascertained 
that Li Binglin was a permanent resident of Macao Special Administrative Region, 
and the special provisions on foreign-related commercial arbitration shall be used as 
14　Civil Judgment (J72 MT [2016] No. 32) issued by Tianjin Maritime Court on 13 March, 2017.
15　Civil Judgment (J01 MT [2017] No. 12) issued by Changchun Intermediate People’s Court on 23 
November, 2017.


183
CHAPTER 4
the arbitration rules for this case. But Chapter 8 Special Provisions on International 
(Foreign-Related) Commercial Arbitration of the Arbitration Rules of Changchun 
Arbitration Commission specified general rules for the composition of arbitral 
tribunal, notice of hearing, governing laws, etc. different from commercial arbitration 
without foreign elements. Nevertheless, the tribunal did not try the arbitration case 
(CZCZ [2016] No. 334) according to the proceedings set forth in Chapter 8 thereof, 
thus affecting due right of Li Binglin. The arbitration proceedings was illegal. Besides, 
the arbitral award indicated that Han Yongtian acted as the authorized agent of Li 
Binglin, and stated that three agents authorized by Han Yongtian served as the re-
authorized agents of Li Binglin, but neither the information of the re-authorized 
agents nor the record of the procedures for re-authorization was referred in the 
arbitral award. Moreover, the two claimants both denied that Li Binglin authorized 
the agents or Han Yongtian entrusted the re-authorized agents to appear in hearing 
during the arbitration, and no procedure of authorization for agency was available, so 
the court held the arbitration proceedings illegal. Therefore, the arbitral award shall 
be set aside. 
2. Whether "The Other Party has Concealed Evidence that is Sufficient to Affect the 
Impartiality of the Award"
In the case of Cai Qunli (the Claimant) v. Hainan Lianhua Real Estate Development 
Co., Ltd. (the Respondent or Lianhua Company) concerning the application for 
setting aside the arbitral award
16, the Claimant claimed that Lianhua Company 
had concealed evidence that were sufficient to affect the impartiality of the award, 
i.e., evidence that whether Liu Xiaobai served as the General Manager of Lianhua 
16　Civil Judgment ([2017]Q01 MT No. 34) issued by Haikou Municipal Intermediate People's Court of 
Hainan Province on 20 September, 2017.


184
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Company and whether Liu Xiaobai had the right to collect the housing purchase 
amount on behalf of Lianhua Company, and whether his acts were the duties 
of position. The investigation revealed that Lianhua Company had employed 
Liu Xiaobai to serve as the General Manager on 18, May 2010 and notified all 
departments. However, Lianhua Company concealed not only the fact and also 
evidence that are sufficient to ascertain the fact during the arbitration. The court 
held that Liu Xiaobai's capacity in Lianhua Company was key fact to ascertain the 
case and played a critical role for ascertainment of main facts. The act of Lianhua 
Company concealed the evidence that Liu Xiaobai was its General Manager was 
sufficient to affect the impartiality of the award rendered by Hainan Arbitration 
Commission. The court set aside the arbitral award (HZZ [2016] No. 976) rendered 
by Hainan Arbitration Commission in accordance with Article 58.1(5) of the 
Arbitration Law. 
3. Relationship between Extended Arbitration Trial and Arbitration Proceedings 
For the case of Zhu Qianhong (the Claimant) v. Shenzhen Lianma Property 
Management Co., Ltd. (the Respondent or Lianma Property Company) concerning 
the application for setting aside the arbitral award
17, the court ascertained that the 
arbitration exceeded the time limit as stated in the Arbitration Rules, but no evidence 
proving that the late award could influence correct ruling. Therefore, the arbitration 
proceeding did not violate the legal procedures. The court did not accept the ground 
that the Claimant applied for setting aside the arbitral award. 
iii. Whether the Parties Can Apply for Setting Aside the Arbitral 
17　Civil Judgment (Y03 MC [2017] No. 624) issued by Shenzhen Intermediate People's Court on 22 
December, 2017.


185
CHAPTER 4
Awards on the Ground of "Wrong Application of Laws" 
ADM Asia-Pacific Trading Pte. Ltd. (the Claimant or ADM Limited" applied for 
annulling the arbitral award (ZGMZJCZ [2016] No. 0517) rendered by CIETAC on 
6 May, 2016
18 on the grounds that: 1) the arbitral award failed to apply the correct 
law; 2) ADM Company failed to express its opinions fully during the arbitration 
and the arbitral award failed to give full consideration to all opinions expressed by 
ADM Company. Through investigation, the court held that "Others" in the Purchase 
and Sale Contract were governed by the laws of the UK as agreed upon by both 
parties. Other articles of the Purchase and Sale Contract shall be governed by the 
laws of China, because both parties did not reach an agreement on the governing 
laws and their places of operation were China and Singapore, which were both the 
contracting member state of the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the 
International Sale of Goods (CISG), so the CISG shall be applied. The laws of China 
shall be the governing laws upon the doctrine of most significant relationship. The 
above concerned the governing law to confirm the rights and obligations of the 
parties of arbitration, which was not the ground for setting aside the foreign-related 
arbitral awards as stipulated in Article 70 of the Arbitration Law, Article 274 of 
the Civil Procedure Law of the People's Republic of China (2012 Revision) (the Civil 
Procedure Law) , so the court would not rule on these claims. For the claims that 
ADM Company failed to express its opinions fully during the arbitration, the arbitral 
award failed to give full consideration to all opinions expressed by ADM Company, 
the arbitral tribunal did not treat both parties equally, and the court held that the 
arbitral tribunal's decision not to adopt the parties' opinions did not fall into the 
18　Civil Judgment (J04 MT [2016] No. 58) issued by Beijing Municipal No. 4 Intermediate People's Court 
on 3 January, 2017.


186
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
circumstance of Article 274 of the Civil Procedure Law, i.e., "the respondent was 
unable to state his opinions due to reasons for which he is not responsible." It was the 
power of an arbitral tribunal to decide to adopt or not to adopt the parties' opinions 
and render the arbitral awards according to the opinions of the majority of arbitrators 
based on the facts, contractual provisions and governing laws. It cannot determine 
that the arbitral tribunal's decision not to adopt the opinions of a party could be 
deemed that the party failed to express its opinions fully or the party was deprived 
of fully expressing its opinions, and it could not rule that the arbitral tribunal did 
not treat both parties equally. In this case, both parties selected the arbitrators and 
presented the evidence, as well as exchanged the cross-examination opinions before 
the hearing, participated in the hearing and submitted the supplementary opinions 
after the hearing, thus, the situation that "the respondent was unable to state his 
opinions due to reasons for which he is not responsible" did not exist. 
iv. Conclusion 
Setting-aside and non-enforcement of arbitral awards relating to foreign countries, 
Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan in 2017 reveal that the arbitration procedure against 
arbitration rules that other common issues remain key grounds in the application of 
setting-aside and non-enforcement of arbitral awards. 
Apart from the traditional problems relating to the arbitration proceedings, such as 
whether the composition of arbitral tribunal is fair and equal, some new matters, like 
relationship between arbitration time limit and arbitration procedure, and whether 
the parties fully expressed their opinions, emerged. For the problem whether the 
arbitration exceeding the given period violates the arbitration proceedings, the court 


187
CHAPTER 4
identified the standards for correct judgment, i.e., the arbitration is later than the 
time limit as stated in the Arbitration Rules, but there is no evidence proving that 
the late award could influence correct ruling, thus the arbitration procedure is not in 
violation of legal procedure.
For the problem whether the parties have fully expressed their opinions, the court 
stated that "the respondent was unable to state his opinions due to reasons for which 
he is not responsible" did not contain the arbitral tribunal's decision not to adopt 
the parties' opinions. The arbitral tribunal's decision not to adopt the opinions of a 
party could not be deemed that the party failed to express its opinions fully or the 
party was deprived of fully expressing its opinions, and it could not rule that the 
arbitral tribunal did not treat both parties equally, which could be actually concrete 
interpretation for Article 274 of the Civil Procedure Law. It is worthy of paying 
attention to new review standards raised by the court for the said problems. 
Besides, for the scope of judicial review of arbitration, the court held that 
qualification of subject of parties were the premise for ascertaining whether the 
arbitration clauses existed between the parties, which were the legal circumstances 
to judge whether the arbitral award was legal. On this basis, reviewing the subject 
qualification of parties and ascertaining whether the contracting parties have agreed 
upon the arbitration clauses did not fall out of court’s jurisdiction.
III. Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign-Related and 
HMT-Related Arbitral Awards 
i. About the Jurisdiction


188
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
For the case of S.M. Entertainment (the Claimant) v. Huang Zitao (the Respondent) 
concerning the confirmation of the validity of contract, the SPC stated in the 
reply
19 that the arbitration agreement involved therein stipulated that "any dispute 
that cannot be resolved through mutual negotiation may be filed for arbitration 
to the competent court in accordance with the Civil Procedure Law of the Republic 
of Korea and other relevant laws, or filed to the Korean Commercial Arbitration 
Board in accordance with the Arbitration Law. Both parties disputed on whether 
the Arbitration Law referred to the Arbitration Law of the People's Republic of China 
or the Arbitration Law of the Republic of Korea, which could, however, refer to the 
Arbitration Law of the Republic of Korea according to the context, so the validity of 
the arbitration agreement should be confirmed in accordance with the Arbitration 
Law of the Republic of Korea. Pursuant to the applicable laws of South Korea, both 
parties' agreement on the arbitration clauses and clauses of competent court shall be 
deemed that the parties enjoyed the right of choice, however, "any dispute may be 
filed for arbitration to the competent court in accordance with the Civil Procedure 
Law of the Republic of Korea and other relevant laws" could be explained that both 
parties agreed upon the jurisdiction enjoyed by the courts in South Korea, excluding 
the jurisdiction of Chinese courts on the dispute. 
ii. About the Validity of Arbitration Clauses 
For the case of Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A. (the Claimant or Louis 
Dreyfus Company) v. Ningbo Future Import & Export Co., Ltd. (the Respondent 
or Future Company) concerning the application for recognizing and enforcing the 
foreign arbitral awards, the SPC, upon request of Zhejiang High People's Court, 
19　Reply of the Supreme People's Court to the Request for Instructions on Confirming the Validity of a Contract in 
the Case of S.M. Entertainment v. Huang Zitao (ZGFMT [2017] No. 123) issued on 18 December, 2017. 


189
CHAPTER 4
gave a reply
20. According to the application of Louis Dreyfus Company, the Cotton 
Council International (CCI) arbitrated 22 raw cotton sale contracts under dispute. 
Based on the consultation between both parties on the said 22 contracts, Louis 
Dreyfus Company sent a "letter for terminating the contracts" to Future Company 
on 8 October, 2012, and attached the list of contract numbers, including those of 
22 raw cotton sale contracts thereto. Future Company raised no objection to the 
execution of these 22 contracts in the reply given on 26 October, but just asked for 
further consultation on its difficulty to perform these contracts. The reply of Future 
Company did not only indicate the execution of the 22 contracts, but also proved 
that both parties had reached an agreement on the arbitration clauses contained 
therein. Moreover, Future Company consulted with Louis Dreyfus Company about 
the security deposit for 40,000 tons of raw cotton as stated in Contracts S1043, 
1044 and 1045, but there was no evidence proving that both parties had reached an 
agreement. In addition, the security deposit agreement was a single agreement on 
the performance of security deposit as stated in the raw cotton sale contracts, which 
was independent of the raw cotton sale contracts, and the clauses of competent court 
therein, assuming it is valid, could only provide for the repayment of the security 
deposit, and would not affect the validity of arbitration clauses set forth in the raw 
cotton sale contracts. This case did not involve the situations as stated in Article V:1(c)
of the New York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral 
Awards (New York Convention). Therefore, the case had no ground of refusing the 
arbitral awards rendered by the CCI. Afterwards, Ningbo Intermediate People's 
Court judged that the arbitral awards (No. A01/2012/222) rendered by the CCI on 
20　Reply of the Supreme People's Court to the Request Raised by Zhejiang High People's Court for Instructions on 
Recognizing and Enforcing a Foreign Arbitral Award in the Case of Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A. v. Ningbo 
Future Import and Export Co., Ltd. (ZGFMT [2017] No. 96) issued on 19 December, 2017. 


190
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
28 October, 2014 could be recognized and enforced
21. 
For the case of Praxair Cotton Co., Ltd. (the Claimant or Praxair Company) v. 
Jiangsu Jinfang Industry Co., Ltd. (the Respondent or Jinfang Company) concerning 
the application for recognizing and enforcing the arbitral awards (ICA Reference 
AO1/2013/04) rendered by CCI
22, Jinfang Company claimed that the arbitral 
awards involved therein could be refused to be recognized and enforced on the 
ground that it did not enter into an arbitration agreement with Praxair Company. 
The court held that the establishment of an arbitration agreement was the premise to 
judge whether it was valid and fell into the scope of validity review. The invalidity of 
an arbitration agreement set forth in Article V of the New York Convention included 
the circumstances of non-establishment of the agreement. Thus, the court shall 
adjudicate whether this case involved the situations as stated in Article V:1(a) of the 
New York Convention. Both parties did not agree upon the proper law for confirming 
the validity of the arbitration agreement, so it should refer to the law of the place 
of arbitration i.e. the UK to decide whether the concerned arbitration agreement 
had been established. The fact that the contract has been executed could not suffice 
to judge that Jinfang Company and Praxair Company had reached a consensus on 
the arbitration agreement. Pursuant to the laws of the UK, both parties' consensus 
on filing the disputes for arbitration was an element for the arbitration agreement 
to be entered into. Jinfang Company and Praxair Company failed to enter into an 
arbitration agreement, so this case involved the situation as stated in Article V:1(a) of 
the New York Convention, i.e., refusing to recognize and enforce the arbitral awards. 
21　Civil Judgment (ZYZQZ [2015] No. 5) issued by Ningbo Intermediate People’s Court on 28 January, 
2018.
22　Civil Judgment (YSWZSZ [2014] No. 00001) issued by Yancheng Intermediate People’s Court of Jiangsu 
Province on 29 June, 2017.


191
CHAPTER 4
iii. About the Scope of Courts' Review 
For the case of Huaxia Life Insurance Co., Ltd. (the Claimant or Huaxia Insurance) 
v. American International Group, et al (the Respondent or AIG) concerning the 
application for recognizing and enforcing the arbitral award (No. 20025/RD(c.20026/
RD)) rendered by the International Court of Arbitration of International Chamber 
of Commerce (ICC Court) in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR)
23, 
the court held that arbitral award involved therein had clearly stated that Huaxia 
Insurance should be entitled to recover the fund under the custody in accordance 
with the Fund Custody Agreement. In fact, Huaxia Insurance was unable to do so 
through negotiation with the custody bank, which simply proved that it was very 
necessary to enforce the arbitral award. Moreover, the arbitral award stated that 
AIG and AIG Capital were obligated to cooperate with Huaxia Insurance, take all 
necessary measures and immediately enforce the final award, including any other 
possible necessary instructions requiring the custody bank to refund the fund under 
the custody to Huaxia Insurance, which did not hinder the custody bank from 
making refund to Huaxia Insurance. The arbitral awards also specified the obligations 
of AIG and AIG Capital for actions and non-actions and stated specific contents of 
enforcement, so non-enforcement of the arbitral award would definitely damage the 
rights and interest that should be obtained by Huaxia Insurance through the arbitral 
award. Whether it could be objectively enforced fell out of the scope of courts’ 
review. If a refusal of enforcement was granted on such ground, it actually exempted 
the enforcee's due obligation and went against the principles of honesty and equality. 
For the case of MASPAL Investment Co., Ltd. (the Claimant or MASPAL Company) 
23　Civil Judgment (J04 RG [2016] No. 1) issued by Beijing Municipal No. 4 Intermediate People’s Court on 
9 May, 2017.


192
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
v. Dongfang Huacheng (Group) Co., Ltd. (Dongfang Company) and Taizhou 
Zhixing Co., Ltd. (Taizhou Company" or collectively "the Respondent) concerning 
the application for recognizing and enforcing the arbitral award, the SPC, upon 
request of Zhejiang High People's Court, gave a reply
24: Article IV of the New York 
Convention stipulates that the parties can apply for recognizing and enforcing an 
arbitral award by submitting the arbitration agreement, however, the parties of this 
case failed to do so, which did not constitute the situation of non-recognition and 
non-enforcement as stated in Article V of the New York Convention. The parties 
failed to submit the arbitration agreement in accordance with Article IV of the New 
York Convention, and the people's court should dismiss the application, rather than 
ruled the non-recognition and non-enforcement of the arbitral award. Moreover, the 
people's court should conduct the pro forma review of the arbitration agreement in 
accordance with the said article. Pursuant to Article V:1 of the New York Convention, 
the people's court has the right to ascertain the recognition and enforcement of 
the arbitral award when the party applies for neither recognizing nor enforcing 
the arbitral award. The people's court could not conduct the review on its own 
initiative. Moreover, the party's application for recognizing and enforcing the foreign 
arbitral award that has exceeded the legal period could be not the ground of non-
recognition and non-enforcement as stated in Article V of the New York Convention, 
either. Afterwards, Ningbo Maritime Court adjudicated and affirmed the validity 
of the arbitral award rendered by the arbitral tribunal consisting of Michael Baker-
Harber, Ian Kinnell and Christopher John William Moss on 6 January, 2014 for the 
24　Reply of the Supreme People's Court to the Request Raised by Zhejiang High People's Court for Instructions on 
Recognizing and Enforcing the Foreign Arbitral Award in the Case of MASPAL Investment Co., Ltd. v. Dongfang 
Huacheng (Group) Co., Ltd. and Taizhou Zhixing Co., Ltd. (ZGFMT [2017] No. 67) issued on 20 December, 
2017.


193
CHAPTER 4
case of MASPAL Investment Co., Ltd. v. Dongfang Huacheng (Group) Co., Ltd. 
and Taizhou Zhixing Co., Ltd. concerning the dispute over ship purchase and sale 
contract
25. 
iv. About the Notice on Arbitration 
For the case of Royal Foods Import Corp. (the Claimant) v. Suqian Canned Food 
Co, Ltd. (the Respondent) concerning the application for recognizing and enforcing 
the arbitral award (No. 2590) rendered by Association of Food Industries, Inc.(AFI)
26, 
the Respondent alleged that it had not undertaken to use the email box of Guo Wei, 
Business Manager of the Respondent, as the eligible mailbox to receive the notice 
of arbitration and relevant documentation served by the arbitral tribunal, therefore, 
the arbitration proceedings violated relevant provisions of the New York Convention. 
The court held that both parties agreed to designate AFI as the arbitration institution 
for resolution of disputes, which should be deemed as the acceptance of the AFI 
Arbitration Rules. Section 13 of the AFI Arbitration Rules reads: the arbitral tribunal 
may use the reasonable ways to send any arbitral instruments, including the notice 
of arbitration, notice of selecting the arbitrators and arbitral award, to the party's last 
known address, and the reasonable ways mentioned herein include sending by mail. 
Although the Claimant and the Respondent did not agree upon using the email box 
of Guo Wei as the address to receive the arbitral instruments, Guo Wei signed the 
contracts involved in this case as the Respondent's representative and the Respondent 
used the mailbox of Guo Wei to keep business correspondence with the Claimant, it 
could be ascertained that the mailbox of Guo Wei was the Respondent's last known 
25　Civil Judgment (Z72 XWR [2016] No. 5) issued by Ningbo Maritime Court on 20 March, 2018.
26　Civil Judgment (S13 XWR [2016] No. 1) issued by Suqian Intermediate People’s Court on 8 February, 
2017.


194
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
address, and the notice of arbitration, notice of selecting the arbitrators, arbitral 
award and other arbitral instruments sent to the mailbox should be deemed to have 
been served upon the Respondent. 
For the case that Hailong Yacht Project (China) Co., Ltd. applied for recognizing and 
enforcing an arbitral award made in the UK, the SPC, upon request of Shandong 
High People's Court, gave a reply
27: Article 13 "Disputes and Arbitration" of the 
contract involved therein was the agreement between both parties on the arbitration 
proceedings, so the court should identify the consistency between arbitration 
proceedings and arbitration agreement according to this article. About the "notice of 
award", the said article specified that: Any notice of award shall be immediately sent 
to the address of both parties by facsimile or email address that has been confirmed 
in a written form. The arbitrator had sent the notice of award to shang email on 
9 January, 2104, sent the unsigned arbitral award to dragon email and also sent a 
carbon copy to shang email and cheng email on 21 January, 2014. Based on the 
findings above, it could be deemed that the arbitrator had sent the notice of award in 
accordance with agreement of both parties on the arbitration proceedings. This case 
incurred no inconsistency between arbitration proceedings and arbitration agreement. 
Article 17 of the contract involved in this case specified the delivery of notices 
between both parties, rather than the arbitration proceedings, which was inapplicable 
to the circumstances of sending the arbitral award during the arbitration proceedings. 
v. About the Composition of the Arbitral Tribunal 
27　Reply of the Supreme People's Court to the Request Raised by Shandong High People's Court for Instructions on 
the Application of Hailong Yacht Project (China) Co., Ltd. for Recognizing and Enforcing an Arbitral Award Made 
in the UK (ZGFMT [2017] No. 114) issued on 26 December, 2017.


195
CHAPTER 4
For the case of Bright Morning Limited (the Claimant or BM Company) and 
Yixing Lucky Textile Group Limited (the Respondent) concerning the application 
for recognizing and enforcing the arbitral award ([2011] No. 130 ARB130/11/
MJL) rendered by the SIAC
28, the Respondent claimed that the tribunal had failed 
to uphold the independence, neutrality and fairness firmly, resulting in many 
material error in the final award. Moreover, the arbitral tribunal apparently showed 
favor to the Claimant. The court asked the Respondent to assume the burden of 
proof for its claim that the composition of the arbitral tribunal was inconsistent 
with the arbitration rules. Firstly, the proof presented by the Respondent could not 
prove that the two arbitrators of this case failed to disclose relevant circumstances 
or made disclosure in an accurate way. Secondly, Article 2 and Article 4 of the 
SIAC Arbitration Rules specified the requirements for independence or neutrality of 
arbitrators. The Respondent claimed that the two arbitrators were not independent or 
neutral on the grounds that arbitrators of this case concurrently served as arbitrators 
of other cases, and the law firm of one of the arbitrators maintained the long-term 
business relationship with MWE Law Firm, the arbitration agent of BM Company. 
Such claim lacked sufficient grounds. Thirdly, the Respondent claimed that the said 
two arbitrators had violated the obligation of disclosure set forth in the Guidelines 
on Conflicts, no matter whether these two arbitrators must perform the obligation 
of disclosure in accordance with the Guidelines on Conflicts, which were not the 
mandatory regulations in fact. Moreover, violating the Guidelines on Conflicts could 
not necessarily go against the SIAC Arbitration Rules. Finally, all the claims that the 
arbitral tribunal violated the SIAC Arbitration Rules raised by the the Respondent to 
the court had been presented to the arbitral tribunal during the arbitration, and the 
28　Civil Judgment ([2016]S02 XWR No. 1) issued by Wuxi Intermediate People's Court on 31 August, 2017.


196
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
SIAC had adjudicated in accordance with its Arbitration Rules and made the decision 
on the composition of the arbitral tribunal after asking BM Company to give a 
response. To conclude, the aforesaid pleading opinions raised by the Respondent shall 
be deemed inadmissible by the court. 
vi. Which One Shall Prevail in Case of Inconsistency between 
Arbitration Clauses and Arbitration Rules 
For the case of Noble Resources International Pte Ltd. (the Claimant or Noble 
Limited) v. Shanghai Xintai International Trade Co., Ltd. (the Respondent or Xintai 
Company) concerning the application for recognizing and enforcing the foreign 
arbitral award, the SPC, upon request of Shanghai High People's Court, gave a 
reply
29 that the Iron Ore Purchase and Sale Contract entered into by and between both 
parties agreed upon the quoting of terms and conditions under Section 2 of L2.4 set 
forth in the Standard Protocol, which actually contained the arbitration clauses. These 
arbitration clauses were thus effectively incorporated to the Iron Ore Purchase and 
Sale Contract, and both parties had reached valid written arbitration clauses. Article 
16.1 of the arbitration clauses specified that: Any dispute and compensation shall 
be submitted to the SIAC for arbitration in Singapore in accordance with the then-
current effective SIAC Arbitration Rules. The arbitral tribunal shall be composed of 
three arbitrators. Therefore, both the arbitration proceedings the composition of the 
arbtrial tribunal of this case complied with the arbitration clauses agreed upon by 
both parites. 
29　Reply of the Supreme People's Court to the Request for Instructions on Recognizing and Enforcing the Foreign 
Arbitral Award in the Case of Noble Resources International Pte Ltd. v. Shanghai Xintai International Trade Co., 
Ltd. (ZGFMT [2017] No. 50) issued on 26 June, 2017.


197
CHAPTER 4
Besides, the SPC gave a reply to the problem about whether the expedited arbitration 
procedure was applied for this case was consistent with the agreement of both parties. 
The dispute of this case was arbitrated in accordance with the then effective SIAC 
Arbitration Rules (5th Edition, 2013) (the Arbitration Rules (2013 Edition)", Article 
5 of which provided for the expedited procedure, and the amount in dispute of this 
case did not exceed SGD5 million and both parties did not exclude the application 
of "expedited procedure", so the SIAC conducted the arbitration through the 
"expedited procedure" upon the request of Noble Limited, which complied with the 
the Arbitration Rules (2013 Edition) and did not violate the agreement concluded 
between both parties. 
Also, the SPC gave a reply to the problem about whether the composition of the 
arbitral tribunal was consistent with the agreement of both parties. Pursuant to Article 
5.2 of the Arbitration Rules (2013 Edition), other ways of the composition of the 
arbitral tribunal applicable to the expedited procedure were not excluded therefrom. 
Moreover, the Arbitration Rules (2013 Edition) did not specify that the President of 
the SIAC could enjoy the right of discretion to apply the provisions for sole arbitrator 
set forth in Article 5.2(2) thereof when the parties concerned have agreed differently 
on the composition of the arbitral tribunal. The party autonomy was the foundation 
stone of the operation of arbitration system, and the composition of the arbitral 
tribunal is actually the basic rule of arbitration proceedings, therefore, "unless the 
President determines otherwise" as stated in Article 5.2(2) of the Arbitration Rules 
(2013 Edition) could not be explained that the President of the SIAC had the right of 
discretion to determine the way of composing the arbitral tribunal. On the contrary, 
the President should fully respect the parties' intention of the composition of the 


198
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
arbitral tribunal when exercising his/her right to make decisions, so as to guarantee 
the party autonomy. Both parties of this case have agreed that the arbitral tribunal 
should consist of three arbitrators, and did not exclude the application of "expedited 
procedure" for the way of composition. Therefore, the application of "expedited 
procedure" did not influence the parties' basic procedural right to have the disputes 
arbitrated by the arbitral tribunal consisting of three arbitrators in accordance with 
the arbitration clauses. 
The SIAC appointed a sole arbitrator to form the arbitral tribunal in accordance 
with Article 5.2(2) of the Arbitration Rules (2013 Edition) despite that the arbitration 
clauses had specified that the aribitral tribunal should be composed of three 
arbitrators, and Xintai Company clearly opposed the sole arbitrator, which violated 
the arbitration clauses and coincided with the situation that "The composition of 
the arbitral authority was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties" as 
stipulated in Article V:1(d) of the New York Convention. 
vii. About the Awards beyond the Scope of Arbitration Agreement 
For the case of Chen Co Chemical Engineering and Consulting GMBH (the 
Claimant or Chen Co Company) v. Do-Fluoride Chemicals Co., Ltd. (the 
Respondent or DFD Company) concerning the application for recognizing and 
enforcing the foreign arbitral award
30, the Respondent argued that the arbitral 
award of this case suffered such problems as award beyond the scope of arbitration 
agreement, unclear matters of arbitration and violation of the arbitration 
proceedings, it thus requested the people's court to disallow the recognition and 
30　Civil Judgment (XZMSZCZ [2015] No. 53) issued by Xinxiang Intermediate People’s Court of Henan 
Province on 5 May, 2017.


199
CHAPTER 4
enforcement of the arbitral award. The court held that Chen Co Company claimed 
that DFD Company should stop using the unauthorized technology and pay the 
liquidated damages for the unauthorized use, however, the ICC Court had rendered 
the Final Award for the arbitration case (No. 18046/JHN/GFG) in Zurich in the 
Switzerland, with Paragraph (414) reading that "DFD Company shall pay the 
penalty of EUR0.1 million on the 23th day each month if only DFD Company 
continues to use the technology of Chen Co Company", Paragraph (415) specifying 
that "DFD Company cannot use the technology of Chen Co Company until it 
pays off all the expenses as stated in Paragraph (414) of the Final Award." Concrete 
details of the award above did not stress the authorized technology, and also referred 
to the authorized technology, showing the situation of going beyond the request 
of Chen Co Company. In addition, Paragraph (417) thereof specified that "The 
default interest shall be accrued at the rate of 5% of the annual interest rate for 
the penalty that becomes expired each month until all the expenses are paid off", 
echoing the situation of award beyond the scope of arbitration agreement set forth 
in Paragraph (414). Therefore, the recognition and enforcement of contents of the 
award beyond the scope of arbitration agreement should be disallowed. Also, the 
court also ascertained whether the matters of arbitration in the Final Award were 
definite and enforceable. It should review whether the arbitral award of this case 
should be recognized and enforced in accordance with the New York Convention, if 
the arbitral award was uncertain but not under the circumstances of non-recognition 
and non-enforcement as stated in the New York Convention. On this basis, it should 
not disallow the recognition and enforcement of the arbitral award for the reason of 
uncertain award. Regarding whether the arbitral award coincided with the situation 
that "The composition of the arbitral authority was not in accordance with the 


200
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
agreement of the parties" set forth in Article V:1(d) of the New York Convention: 
Firstly, it involved the language and expressions of Proof C-46. Although both 
parties agreed that the arbitration proceedings should be made in English, Chen Co 
Company did not provide the proof in English, to which DFD raised no objection 
during the arbitration, and gave the cross-examination opinions on the said proof. 
Besides, Article 33 of the ICC Arbitration Rules, applicable to this case, stipulates 
that "A party which proceeds with the arbitration without raising its objection to a 
failure to comply with any provision of the Rules, or of any other rules applicable 
to the proceedings, any direction given by the arbitral tribunal, or any requirement 
under the arbitration agreement relating to the constitution of the arbitral tribunal or 
the conduct of the proceedings, shall be deemed to have waived its right to object." 
Therefore, the failure of Chen Co Company to provide the said proof in English was 
not the situation as stated in Article V:1(d) of the New York Convention. Secondly, it 
involved the problem about whether the proper law selected by the arbitral tribunal, 
the Swiss Civil Code, violated the arbitration proceedings. Whether the arbitral 
tribunal’s decision went against the basic chemical principles actually was a matter of 
merits, which went beyond the scope of review of the people's court for recognizing 
and enforcing a foreign arbitral award. 
For the case of Raffles International Corp. (the Claimant or Raffles Corporation) 
v. HNA Tianjin Center Development Co., Ltd. (the Respondent or HNA Tianjin) 
concerning the application for recognizing and enforcing an arbitral award made in 
Hong Kong, the SPC, upon request of Tianjin High People's Court, gave a reply
31: 
Raffles Company filed the dispute over the performance of License Contract for 
31　Reply of the Supreme People's Court to the Request for Instructions on the Application of Raffles International 
Corp. for Recognizing and Enforcing the Award Made in the Hong Kong (ZGFMT [2017] No. 16) issued on 28 
March, 2017.


201
CHAPTER 4
arbitration, and the arbitral award was also made over the claims concerning the 
dispute thereof. Therefore, the dispute arbitrated therein fell into the scope of matters 
as agreed upon by both parties in the arbitration agreement. The License Contract 
was closely associated with the Hotel Management Contract, and the arbitral award 
also referred to the contents of the Hotel Management Contract in ascertaining facts 
and demonstrating grounds, but did not make specific award for the dispute over 
the Hotel Management Contract. Therefore, the arbitral award neither handled 
the dispute over the Hotel Management Contract, nor incurred the situation that 
the award went beyond the scope of arbitration agreement. Afterwards, Tianjin 
Municipal No. 1 Intermediate People's Court ruled that
32 the arbitral award should 
be recognized and enforced, and Raffles Corporation and HNA Tianjin reached a 
compromise during the enforcement. 
viii. About the Identification of Recognition or Enforcement of 
Arbitral Awards Contrary to the Public Policies 
1. Relationship between the Principles of Honesty and Credibility and Public Policies 
For the case of Xinhe Maritime Co., Ltd. (the Claimant or Xinhe Company) v. 
Sinwa Ship Material Supply Co., Ltd. (Dalian Sinwa Company) and Gao Desheng 
(collectively "the Respondent) concerning the application for recognizing and 
enforcing an arbitral award made abroad
33, Gao Desheng, Board Chairman of the 
Respondent, alleged that he had not been aware of the arbitration clauses when 
signing the agreement and recognizing the arbitral award could go against the 
32　Civil Judgment (J04 RG [2016] No. 1) issued by Tianjin Municipal No. 4 Intermediate People’s Court on 
18 May, 2017.
33　Civil Judgment (L02 XWR [2016] No. 2) issued by Dalian Intermediate People’s Court on 24 February, 
2017.


202
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
principles of honesty and credibility set forth in the General Principles of the Civil 
Law of the People's Republic of China (the General Principles of the Civil Law) . 
The court held that "The recognition or enforcement of the award would be contrary 
to the public policy of that country" as stipulated in Article V:2(b) of the New York 
Convention should be explained that recognition or enforcement of a foreign arbitral 
award would seriously violate basic legal principles of China, infringe upon the 
sovereignty of China, impair the social public security, go against good custom and 
jeopardize fundamental social and public interests. Article 4 of the General Principles 
of the Civil Law specifies that: "In civil activities, the principles of voluntariness, 
fairness, making compensation for equal value, honesty and credibility shall be 
observed." Honesty and credibility are basic principles of the civil law, which requires 
the people to be honest and keep faith, exercise rights and perform obligations duly 
in civil activities. As the Board Chairman of Dalian Sinwa Company, Gao Desheng 
has been engaged in the international trade for many years, and should read through 
an agreement without the Chinese version, ask the counterparty to provide the 
Chinese version and perform the duty of care and prudence. Moreover, after signing 
the agreement, Gao Desheng had the agreement performed. Nevertheless, he claimed 
that he had been never aware of the arbitration clauses therein when disputes arising 
out of the agreement were submitted for arbitration, which could be against the 
principle of honesty and credibility. Performing the agreement and complying with 
the contractual provisions simply reflect the principles of honesty and credibility. 
For the claim raised by the Respondent that the arbitral award was unenforceable, 
the court determined that: pursuant to Article 4 of the Notice on Implementation 
of New York Convention, if a people's court does not think the application contains 


203
CHAPTER 4
the conditions as stated in Articles V:1 and V:2 of the New York Convention after 
carrying through examination and investigation to the recognition and enforcement 
of an arbitral award, the people's court shall recognize the validity and recognize the 
arbitral award in accordance with the enforcement procedures set forth in the Civil 
Procedure Law. Therefore, adjudicating whether an arbitral award was enforceable in 
accordance with the laws and regulations of China was not a ground for refusal of the 
recognition as stipulated by the New York Convention. 
The court also reviewed the claim raised by the Respondent for unenforceable arbitral 
award due to unclear enforcee and contents of payment. The trademark involved 
herein was registered in the name of Dalian Sinwa Company, but Gao Desheng, as 
its legal representative, should be obligated to prepare, present and sign documents 
required for deregistering the trademark or transferring the ownership of such 
trademark upon the request of Xinhe Company. Thus, the enforcee and contents 
of payment of the arbitral award were clear and enforceable and the Respondent's 
allegation was untenable.
2. Relationship between Mandatory Provisions Set Forth in Administrative 
Regulations and Department Bylaws and Public Policies 
For the case of China Aviation Oil (Singapore) Corporation Ltd. (the Claimant or 
CAOSCO) v. Chengdu Xinhuaxin Chemical and Industrial Materials Co., Ltd. (the 
Respondent or Xinhuaxin Company) concerning the application for recognizing and 
enforcing the arbitral award (No. 2016/091) rendered by the SIAC
34, the Respondent 
alleged that the contract involved in the arbitral award was a false contract upon 
34　Civil Judgment (C03 ['2017] XWR No. 1) issued by Chengdu Intermediate People's Court on 23 June, 
2017.


204
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
which no goods were delivered, violating the foreign exchange control laws and 
regulations of China and being contrary to the public policy of China, so the arbitral 
award made thereupon could not be recognized and enforced. 
The court ascertained that CAOSCA and Xinhuaxin Company carried out the 
reversing trade and made the settlement of differences by signing the purchase and 
sale contract, which was actually the futures trading. Conducting the overseas futures 
trading without obtaining the permission was contrary to the foreign exchange 
administration policies of China and trading the methyl benzene without reporting 
for recordation violated the Foreign Trade Law of the People's Republic of China, 
nevertheless, violation of mandatory provisions set forth in administrative regulations 
and department bylaws could not necessarily violate the public policies of China. 
Recognition and enforcement of the arbitral award could not violate basic legal 
principles, impair the social public security and jeopardize fundamental social and 
public interests of China. Based on the findings above, the arbitral award involved 
in this case did not constitute the situation as stipulated in Article V:2(b) of the New 
York Convention. 
3. Influence of the Relationship between Arbitral Award and Civil Judgment on 
Public Interest 
For the case of Chi Shing (Hong Kong) Limited (the Claimant or Chi Shing 
Company) v. Guangzhou Mingsheng Real Estate Development Co, Ltd. converning 
the application for recognizing and enforcing the arbitral award (No. HKIAC/
A12021) rendered by Hong Kong International Arbitration Centre (HKIAC)
35, 
35　Civil Judgment (SZFSSCZ [] No. 110) issued by Guangzhou Intermediate People’s Court on 14 March, 
2017.


205
CHAPTER 4
the Respondent alleged that the facts ascertained by the HKIAC were contradictive 
to those in effective judgment made by the court in mainland China, which 
thus impaired the judicial sovereignty in mainland China, violated the social 
public interests and went against public order and good custom of the society. 
The Respondent accordingly requested the court to disallow the recognition and 
enforcement of the arbitral award. 
The court held that the civil judgment involved therein had ruled that the payment 
of housing money by Chi Shing Company lacked strong grounds and dismissed 
the counterclaim of Chi Shing Company for asking Mingsheng Company to pay 
the liquidated damages for overdue delivery of housing. After Chi Shing Company 
produced the additional proof, the arbitral tribunal upheld its claims. The subject 
housing involved in the litigation was not that involved in the arbitration, the 
findings ascertained in the arbitral award that Chi Cheng Company had paid the 
housing payment and taxes and deeds did not deny the fact that Chi Shing Company 
failed to make the payment of another housing as adjudicated by the civil judgment, 
and the results of arbitral award did not deny the judgment results of the said civil 
judgment. The allegation of Mingsheng Company that the arbitral award involved 
in this case violated the social public interests, public order and good custom of the 
society in mainland China lacked factual ground, so the court did not uphold the 
allegation. 
ix. Application of the Expedited Procedure Rules 
For the case of Hyundai Glovis Co., Ltd. (the Claimant or Hyundai Company) v. 
Zhejiang Qiying Energy Chemicals Co., Ltd. (The Respondent or Qiying Company) 


206
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
concerning the application for recognizing and enforcing the arbitral award ([2015] 
No. 004) (No. 004 Award) rendered by the SIAC
36, the Respondent requested the 
court to disallow No. 004 Award on the grounds that: 1) it failed to receive any 
notice about the arbitration; 2) the arbitration clauses agreed by both parties were 
invalid; and (3) the arbitration proceedings were contrary to the arbitration clauses, 
failing to comply with the SIAC rules. 
Regarding the problem about whether the arbitration proceedings went against the 
agreement of both parties, the court held that the arbitration rules as stated through 
the arbitration rules in the Purchase and Sale Agreement were unavailable, because 
both parties clearly agreed that disputes in connection with the agreement would be 
submitted to the SIAC for arbitration, and the SIAC had properly notified Qiying 
Company of the application of the SIAC rules and the trail of the dispute through 
the expedited procedure after accepting the arbitration request raised by Hyundai 
Company, to which Hyundai Company raised no objection. On the premise that 
the arbitration rules as had been agreed upon by both parties were unavailable, it 
was not inappropriate that the SIAC used the SIAC rules to hear the case. Thus, the 
allegations of Qiying Company were untenable. 
Regarding the problem about whether the composition of the arbitral tribunal was 
contrary to the agreement of both parties and the SIAC rules, the court ascertained 
that amount in dispute of this case complied with the standards for expedited 
procedures of the SIAC rules. Upon the request of Hyundai Company, the SIAC 
decided to apply the expedited procedures to hear the case and notified both parties 
to jointly nominate an arbitrator, otherwise, the President of the SIAC could appoint 
36　Civil Judgment (ZYZQZ [2015] No. 3) issued by Ningbo Intermediate People’s Court on 13 January, 
2017.


207
CHAPTER 4
a sole arbitrator. However, Qiying Company disagreed with the arbitrator nominated 
by Hyundai Company by sending an email via its actually used mailbox, and asked 
the President of the SIAC to designate a sole arbitrator. Based on the facts above, it 
could be judged that Qiying Company agreed to change the number of arbitrators 
from three to be one. The President of the SIAC designated Tao Jingzhou to serve 
as a sole arbitrator and notify Qiying Company of the designation, to which Qiying 
Company raised no objection. Therefore, the composition of the arbitral tribunal did 
not go against the will of Qiyign Company, and Qiying Company failed to present 
any evidence to prove the hearing by a sole arbitrator affected the fairness of the case. 
To conclude, the allegations of Qiying Company were not upheld. 
x. Interpretation of "Disputes Incapable of Being Resolved through 
Arbitration" 
Pursuant to the Arrangement of the Supreme People's Court on Mutual Enforcement of 
Arbitration Awards between the Mainland and the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region, the party against whom an application is filed may, after receiving the notice 
of an arbitral award made in HKSAR, adduce evidence to show the dispute involving 
the arbitral award cannot be resolved through arbitration, then the court may refuse 
to enforce the award through verification. For the case of Zhongyi'ou International 
Investment Group Co., Ltd. (the Claimant or Zhongyi'ou Company) v. Wuxi Franke 
GMKP Energy Limited (the Respondent) concerning the application for enforcing 
the arbitral award made in HKSAR
37, the court ascertained that the Zhongyi'ou 
Company filed the dispute on joint venture for arbitration in accordance with the 
arbitration clauses set forth in the Joint Venture Contract, although Zhongyi'ou 
37　Civil Judgment (XSWZSZ [2015] No. 2) issued by Wuxi Intermediate People’s Court on 22 February, 
2017.


208
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Company did not request for discharging the Joint Venture Contract, the legal 
precondition of dissolving the joint venture and making the liquidition of the joint 
venture must be the discharge of the Joint Venture Contract. Item (b) of the arbitral 
award involved herein was the dispute arising out of the performance of the Joint 
Venture Contract, rather than the "disputes incapable of being resolved through 
arbitration." Item (c) of the arbitral award involved herein did not mean that the 
liquidation matters of the joint venture should be conducted by the arbitral tribunal, 
which simply meant that the joint venture should enter the procedure of liquidation 
upon the termination of the Joint Venture Contract. Based on the findings above, it 
could not judge that Items (b) and (c) of the arbitral award involved herein fell into 
the circumstances of going beyond the arbitral jurisdiction or "disputes incapable of 
being resolved through arbitration" as stipulated by the Arrangement of the Supreme 
People's Court on Mutual Enforcement of Arbitration Awards between the Mainland and 
the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. 
xi. Conclusion 
Summarizing the courts' decisions on recognition and enforcement of foreign 
or HMT related arbitral awards in 2017, key issues include whether the notice 
of arbitration has been served effectively, whether the composition of arbitration 
tribunal complies with the arbitration rules, whether arbitral awards violate the public 
policies of China, etc. New trends worthy of great attention include the following: 
Firstly, the court specified the standards to deduce the address to which the arbitral 
instruments will be served if both parties fail to specify such address. For the cases 
mentioned above, the address to which the arbitral instruments will be served is 


209
CHAPTER 4
the correspondence address used in daily operation, which meets general cognition 
of normal commercial practice, and delivering documents to such address shall be 
deemed the "reasonable ways for delivery" as stipulated in the arbitration rules. 
Secondly, the court specified the standards to judge whether arbitrators are not 
neutral. For the cases mentioned above, the court pointed out the standards for 
judging the neutrality or independence of arbitrators were that arbitrator failed to 
disclose relevant circumstances or made disclosure in an accurate way during the 
arbitration, which can be proved by firm evidence. 
Thirdly, the court specified the sequence of application of the arbitration clauses 
and the arbitration rules in case of conflicts between them. For the cases mentioned 
above, the court stated that the party autonomy was the foundation stone of the 
operation of arbitration system, and the principal of an arbitration institution should 
fully respect the parties' intention when exercising his/her right to make decisions, 
without making decisions at his/her own initiative. 
Fourthly, the court specified the relationship between mandatory provisions set 
forth in administrative regulations and department bylaws and public policies. For 
the cases mentioned above, the court stated that violating basic legal principles of 
China as stipulated in the New York Convention did not violate mandatory provisions 
set forth in administrative regulations and department bylaws, which could not 
definitely violate the public policies of China. Overall consideration should be given 
to other factors to make a judgment. 
Fifthly, the court specified the concrete meaning of "disputes incapable of being 
resolved through arbitration" as stipulated in the Arrangement of the Supreme People's 


210
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
Court on Mutual Enforcement of Arbitration Awards between the Mainland and the 
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. For the cases mentioned above, the court 
stated that the matter was not under the circumstances of "disputes incapable of 
being resolved through arbitration", as the necessary precondition for the disputes 
involved therein, despite that the claimant raised no concrete request. 


211
ANNUAL SUMMARY
Summary of the Year
The world is undergoing major developments, transformation and adjustments, 
but peace and development remain the themes of the times, and the economic 
globalization has become an irreversible trend of the times.
With continuous growth of economic, trade and investment activities among 
countries, Chinese and foreign enterprises are facing increasing legal risks arising from 
the said activities and raising more and higher demands for resolution of disputes. 
This year marks the 40
th anniversary of China's reform and opening-up. CIETAC 
has enjoyed extensive compliments both at home and abroad with its independent, 
impartial and efficient arbitration services and made positive contributions to the 
development of China’s international commercial arbitration. As the leader and 
driver of China's foreign-related arbitration, CIETAC has witnessed and practiced 
the integrative development of China’s arbitration and international arbitration. 
In retrospect of the year 2017, developments of China's international commercial 
arbitration are mainly evidenced by the following four aspects:
First of all, compared with the previous year, changes in the arbitration legal system 
in 2017 focus more on judicial supervision, as well as the positive role of arbitration 
in the implementation of the "Belt and Road" Initiative from the perspective of the 
alternative dispute resolution. To be specific, the legislature made amendments to 
qualificatory conditions of arbitrators through the Arbitration Law of the People's 
Republic of China (Arbitration Law) that was implemented in 1995, and the SPC 
vigorously supported arbitration as usual and released multiple important judicial 


212
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
interpretations, including centralized management of arbitration cases under judicial 
review, reporting and verification system for arbitration cases under judicial review, 
improvement of arbitration judicial review rules and reform of the arbitration 
awards rules. It is worth special noticing that courts at various levels will establish the 
centralized information management platform for arbitration cases under judicial 
review, so as to strengthen the information-based management and data analysis 
of relevant arbitration cases under judicial review and guarantee the accuracy of 
applicable laws and the consistency of judgment criteria. Furthermore, after the SPC 
released the Opinions on Providing Judicial Guarantee for the Building of Pilot Free 
Trade Zones, the arbitration circle in China tried the specialized arbitration or ad hoc 
arbitration. From the perspective of rules, ad hoc arbitration has made a figure in 
mainland China. As time goes on, these measures will have a profound impact on 
China's international commercial arbitration. 
Secondly, the Chinese government encourages and supports extensive application 
of the PPP mode in the fields of infrastructure construction and public services, 
and arbitration has the advantage in resolving the disputes in connection with PPP 
projects. Disputes relating to PPP contracts involve multiple types and complex legal 
relationships, the dispute amount is significant, and the dispute usually involves 
a series of parties. To resolve PPP-related disputes by arbitration can effectively 
guarantee the independence, professionalism and efficiency of cases and also shoulder 
some of the burden of the courts in trialing of onerous cases. Continuous increase 
of PPP projects will offer a vast market for arbitration institutions. The legislation 
of PPP projects will be gradually improved in the future, therefore, policies and 
regulations, and even laws, will be formulated to respond to many questions such as 


213
ANNUAL SUMMARY
whether disputes arising out of PPP contracts can be resolved through arbitration and 
how PPP projects will be managed, etc. 
Thirdly, positive efforts shall be devoted to implement the "Belt and Road" Initiative 
and build up the platform for investment dispute resolution in China. As China’s 
outbound investments keeps growing, investment disputes between investors and 
host states in other fields than the traditional commercial arbitration will increase 
accordingly, both policymakers and investors face important questions such as how 
to introduce terms and conditions to protect investors and resolve disputes into 
the bilateral or multilateral treaty in the future, and how to make full use of the 
existing investment dispute resolution mechanism in an effective way. To adapt to 
the changing situation and resolve international investment disputes independently 
and fairly, CIETAC formulated the International Investment Arbitration Rules in 
September 2017 by referring to international arbitration conventions and practices. 
The Rules are another set of investment arbitration rules following investment 
arbitration rules of International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes 
(ICSID) of the World Bank and the SIAC, which fills up a gap in China, provides an 
important platform and approach for Chinese enterprises to resolve the investment 
disputes with host countries and becomes a proactive measure to build up an 
internationalized, law-based, and business-friendly business environment through the 
"Belt and Road" Initiative. 
Fourthly, courts in China recognize and enforce the foreign-related and HMT-related 
arbitral awards and reflect and practice the basic judicial concept of "supporting 
arbitration" throughout judicial review. The situation about revocation and non-
enforcement of foreign-related and HMT-related arbitral awards in 2017 reveals 


214
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2017)
that arbitration procedure against arbitration rules, awards beyond the scope of 
arbitration and other common issues remain as key grounds for the application of 
such revocation and non-enforcement. Moreover, practices also produced some new 
issues, e.g. whether arbitrators actually engaged in the arbitration, and whether the 
parties concerned fully presented their opinions. The courts thus came up with new 
review standards, which are worth attention. According to the courts' recognition 
and enforcement of arbitral awards made in foreign countries, Hong Kong, Macao 
and Taiwai in 2017, key issues include whether the notice of arbitration has been 
served effectively, whether the formation of the arbitration tribunal complies with 
the arbitration rules, whether arbitral awards violate public policies of China, etc. 
New issues needing concern include the business relationship between the law firm 
of an arbitrator and the law firm of a party involved therein could not be considered 
as the ground to challenge the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence; violating the 
compulsory provisions of administrative regulations or departmental regulations does 
not necessarily constitute the violation of China's public policies. 
In the Report delivered at the 19
th National Congress of the CPC, General Secretary 
Xi Jinping stated that the trends of global multi-polarity, economic globalization, 
society informationization and cultural diversity were surging forward, and changes 
in the global governance system and the international order were speeding up. 
China would adhere to the fundamental national policy of opening up and pursue 
development with its doors open. China would actively promote international 
cooperation through the "Belt and Road" Initiative. In doing so, we hope to achieve 
policy communication, infrastructure connection, trade development, financial 
exchange, and people-to-people connection and thus build a new platform for 


215
ANNUAL SUMMARY
international cooperation to create fresh drivers of joint development. China would 
support multilateral trade regimes and work to facilitate the establishment of free 
trade zones and build an open world economy.
With smooth implementation and continuous progress of the "Belt and Road" 
Initiative, CIETAC will strive to play a more active role in building the alternative 
dispute resolution mechanism along the "Belt and Road". To facilitate the 
integrative development of China’s arbitration and international arbitration and 
allow the international commercial parties enjoy CIETAC’s arbitration services 
in a more convenient manner, CIETAC held the landing ceremony of CIETAC 
North America Arbitration Center (the Center) in this July in Vancouver, Canada, 
marking the official establishment of the Center. This will help CIETAC to draw 
on advanced theories and practices of international arbitration, and further enhance 
the internationalization of its arbitration services. In the meantime, the Center will 
become a window for arbitration and legal professionals in North America to gain a 
better understanding of China’s arbitration, and also a fresh platform for extensive 
interactions and common development for Chinese and foreign arbitration and legal 
communities. CIETAC will make full use of the development opportunities for 
dispute resolution under current international situation and promote international 
economic and trade cooperation and development with efficient, independent and 
impartial arbitration services.






Introduction.
............................................................................................................................ 5
Chapter One Overview of the Development of International Commercial Arbitration 
                     in China.
............................................................................................................. 9
       I. Data Analysis of International Commercial Arbitration Cases in China..................... 9
       II. Development of the Legal System Related to International Commercial Arbitration
            in China.
.................................................................................................................... 13
              1. Stipulations regarding Arbitration in the New Judicial Interpretation on the 
                  Civil Procedure Law........................................................................................... 14
              2. Recognition and Enforcement of Taiwan Arbitral Awards................................ 18
              3. Judicial Review of Arbitral Awards Issued by the CIETAC and Its Former 
                  Sub-Commissions............................................................................................... 21
              4. Judicial Services and Safeguards for the Construction of the “Belt and Road”.23
       III. Judicial Review of International Commercial Arbitration in China.
....................... 24
       IV. Research Highlights of International Commercial Arbitration in China.
................ 27
              1. Research Highlights of China’s Foreign-Related Arbitration............................ 27
              2. Research Highlights of International Commercial Arbitration outside China.
... 30
Table of Contents


Chapter Two Observation on International Commercial Arbitration Practice in China...... 35
       I. Comparison of the 2015 International Commercial Arbitration Practice in China.
... 35
              1. Caseload.
............................................................................................................. 35
              2. Parties.
................................................................................................................. 40
              3. Dispute Types..................................................................................................... 43
              4. Cases Concluded.
................................................................................................ 46
              5. Arbitrators........................................................................................................... 48
              6. Dispute Amount.................................................................................................. 49
              7. Arbitration Fees.................................................................................................. 51
       II. The CIETAC Guidelines on Evidence Help Promoting the Internationalization
            of Arbitration in China.
............................................................................................. 56
              1. Legal Sources for Evidence Issues in Commercial Arbitration .
........................ 56
              2. Features of the CIETAC Guidelines on Evidence.............................................. 60
              3. Comparison between the CIETAC Guidelines on Evidence and the IBA Rules
              ................................................................................................................................ 62
Chapter Three Special Observation on International Commercial Arbitration in China
       -The Application of the CISG in International Commercial Arbitration in China........ 67
       I. General Situation of CISG-related Awards................................................................ 69
              1. Simplicity and Complexity of Judgments.
.......................................................... 69
              2. Reasoning and Invocation.
.................................................................................. 70


              3. Ratio of Awards in Favor of Chinese or Foreign Parties.
................................... 71
              4. Application of the CISG..................................................................................... 73
       II. Application of the CISG in International Commercial Arbitration in China.
........... 75
              1. Autonomous Application.................................................................................... 76
              2. Non-autonomous Application.
............................................................................ 88
              3. Application of Domestic Laws under Private International Law Rules............. 96
              4. HMT(Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan) and the CISG.
.................................... 100
       III. Further Analysis and Comments.
........................................................................... 102
              1. Improvement on Invocation of Legal Provisions and Reasoning in Arbitral 
                  Awards.............................................................................................................. 102
              2. How to Evaluate the Ratio of Win.
................................................................... 105
       IV. Conclusions and Suggestions................................................................................ 107
Chapter Four Judicial Supervision of China’s International Commercial Arbitration....... 110
       I. Confirmation of Validity of Foreign-related and HMT-related Arbitral Clauses.... 110
              1. Applicable Law to a Foreign-Related or HMT-Related Arbitral Agreement.
.. 110
              2. Interpretation of the Choice of Arbitration Institutions in Arbitral Clauses.
.... 112
              3. Interpretation of the Scope of an Arbitration Agreement................................. 115
       II. Annulment or Non-enforcement of Foreign-Related or HMT-Related Arbitral 
            Awards.................................................................................................................... 117
              1. Scope of Judicial Review on Arbitration.......................................................... 117
              2. Confirmation of Validity of Arbitration Agreements....................................... 118


              3. Relevant Issues in Arbitration Procedures.
....................................................... 120
              4. Clerical Errors in Arbitral Awards.
................................................................... 122
              5. Arbitrators’ Obligation to Disclose Conflict of Interest................................... 123
              6. Implementation of the Reply............................................................................ 124
       III. Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards.
.................................. 125
              1. Validity of Arbitration Agreements.................................................................. 125
              2. Extensive Interpretation of Foreign-related Elements...................................... 128
              3. Relevant Legal Issues in Arbitration Procedures.
............................................. 130
              4. Public Policy..................................................................................................... 134
              5. Awards Exceed the Tribunals’ Power.
.............................................................. 136
              6. Jurisdictional Issues in the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral
                  Awards.............................................................................................................. 137
Annual Summary................................................................................................................ 140


5
INTRODUCTION
Introduction
China’s international commercial arbitration, since the establishment of the 
China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission (the CIETAC), 
formerly known as the Foreign Trade Arbitration Commission, under the China 
Council for the Promotion of International Trade in 1956, has undergone sixty-
year development. China, with the deepening of reform and opening up and 
the rapid growth of foreign trade and investment, has improved international 
commercial arbitration in China to a new level with the booming of arbitration. 
International commercial arbitration in China is now being provided with the best 
opportunities along with the transformation of China from a trader of quantity to 
a trader of quality and the steady advancement of the Belt and Road Initiative. 
However, China’s international commercial arbitration is also facing great 
challenge with improvement needed comparing with international practice due to 
the globalization of the international commercial arbitration market and the fierce 
competition among major international commercial arbitration institutions.
On 22 September 2015, China Academy of Arbitration Law released the 2014 
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China. This is the first 
annual report on the development of international commercial arbitration in China 
which is normally called the foreign-related arbitration in China. The 2014 Annual 
Report has attracted extensive attention in China’s arbitration community, legal 
profession and the media since its release and been formally published. The China 
Academy of Arbitration Law decided to carry out its preparation and publication 


6
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
of the 2015 Annual Report as an effort to sum up the annual development of 
international commercial arbitration in China and the improvement of arbitration 
legal system, promote the perfection of China’s international commercial 
arbitration system, build information exchange platform for domestic and foreign 
commercial arbitration practitioners and theorists, enhance China’s influence in 
international commercial arbitration arena, and provide suggestions and references 
for future developments of China’s international commercial arbitration cause. 
The 2015 Annual Report on International Arbitration in China, through empirical 
analysis and theoretical research, reflects the development status of international 
commercial arbitration in China and highlights relevant practice. Specifically, 
based on the analysis of the data of international commercial arbitration cases 
in 2015 based on the analysis of the data of international commercial arbitration 
cases in 2015, the 2015 Annual Report on International Arbitration in China 
follows up the developments of the legal system on international commercial 
arbitration in China, observes the efforts of Chinese international commercial 
arbitration institutions to promote the development of international commercial 
arbitration, discusses the judicial supervision in the field of international 
commercial arbitration in China, and makes special observation on the application 
of CISG in such field. 
There are four chapters besides the Introduction and the Annual Summary in the 
2015 Annual Report on International Arbitration in China. Chapter one refers 
to the overview of the development of international commercial arbitration, 
the analysis of data regarding arbitration cases in China, judicial support and 


7
INTRODUCTION
supervision of international commercial arbitration cases by the Supreme People’s 
Court (SPC), and the development of theoretical research on international 
commercial arbitration in China in 2015. Chapter two covers the observation on 
the practice of international commercial arbitration in China from the perspectives 
of attorneys and arbitration clients and through comparative analysis of relevant 
data from representative international arbitration institutions in China and major 
foreign arbitration institutions. It also comments on the CIETAC Guidelines on 
Evidence with a comparative analysis to the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence. 
Chapter three deals with the special observation on international commercial 
arbitration in China through analysis of 81 awards of CIETAC from 2008 to 
2015 in which the application of CISG is involved, summarizing experience and 
issues in such application. Chapter four focuses on the judicial supervision of 
international commercial arbitration in China, including confirmation of validity 
of arbitration agreements, annulment and enforcement of arbitration awards, etc.
The 2015 Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China was 
undertaken by the research team of Renmin University of China, commissioned 
by the China Academy of Arbitration Law. Professor Du Huanfang, Vice 
President of the Law School of Renmin University of China, and Ms. Yue Jie, 
Director of the Arbitration Research Institute of the CIETAC, lead the team. Main 
team members are Professor Song Lianbin from the International Law School 
of China University of Political Science and Law, Ms. Shen Hongyu, judge of 
the 4
th Civil Division of the SPC, Mr. Dong Xiao, Partner of Anjie Law Firm 
and Ms. Yang Fan, Deputy Director of the Arbitration Research Institute of the 


8
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
CIETAC. The division of task is as follows: Introduction and Annual Summary 
were composed by Professor Du Huanfang. Chapter one was accomplished by 
Professor Song Lianbin’s team with Part III, Judicial Supervision of International 
Commercial Arbitration in China, composed by Ms. Shen Hongyu. Chapter two 
was accomplished by Mr. Dong Xiao’s team. Chapter three was modified and 
finalized by Professor Du Huanfang according to recent data based on the research 
result of Professor Han Shiyuan’s team from Tsinghua University School of Law. 
Chapter four was led by Ms. Shen Hongyu. Professor Du Huanfang, Director 
Yue Jie and Vice Director Yang Fan compiled and edited this Report after the 
completion of the draft. 
We hereby acknowledge the kind support and generous assistance from the Legal 
System Coordination Department of the Office of Legislative Affairs of the State 
Council, the Fourth Civil Division of the SPC, the CIETAC, Anjie Law Firm, 
Renmin University of China, Tsinghua University, China University of Political 
Science and Law, etc. for providing information, drafting and providing advise 
and assessment for this Report, and extend our gratitude to Ms. Gu Huaning, a 
CIETAC Arbitrator, who translated this Report into English.
The Research Team of 2015 Annual Report on International Commercial 
Arbitration in China
8 September 2016


9
CHAPTER 1
Chapter One Overview of the 
Development of International 
Commercial Arbitration in China
International commercial arbitration in China remained active in 2015. As is 
shown in the arbitration work all over China, China’s arbitration circle passed 
the first test with excellent scores in the new development phase. The Supreme 
People’s Court (SPC) issued four important judicial interpretations and normative 
documents in 2015 though there was no special legislation on arbitration. The 
SPC gave more judicial support to the implementation of foreign and foreign-
related arbitral awards. International commercial arbitration continued to attract 
great attention from domestic and foreign academia in research.
I. Data Analysis of International Commercial Arbitration 
Cases in China
The year 2015 marks the 20
th anniversary of the implementation of the Arbitration 
Law of the People’s Republic of China (the Arbitration Law) as well as the 20
th 
anniversary of the establishment of the first-batch experimental re-constructed 
Chinese arbitration institutions. As stated in the 2015 report on arbitration 
work in China by the State Council Legislative Affairs Office, 244 arbitration 
commissions in China accepted a total of 136,924 cases with an increase of 
23,264 cases at the increase rate of 20% compared to the previous year. The total 
amount of dispute was RMB 411.2 billion with an increase of RMB 145.6 billion 


10
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
at the increase rate of 55% compared to the previous year.
The average number of cases accepted by Chinese arbitration commissions was 
561 with an increase of 78 at the increase rate of 16% compared to the previous 
year. The average amount of dispute was RMB 1.7 billion with an increase of 
RMB 0.6 billion at the increase rate of 55% compared to the previous year. Most 
cases were domestic ones. 62 Chinese arbitration commissions accepted 2,085 
foreign-related, Hong Kong-related, Macao-related and Taiwan-related (HMT-
related) cases, accounting for 1.5% of the national total caseload. The ratio was 
almost the same as the previous year. 
Among the 244 Chinese arbitration commissions, the three arbitration 
commissions established within the CCOIC/CCPIT, i.e. the CIETAC, the CMAC 
and the Arbitration Centre across the Straits (ACAS), accepted 2,104 cases, 
accounting for 2% of the national total caseload. The amount of dispute was RMB 
43.9 billion, accounting for 11% of the national total dispute amount. 4 arbitration 
commissions in municipalities directly under the central government accepted 
9,736 cases, accounting for 7% of the national total caseload. The amount of 
dispute was RMB 63.3 billion, accounting for 15% of the national total dispute 
amount. 27 arbitration commissions in cities where the people’s governments of 
provinces and autonomous regions are located accepted 52,448 cases, accounting 
for 38% of the national total caseload. The amount of dispute was RMB 114.5 
billion, accounting for 28% of the national total dispute amount. 211 arbitration 
commissions in other prefecture-level cities accepted 72,636 cases, accounting for 
53% of the national total caseload. The amount of dispute was RMB 189.5 billion, 
accounting for 46% of the national total dispute amount. 


11
CHAPTER 1
The number of arbitration commissions accepting over 500 cases was 68, 
accounting for 28% of the national total number. The number of arbitration 
commissions accepting between 200 and 500 cases was 50, accounting for 21% 
of the national total number. The number of arbitration commissions accepting 
between 50 and 200 cases was 74, accounting for 30% of the national total 
number. The number of arbitration commissions accepting less than 50 cases 
was 52, accounting for 21% of the national total number. The 68 arbitration 
commissions accepting over 500 cases include 1 arbitration commission 
established within the CCOIC, i.e. the CIETAC, 4 arbitration commissions in 
municipalities directly under the central government, 20 arbitration commissions 
in cities where the people’s governments of provinces and autonomous regions 
are located and 43 arbitration commissions in other prefecture-level cities.
The number of arbitration commissions accepting more cases than the national 
average caseload, i.e. 561, was 62, accounting for 25% of the national total 
number. Altogether, these commissions accepted 108,710 cases, accounting 
for 79% of the national total caseload. The number of arbitration commissions 
accepting fewer cases than the national average caseload was 182, accounting for 
75% of the national total number. Altogether, these commissions accepted 28,214 
cases, accounting for 21% of the national total caseload.
The number of arbitration commissions with increased caseload was 162, 
accounting for 66% of the national total number, with a decrease of 3% compared 
to the 163 arbitration commissions accounting for 69% of the national total 
number in 2014. The number of arbitration commissions with increased dispute 
amount was 176, accounting for 72% of the national total number, with a decrease 


12
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
of 5% compared to the 180 arbitration commissions accounting for 77% of the 
national total number in 2014. The number of arbitration commissions with both 
increased caseload and increased dispute amount was 129, accounting for 53% of 
the national total number, with a decrease of 3% compared to the 132 arbitration 
commissions accounting for 56% of the national total number in 2014.
56,659 cases were settled through mediation or conciliation, accounting for 41% 
of the national total caseload, with a decrease of 24%, i.e. 17,541 cases, compared 
with 74,200 cases settled through mediation or conciliation, accounting for 65% 
of the national total caseload in 2014.
The number of arbitral awards set aside by the people’s courts was 209, 
accounting for 0.15% of the national total number of awards made in 2015, with 
a minor decrease compared to 203 awards set aside, accounting for 0.18% of 
the national total number in 2014. The number of arbitral awards unenforced by 
the courts was 84, accounting for 0.06% of the national total number of awards 
made in 2015, with a minor decrease compared to 106 awards unenforced by the 
courts, accounting for 0.09% of the national total number in 2014. 163 arbitration 
commissions had no award set aside or unenforced by the courts, accounting for 
67% of the 244 Chinese arbitration commissions. 20 arbitration commissions had 
more than 5 awards set aside or unenforced by the courts, accounting for 8%.
1
Though great achievements were made in China’s arbitration in 2015, Mr. 
Lu Yunhua, the deputy head of the preparatory group for the Association of 
1　Based on the 2015 annual report on China’s arbitration published by the Legal Daily with authorization 
from Legislative Affairs Office of the State Council. http://www.legaldaily.com.cn/Arbitration/
content/2016-03/29/content_6545612.htm?node=79488, last visited on 5 September 2016.


13
CHAPTER 1
Arbitration of China under the Legislative Affairs Office of State Council, pointed 
out in an exclusive interview by the Legal Daily that there was still broad space 
for development. “After so long development, China’s arbitration market is still 
a niche one. The arbitration service, as a dispute settlement method, has not been 
regarded as the focus and is still limited to traditional commercial disputes. The 
three features of China’s arbitration, i.e. niche, non-focus and over-traditional, are 
the prominent problems and likely to restrict its future development”, he said.
2  
II. Development of the Legal System Related to 
International Commercial Arbitration in China
In 2015, the SPC issued and implemented various judicial interpretations and 
normative documents supporting and encouraging the development of arbitration. 
The SPC, through the issuing of three judicial interpretations regarding arbitration, 
i.e. the Interpretation concerning the Application of the Civil Procedure Law of 
the People's Republic of China [Fa Shi (2015) No.5], effective as from 4 February 
2015, the Provisions on Recognition and Enforcement of the Arbitral Awards 
of the Taiwan Region [Fa Shi (2015) No.14] effective as from 1 July 2015 and 
the Official Reply on the Requests of the Higher People's Court of Shanghai 
Municipality and Other Courts for Instructions on Cases Involving Judicial 
Review of the Arbitral Awards Issued by the China International Economic and 
Trade Arbitration Commission, Former Sub-Commissions Thereof and Other 
Arbitration Institutions [Fa Shi (2015) No.15], effective as from 17 July 2015, 
clarified some difficult problems in China’s arbitration practice. Several Opinions 
2　“Amazing Growth in the Caseload of Arbitration Commissions along with the Experimental Diversified 
and Alternative Service”, ‘Goverment and Rule of Law’, Legal Daily (31 March 2016) p.6.


14
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
of the Supreme People's Court on Providing Judicial Services and Safeguards for 
the Construction of the “Belt and Road” by People's Courts issued in July 2015 
is of great declaratory significance for the judicial review on arbitration by the 
people’s courts. 
1. Stipulations regarding Arbitration in the New Judicial 
Interpretation on the Civil Procedure Law
The Interpretation on the Application of the Civil Procedure Law of the People's 
Republic of China [Fa Shi (2015) No.5] effective as of 4 February 2015 regarding 
the 2012 Civil Procedure Law of the People's Republic of China (the Civil 
Procedure Law) is the longest judicial interpretation in mainland China. Of the 
552 articles, 17 relate to arbitration, covering almost all the aspects of arbitration. 
There are stipulations on the coordination of jurisdictional conflicts between 
arbitral tribunals and courts, on the recognition and enforcement of interim 
awards made outside mainland China, and on the calculation of the term for the 
application of award enforcement, etc. so that arbitral awards can be enforced 
more efficiently and conveniently in China. 
1) Courts with jurisdiction over litigation cases involving compensation for 
improper pre-action preservation. 
The people's court that rendered the preservation ruling has the jurisdiction 
over the litigation case involving compensation for losses suffered by the other 
party or any interested party due to the applicant’s failure in initiating litigation 
or arbitration within the prescribed time after the pre-action preservation is 
rendered. The people’s court accepting the case or the people’s court rendering 


15
CHAPTER 1
the preservation ruling has the jurisdiction over the litigation case initiated by the 
other party or any interested party for losses arising out of the preservation if the 
applicant has initiated litigation or arbitration within prescribed time. 
2) A party needs not to provide evidence for facts confirmed by effective awards 
rendered by arbitration commissions unless there is contrary evidence which 
suffices to overturn.
3) Preclusion force of arbitral clauses. 
Parties are not allowed to initiate litigation over matters regarding which valid 
arbitration agreements have been signed. The people’s court accepting the case 
involving a valid arbitration agreement shall rule to dismiss the action as per one 
party’s objection. 
4) Arbitral awards and court retrial procedures. 
 If an arbitral award is altered or set aside, the court should retry the case on which 
the judgement was made according to the rulings of the arbitral award
5) Partial non-enforcement of arbitral awards. 
Where part of the rulings of an arbitral award fall under the circumstances for 
non-enforcement as set forth in the Civil Procedure law, the people's court shall 
rule not to enforce that part of the award.
6) Courts’ non-acceptance of objection or reconsideration application to non-
enforcement of arbitral awards. The people’s court shall not accept a party’s 


16
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
objection or reconsideration application on the non-enforcement ruling. The 
parties can reach a new agreement to arbitrate their disputes or go to court. 
7) Enforcement procedures are not influenced by confirmation or division of 
property through arbitration procedures. The enforcement procedure shall not 
be influenced if the party subject to enforcement affirmed or transferred the 
ownership of the sealed-up, distrained and frozen property to a third party through 
arbitration procedure. 
8) Time limit for applying for non-enforcement of arbitral awards. Where a party 
requests the non-enforcement of an arbitration award, the party shall file the 
request with the enforcement court before the termination of enforcement.
9) The exclusion of courts’ exclusive jurisdiction by arbitration agreements. For 
the cases under the exclusive jurisdiction of courts of the People's Republic of 
China, the parties shall not select a foreign court; unless they stipulate to settle the 
dispute through arbitration.
10) The form requirement for the enforcement of arbitral awards. To apply to the 
people's court for enforcement of an award rendered by a foreign-related arbitral 
institution of the People's Republic of China, the applicant shall file a written 
application, to which the original of the award shall be affixed. If the applicant is 
a foreign party, the written application shall be filed in Chinese.
11) The grounds for defense against the enforcement of arbitral awards. When a 
people's court enforces the arbitration award rendered by a foreign-related arbitral 
institution, if the party subject to enforcement makes defense that there is any 


17
CHAPTER 1
circumstance prescribed in Paragraph 1, Article 274 of the Civil Procedure Law, 
the people's court shall examine the defense, and rule to enforce the award or 
reject the defense according to the review results.
12) The application, examination and security of preservation. Where a foreign-
related arbitral institution of the People's Republic of China submits a property 
preservation application filed by the party to a people's court for ruling, the 
people's court may examine the application and decide whether or not to take the 
preservation measure. The people's court that issues a ruling of preservation shall 
order the applicant to provide the security, and if the applicant fails to do so, the 
people's court shall render a ruling to dismiss the application.
13) The recognition and enforcement of foreign ad hoc awards. Where one party 
applies to the people's court for the recognition and enforcement of an arbitration 
award rendered by an ad hoc arbitration tribunal outside the territory of the 
People's Republic of China, the people's court shall review the application in 
accordance with the Civil Procedure Law.
14) The recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards. A foreign 
arbitration award may be recognized and enforced in accordance with the relevant 
international treaties acceded to by the People's Republic of China or on the basis 
of the principle of reciprocity.  Recognition and enforcement are two separate 
procedures and the court shall review the case as per the party’s application.
15) The application period for the recognition and enforcement of foreign 
arbitral awards. During the period when one party applies for the recognition and 
enforcement of a foreign arbitration award, the Civil Procedure Law shall apply. 


18
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
The period of application for enforcement shall be recalculated from the date 
when the ruling issued by the people's court on the recognition application comes 
into force.
16) The examination and ruling on the recognition and enforcement of foreign 
arbitral awards. The people's court shall form a collegial bench to examine a case 
of recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitration award. The people's court 
shall serve the written application upon the respondent. The respondent may state 
its opinions. The ruling rendered by the people's court upon examination shall be 
legally effective once it is served upon the parties.
17) The reference for HMT-related cases. The people's courts may apply, mutatis 
mutandis, the special provisions on foreign-related civil procedures to civil actions 
that relate to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, the Macao Special 
Administrative Region, or the Taiwan Region.
2. Recognition and Enforcement of Taiwan Arbitral Awards
The mutual recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards across the Taiwan 
Strait is an interregional legal issue. This Chapter also covers relevant Taiwan-
related judicial interpretations since in mainland China the special provisions on 
foreign-related civil procedures usually apply to Taiwan-related cases. 
Along with the continuous improvement of relationship and further exchange 
in civil and commercial matters across the Taiwan Strait, the Provisions on the 
People's Court's Recognition of the Verdicts on Civil Cases Made by Courts of 
Taiwan Province [Fa Shi (1998) No.11] and the Supplementary Provisions on 


19
CHAPTER 1
the People's Courts' Recognition of Civil Judgments of the Relevant Courts of 
the Taiwan Region [Fa Shi (2009) No.4] issued by SPC on 22 May 1998 and 
24 April 2009 have fallen behind the requirements in practice. The Provisions 
of the Supreme People's Court on Recognition and Enforcement of the Arbitral 
Awards of the Taiwan Region [Fa Shi (2015) No.14] came into force as from 2 
June 2015. Through the 22 articles in the Provisions, the SPC extends the scope 
of application for the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards of the 
Taiwan Region, specifies the time limit for examination and internal report system 
regarding the recognition of arbitral awards of the Taiwan Region, clarifies the 
reasons for refusal of recognition, stipulates the effect of the revocation procedure 
in a court of the Taiwan Region where one party has applied to the people’s court 
for recognition on the recognition and enforcement procedure in the people’s 
court, and adds the relief for non-recognition. The most important article in 
the Provisions is Article 14 on circumstances for non-recognition and non-
enforcement of arbitral awards of the Taiwan Region. Where, with respect to an 
arbitral award under application for recognition or enforcement, the respondent 
provides evidence showing any of the following circumstances, upon examination 
and verification, the people's court shall issue a ruling not to recognize it:
1) One party to the arbitration agreement lacked competency under the applicable 
law at the time the parties entered into the arbitration agreement, or the arbitration 
agreement is invalid in accordance with the governing law as agreed on by the 
parties, or the provisions of the Taiwan Region on arbitration, in the event that 
the parties did not agree on the applicable governing law, or the parties did not 
enter into a written arbitration agreement, unless an application for recognition of 


20
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
arbitration-mediation award of the Taiwan Region was filed.
2) The respondent did not receive proper notice on the selection and appointment 
of arbitrators or the arbitration procedure, or the respondent did not state its 
opinions due to any other reason not attributable to the respondent.
3) The dispute addressed in the arbitral award was not the dispute submitted for 
arbitration, or did not fall within the scope of the arbitration agreement. Where 
the arbitral award includes any decision exceeding the scope of items submitted 
by the parties for arbitration, but the decision in the arbitral award exceeding the 
scope of items submitted for arbitration may be separated from the decision on the 
items submitted for arbitration, the part of the decision in the arbitral award on the 
items submitted for arbitration may be recognized.
4) The formation of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitration procedure violates the 
agreement between the parties, or, in the absence of the agreement between the 
parties, fails to comply with the provisions of arbitration in the Taiwan Region.
5) The arbitral award is not yet binding on the parties, or a court of the Taiwan 
Region has revoked the arbitral award or dismissed an enforcement application.
Where the item in dispute cannot be resolved through arbitration in accordance 
with the state law, or the recognition of the arbitral award violates the principle 
of One China or any other fundamental principle of the national laws, or damages 
social and public interests, the people's court shall issue a ruling not to recognize 
it.


21
CHAPTER 1
It is clear that the above circumstances for the recognition and enforcement of 
arbitral awards of the Taiwan Region in mainland China are basically the same 
as those in Article V of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of 
Foreign Arbitral Awards (the New York Convention) except for circumstances 
regarding the “One-China” policy.
3. Judicial Review of Arbitral Awards Issued by the CIETAC and 
Its Former Sub-Commissions
The CIETAC and its former South China Sub-Commission and Shanghai Sub-
Commission were separated in 2012, triggering a special conflict of arbitration 
jurisdiction, i.e., which commission could accept cases involving arbitration 
agreements under which the parties had agreed to submit disputes to Shanghai 
Sub-Commission or South China Sub-Commission after they ‘declared 
independence’ from the CIETAC. Such conflict resulted in not only argument 
among these commissions, but also great trouble of the parties and difficulties in 
the courts’ judicial review over relevant arbitral awards.
In order to protect the legitimate rights and interests of the parties to arbitration in 
accordance with the law, and fully respect the autonomy of the will of the parties, 
in consideration of the historical relations between the CIETAC, the CIETAC 
South China Sub-Commission and the CIETAC Shanghai Sub-Commission, 
and from the perspectives of supporting and maintaining the sound growth of 
arbitration, and promoting the establishment of a diverse dispute resolution 
mechanism, the SPC, through the Official Reply on the Requests of the Higher 
People's Court of Shanghai Municipality and Other Courts for Instructions on 


22
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
Cases Involving Judicial Review of the Arbitral Awards Issued by the China 
International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission, Former Sub-
Commissions Thereof and Other Arbitration Institutions (the Reply), which 
came into force as from 17 July 2015, replied on the relevant issues to settle the 
disputes over the validity of the relevant arbitration agreements, authority of the 
above arbitration institutions to accept arbitration cases, arbitration jurisdiction, 
arbitration enforcement and other issues arising out of the revision of CIETAC 
2012 Arbitration Rules and the change of names and arbitration rules by the 
former South China Sub-Commission (already renamed as the South China 
International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission, also known as the 
Shenzhen Court of International Arbitration, hereinafter referred to as the SCIA) 
and the former Shanghai Sub-Commission (already renamed as the Shanghai 
International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission, also known as the 
Shanghai International Arbitration Center, hereinafter referred to as SIAC). The 
reply gave unified guidance on the relevant judicial review and have achieved 
good results.
The SPC, through its 2015 Reply as an effective judicial interpretation and 
in respect of party autonomy, offered the solution for the determination of 
jurisdiction among the three commissions based on the separation time of the 
two former sub-commissions (the renaming date of the CIETAC South China 
Sub-Commission on 22 October 2012 and that of the CIETAC Shanghai Sub-
Commission on 17 April 2013). Where, before the sub-commissions were 
renamed, the parties had entered into an arbitration agreement, stipulating that a 
dispute shall be submitted to the CIETAC South China Sub-Commission or the 


23
CHAPTER 1
CIETAC Shanghai Sub-Commission for arbitration, the SCIA or the SIAC shall 
have jurisdiction over the case. Where, from the day the sub-commissions were 
renamed, the parties had entered into an arbitration agreement, stipulating that 
a dispute shall be submitted to the CIETAC South China Sub-Commission or 
the CIETAC Shanghai Sub-Commission for arbitration, the CIETAC shall have 
jurisdiction over the case. However, where the applicant applies for arbitration 
according to the above jurisdiction rules and the respondent does not object or 
an arbitral award has been rendered, either party applies for setting aside or non-
enforcement of the arbitral award on the jurisdiction ground, the people's court 
shall not support it.
4. Judicial Services and Safeguards for the Construction of the “Belt 
and Road”
Under the Several Opinions of the Supreme People's Court on Providing Judicial 
Services and Safeguards for the Construction of the “Belt and Road” by the 
People's Courts issued in July 2015, the people's courts shall strengthen the 
judicial review of arbitral awards involving the parties of countries along the 
“belt and road” and promote the important roles of international commercial 
and maritime arbitrations in the construction of the “belt and road.” They shall 
accurately comprehend and apply the New York Convention, legally recognize 
and enforce foreign commercial and maritime arbitral awards relating to the 
construction of the “Belt and Road” in a timely manner, and promote the mutual 
recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards with countries along the “belt and 
road” that have not participated in the New York Convention. They shall explore 
the improvement of such judicial review procedure systems and carry out the 


24
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
work mechanism of uniform administration of arbitration cases under judicial 
review. They shall explore methods and ways for giving a full play to the roles of 
trade, investment, and other international dispute mechanisms by judicial support. 
The Several Opinions is of important declarative significance in the people’s 
courts’ judicial review of arbitration. 
III. Judicial Review of International Commercial 
Arbitration in China
In 2015, Chinese courts concluded 18 cases involving application for confirmation 
of the validity of foreign-related arbitration clauses, 36 cases involving application 
for confirmation of the validity of HMT-related arbitration clauses, 59 cases 
involving application for setting aside foreign-related arbitral awards, 24 cases 
involving application for setting aside HMT-related arbitral awards, 40 cases 
involving application for enforcing foreign-related arbitral awards and 4 cases 
involving application for enforcing HMT-related arbitral awards.
3 
It is shown in the cases involving application for confirmation of the validity of 
foreign-related arbitration clauses that courts of various levels have unified way 
of determining the applicable law of foreign-related arbitration clauses first and 
confirming the validity of both the form and substance of arbitration clauses 
in accordance with the applicable law. The main reasons for the invalidity of 
arbitration clauses could be found in the following cases. The parties failed to 
agree on a selected arbitration commission in the arbitration agreement when 
the applicable law thereof was P.R.C. laws.
4 The arbitral clause in the charter 
3　Source: 2015 judicial statistics from the Research Office of the SPC.
4　(2015) San Zhong Min (Shang) Te Zi No.04910 Civil Ruling by Beijing Third Intermediate People’s 


25
CHAPTER 1
party was not incorporated in the bill of lading. The signatory of the arbitration 
agreement was not authorized.
5 Besides, there were cases on the jurisdictional 
disputes with regard to specific arbitration commissions.
6
In 2015, 1 HMT-related arbitral award was set aside with the approval of the 
SPC in its reply
7 and 2 cases were remanded to the arbitral tribunal.
8 It is found 
from the rulings on revocation and non-enforcement of foreign-related and 
HMT-related arbitral awards that the people’s courts fully respect the finality of 
arbitral awards and show the value orientation of encouraging and supporting the 
development of arbitration. First, the courts strictly follow the principle of judicial 
review over issues stipulated in laws and exclude substantial matters such as 
burden of evidence, evidence admissibility and fact finding, etc. from the review. 
Secondly, the courts only review the grounds relied on and evidence submitted by 
the parties for the application of revocation or non-enforcement of awards with 
no initiative enlargement of the review scope except for those elements that the 
courts may review on its own initiatives such as the violation of public interest 
and non-arbitrable matters. Thirdly, the courts consider factors including whether 
the arbitration procedure is against the mandatory provisions of the Arbitration 
Law and whether the violation of the arbitration rules results in substantial 
effect on the award out of the respect of the party autonomy and the features of 
arbitration procedure when deciding the legality of arbitration procedure, thus 
Court, (2015) Min Si Ta Zi No.2,10,21,22,23 Replies of the SPC, (2015) E Min Si Zhong Zi No.00194 
Civil Ruling by Hubei High People’s Court and (2015) Min Si Ta Zi No.4 and 41 Replies of the SPC.
5　(2015) Min Si Ta Zi No.36 Reply of the SPC.
6　(2015) Min Si Ta Zi No.6 Reply of the SPC.
7　(2015) Min Si Ta Zi No.51 Reply of the SPC and (2015) Er Zhong Min Te Zi No.00429 Civil Ruling by 
Beijing Second Intermediate People’s Court.
8　(2015) Min Si Ta Zi No.39 and 40 Replies of the SPC


26
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
party autonomy could be realized in the dispute resolution process. Meanwhile, 
the courts effectively perform the judicial supervision function, maintain and 
promote the credibility of arbitration through the timely revocation and non-
enforcement of arbitral awards when circumstances stipulated in law such as no 
jurisdiction of arbitration commissions, violation of due process, etc. occur.
In 2015, in its replies, the SPC confirmed 3 foreign arbitral awards not to be 
recognized or enforced. The awards were all rendered by the International Cotton 
Association and the rulings were based on the same reason, i.e., non-existence 
of a valid arbitration agreement.
9 The recognition and enforcement of 1 Hong 
Kong arbitral award was refused. The award was rendered by HKIAC and the 
refusal ground was the tribunal had exceeded its authority in issuing the arbitral 
award.
10 Though there was increase in the number of cases involving the refusal 
of recognition and enforcement of awards compared to 2 cases in 2014, the courts 
review was focused on two issues, i.e., the validity of arbitration agreements and 
the scope of arbitration. The courts made rulings thereon according to the fact 
finding in each case and in strict accordance with the New York Convention, 
strictly observed the principle of reviewing statutory reasons only and applying 
9　(2013) Xi Shang Wai Zhong Shen Zi No.0009 Civil Ruling by Wuxi Intermediate People’s Court 
of Jiangsu Province on 14 January 2015 in ALLENBERG COTTON CO. v. Jiangsu Nijia Alley Group 
Corporation case involving the application for recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral award. 
(2013) Xi Shang Wai Zhong Shen Zi No.0003 Civil Ruling by Wuxi Intermediate People’s Court of 
Jiangsu Province on 14 January 2015 in Louis dreyfus Australia co., LTD v. Jiangsu Nijia Alley Group 
Corporation case involving the application for recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral award. (2014) 
Yan Min She Chu Zi No.15 Civil Ruling by Yantai Intermediate People’s Court of Shandong Province on 
2 November 2015 in ECOMAGROINDUSTRIALASIAPTELTD v. Penglai textile co., LTD. Qingdao Jin 
Chang Jiang group case involving the application for recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral award.
10　(2011) Shen Zhong Fa Min Si Chu Zi No.270 Civil Ruling by Shenzhen Intermediate People’s Court 
on 30 March 2015 in Noble Resources International Pte Ltd v. Shenzhen Cereals Group Co., Ltd. case 
concerning the application for recognition and enforcement of a Hong Kong arbitral award.


27
CHAPTER 1
the public policy cautiously. 
IV. Research Highlights of International Commercial 
Arbitration in China
1. Research Highlights of China’s Foreign-Related Arbitration
In this stage, the relatively important and new contents of the research on China’s 
foreign-related arbitration theories are as follows.
1) Party Autonomy in International Commercial Arbitration
Party autonomy, as a fundamental principle in international commercial 
arbitration, used to be a natural and understandable fact. However, it is severely 
challenged by the complicated expansion of jurisdiction with the support of 
national laws, the tendency of normalized and litigious arbitration under the 
influence of institutional arbitration, the demand for protection of special interest 
in lex mercatoria arbitration, and the uncertainty shown in nations’ coordination 
of conflicts between the enforcement of international commercial arbitration 
awards and public interest through public policy and mandatory laws. Some 
scholars have even declared recently that ‘the contract empire of international 
commercial arbitration has declined’ and ‘international commercial arbitration 
will soon be replaced by other ADR especially mediation’. Is that true? Dr. Lin 
Yi, in his doctoral dissertation ‘The Thesis on The Doctrine of Party Autonomy 
in International Commercial Arbitration-Based on The Observation of Modern 
Commercial Society’, demonstrated the legitimacy and unbeatable position of 
the doctrine as a fundamental principle in the system of international commercial 


28
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
arbitration. The Thesis covers the contents, origins, evolution, value/role, 
obstacles in development, ups and downs in modern commercial society, future 
trend and guidance of the system of international commercial arbitration in the 
future of the doctrine of party autonomy in international commercial arbitration.
11 
 
2) International Commercial Arbitration Power
Arbitration power, as the core of arbitration system, runs throughout arbitration 
process. In particular, it is an inseparable part of the arbitration system. Its proper 
exercise is a necessary guarantee for the realization of the fairness of arbitration. 
An in-depth understanding thereof helps the clarification of standards and scope of 
judicial supervision. Mr. Hu Di, in his publication ‘The Research on International 
Commercial Arbitration Power’, following the usual logic in discussing power 
from international level, established the main framework of discussing the 
definition, sources, contents, exercise and supervision of international commercial 
arbitration power and clarifies the relevant issues rather completely and clearly. 
Furthermore, Mr. Hu, based on the above discussion, made comprehensive 
reflection on China’s existing system of international commercial arbitration, 
pointed out the shortcomings of the 1994 Arbitration Law and analysed the 
reasons. Finally, he made suggestions for relevant improvement.
12
3) Re-arbitration in International Commercial Arbitration
Re-arbitration is a flexible and effective system. It follows the idea of efficiency, 
11　Lin Yi, ‘The Thesis on The Doctrine of Party Autonomy in International Commercial Arbitration-
Based on The Observation of Modern Commercial Society’, East China University of Political Science and 
Law doctoral dissertation (2015). 
12　Hu Di, ‘The Research on International Commercial Arbitration Power’, Law Press (2015).


29
CHAPTER 1
fairness and party autonomy which is consistent with the international tendency 
of respecting and supporting arbitration, and has been adopted by most nations. 
China also adopted the system in the Arbitration Law and translated it in Article 
61 of the Arbitration Law
13 and relevant provisions in the 2005 Interpretation 
of the Supreme People's Court concerning Some Issues on Application of the 
Arbitration Law of the People's Republic of China (the Interpretation on the 
Arbitration Law)
14. However, the provisions on re-arbitration are too abstract, 
which have resulted in a series of issues in the courts’ application thereof. 
The advantages of re-arbitration have not been brought into full play. To fully 
exploit the advantages of re-arbitration, China need to improve the system of re-
arbitration from all aspects through clarifying relevant legal issues. Dr. Wang 
Zhe, in his doctoral dissertation ‘The Value Orientation and System Designing 
of Re-arbitration in International Commercial Arbitration’, discussed the value 
orientation of the system theoretically and researched on specific system designing 
issues such as the application circumstances, the initiating party, the hearing 
authority, the scope of hearing and the legal result, etc. Finally, he put forward 
suggestions for improvement based thereon.
15
13　‘If the people's court holds that the case may be re-arbitrated by the arbitration tribunal after receipt of 
the application for cancellation of an award, the court shall inform the arbitration tribunal of re-arbitrating 
the case within a certain period of time and rule to suspend the cancellation procedure. If the arbitration 
tribunal refuses to re-arbitrate, the people's court shall rule to resume the cancellation procedure.’
14　Article 21 ‘Where a case regarding which a party concerned applies for revoking the domestic arbitral 
award is under any of the following circumstances, the people's court may, in accordance with Article 61of 
the Arbitration Law, notify the arbitral tribunal to arbitrate the case for a second time within a time limit: (1) 
The evidence on which the arbitral award is based is forged; or (2) The other party concealed any evidence, 
which is enough to impact the impartial award.’
15　Wang Zhe, ‘The Value Orientation and System Designing of Re-arbitration in International 
Commercial Arbitration’, East China University of Political Science and Law doctoral dissertation (2015).


30
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
4) The Theory of Delocalization
The traditional lex locidelictus principle has been recognized and implemented 
by the international society for long. It shows the national judicial sovereignty 
and empowers a nation the final saying on legal acts within its territory. However, 
the delocalization theory rejecting the governing law at the seat of arbitration 
has originated in Europe since 1950’s to meet the demand in specific cases. 
It advocates that the law at the seat of arbitration may not be the governing 
law of international commercial arbitration process while the procedural law 
of other nations may be applied instead so that high degree of liberalization 
can be achieved in international commercial arbitration. Why was the theory 
introduced? How to avoid the restraint of the governing law at the seat of 
arbitration? What are the specific contents of the theory? What effect will it have 
on international commercial arbitration? Ms. Chen Yanhong, in her publication 
‘The Delocalization Theory And Its Impact on The Integration of International 
Commercial Arbitration’, had comprehensive and detailed discussion on issues 
relating to the theory, including the cause, the contents, the practical trends, 
the shortcomings and the suggestions for improvement, etc. Furthermore, she 
promoted the idea of the integration of international commercial arbitration, and 
analyzed and discussed the formation and operation of the idea and the impact of 
the delocalization theory thereon.
16
2. Research Highlights of International Commercial Arbitration 
outside China
16　Chen Yanhong, ‘The Delocalization Theory And Its Impact on The Integration of International 
Commercial Arbitration’, China University of Political Science and Law Publishing House (2015).


31
CHAPTER 1
In this stage, the relatively important and new contents of the research on 
international commercial arbitration outside China are as follows.
1) Application of The New York Convention
The New York Convention, as an international convention on the recognition and 
enforcement of foreign arbitral awards, has played an important role in decades. 
However, its own nature and the inconsistency in the application by different 
contracting nations resulted in the difference in its application. Mr. Marke R.P. 
Paulsson, in his publication ‘The 1958 New York Convention in Action’, made 
comprehensive interpretation of the New York Convention from the perspective 
of its international nature. In particular, he adopted the way of interpreting 
conventions stipulated in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties to 
interpret the New York Convention article by article.
17
2) Functions of Arbitration Institutions
Despite the fact that thousands of international civil and commercial disputes are 
settled through arbitration institutions each year, there is still a lack of well-placed 
understanding of these institutions. Especially, there is little discussion on the 
functions of arbitration institutions in the administration of arbitration cases in the 
theoretical circle. Dr. Remy Gerbay, in his publication ‘The Functions of Arbitral 
Institutions’, made in-depth research thereon based on the previous research 
results. He had systematic research on over 40 arbitral institutions’ activities in 
the administration of cases. Meanwhile, he made observations on courts’ finding 
of the functions of arbitral institutions in major continental law and common law 
17　Marike R.P.Paulsson, ‘The 1958 New York Convention in Action’, Kluwer Law International (2016).


32
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
countries and regions. Above all, his way of research is to summarize traditional 
theories, make objective comments thereon and put forward his own ideas.
18
3) Parties’ Appointment of Arbitrators
The right of parties to appoint arbitrators is an important factor why people prefer 
arbitration as an international civil and commercial dispute resolution method 
as well as an essential element in the development of the arbitration mechanism. 
Parties’ appointment of arbitrators may bring lots of benefits to arbitration on one 
side and some inconvenience on the other side. It is of vital importance in the 
development of the arbitration system and the arbitration process to coordinate 
between the two sides. Mr. Alfonso Gomez-Acebo, in his publication ‘Party-
Appointed Arbitrators in International Commercial Arbitration’, made an all-
round discussion on parties’ appointment of arbitrators from historical, theoretical 
and practical perspectives based on previous research results. In particular, he 
discussed the historical evolution of appointment of arbitrators by the parties, 
commented on the current status of the system and analyzed challenges to 
arbitrators through comparative and empirical study. Finally, he made relevant 
suggestions for improvement.
19
4) Document Production
Document production is one of the most important while most controversial 
procedural issues in international commercial arbitration. It is the key to win 
cases, but it consumes money and time, complicates the arbitration process and is 
18　Remy Gerbay, ‘The Functions of Arbitral Institutions’, Kluwer Law International (2016).
19　Alfonso Gomez-Acebo, ‘Party-Appointed Arbitrators in International Commercial Arbitration’, 
Kluwer Law International (2016).


33
CHAPTER 1
unfamiliar to parties from continental law countries. The 2010 IBA Rules draws 
up relevant rules and is highly praised by various institutions and individuals in 
the practice and theoretical circles of arbitration, but it is still under debate due 
to cultural differences in reality. To find a solution to integrate advantages and 
disadvantages of document production, Dr. Reto Marghitola, in his publication 
‘Document Production in International Arbitration’, provided comprehensive 
deliberation thereon. The deliberation covers the purpose of document production, 
the power of arbitral tribunals to order document production, the interpretation of 
the IBA Rules including in-depth analysis of conflicting interpretations regarding 
the Rules, document production requirements and objection grounds, the 
strategies of document production, the rules of document production, punishment 
for not obeying tribunals’ directions and challenge of arbitral awards, etc.
20
5) Witness Testimony
In most international commercial arbitration cases, arbitral tribunals mainly rely 
on written evidence to render awards, but witness testimony still plays a decisive 
role. Dr. Ragnar Harbst, in his publication ‘A Counsel’s Guide to Examining 
and Preparing Witnesses in International Arbitration’ made comprehensive 
discussion on the guidance for lawyers’ examination and preparation of witnesses. 
The discussion involves the importance of witness testimony, similarities 
and differences in witness examination between the common law system 
and the continental law system, the origin of evidence rules in commercial 
arbitration, advocates preliminary inquiries of witnesses, witness statement, 
cross-examination, re-inquiries, witness meeting, arrangement of oral hearings, 
20　Reto Marghitola, ‘Document Production in International Arbitration’, Kluwer Law International (2015).


34
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
preparation of witnesses, etc.
21
6) Third-Party Funding in Arbitration
The cost of resolving international civil and commercial disputes through 
arbitration is quite high. Arbitral institutions have been trying to enhance the 
efficiency of arbitration and lower the cost through improvement of arbitration 
rules, but little process has been made. Thus, third-party funding has emerged in 
arbitration practice. Mr. Jonas von Goeler, in his publication ‘Third-Party Funding 
in International Arbitration and its Impact on Procedure’, made comprehensive 
and detailed deliberation on relevant issues of third party funding in arbitration. 
The deliberation covers the background for the emergence of third-party funding 
in arbitration, the agreements between funders and funded parties, funding forms, 
evolution, potential advantages and disadvantages, rules, disclosure of third-
party funding in arbitration, special protection of documentary proof, jurisdiction, 
impartiality and independence of arbitrators, conflict of interest, property 
guarantee and arbitration fees, etc.
22
21　Ragnar Harbst, ‘A Counsel’s Guide to Examining and Preparing Witnesses in International 
Arbitration’, Kluwer Law International (2015).
22　Jonas von Goeler, ‘Third-Party Funding in International Arbitration and its Impact on Procedure’, 
Kluwer Law International (2016).


35
CHAPTER 2
Chapter Two Observation 
on International Commercial 
Arbitration Practice in China
Considering that China’s international commercial arbitration is institutional 
arbitration in the sense of both legislation and practice, this Chapter endeavors 
to reflect the latest trend and development direction in China’s international 
commercial arbitration practice mainly through comparison based on the 2015 
annual reports and case statistics published by major international arbitration 
institutions on their websites or through other official channels. Meanwhile, this 
Chapter contains a brief introduction of the CIETAC Guidelines on Evidence 
effective as from 1 March 2015, which is a pioneering move for a commercial 
arbitration institution to publish and implement its rules on evidence, offers 
valuable reference for tribunals in handling evidence issues and has further pushed 
forward the internationalization of China’s commercial arbitration. 
I. Comparison of the 2015 International Commercial 
Arbitration Practice in China
1. Caseload
In 2015, CIETAC accepted 1,968 cases with an increase of 22% compared to 
the previous year (statistics of CIETAC caseload from 2007 to 2015 are shown 
in Figure 2.1). There were 1,531 domestic cases and 437 international cases 


36
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
(including 156 HMT-related ones). The international caseload has increased 
by 50 cases compared to the previous year (a 13% growth). There were 71 
cases conducted in English or in both Chinese and English, an obvious increase 
compared to the 58 cases in the previous year (see Figure 2.2). There were 
16 cases where arbitration rules other than the CIETAC Rules (including 
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules) were applied. Summary procedure cases 
accounted for 67 percent of the total caseload. There were 40 international cases 
with both parties from outside mainland China, a rather significant increase 
compared to the 28 cases in the previous year (see Figure 2.3).
 
2007      2008        2009       2010        2011        2012         2013       2014       2015
2200
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
■ domestic cases
■ foreign-related
      cases
Caseload of CIETAC from 2007 to 2015 (Unit: Number of Cases)
1118
689
429
1482
923
559
1610
1223
387
1968
1531
437
1230
682
548
1060
729
331
1352
934
418
1435
965
470
1256
881
375
Figure 2.1
 


37
CHAPTER 2
Statistics of CIETAC cases with English or both Chinese and English as
The Arbitration Language (Unit: Number of Cases)
2011                        2012                        2013                        2014                        2015
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
33
51
58
71
Figure 2.2
Statistics of Cases with Both Parties from outside Mainland China
(Unit: Number of Cases)
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
9
18
10
14
19
28
40
2009              2010              2011              2012               2013             2014              2015
Figure 2.3


38
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
The International Court of Arbitration of International Chamber of Commerce 
(the ICC Arbitration Court) accepted 801 cases in 2015, 10 cases more than 
the figure in 2014. This was also the second time in its history for its caseload 
to exceed 800.
1 About 75 percent of the cases involved parties from different 
nations. Meanwhile, the ICC Arbitration Court also accepted lots of ‘domestic 
cases’ involving both parties from the same nation. The ICC Arbitration Court 
had statistics of cases according to the nationalities of the parties. For example, 
33 percent of its cases involving Australian parties were domestic ones, while 16 
percent of its cases involving American parties were domestic ones.
2
The London Court of International Arbitration (the LCIA) accepted 326 cases 
in 2015, reaching a record high with an increase of about 10 percent compared 
to the previous year. Among the cases, 10 were domestic ones. There were 256 
cases where the LCIA Arbitration Rules were applied, and in the rest 70 cases, the 
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules were applied . 
The Hong Kong International Arbitration Centre (the HKIAC) accepted 271 
cases in 2015. About 79 percent of the cases were international ones, 43 percent 
of which had no connection with Hong Kong, and 93 cases involved parties from 
mainland China. The HKIAC administered 116 cases  according to its Rules or 
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, among which 94.8 percent were international 
ones. 
The Singapore International Arbitration Centre (the SIAC) accepted 271 cases in 
1　ICC Dispute Resolution Bulletin, 2016-Issue 1, p.4.
2　ICC Dispute Resolution Bulletin, 2016-Issue 1, p.6.


39
CHAPTER 2
2015 with an increase of 22 percent compared to the previous year, also creating 
a new record. Among the cases, 84 percent were international ones. The SIAC 
received 69 applications for fast-track procedure with 27 approved, accounting for 
10 percent of the total caseload. 
The Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (the SCC) 
accepted 181 cases in 2015, ranking sixth since its establishment in 1917. Among 
the cases, 78 were Swedish domestic ones and 103 were international ones. The 
SCC Rules were applied in 62 percent of the cases, the SCC Rules for Expedited 
Arbitration was applied in 27 percent of the cases, while other rules were applied 
in 13 cases.
The statistics of the caseloads of the above arbitration institutions are shown in 
Figure 2.4.
 


40
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
437
 
601
 
316
 
214
 
228
 
103
 
1531
 
200
 
10
 
57
 
43
 
78
 
0
 
500
 
1000 
1500
 
2000
 
2500
 
CIETAC
 
ICC
 
LCIA
 
HKIAC
 
SIAC
 
SCC
 
 
 
 
Statistics of Caseloads of Arbitration Institutions in 2015 (Unit: Number of Cases)
■ domestic cases
■ international
      cases
Figure 2.4
2. Parties
The internationalization of the parties can also reflect how much an arbitration 
institution is recognized in international arbitration. According to the statistics 
published by the arbitration institutions, the parties of the cases accepted in 2015 
were from the following countries or regions: 
The parties of the CIETAC cases were from 57 countries or regions. The top 
10 countries or regions with the most parties involved were Hong Kong, U.S., 
Germany, Singapore, Japan, South Korea, Macao, Swiss, Italy and Taiwan.


41
CHAPTER 2
The statistics of these top 10 countries or regions are shown in Figure 2.5.
 
Hong Kong
136
U.S.
39
Germany
32
Singaore
16
Japan
16
South Korea
13
Macau
11
Swiss
10
Italy
10
Taiwan
9
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Top 10 countries of Regions with the Most Parties involved (Unit: Number of Cases)
Figure 2.5
Among the parties involved in the cases accepted by the CIETAC from 2007 to 
2015, Asian parties accounted for over 50 percent, European ones came second, 
while those from North America also took up a certain proportion.
The statistics of foreign and HMT parties involved in the cases accepted by the 
CIETAC from 2007 to 2015 are shown in Figure 2.6.
 


42
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
Statistics of Foreign and HMT Parties involved in Cases Accepted by the CIETAC in 2007-2015 
South America 1%
Oceania 3%
North America 16%
Europe 22%
Asia 56%
Africa 2%
Figure 2.6
The parties of the cases accepted by the ICC Arbitration Court in 2015 were 
from 133 countries or regions. It is worth mentioning that there was a remarkable 
increase in the number of cases involving parties from China (including Hong 
Kong and Macao), with 90 Chinese parties involved which ranked seventh in 
the list of nations with the most parties involved.
3 The number of parties from 
3　ICC Dispute Resolution Bulletin, 2016-Issue 1, p.4.


43
CHAPTER 2
mainland China has been increasing steadily.
4
The parties of the cases accepted by the HKIAC in 2015 were from 41 countries 
or regions. The top 10 countries or regions with the most parties involved were 
mainland China, BVI, Macao, Singapore, Cayman Islands, Australia, U.S., 
Mongolia, U.K., the Philippines and South Korea.
The parties of the cases accepted by the SIAC in 2015 were from 55 countries 
or regions. The top 10 countries or regions with the most parties involved were 
India, China, South Korea, Vietnam, Australia, Hong Kong, Indonesia, U.S., BVI 
and Malaysia.
The parties of the cases accepted by the SCC in 2015 were from 37 countries 
or regions. The top 10 countries or regions with the most parties involved were 
Russia, Ukraine, Germany, Norway, U.K., Azerbaijan, Denmark, Italy, U.S. and 
Cyprus (Cyprus, Tajikistan and Netherlands tied for the tenth place).
3. Dispute Types
There were 17 types of cases among the 437 international cases accepted by 
the CIETAC in 2015, involving disputes arising from sale of goods, electro-
mechanical equipments, share transfer, joint ventures, industrial raw materials, 
service contracts, construction, decoration, contract projects, real estate 
construction and development, private loan contracts, house selling and leasing, 
insurance, franchising and licensing, transport contracts, intellectual property, 
agency agreements, finance, financial leasing, and others.
4　ICC Dispute Resolution Bulletin, 2016-Issue 1, p.5.


44
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
The statistics of the types of cases accepted by the CIETAC in 2015 are shown in 
Figure 2.7.
■ Sales of Goods
■ Electromechanical Equipments
■ Share Investment and Transfer
■ Others
■ Joint Ventures
■ Industrial Raw Materials
■ Service contracts
■ Construction, Decoration, Contract 
     Projects, Real Estate Construction 
     and Development
■ Private Loan Contracts
■ House Selling or Leasing
■ Insurance
■ Franchising and Licensing
■ Transport Contracts
■ Intellectual Property
■ Agency Agreements
■ Financial Disputes
■ Financial Leasing
Statistics of Types of International Cases Accepted by the CIETAC in 2015
(Unit: Number of Cases)
6, 1%
5, 1%
10, 2%
7, 2%
2, 0%
4, 1%
4, 1%
3, 1%
152
35%
67
15%
45
10%
36
8%
29
7%
25
6%
19
4%
15
3%
11
3%
Figure 2.7
Various types of disputes were involved in the cases accepted by the ICC 
Arbitration Courts in 2015, covering heavy industry, agriculture, transport, 
construction projects, telecommunications, leisure and entertainment, 


45
CHAPTER 2
pharmaceutical, insurance and financial services as well as the most traditional 
trade and distribution. Take the data of one season in 2015 as an example. The 
most frequent dispute type was still the construction project disputes, the second 
frequent one was energy disputes while other dispute types accounting for 
more than 5 percent of the total caseload were financial and insurance disputes, 
industrial equipment disputes, and bulk trade and distribution disputes.
5
According to the statistics from the LCIA, the cases it accepted in 2015 were 
mainly composed of medical and pharmaceutical disputes, retail and consumer 
product disputes, mineral disputes, oil and gas disputes, asset and equity transfer 
disputes, joint venture disputes, construction and energy disputes, shipbuilding 
disputes, telecommunications disputes, loan and other financial services disputes, 
partnership disputes, insurance disputes, culture media and sports disputes, sale of 
goods disputes, consulting and other professional services disputes.
The main types of disputes involved in the cases accepted by the HKIAC in 
2015 were as follows: commercial disputes accounting for 50 percent of the total 
caseload, construction project disputes accounting for 22.2 percent, maritime 
disputes accounting for 18 percent, company disputes and insurance disputes, 
accounting for 8.9 percent and 0.9 percent respectively.
The main types of disputes involved in the cases accepted by the SIAC in 2015 
were trade and business disputes, company disputes, transport/maritime disputes, 
construction/project disputes, insurance disputes, minerals and energy disputes, 
intellectual property disputes, information technology and financial service 
5　ICC Dispute Resolution Bulletin, 2016-Issue 1, p.11.


46
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
disputes.
According to the statistics from the SCC, there were mainly 12 types of 
disputes involved in its cases accepted in 2015, including transport disputes, 
service disputes, share acquisition disputes, shareholders’ agreement disputes, 
construction project disputes, investment disputes, partnership disputes, labor 
contract disputes, licensing disputes, loan disputes, intellectual property disputes 
and direct investment disputes.
4. Cases Concluded
1) The Rate and Ways of Case Conclusion
In 2015, the CIETAC concluded 1,821 cases including 402 international ones 
with an increase of 18 cases compared to the previous year. Such figure was about 
the same as its 2015 newly accepted international cases (437 cases). Among these 
cases, 321 were concluded by way of awards, accounting for 79.85 percent, 81 
were concluded by way of consent awards or dismissal decisions, accounting for 
20.15 percent.
In 2015, the ICC Arbitration Court rendered 498 awards, among which 343 were 
final awards, 126 were partial awards and 29 were consent awards, accounting for 
62.17 percent of the new caseload. Among these awards, 217 were made by sole-
arbitrator tribunals while 281 were made by three-member tribunals.
6
2) Time for Case Conclusion
6　ICC Dispute Resolution Bulletin, 2016-Issue 1, p.12.


47
CHAPTER 2
The arbitral institutions did not distinguish between international cases and 
domestic ones in their statistics on the time for case conclusion. Accordingly, no 
such distinction is made below, and readers may get an overall idea of the time for 
case conclusion at each arbitral institution in the same period.
The CIETAC, summary procedure cases accounted for 67 percent of the cases it 
accepted in 2015, where the amount in dispute did not exceed RMB 5,000,000 
or under other circumstances stipulated in the Arbitration Rules. Based on the 
statistics of all the cases concluded in 2015, the average time for case conclusion 
(including domestic and international ones) was 143 days after the formation of 
the tribunal, while the average time for summary-procedure cases was 104 days 
after the formation of the tribunal.
The LCIA did not provide detailed data on the time for case conclusion in its 
annual report, but the statistic on its cases concluded from 1 January 2013 to 15 
June 2015 with the application of the LCIA Arbitration Rules can be found in the 
Costs and Duration
7 Data
8 released on its official website on 3 November 2015. 
As shown in the data, its median time for case conclusion was 16 months, which 
means half of the cases were concluded in more than 16 months and the other half 
concluded in less than 16 months. The average time for case conclusion would be 
20 months. 
The SCC Arbitration Rules were applied in 62 percent  of the cases accepted 
7　From the day the LCIA receives the application for arbitration to the day the final award is made.
8　LCIA Release Costs and Duration Data, http://www.lcia.org/News/lcia-release-costs-and-duration-data.
aspx , last visited on 20 July 2016.


48
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
by the SCC in 2015. In 52 percent  of these cases, the time for case conclusion
9 
was 6-12 months; in 35 percent of them, the time was 12-18 months. The SCC 
Expedited Rules were applied in 27 percent of the cases, 62 percent of which were 
concluded in 3-6 months. Calculated by the above published data, in all the cases 
accepted by the SCC, the ones concluded in 3-6 months accounted for 18 percent, 
those concluded in 6-12 months accounted for 39 percent , while those concluded 
in 12-18 months accounted for 23 percent.
5. Arbitrators
Foreign arbitrators or arbitrators from outside mainland China participated in 
the hearing of 58 international cases accepted by the CIETAC in 2015, with an 
increase of 23 cases compared to the previous year. Among them, there were 17 
arbitrators from 8 countries and regions, including 4 from Taiwan, 3 from Hong 
Kong, 2 from Germany, 2 from U.K., 2 from Singapore, 2 from Australia, 1 from 
U.S. and 1 from France.
According to the data of the ICC Arbitration Court, the arbitrators of its 2015 
cases were from 77 countries, with U.K., U.S., Swiss, France, Germany, Brazil, 
Italy, Australia and Canada as the top 10.
Foreign arbitrators participated in the hearing of the LCIA cases in 2015 were 
from 29 countries, including Australia, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, 
Cyprus, Denmark, Netherlands, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iran, Ireland, 
Italy, Latvia, Lebanon, New Zealand, Nigeria, Russia, Singapore, South Africa, 
9　From the day the case is accepted till the day the award is made.


49
CHAPTER 2
Spain, Sweden, Swiss, Turkey, Ukraine, etc.
Foreign arbitrators participated in the hearing of the HKIAC cases in 2015 
were from various countries or regions, with U.K., Hong Kong, Australia, U.S., 
Singapore, Canada, mainland China, Malaysia, Sweden and New Zealand as the 
top 10. 
The SAIC, in its statistics, divided foreign arbitrators participating in the case 
hearing into two categories: the SIAC-appointed ones and the party-appointed 
ones. The SIAC-appointed foreign arbitrators were from 20 countries and regions, 
including Australia, Canada, China, France, Hong Kong, India, Japan, Malaysia, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, the Philippines, Saudi Arab, South Africa, South 
Korea, Sri Lanka, Swiss, Taiwan, United Arab Emirates, U.K. and U.S.. The 
party-appointed foreign arbitrators involved 4 more countries, including Germany, 
Ireland, Lebanon and Pakistan. It is shown in the statistics that arbitrators from 
U.K. and Australia were appointed the most frequently by the SIAC and the 
parties, perhaps due to historic and geographic reasons. 
6. Dispute Amount
Though claims for compensation are not the whole or only request in international 
commercial arbitration, most arbitral institutions do take such quantifiable claims 
as the basis for calculating arbitration fees, which indicates the universality of 
this kind of requests in arbitration. Meanwhile, the dispute amount in the cases 
accepted by arbitral institutions each year reflects the market recognition of these 
institutions.


50
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
In 2015, the amount in dispute for the 1,968 cases accepted by the CIETAC 
was 42.54 billion yuan (about USD 6.458 billion), with an increase of 12.5 
percent compared to the previous year. This accounted for over 10 percent of 
the total national dispute amount of 411.2 billion yuan in 2015, ranking the 
first among the 244 Chinese arbitration institutions. There were 71 cases with 
an amount of dispute above 100 million yuan
10, accounting for 3.61 percent 
of the total caseload. The total dispute amount of international cases was 12.6 
billion yuan(about USD 1.913 billion) while the average dispute amount thereof 
was 28.83 million yuan (about USD 6.3764 million) per case. There were 23 
international cases with an amount of dispute above 100 million yuan, accounting 
for 5.26 percent of the total international caseload. With regard to the average 
dispute amount in different types of disputes, the top three were, respectively, 
the cases involving equity investment and transfer disputes, the cases involving 
electromechanical equipment disputes, and those involving joint venture disputes. 
The total dispute amount of cases accepted by the ICC Arbitration Court in 2015 
was approximately USD 67 billion, with the average amount of USD 84 million 
per case.
11 There were 309 cases with a dispute amount above USD 10 million, 
with an increase of 32 cases compared to the previous year. Meanwhile, 23.2 
percent of the cases involved an dispute amount of less than USD 1 million.
12
In the cases accepted by the LCIA in 2015, 77 percent of the claimants specified 
the dispute amount in their application for arbitration. The statistic thereof is 
10　RMB 100 million is about USD 15.2 million based on the official exchange rate of China in July 2016.
11　ICC Arbitration Post Strong Growth in 2015, http://www.iccwbo.org/News/Articles/2016/ICC-
Arbitration-posts-strong-growth-in-2015 , last visited on 20 July 2016.
12　ICC Dispute Resolution Bulletin, 2016-Issue 1, p.11.


51
CHAPTER 2
shown in Figure 2.8.
2015
US$1m or less
US$1-5m 
US$5-10m 
US$10-20m 
US$20-50m 
US$50m or more
21.4%
26%
13.9%
20.2%
6.4% 12.1%
Figure 2.8
The total dispute amount of cases accepted by the HKIAC in 2016 was about 
HKD 47.9 billion (about USD 6.2 billion) while the average amount was about 
USD 22.9 million per case.
The total dispute amount of cases accepted by the SIAC in 2015 was SGD 6.23 
billion (about USD 4.59 billion), with an increase of 24 percent compared to 
the previous year. The highest dispute amount involved in a case was SGD 2.03 
billion (about USD 1.496 billion), while the average amount was SGD 23 million 
(about USD 16.9533 million) per case.
7. Arbitration Fees
This Chapter makes comparison of possible arbitration fees for three-member-
tribunal cases including arbitrators’ fees and arbitral institutions’ administrative 
fees with the 6 intervals of USD 1 million, USD 5 million, USD 10 million, USD 


52
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
30 million, USD 50 million and USD 100 million. The calculation is based on the 
fee calculators of the respective arbitral institutions.
The calculation result is shown in Figure 2.9.
13
 
0.00  
200,000.00 
 
400,000.00 
 
600,000.00 
 
800,000.00 
 
1,000,000.00 
 
1,200,000.00 
 
1,400,000.00 
 
1 million
 
5 million
 
10 million
 
30 million
 
50 million
 
100 million
 
CIETAC
 
ICC
LCIA
HKIAC
SIAC
SCC
Arbitration Fee (USD)
 
Figure 2.9
 (The abscissa is the dispute amount; the ordinate is the arbitration fee)
It may be inferred from the above comparison that the CIETAC apparently 
has a competitive advantage in its fee collection standards vis-a-vis the other 
international commercial arbitration institutions.
8) Conclusion
13　The exchange rate is the central parity rate of RMB in August 2016 published on the official website 
of the People’s Bank of China, http://www.pbc.gov.cn/zhengcehuobisi/125217/125925/index.html , last 
visited on 5 August 2016.


53
CHAPTER 2
The following conclusion may be drawn from the above statistics and analysis 
of the annual reports and case data of the international commercial arbitration 
institutions.
① The caseloads of major international commercial arbitration institutions were 
all on the rise, which indicates that arbitration, as a commercial dispute resolution 
method, has won greater recognition. The CIETAC remained its top position 
among international commercial arbitration institutions in the total caseload, with 
its international caseload also ranking among the top list. 
② China’s international arbitration institution has an apparent advantage in the 
efficiency of dispute resolution. This is reflected in both the rather short time 
for case conclusion and the top ratio of summary procedure cases. It is shown 
in the data relating to case conclusion rate that the cases concluded by China’s 
international arbitration institution in 2015 amounted to 91.99 percent of its newly 
accepted cases, significantly higher than other international arbitration institutions. 
It should be admitted that the CIETAC, in the competition among international 
arbitration institutions in 2015, submitted a satisfactory answer to parties seeking 
efficient dispute resolution. China’s commercial arbitration institution ranked the 
first in the ratio of summary procedure cases. In particular, the CIETAC has lifted 
the maximum dispute amount for the application of summary procedure from 2 
million yuan to 5 million yuan in its new Arbitration Rules effective as from 1 
January 2015 so that the procedure could be applied in more cases, which has 
greatly enhanced efficiency and saved costs. 
③ The cases accepted by China’s international commercial arbitration institution 


54
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
covered more types of disputes. Though each institution has its own way of 
classifying cases, it may be found from a rough distribution of the caseload that 
Chinese international commercial arbitration cases involved not only disputes in 
traditional sale of goods, electromechanical equipments, joint ventures, etc., but 
also rather new ones in service contracts, finance, equity investment and share 
transfer, intellectual property, insurance contracts, etc., covering a wide range and 
distributing over a large spectrum, by which China’s arbitration institution has 
kept abreast with or even in some way surpassed other international arbitration 
institutions. 
④ Concerning foreign arbitrators’ participation in case hearing, China’s 
international commercial arbitration institution slightly lagged behind compared to 
other international arbitration institutions, due to the restrictions by the arbitrators’ 
panel system and arbitration language, etc. However, the CIETAC will offer 
parties more choices in the appointment of international arbitrators along with the 
increase in the number of its foreign arbitrators and the relaxation of restrictions 
on the arbitrators’ panel system. 
⑤ With regard to dispute amount and arbitration fees, there was apparent increase 
in the total dispute amounts of all the international arbitration institutions in 
2015. Though it is hard to sequence the data, it can be found from the current 
statistics that the total dispute amount of the CIETAC was higher than that 
of some well-known arbitration institutions abroad, which indicates that the 
caseload of China’s international commercial arbitration institution has reached 
the average international level. However, the arbitration fees collected by 


55
CHAPTER 2
China’s international commercial arbitration institution for the vast majority of 
cases involving common-range dispute amounts were the lowest among all the 
institutions, accounting for only 17-50 percent  of the fees of other international 
arbitration institutions, with an apparent cost-effective competitive advantage.
⑥ The internationalization of China’s commercial arbitration has been further 
improved, which is shown in more involvement of Chinese parties in international 
commercial arbitration cases and higher recognition of the internationalized 
service provided by China’s commercial arbitration institution. It is shown in 
the comparison of the internationalization of parties that the ICC Arbitration 
Court, as a traditional international arbitration institution, maintained its 
advantageous influence in the circle. More Chinese parties were involved in cases 
administered by the ICC Arbitration Court, indicating their better understanding 
and higher recognition of international arbitration. Meanwhile, China’s 
international commercial arbitration institution has been known and chosen by 
more and more foreign parties. Furthermore, China’s international commercial 
arbitration institution administered more cases conducted in English, showing 
the improvement of its ability in offering multi-language service. Chinese 
international commercial arbitration institutions, represented by the CIETAC, 
have administered an increasing number of cases where arbitration rules other 
than the administrator’s own rules were applied, and  have witnessed a growth 
in the number of cases where both parties are from outside mainland China. 
These not only indicate that the development of arbitration in China conforms 
to the international trend, but also illustrate that the professionalism in case 
administration of Chinese international arbitration institutions have won the trust 


56
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
and affirmation of the parties, and their internationalized arbitration services have 
been more and more recognized by parties whose mother tongues are not Chinese. 
II. The CIETAC Guidelines on Evidence Help Promoting 
the Internationalization of Arbitration in China
As from 1 March 2015, the CIETAC Guidelines on Evidence came into force. 
This is a pioneering move for a commercial arbitration institution to publish and 
implement its rules on evidence, and offers valuable reference for tribunals in 
handling evidence issues.
1. Legal Sources for Evidence Issues in Commercial Arbitration 
It is well-known that there is no unified code of evidence in China. Relevant 
legislation is scattered in various procedural laws and other legal documents 
such as judicial interpretations. In the hearing of arbitration cases, parties in their 
production and examination of evidence, and arbitrators in their finding of facts, 
follow evidence rules for civil and commercial litigation or take such rules as 
reference in most cases. However, arbitral tribunals prefer a more relaxed attitude 
towards evidence issues in commercial arbitration due to the special features of 
arbitration procedures such as flexibility and party autonomy. Thus, although 
evidence rules in civil and commercial litigation may be applied in arbitration, 
they are neither mandatory, nor necessary to be fully copied. The legal sources 
for evidence issues in China’s international commercial arbitration before the 
implementation of the CIETAC Guidelines of Evidence are as follows:


57
CHAPTER 2
Firstly, relevant stipulations in the Arbitration Law and the Civil Procedure Law, 
such as Articles 43, 45 and 46 of the Arbitration Law.
14 The evidence rules in the 
above laws are mostly only stipulated in principle.
Secondly, the judicial interpretation on evidence rules in civil and commercial 
litigation, i.e., Some Provisions of the Supreme People's Court on Evidence in 
Civil Procedures.
Thirdly, relevant provisions in applicable arbitration rules such as Articles 
41-44 of the 2015 CIETAC Arbitration Rules
15 and Articles 27 and 29 of the 
14　The Arbitration Law of the People’
s Republic of China
Article 43 The parties shall produce evidence in support of their claims. An arbitration tribunal may collect 
on its own evidence it considers necessary.
Article 45 Any evidence shall be produced at the start of the hearing. The parties may challenge the validity 
of such evidence.
Article 46 In the event that the evidence might be destroyed or if it would be difficult to obtain the evidence 
later on, the parties may apply for the evidence to be preserved. If the parties apply for such preservation, 
the arbitration commission shall submit the application to the basic-level people's court of the place where 
the evidence is located.
15　China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission CIETAC Arbitration Rules （2015）
Article 41 Evidence
1. Each party shall bear the burden of proving the facts on which it relies to support its claim, defense or 
counterclaim and provide the basis for its opinions, arguments and counter-arguments.
2. The arbitral tribunal may specify a time period for the parties to produce evidence and the parties shall 
produce evidence within the specified time period. The arbitral tribunal may refuse to admit any evidence 
produced after that time period. If a party experiences difficulties in producing evidence within the specified 
time period, it may apply for an extension before the end of the period. The arbitral tribunal shall decide 
whether or not to extend the time period.
3. If a party bearing the burden of proof fails to produce evidence within the specified time period, or if 
the produced evidence is not sufficient to support its claim or counterclaim, it shall bear the consequences 
thereof.
Article 42 Examination of Evidence
1. Where a case is examined by way of an oral hearing, the evidence shall be produced at the oral hearing 
and may be examined by the parties.
2. Where a case is to be decided on the basis of documents only, or where the evidence is submitted after 


58
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules)
16. The parties generally make clear agreement on 
the hearing and both parties have agreed to examine the evidence by means of writing, the parties may 
examine the evidence in writing. In such circumstances, the parties shall submit their written opinions on 
the evidence within the time period specified by the arbitral tribunal.
Article 43 Investigation and Evidence Collection by the Arbitral Tribunal
1. The arbitral tribunal may undertake investigation and collect evidence as it considers necessary.
2. When investigating and collecting evidence, the arbitral tribunal may notify the parties to be present. In 
the event that one or both parties fail to be present after being notified, the investigation and collection of 
evidence shall proceed without being affected.
3. Evidence collected by the arbitral tribunal through its investigation shall be forwarded to the parties for 
their comments.
Article 44 Expert’s Report and Appraiser’s Report	
1. The arbitral tribunal may consult experts or appoint appraisers for clarification on specific issues of the 
case. Such an expert or appraiser may be a Chinese or foreign institution or natural person.
2. The arbitral tribunal has the power to request the parties, and the parties are also obliged, to deliver or 
produce to the expert or appraiser any relevant materials, documents, property, or physical objects for 
examination, inspection or appraisal by the expert or appraiser.
3. Copies of the expert’s report and the appraiser’s report shall be forwarded to the parties for their 
comments. At the request of either party and with the approval of the arbitral tribunal, the expert or 
appraiser shall participate in an oral hearing and give explanations on the report when the arbitral tribunal 
considers it necessary.
16　The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules 
Article 27 - Evidence
1. Each party shall have the burden of proving the facts relied on to support its claim or defence.
2. Witnesses, including expert witnesses, who are presented by the parties to testify to the arbitral tribunal 
on any issue of fact or expertise may be any individual, notwithstanding that the individual is a party to the 
arbitration or in any way related to a party. Unless otherwise directed by the arbitral tribunal, statements by 
witnesses, including expert witnesses, may be presented in writing and signed by them.
3. At any time during the arbitral proceedings the arbitral tribunal may require the parties to produce 
documents, exhibits or other evidence within such a period of time as the arbitral tribunal shall determine.
4. The arbitral tribunal shall determine the admissibility, relevance, materiality and weight of the evidence 
offered.
Article 29 - Experts appointed by the arbitral tribunal
1. After consultation with the parties, the arbitral tribunal may appoint one or more independent experts to 
report to it,in writing, on specific issues to be determined by the arbitral tribunal. A copy of the expert’s 
terms of reference, established by the arbitral tribunal, shall be communicated to the parties.
2. The expert shall, in principle before accepting appointment, submit to the arbitral tribunal and to the 
parties a description of his or her qualifications and a statement of his or her impartiality and independence. 
Within the time ordered by the arbitral tribunal, the parties shall inform the arbitral tribunal whether they 


59
CHAPTER 2
arbitration rules in their arbitration agreements, therefore they should be regarded 
as having reached consensus on the evidence provisions therein. 
Fourthly, based on many years of practice, some international institutions have 
developed detailed and specific rules on evidence for the reference of parties and 
tribunals. For example, the International Bar Association (the IBA) issued the 
Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration (the IBA Rules), 
the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators made the Protocol for the Use of Party-
Appointed Expert Witnesses in International Arbitration, the International Center 
for Dispute Resolution (the ICDR) issued the ICDR Guidelines for Arbitrators 
Concerning Exchange of Information, and the International Institute for Conflict 
Prevention & Resolution published the Protocol on Disclosure of Documents and 
Presentation of Witnesses in Commercial Arbitration.
However, it is very rare for the parties or tribunals to choose the above rules in the 
have any objections as to the expert’s qualifications, impartiality or independence. The arbitral tribunal shall 
decide promptly whether to accept any such objections. After an expert’s appointment, a party may object 
to the expert’s qualifications, impartiality or independence only if the objection is for reasons of which the 
party becomes aware after the appointment has been made. The arbitral tribunal shall decide promptly what, 
if any, action to take.
3. The parties shall give the expert any relevant information or produce for his or her inspection any 
relevant documents or goods that he or she may require of them. Any dispute between a party and such 
expert as to the relevance of the required information or production shall be referred to the arbitral tribunal 
for decision.
4. Upon receipt of the expert’s report, the arbitral tribunal shall communicate a copy of the report to the 
parties, which shall be given the opportunity to express, in writing, their opinion on the report. A party shall 
be entitled to examine any document on which the expert has relied in his or her report.
5. At the request of any party, the expert, after delivery of the report, may be heard at a hearing where the 
parties shall have the opportunity to be present and to interrogate the expert. At this hearing, any party 
may present expert witnesses in order to testify on the points at issue. The provisions of article 28 shall be 
applicable to such proceedings.


60
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
practice of international commercial arbitration in China. On the one hand, they 
are not familiar with these rules and not ready to use them, and on the other hand, 
these rules are inconsistent with traditional practice in China’s arbitration. It can 
be found from the foreword of the CIETAC Guidelines on Evidence that the main 
legal sources of the Guidelines are the Arbitration Law and the CIETAC Rules 
while the evidence rules in civil and commercial litigation and the IBA Rules are 
not direct resources but references only.
2. Features of the CIETAC Guidelines on Evidence
Generally speaking, the CIETAC Guidelines on Evidence is a special set of rules 
based on the summary of the CIETAC practice. The Guidelines not only integrate 
with the CIETAC Rules and its long-term practice, but also take appropriate 
reference of the Chinese evidence rules in civil litigation that are suitable for 
use in arbitration as well as the IBA Rules. The Guidelines have the following 
features:
Firstly, the Guidelines are evidence rules applicable to arbitration. Considering 
that arbitration, in contrast to litigation, has features such as flexibility and party 
autonomy, the Guidelines make it clear in the foreword that its application is 
subject to the parties’ consent while the parties may agree to adopt the Guidelines 
in part or in whole, which gives the parties great freedom in adopting the 
Guidelines and the tribunals more flexibility in handling the application of the 
Guidelines in cases since the tribunals may only take it as reference instead of 
mandatory rules. 


61
CHAPTER 2
Secondly, the Guidelines are more suitable for international commercial 
arbitration in China. It is clearly stated in the foreword that ‘the application of the 
Guidelines is presumably to be more appropriate in an arbitration the seat of which 
is in Mainland China and where the Arbitration Law of the People’s Republic 
of China is the law applicable to the arbitration procedure’. Since the Guidelines 
are in accordance with the Arbitration Law, the CIETAC Rules and practice, and 
with appropriate reference to the IBA Rules as well as the Chinese  evidence 
rules in civil and commercial litigation that are suitable for use in arbitration, the 
Guidelines, from the level of legislative technique, are better connected with the 
current Chinese legislation on civil and commercial evidence rules. Therefore, 
the Guidelines are easier for the parties and arbitrators to understand and apply, 
and are more in line with the traditional practice of arbitration in China. Many 
stipulations in the Guidelines directly reflect the current evidence rules in China’s 
civil and commercial litigation. For example, Article 1.4 on the burden of proof 
for alleging that the amount of liquidated damages as provided for in the contract 
is lower or higher than the actual loss suffered reflects Article 114 of the Contract 
Law of China; Article 12.1 regarding evidence preservation is in accordance 
with the stipulations in the Civil Procedure Law and the Arbitration Law; and 
Article 16.2 which stipulates that ‘[F]or written documents in respect of which 
discrepancies are likely to exist between the original and photocopies of the 
original, a party and the tribunal may request that the original be presented for 
examination’ bears the mark of the Chinese judicial practice. 
Thirdly, the Guidelines also incorporate some internationalized approach on the 
basis of Chinese local practice on evidence. For example, parties are allowed 


62
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
to submit electronic versions of documentary evidence under Article 6.2, no 
more requiring the precondition of parties’ consent with the tribunal’s approval, 
or the tribunal’s otherwise decision. This is in accordance with the practice of 
other international arbitration institutions and helps improving the efficiency of 
arbitration by greatly saving the time of arbitration institutions for documents 
exchange. Another example is Article 14 regarding the translation of documents, 
under which relevant issues may be determined through consultation between 
parties and tribunals, in contrast to the traditional practice of requiring translation 
in the language of arbitration under all circumstances, thus saving unnecessary 
translation fees and improving efficiency of arbitration. Furthermore, a system 
similar to the disclosure of specific evidence in the common law jurisdictions is 
introduced in Article 7 of the Guidelines, under which ‘[A] party may request the 
tribunal to order the other party to produce a specific document or a narrow and 
specific category of documents’. This mechanism is also an innovation based on 
the practice of international commercial arbitration in China with reference to 
relevant provisions on the ‘Request to Produce’ in the IBA Rules. 
3. Comparison between the CIETAC Guidelines on Evidence and 
the IBA Rules
The CIETAC, when drafting its Guidelines on Evidence, took appropriate 
reference of the IBA Rules so as to keep in line with international commercial 
arbitration practice. The IBA Rules are based on the relatively consistent practices 
regarding evidence issues in international commercial arbitration and the result 
of compromise between the common law and continental law systems in relevant 


63
CHAPTER 2
rules and practice.
17 The IBA Rules have been taken as reference by many 
major international arbitration institutions, and have been highly recognized. 
The CIETAC Guidelines, learning from the IBA Rules and integrating Chinese 
legislation and practice of arbitration and evidence rules, have its own features. 
The CIETAC Guidelines and the IBA Rules share similarities while reserving 
differences. 
1) Similarities
Firstly, both the CIETAC Guidelines and the IBA Rules are for reference with no 
mandatory force.
18 This is fundamentally consistent with the features of arbitration 
as a dispute resolution method. It is unrealistic to force parties or tribunals to 
adopt evidence rules in arbitration. 
Secondly, the CIETAC Guidelines and the IBA Rules adopt similar classifications 
of evidence, dividing evidence into documentary evidence, witnesses of fact, 
expert opinions, inspection and appraisal. The CIETAC Guidelines neither adopt 
the evidence classification in the Civil Procedure Law nor include other types of 
evidence in international arbitration. 
Thirdly, the CIETAC Guidelines lay emphasis on evidence production, collection 
and exchange, which is similar to the IBA Rules. Among the 26 articles of the 
CIETAC Guidelines including supplementary provisions, 11 are relevant to 
evidence collection and exchange and 3 are related to evidence assessment, which 
17　Lu Song, ‘Evidence in International Commercial Arbitration’, Beijing Arbitration (Vol. 8), p.96.
18　Foreword of the CIETAC Guidelines on Evidence and Article 1 of the IBA Rules. 


64
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
means over half thereof are about evidence production, collection and exchange.
19 
 
2) Differences
Firstly, concerning the application of the rules, the CIETAC Guidelines show 
more respect to party autonomy and are more lenient and tolerant than the IBA 
Rules. The CIETAC Guidelines may be applied only by parties’ consent, while 
the IBA Rules be adopted either by the choice of the parties or by the decision of 
the tribunal. 
Secondly, the style and content of the CIETAC Guidelines are different from 
those of the IBA Rules. There are 26 articles in 5 chapters under the CIETAC 
Guidelines, which follows the normal style of chapters and sections in Chinese 
legislation. In contrast, there are 9 articles with no chapters but definitions on 
relevant concepts in the IBA Rules, which is in accordance with the common law 
tradition. As to the style, the CIETAC Guidelines cover a wider range of evidence 
rules than the IBA Rules, and the contents of the two are different. The IBA Rules 
mainly include sections of witnesses of facts, expert witnesses, evidence exchange 
and admissibility and assessment of evidence, while the CIETAC Guidelines 
involve various aspects such as burden of proof, evidence production, evidence 
collection and exchange, evidence examination and assessment, etc., with specific 
provisions on assumption of the burden of proof and standard of proof. 
Secondly, the CIETAC Guidelines are different from the IBA Rules on the 
19　Xu Jianguo, Shen Yuan & Ruan Fangyang, ‘Comparison between the Guidelines on Evidence and the 
IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence’, http://www.08kan.com/gwk/MzA4MTY3ODQwNA/204223087/1/
7f81589cd417cb9f44065837ceefeffb.html , last visited on 26 July 2016.


65
CHAPTER 2
relevant provisions concerning witness statements and expert opinions. The IBA 
Rules incorporate the features of the evidence systems in the common law and 
civil law jurisdictions. However, it can be found from the provisions related to 
witness statements and expert reports that the Rules are under more influence 
of the common law system, reflecting the features of evidence rules under the 
adversary approach of the common law system, i.e., emphasis on appearance 
and examination of witnesses. The IBA Rules adopt stricter requirements on 
the admissibility of witness statements. If a witness fails without a valid reason 
for testifying at an evidentiary hearing, his statement will not be admissible. 
However, it is stipulated in the CIETAC Guidelines that the statement of a witness 
who fails to appear at the hearing for examination without good cause shall not 
independently serve as the basis for the establishment of a fact, but this does not 
necessarily result in the inadmissibility of his statement. The strict requirement on 
appearance and examination of witnesses is also adopted in the relevant provisions 
on expert reports in the IBA Rules. Experts shall be present at hearings and may 
be questioned by the tribunal, the parties and the party-appointed experts. The 
CIETAC Guidelines only contain a brief provision stipulating that ‘[T]he tribunal 
may appoint one or more experts on its own initiative. The parties shall assist the 
tribunal-appointed expert, and provide any documents and information that the 
expert requests. The expert shall issue his/her opinion which shall be forwarded to 
the parties for comments’.
20
Finally, compared with the IBA Rules, the CIETAC Guidelines clarify the 
20　Xu Jianguo, Shen Yuan & Ruan Fangyang, ‘Comparison between the Guidelines on Evidence and the 
IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence’, http://www.08kan.com/gwk/MzA4MTY3ODQwNA/204223087/1/
7f81589cd417cb9f44065837ceefeffb.html , last visited on 26 July 2016.


66
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
standard of proof for fact finding in arbitration. It is stipulated in Article 24 of the 
CIETAC Guidelines:
‘24.1 Where conflicting evidence has been adduced by the parties in respect of a 
particular fact, the tribunal may make a determination of the fact pursuant to the 
principle of the preponderance of evidence. 
24.2  The tribunal shall make a finding of fraud only if clear and convincing 
evidence exists to support the fact.’ 
The importance of the standard of proof in trials is self-evident, because judges 
rely on it to meet relevant legal requirements in fact finding, while parties rely 
on it to prove facts with evidence produced and determine whether the proof is 
enough. With the standard of proof incorporated in the evidence rules and the 
standard clarified in advance, parties may have a better prediction on the result of 
the final award in arbitration, thus the acceptability and authority of the arbitral 
award are better ensured.
Arbitration, as an important dispute resolution method, has features such as 
party autonomy, flexibility and efficiency compared to litigation. Evidence 
rules in arbitration should also adapt to these features. The introduction of the 
CIETAC Guidelines on Evidence is a Chinese initiative in making specialized 
and non-litigious evidence rules in arbitration. The drafting of the Guidelines 
is based on the IBA Rules which come from advanced experience in repeated 
practice of international arbitration, which reflects the continuous and steady 
internationalization of the system of international commercial arbitration in China. 


67
CHAPTER 3
Chapter Three Special Observation 
on International Commercial 
Arbitration in China
1
-The Application of the CISG in International 
Commercial Arbitration in China
The United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods 
(the Convention or the CISG) has been the most successful achievement in the 
unification of private international law and turned to be a ‘lingua franca’ of 
international sales.
2 There are 85 contracting states now.
3 Though the enactment 
and creation of laws are important, the real life of laws is in the interpretation and 
application. The life of laws would wither while the value thereof would get lost if 
there were no interpretation or application. That is true for treaties as well.
4 For the 
1　This Chapter is drafted through amendment and adjustment according to the keynote of the Annual 
Report and latest data based on the Application of the CISG in International Commercial Arbitration 
which is the study result of Professor Han Shiyuan’s team from Tsinghua University the School of Law 
as commissioned by the CIETAC. The gratitude is reiterated here to the team. The English version of the 
study result is in Shiyuan Han, ‘The Application of the CISG in International Commercial Arbitration in 
China’, in Ingeborg Schwenzer (ed.), 35 Years CISG and Beyond, Elevan International Publishing, 2016, 
pp.91-111. The Chinese version, Han Shiyuan,‘The Application of the CISG in International Commercial 
Arbitration in China’, China Legal Science, Vol. 5 (2016). 
2　P. Schlechtriem, ‘Keynote Address’ in Pace International Law Review ed., Review of the Convention 
on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods (CISG) 2003-2004, Munich: Sellier. European Law 
Publishers, 2005, pp.84-85.
3　http://www.uncitral.org/uncitral/zh/uncitral_texts/sale_goods/1980CISG_status.html, last visited on 24 
August 2016.
4　Du Huanfang, ‘Path Dependence and Methosd Expansion in the Interpretation of Private International 


68
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
uniform text of international trade rules, the unified text itself does not necessarily 
result in the uniform law. The ultimate goal should go beyond unifying the texts 
and be the unification of the operation of laws. Thus, there is a need to emphasize 
the unified interpretation and application of the Convention throughout the world. 
The functions of judgments applying the Convention should not be limited to the 
settlement of disputes but be extended to the improvement of unification of the 
laws. From this perspective, each case involving the application of the Convention 
may be a good growing point for the Convention. China, among the first group of 
the Convention’s contracting states, has attracted much attention from around the 
world to its interpretation and application of the Convention. 
In view of the above, this Chapter makes empirical research and special 
observations on 81 awards related to the Convention rendered by the CIETAC 
from 2008 to 2015. It intends to reveal the current status of the application of the 
Convention in China from the perspective of international commercial arbitration, 
analyze the difference between such status and the uniform interpretation and 
application requested by the Convention and find solution thereof. The CIETAC, 
as the longest-established arbitration commission in China, enjoys high reputation 
domestically and internationally. The Pace University School of Law have 
collected a large number of CIETAC awards involving the application of the 
Convention in the database
5 and made research thereon,
6 which is of far-reaching 
Law Treaties’, China Legal Science, Vol. 2 (2014).
5　http:www.cisg.law.pace.edu/cisg/text/casecit.html#a07, last visited on 24 August 2016.
6　For example, A Vincze, ‘Conformity of the Goods in the UN Convention on Contracts for the 
International Sale of Goods (CISG)-Overview of CIETAC’s Practice’, in C.B. Andersen and U. G. 
Schroeter eds., Sharing International Commercial Law across National Boundaries: Festschrift for Albert 
H Kritzer on the Occasion of his Eightieth Birthday, London: Wildy, Sommonds& Hill Publishing, 2008, 


69
CHAPTER 3
influence in international academic and professional communities. This Chapter 
makes research on Chinese and English awards provided by the CIETAC which 
are still unavailable in the database of the Pace University. In consideration of the 
confidentiality, the relevant case numbers and award numbers will be omitted, 
and reference will be made to the award dates, the subject matters involved in 
transaction and the parties’ nationalities to identify specific cases. 
I. General Situation of CISG-related Awards
1. Simplicity and Complexity of Judgments
Different institutions have different styles of judgments. Some nations may prefer 
concise judgments while others adopt rather complicated ones like academic 
papers.
7 Each style has its strong and weak points. Concise judgments can meet 
the demands of raising efficiency, solving practical problems and relieving judges 
from work pressure, but may lack sufficient reasoning. Complicated ones, though 
with abundant reasoning, impose great challenge to judges in the sense of time, 
energy and wisdom, and lack operability when there is a huge caseload. 
Of course, when drafting judgments, the form is determined by the need of the 
content, so is the style of the judgments. According to statistics, the total number 
pp.552-581; Fan Yang, ‘CISG, CIETAC Arbitration and the Rules of Law in P.R. of China: A Global 
Jurisconsultorium Perspective’, in ibid, pp.600-626, M. R. Shulman and L. Singh, ‘China’s Impementation 
of the CISG through Arbitral Insitutions’, translated by Wang Wanlu, China University of Political Science 
and Law Journal, Vol. 1 (2011).
7　Analysi of judgment reasoning status in U.K., France and Germany, etc., Xu Zhengxian, ‘Science of 
Civil Law and Judicial System (2009), published by Xin Xue Lin Publishing Co., Ltd., Tai Bei, p.228, 
pp.239-240.


70
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
of words in the 81 CISG-related CIETAC awards is 974,406. The minimum 
number of words in an award is 2,578
8 while the maximum is 49,620.
9 The 
average number of words in an award is 12,030. Calculated without the minimum 
and the maximum, the average number of words is 11,674 which is equivalent to 
that of law papers acceptable to most Chinese legal journals. 
2. Reasoning and Invocation
In judging cases and applying laws, it is naturally necessary to mention the source 
and content of specific legal provisions, which is inseparable from citing law 
articles. Interpretation must be made on the invoked articles, and gaps should be 
filled when there are insufficient provisions or loopholes. Therefore, the primary 
task of adjudicators is to find the applicable law articles, invoke and interpret 
them in judgments. 
The CIETAC awards follow a uniform model containing three basic parts, i.e., 
the statement of facts, the tribunal’s opinion and the award. Procedural issues 
including the acceptance of case, the formation of tribunal and the hearing are 
listed before the statement of facts. The invocation of law articles is not found 
in the third part, i.e., the award. Generally, it is briefly stated as ‘Above all, the 
tribunal makes the following award’. It is quite common and with no exception in 
the 81 CIETAC awards, so it may be regarded as the CIETAC style. 
Of course, no invocation of law articles in the award part does not mean no such 
8　The CIETAC award on 24 April 2008 (iron ore, South Korea buyer v. Chinese seller).
9　The CIETAC award on 21 September 2009 (sulfur, mainland China buyer v. Hong Kong seller).


71
CHAPTER 3
invocation in the whole award. Among the 81 awards, those quoting specific legal 
provisions in the tribunal’s opinion part account for 69% of the total (Figure 3.1 
shows 51% thereof invoke Chinese laws while only 35% invoke the Convention) 
while 38% have absolutely no invocation.  
Figure 3.1
invocation
No invocation number of cases
The Convention
Chinese laws
Year 2008
0
6
8
14
Year 2009
8
8
7
19
Year 2010
2
7
10
19
Year 2011
4
7
6
15
Year 2012
2
2
0
2
Year 2013
4
4
0
4
Year 2014
4
3
0
4
Year 2015
4
4
0
4
Total
28
41
31
81
*56
(*The number 56 does not equal to 28 plus 41 since there are cases involving the 
invocation of both the Convention and Chinese laws.)
3. Ratio of Awards in Favor of Chinese or Foreign Parties
Scholars have been committed to exploring a set of methods for unified 
interpretation of the Convention so as to ensure the uniform application and 


72
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
interpretation. In this regard, Professor Magnus from the University of Hamburg, 
Germany pointed out that even such methods were adopted, there would still 
be obstacles to frustrate all the efforts of maximizing the unification in the 
interpretation of the Convention. The obstacles include a ‘political’ interpretation 
of the CISG and great difference in judgment quality of various countries. The 
so-called ‘political’ interpretation means that domestic courts deliberately favour 
their own citizens in judgments on international relations. In cases involving 
international sale of goods, it is easy for courts to favour business of their own 
country in the judgments. Such favour is not done openly but through a concealed 
way via the interpretation of the vague and flexible terms of the respective law. 
“Sales law-and in particular the CISG-contains so many vague and flexible terms 
that their systematic interpretation in favour of the home industry would pose no 
real difficulty”.
10
Obviously, such ‘political’ interpretation of the Convention is in conflict with 
the principle of fairness including ‘like case, like treatment’ and impartiality 
of judgments. So we should keep alert on it. Professor Magnus proposed a 
verification method that for cases involving the application of the Convention, 
if the courts decide the case in a neutral, impartial manner, there should be ten 
foreign parties and ten domestic parties should have won their cases at least in 
theory. In another word, the ratio of winning foreign parties to winning domestic 
parties should be 1:1.
10　U. Magnus, ‘Tracing Methodology in the CISG: Dogmatic Foundations’, in A. Janssen and O. Meyer 
eds., CISG Methodology, Munich: Sellier, European Law Publishers 2009, pp.35-36.


73
CHAPTER 3
Figure 3.2 shows the analysis result of the awards involving the application of the 
Convention rendered by the CIETAC from 2008 to 2015. The ratio of winning 
Chinese parties to winning foreign parties is 1.68:1. How to interpret such result? 
Is there a serious problem of ‘political’ interpretation in the CIETAC’s practice 
involving the application of the Convention? These questions will be discussed 
later in this Chapter. 
Figure 3.2
Chinese Party Win
Foreign Party Win
Draw
Total
Year 2008
7
5
2
14
Year 2009
15
4
0
19
Year 2010
11
7
1
19
Year 2011
8
6
1
15
Year 2012
1
1
0
2
Year 2013
1
2
1
4
Year 2014
3
1
0
4
Year 2015
1
2
1
4
Total
47
28
6
81
4. Application of the CISG
The application of the Convention involves the understanding of Chapter 1, 


74
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
especially Article 1 thereof. Figure 3.3 shows the research result of the 81 
Convention-related CIETAC awards in the 8 years and the following Part II will 
make analysis thereon.
Figure 3.3
Autonomous Application
Non- Autonomous 
Application
Application 
of Domestic 
Laws under 
Private 
International 
Laws
Total
Autonomous 
Application
Mistaken 
as Non- 
Autonomous 
Application
Explicit 
Agreement
Implied 
Choice
Year 2008
5
2
5
1
1
14
Year 2009
9
1
6
2
1
19
Year 2010
7
0
9
1
2
19
Year 2011
4
2
5
2
2
15
Year 2012
1
0
1
0
0
2
Year 2013
3
0
1
0
0
4
Year 2014
4
0
0
0
0
4
Year 2015
3
0
1
0
0
4
Total
36
5
28
6
6
81
In Hong Kong-related cases, most CIETAC tribunals deny the autonomous 


75
CHAPTER 3
application of the Convention on a contract of sale of goods with one party’s place 
of business in Hong Kong. However, there are still awards holding the opposite 
position. For example, in one award involving disputes arising out of the contract 
for sale of solar panels between an American buyer and a Hong Kong seller which 
contains no agreement on the applicable law, it is stated in the tribunal’s opinion 
that ‘Considering the Claimant and the Respondent are companies registered in 
Florida, U.S. and Hong Kong respectively, the countries of registration are both 
contracting states of the CISG while neither party excluded the application thereof 
explicitly in the contract, the Claimant invoked provisions of the CISG as its 
legal ground in the application for arbitration while the Respondent never objects 
thereto, the tribunal deems that the CISG should be applied in this case.’
11 In 
another award involving disputes arising out of the contract for sale of Indonesian 
nickel ore between a mainland China buyer and a Hong Kong registered seller, it 
is stated in the tribunal’s opinion that ‘The contract is foreign-related. The parties 
agreed in the contract that the CISG should be applied to the contract. Such 
agreement is not against mandatory provisions in Chinese laws and administrative 
regulations, so the CISG shall be the applicable law of the contract as per Article 
41 of the Law of the People's Republic of China on Choice of Law for Foreign-
related Civil Relationships’.
12
II. Application of the CISG in International Commercial 
Arbitration in China
11　The CIETAC award on 31 May 2010 (solar panel, American buyer v. Hong Kong seller).
12　The CIETAC award on 4 March 2013 (Indonesian Nickel ore, mainland China buyer v. Hong Kong 
seller).


76
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
The applicability of the Convention has been discovered as a subject of discussion, 
not only in Europe
13, but also in China
14. As pointed out by a German professor, 
the grounds for tribunals’ application of the Convention are different. Some 
tribunals rely on Article 1.1 (a) of the Convention or rules of private international 
law, while others may treat the Convention as a part of the Lex Mercatoria or 
existing trade usages.
15 In the CIETAC practice, the ground for the application of 
the Convention is either the parties’ agreement or Article 1.1(a) of the Convention 
though the latter has begun to be questioned by Chinese scholars. The following 
analysis is still based on the normal CIETAC practice, i.e. autonomous or direct 
application of the Convention.
In the practice of international commercial arbitration in China, if the parties’ 
places of business are in different contracting states of the Convention, the 
tribunals normally apply the Convention unless the parties have excluded the 
application thereof or relevant disputes are not within the scope thereof.
16
1. Autonomous Application
1) Most CIETAC Awards Apply the Convention Autonomously under 
13　See U. P. Gruber, ‘The Convention on the International Sale of Goods (CISG) in Arbitration’, 
2009 Int’l Bus. L.J. pp. 15-34; A. Janssen and M. Spilker, ‘The Application of the CISG in the World of 
International Commercial Arbitration’, 2013 RabelsZ 77, pp. 131-157.
14　Some Chinese scholars object to the direct application of the CISG in arbitration based on the 
contractual nature of arbitration and difference between arbitration and litigation. Du Tao, ‘Issues regarding 
the Application of the CISG in Arbitration’, Oriental Law (2009), Vol. 3.
15　U. P. Gruber, ‘The Convention on the International Sale of Goods (CISG) in Arbitration’, 2009 Int’l 
Bus. L.J. p.23.
16　Han Jian, ‘The Application of the CISG in International Commercial Arbitration in China’, Wuhan 
University International Law Review (2008), Vol. 2.


77
CHAPTER 3
Circumstances of Autonomous Application.
According to the UNCITRAL Digest of Case Law on the Convention on 
Contracts for the International Sale of Goods (2012 Edition), the Convention 
prevails over recourse to private international law. ‘In those countries, however, 
where international uniform substantive rules are in force, such as those set force 
by the Convention, courts must determine whether those international uniform 
substantive rules apply before resorting to private international law rules at 
all. This means that recourse to the Convention prevails over recourse to the 
forum’s private international law rules. This approach has been justified on the 
grounds that, as a set of uniform substantive law rules, the Convention is more 
specific insofar as its sphere of application is more limited and leads directly 
to a substantive solution, whereas resort to private international law approach 
requires a two-step approach-that is, the identification of the applicable law and 
the application thereof.’
17 ‘According to the criterion set forth in article 1 (1)(a), 
the Convention is “directly” or “autonomously” applicable, i.e. without the need 
to resort to the rules of private international law.’
18 According to Certain Issues of 
the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation in Connection with the 
Implementation of United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International 
Sale of Goods
19 that ‘Since our government has already signed the Convention, 
17　UNCITRAL, UNCITRAL Digest of Case Law on the Convention on Contracts for the International 
Sale of Goods (2012 Edition), p.4, http://www.uncitral.org/uncitral/en/case_law/digests.html, last visited on 
10 August 2016. 
18　Ibid., p.11.
19　(87) Wai Jing Mao Fa Zi No. 22 issued on 4 December 1987. The SPC transmitted the document with 
the Circular, requesting for proper application of the Convention in foreign-related economic trials. Fa (Jing) 
Fa (1987) No. 34 issued on 10 December 1987.


78
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
it should assume the commitments on the implementation of the Convention. 
Therefore, according to the provision of Article 1.1 of the Convention, from 
January 1, 1988, the contracts for sale of goods reached between the Chinese 
companies and the companies in the aforementioned countries (except Hungary) 
will automatically apply the provisions of the Convention and the disputes or 
litigations arisen should be also settled under the Convention, unless otherwise 
agreed.’ The autonomous application of the Convention was mentioned above. 
The same position about Article 1(1) of the Convention is held by academic 
circles in and out of China.
20
As shown in the CIETAC awards, the tribunals of 7/8 cases could either directly 
and autonomously apply the Convention as requested above when the condition in 
Article 1.1(a) is met or apply relevant proper laws such as Chinese laws under the 
most significant connection doctrine to matters not stipulated in the Convention 
such as the validity of contracts.
2) A Few Cases Incorrectly Treated as Non-autonomous Application or 
Application as Agreed
Nevertheless, there are still 1/8 of the CIETAC awards where the CISG should 
be applicable autonomously but the tribunal have incorrectly treated them as 
20　P. Schlechtriem and P. Butler, UN Law on International Sales, Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2009, p.13. 
Shan Hailing, ‘The Application of the CISG in China from the Perspective of Private International Law, 
Politics and Laws (2003), Vol. 5; Chen Zhidong, Wu Jiahua, ‘ The Application of the CISG in China’, 
Science of Law(2004), Vol. 10; ChePizhao, ‘The Applicability of the CISG’, Foreign Trade Practice (2008), 
Vol. 4. This Chapter uses ‘autonomous application’ instead of ‘direct application’ not only because of the 
wording in the MOFTEC document but also to avoid confusion with the ‘direct application’ of treaties in 
China. 


79
CHAPTER 3
non-autonomous application by private international law rules. The specific 
circumstances are different and basically include the following types.
21
① Chinese laws were applicable as having the closest connection with the 
disputing contract according to the conflict of law rules. Meanwhile, the 
Convention was applicable since the parties’ places of business were in different 
contracting states while the parties had not excluded the application of the 
Convention.
22 It may be called the concurrent application of the CISG and the 
Chinese domestic law. 
② The tribunal deemed that the laws of the country with the closest connection 
to the contract involved should apply when the parties had not agreed on the 
applicable laws. Considering China was closely connected to the signing and 
performing of the contract and was the place of arbitration, Chinese laws should 
apply. Where there was no Chinese law, the Convention may apply since the 
parties’ places of business were in different contracting states of CISG. It is using 
the CISG to supplement Chinese law. 
③ The tribunal deemed that Chinese laws should apply to the execution, validity, 
interpretation, performance and dispute resolution of the contract as per Article 
41.4 of the Law of the People's Republic of China on Choice of Law for Foreign-
related Civil Relationships, Article 126 of the Contract Law and Article 142 of 
21　The CIETAC award on 2 June 2008 (Plywood, Singapore buyer v. Chinese seller). In the award, 
though the relationship between the P.R.C. Contract Law and the Convention in application is not 
mentioned, it can be found from the tribunal’s opinion that the Contract Law prevails in the application. It 
is the same in the CIETAC award on 20 October 2008 (plastic bags, Chinese seller v. American buyer).
22　The CIETAC award on 18 December 2009 (CNC machine tools, South Korea seller v. Chinese buyer).


80
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
the General Principles of the Civil Law which were on the applicable laws of 
foreign-related contracts, as Chinese laws had the closest connection with the 
case considering the fact that the seller under the obligation of characteristic 
performance was  Chinese party (the Respondent) and the subject matter involved 
in the dispute was stored in the warehouse of Dalian Port.
23 It also said whereas 
both China and the United States were contracting states of the Convention, if 
the CISG had any different provision, the CISG would be applied except those 
China had declared reservation. It is applying the CISG only when it has different 
provisions from Chinese domestic law.
④ For a case where the Convention should have been applied autonomously, the 
tribunal deemed that Chinese laws and regulations should apply with reference 
to the Convention and other international treaties and practices since the buyer 
had agreed in the repayment agreement to ‘accept jurisdiction of the judicial 
authorities at the place of the seller when fails to execute this agreement’.
24
Besides the above types, some awards have a few low-level errors which 
should not have occurred. For example, some tribunals applied the Convention, 
mistaking non-contracting nations such as India
25 and the Philippines
26 for 
23　The CIETAC award on 26 October 2011 (frozen salmon fillet, American buyer v. Chinese seller).
24　The CIETAC award on 11 August 2011 (aluminum profile, Chinese seller v. Australian buyer). The 
buyer’s agreement should have been taken as agreement on courts’ jurisdiction. If so, it would be under 
doubt whether the disputes should have been submitted to arbitration or litigation. No choice of proper 
law is contained therein. The Convention should have applied autonomously since the parties’ places of 
business are in contracting states of the Convention and they had never agreed on the applicable law. For 
matters not stipulated in the Convention, relevant applicable laws should have been determined according 
to private international law rules. 
25　The CIETAC award on 25 December 2008 (iron ore, Chinese buyer v. Indian seller).
26　The CIETAC award on 11 September 2009 (copper ore, Chinese buyer v. Filipinos seller).


81
CHAPTER 3
contracting ones. Some awarded according to the domestic laws applicable 
under private international law rules in cases where the Convention should have 
applied autonomously, ignoring Article 1.3 of the Convention and adopting the 
parties’ nationalities as the standard.
27 Some Chinese scholars had pointed out 
that the parties’ places of business should not be determined according to their 
nationalities.
28 Another example involves Article 2 of the Convention which states 
that ‘This Convention does not apply to sales: …(e)of ships, vessels, hovercraft 
or aircraft’. In the case, the Chinese buyer had purchased the air-cushion 
transportation system (called ‘hovercraft’ by the seller’s agent) from the American 
seller and requested to return the goods due to quality problems, the tribunal 
deemed that ‘Considering this dispute  involves international sale of goods and 
the parties reached no agreement on the applicable laws in the contract, Chinese 
laws shall apply to this case under the closest connection doctrine since the place 
of performance, the place where the subject matter is, the place of arbitration and 
other constituent elements of the legal relationship are all in China. For matters 
not covered thereby, relevant provisions of the Convention shall apply, since 
the seller’s nationality is American and the buyer’s is Chinese while both China 
and U.S. are contracting states of the Convention’
29. Such opinion seems to be 
disputable.
30
27　The CIETAC award on 5 August 2011[baked molybdenum concentrate, British Virgin Island Seller (it 
is found in the award that the seller’s place of business is in China) v. German buyer].
28　Zhao Yong, ‘The Application Scope and Features of the CISG’, Foreign Affairs Review (China 
Foreign Affairs University Journal, 1986), Vol. 2. 
29　The CIETAC award on 31 March 2010 (air-cushion transportation system, Chinese buyer v. American 
seller).
30　The Convention shall not have applied as per Article 2 (3) thereof if the subject matter were hovercraft 
and the applicable law shall have been determined under private international law rules. If so, the tribunal 


82
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
The above examples of mistaking autonomous application for non-autonomous 
one may originate from the arbitrators’ wrong perception. Thus, it is necessary 
to clarify some basic concepts which may involve the relationship between 
international treaties and domestic laws,
31 the divergence of ‘dualism’ and 
‘monism’, the argument of transformation or incorporation, the distinction 
between self-executing treaties and non-self-executing treaties, etc. Those are 
basic theoretical and practical issues in international law, although no final 
conclusion has yet been reached on most of the issues. Considering the above and 
the purpose of this Chapter, this Chapter only covers possible minimum topics 
thereon only when it is necessary to analyse the effectiveness, implementation and 
application of the Convention. 
would have lacked sufficient ground to supplement Chinese laws with the Convention. If this case ‘involves 
international sale of goods disputes’ as found by the tribunal, the Conventional should have applied 
autonomously since the parties had not agreed on the applicable law and their places of business were in 
different contracting states but not supplemented Chinese laws which was determined as the applicable law 
under private international law rules as stated in the tribunal’s opinion. 
31　This is a fundamental but long-lasting topic in international jurisprudence. Relevant reference is as 
follows. Li Zhaojie, ‘Discussion on Treaties’ Effect on Chinse Laws and Relevant Issues’, Chinese Journal 
of International Law (1993). Wang Tieya, ‘Status of Treaties in Chinese Legal System’, Chinese Journal of 
International Law (1994). Chen Hanfeng, Zhou Weiguo& Jiang Hao, ‘Relationship between International 
Treaties and Domestic Laws and Practice in China’, Forum on Political Science and Law (China University 
of Political Science and Law Journal, 2000), Vol. 2. Wang Xiqi, ‘Comparison of Implementation of 
International Treaties across Taiwan Strait’, China Review on International Laws and Transnational Laws 
(Taiwan), Vol. 5, Iss. 2. Wan Exiang (chief editor), ‘Research on the Relationship between International 
Laws and Domestic Laws-from the Perspective of Domestic Application of International Laws’, Beijing 
University Publishing House (2011). D. Shelton ed., International Law and Domestic Legal Systems: 
Incorporation, Transformation, and Persuasion, Oxford University Press (2011). It should be noted that 
the last English publication is the compilation of thesis devoted to the conference on international law in 
domestic system of the international congress of the International Society of Comparative Law, collecting 
reports from various countries, which shows that such issue is still a realistic one all the legal systems are 
facing.


83
CHAPTER 3
The CISG, as an international treaty, has nations as the signing parties,
32 which 
are called ‘the contracting states’. As an agreement among contracting states, 
the Convention of course has binding force on the contracting states, and the 
contracting states have an obligation to implement the Convention. To this 
point, the Convention is still a thing outside the domestic legal systems, though 
the contracting states are under the obligation of implementing it. As for China, 
neither the Chinese Constitution Law nor the Legislation Law has a provision 
on how a treaty like the Convention becomes a part of Chinese domestic system. 
Before the transformation is realized, Chinese parties are under no obligation of 
complying with the Convention. 
After the Chinese government joined the Convention upon ‘ratification’, China 
did not enact a special law to transform the content of the Convention into 
domestic legal system. So it should not be treated as the ‘transformation’ of 
the Convention into the domestic legal system. The official level reactions of 
China on the Convention are mainly shown in two documents: the Certain 
Issues in Connection with the Implementation of United Nations Convention on 
Contracts for the International Sale of Goods issued by the former MOFTEC to its 
affiliates and foreign trade companies, and the SPC’s Circular thereof to Chinese 
courts. The above documents both request Chinese institutions and companies 
to ‘implement’ the Convention. It should be noted that the subject of such 
32　It is provided in Article 26 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties that ‘Every treaty in 
force is binding upon the parties to it and must be performed by them in good faith’．China deposited the 
instrument of ratification on 3 September 1997 and the Convention took effect in China on 3 October 1997. 
China made reservation on Article 66 of the Convention and declared the execution by Taiwan on 27 April 
1970 illegal and invalid. 


84
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
implementation is not the Chinese government though it is mentioned therein that 
Chinese government ‘should assume the commitments on the implementation of 
the Convention’. It can be said that the above document and notification actually 
played the role of transforming the treaty into integral part of the domestic legal 
system through such way, i.e. transformation via notification from a ministry 
under the State Council and the SPC instead of legislative authorities, which does 
not seems perfect. Functionally, such transformation is more like ‘incorporation’. 
The Convention has been part of domestic laws once it was incorporated into 
Chinese legal system while courts and arbitral institutions can directly apply the 
Convention when relevant conditions are met. Therefore, the Convention is a 
kind of self-executing treaty in China. After the incorporation of the Convention 
into Chinese legal system, the content thereof has the nature of both behaviour 
norm and adjudication norm, which is in line with the purpose of the MOFTEC 
and the SPC issuing the above notification. Such being the case, the Convention 
shall naturally bind parties whose places of business are in China while courts and 
arbitral institutions shall apply the Convention when relevant conditions are met. 
A treaty, once ‘incorporated’ into Chinese legal system, turns into part of the 
system. It is stipulated in Article 142.2 of the General Principles of the Civil Law 
that ‘If any international treaty concluded or acceded to by the People's Republic 
of China contains provisions differing from those in the civil laws of the People's 
Republic of China, the provisions of the international treaty shall apply, unless 
the provisions are ones on which the People's Republic of China has announced 
reservations.’ The provision is analysed as follows. First, as a premise, it clearly 


85
CHAPTER 3
affirms the ‘source of law’ status of international treaties concluded or acceded 
to by China. Secondly, as its main purpose of norm, it provides the hierarchical 
structure of effectiveness of different sources of laws, i.e.,  international treaties 
takes precedence to general domestic civil laws. It should not be understood that 
international treaties only apply when ‘differing from those in the civil laws’. The 
provision may leave the wrong impression that the burden of proof is on those 
alleging the application of treaties. It seems that whoever alleging the application 
of treaties shall prove the existence of provisions ‘differing from those in the 
civil laws’. Such burden of proof is absurd and unique. Thus, it is necessary to 
make clear the purpose of norm of this stipulation to avoid misunderstanding and 
misuse. It should be conceptually clarified that the Convention is both ‘a uniform 
law’ and integral part of domestic legal systems of contracting states. Domestic 
courts and arbitral institutions, when applying the Convention, are not applying a 
legal source different from and outside the domestic legal sources, but an integral 
part of the domestic legal sources. Not only should there be any ‘discrimination’, 
priority should be given to the Convention since the General Principles of the 
Civil Law clearly provides the treaty a status of source of law and a higher level 
of effectiveness. 
Furthermore, the essence of the ‘autonomous application’ in Article 1.1(a) of the 
Convention needs to be understood. For example, it seems natural for Chinese 
courts or arbitral tribunals to determine the applicable law of a case according 
to private international law rules, when it involves an international sale of goods 
contract between a buyer whose place of business in China and a seller whose 


86
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
place of business is in U.S., since it is a foreign-related case. However, the true 
meaning of Article 1.1(a) is the Convention shall autonomously apply since the 
Convention, as integral part of Chinese legal system as well as American legal 
system, is a common law of both parties. There is no need to consider private 
international law. This is the so-called ‘one go’ instead of ‘two steps’. From the 
perspective of China, private international law rules are components of Chinese 
civil laws as per Article 145.2 of the General Principles of the Civil Law, Article 
126.1 of the Contract Law and Article 41 of the Law on Choice of Law for 
Foreign-related Civil Relationships. Observing from within the Chinese legal 
system, when such conflict of law rules are in conflict with Article 1.1(a) of the 
Convention, the Convention provision shall prevail as per Article 142.2 of the 
General Principles of the Civil Law. The conclusion is still that adjudicators 
cannot resort to private international law rules directly.
3) The Implied Choice of Chinese Laws with the Convention as Supplement
For a case arising out of the sales contract with the parties’ places of business 
in different contracting states and the parties had not agreed on the applicable 
laws, the tribunal deemed that it was appropriate to apply relevant Chinese laws 
based on the ground that the respondent had made no objection to the claimant’s 
allegation that relevant Chinese laws and the Convention should apply but 
emphasized the application of relevant Chinese laws in its defense and statements. 
Meanwhile, the tribunal supported the claimant’s request of applying the 
Convention in the case since the parties’ domiciles were in Uruguay and China 
which were contracting states of the Convention. The tribunal deemed that the 


87
CHAPTER 3
application of the Convention was in line with the two nations’ commitments to 
the Convention when there was no stipulation in Chinese laws.
33
Analysis of the law application involved in the above case is as follows. First, 
the tribunal tried to find a common ground in the parties’ statements and found it 
to be the relevant Chinese laws. Thus the tribunal deemed the parties had agreed 
on the application of relevant Chinese laws impliedly. There is nothing wrong. 
The question is whether the abstract choice of relevant Chinese laws equals to the 
exclusion of the Convention. As mentioned above, the Convention has constituted 
part of the contracting states’ legal systems. It is recognized in international 
academia that an abstract choice of a contracting state’s laws does not result in 
the exclusion of the Convention. Further discussion will be made in the following 
section. Secondly, if it does not result in the exclusion, what is the relationship 
between the Convention and Chinese laws in the regard of law application? 
There would be no doubt if the parties had expressly agreed on the application 
of Chinese laws with the Convention as supplement. If the parties had made no 
such agreement like the situation in the above case, what is the solution? Possible 
solutions are as follows. 
① Taking the parties’ agreement as equivalent to the 
choice of Chinese laws, the tribunal could have applied Chinese laws with the 
Convention as supplement based on the priority of agreement. ② Treating it as an 
issue within Chinese legal system, the tribunal could have applied the Convention 
with Chinese laws as supplement as per Article 142.2 of the General Principles of 
the Civil Law. The former is similar to the actual position of the tribunal while the 
33　The CIETAC award on 27 December 2011 (plastic woven cloth volumes, Uruguay buyer v. Chinese 
seller).


88
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
latter is the proper result according to the consensus of the international academia. 
Though it is not reflected in the tribunal’s invocation of Chinese laws, i.e., 
Articles 68 and 113 of the Contract Law as to how the Convention supplemented 
Chinese laws, this touches upon an interesting topic. Indeed, the Contract Law 
of China, though promulgated later than the Convention, is not as detailed and 
specific as the Convention. For example, the Contract Law contains no specific 
stipulation on the calculation of damages for breach of contract.
2. Non-autonomous Application
1) Parties’ Express Agreement
According to statistics, there were 28 cases in which the parties had expressly 
agreed on the application of the Convention in the eight years, accounting for 
35 percent of the total number of cases to which the Convention applied, i.e. 81. 
Among the 28 cases, there are situations where one of parties’ place of business 
are not in a contracting state
34 and there are situations where both parties’ places 
of business are in contracting states
35. There are cases where the parties expressly 
agreed on the application of the Convention in the sales contract and cases where 
34　Such as the CIETAC award on 11 January 2008 (multifunctional filter, Chinese buyer v. Indian seller), 
the CIETAC award on 28 November 2008 (mechanical equipment, Chinese buyer v. British seller), the 
CIETAC award on 18 August 2009 (medicine, Chinese seller v. Mali buyer), the CIETAC award-1 on 26 
April 2010 (lateritic nickel ore, Filipino seller v. Chinese buyer) and the CIETAC award -1 on 26 April 
2010 (lateritic nickel ore, Filipino seller v. Chinese buyer).
35　Such as the CIETAC award on 2 February 2010 (solar grade polisilicon, Singapore buyer v. Chinese 
seller), the CIETAC award on 17 September 2010 (alfafa processing production line equipment, Chinese 
buyer v. Spanish seller), the CIETAC award on 7 April 2011 (fiber cement board production line, Chinese 
buyer v. German seller), the CIETAC award on 22 July 2011 (cold rolled steel coil, South Korea buyer v. 
Chinese seller) and the CIETAC award on 15 July 2011 (sodium sulfide, Russian buyer v. Chinese seller).


89
CHAPTER 3
the parties reached the agreement to apply the Convention afterwards during the 
oral hearing.
36 Such application is non-autonomous since it is achieved by the 
parties’ consent. 
① The Degree the Parties’ Agreement is Respected
Both the Convention and Chinese laws (Article 3 of the Law of the People's 
Republic of China on Choice of Law for Foreign-related Civil Relationships) 
recognize party autonomy and respect the parties’ choice of applicable laws. 
Where the parties explicitly choose the Convention as the applicable law, the 
tribunal will generally respect the parties’ choice and apply the Convention.
37 In 
the case involving a mainland Chinese buyer and a Hong Kong seller, though the 
parties had agreed explicitly on the application of the Convention in the contract, 
the tribunal deemed the expressed intention valid since it was not against any 
mandatory legal provisions or public order and good social customs. Under such 
circumstances, the relevant provisions of the Convention could be regarded as 
supplements to the contract terms, binding both parties.
38
36　Such as the CIETAC award on 9 April 2008 (biochemical analyzer, Chinese buyer v. Hong Kong 
seller) and the CIETAC award on 9 November (tea machinery, Japanese seller v. Chinese buyer).
37　Taking the case of one company with the place of business in China and another company with the 
place of business in India agree on the application of the Convention as an example, some scholars are in 
support of such application such as Zhao Chengbi, ‘Uniform Law on International Trade’, Law Press (1998), 
p.350 while those against it advocate the determination of the applicable law according to the closest 
connection doctrine since China’s reservation to Article 1.1(b) when ratifying the Convention shows its 
basic attitude that the Convention shall not apply to contracts signed by and between Chinese companies 
and parties from non-contracting states. Such reservation is mandatory in law, thus party autonomy shall be 
limited. The Convention cannot apply as per the parties’ agreement. Chen Zhidong, Wu Jiahua, ‘Discussion 
on the Application of the CISG in China’, Journal of Law, Iss. 10 (2004).
38　The CIETAC award on 30 November 2009 (laterite nickel ore, mainland China buyer v. Hong Kong 
seller).


90
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
However, there are exceptions. For example, in another case involving a mainland 
China buyer and a Hong Kong seller, the tribunal, though noticing both parties 
had alleged the applicability of the Convention to the contract in the case and 
finding such expressed intention valid since it was not against current statutory 
provisions in Chinese laws or public order and good social customs, insisted 
on the application of the laws of mainland China under the closest connection 
doctrine. Under such precondition, however, the tribunal deemed the Convention 
not be excluded from applying to certain aspects of the contract involved.
39 In 
another case involving a Hong Kong company and a mainland China company, 
the tribunal deemed that the applicable law should be the one with the closest 
connection to the contract, i.e. the laws of mainland China. Meanwhile, the 
tribunal, noticing both parties’ multiple invocation of the Convention in their 
statements, found the Convention be taken as reference when there was no 
relevant stipulation in the laws of mainland China.
40 Such application of law is 
more or less weird, as the party autonomy principle should precede the closest 
connection doctrine when it is found that the parties have agreed on the applicable 
law.
41 It is difficult to understand why the tribunal insisted on determining the 
applicable law according to the closest connection doctrine in the circumstance 
that the parties had chosen the Convention expressly or impliedly. 
39　The CIETAC award on 21 September 2009 (sulfur, mainland China buyer v. Hong Kong seller).
40　The CIETAC award on 31 August 2009 (flake sulfide, Hong Kong buyer v. Mainland China seller).
41　According to Article 4.2 of the Rules of the Supreme People's Court on the Relevant Issues concerning 
the Application of Law in Hearing Foreign-Related Contractual Dispute Cases in Civil and Commercial 
Matters [Fa Shi (2007) No.14] which is expired but was effective at the time of hearing, ‘if the parties have 
not agreed on the applicable law of a contract dispute but invoked the law of the same country or region 
while raising any objection to the law application, they shall be deemed as having chosen the applicable law 
to the contract dispute’. 


91
CHAPTER 3
② Is the Convention Excluded by agreeing to ‘apply Chinese Laws’?
Does the parties’ express agreement on the application of Chinese laws mean the 
exclusion of the Convention by agreement (Article 6)? Obviously we cannot give 
a direct answer, but need to distinguish different circumstances and present the 
positions shown in the CIETAC awards.
First, the Convention shall not apply when the parties have expressly agreed 
on the application of ‘Chinese laws’ in the contract without mentioning the 
Convention either concurrently or alternatively.
42 It is another issue whether 
Chinese laws can be supplemented by the Convention. In the case the parties 
had agreed on the application of both Chinese laws and the Convention without 
specifying which one preceded, the tribunal deemed that ‘the Convention shall 
prevail when it is in conflict with Chinese laws’.
43
Secondly, it is common for the CIETAC tribunals to treat ‘Chinese laws’ and 
the Convention as two separate things and exclude the Convention from the 
concept of ‘Chinese laws’ when the parties have not made it clear whether the 
Convention is included in the ‘Chinese laws’ chosen by them.
44 Under such 
42　The CIETAC award on 24 January 2008 (Toluene, Hong Kong seller v. Mainland China buyer). It is 
stipulated in the contract of the case that Chinese laws shall apply when the place of contract or the location 
of the goods when disputes arise is in mainland China or the Chinese company is the respondent while the 
Convention shall apply in other circumstances. 
43　The CIETAC award on 17 September 2010 (alfalfa processing production line equipment, Chinese 
buyer v. Spanish seller)
44　It is inconsistent in the CIETAC awards whether dualism or monism should be adopted in the 
relationship between the Convention and Chinese laws. The analysis of relevant changes may be found 
in Han Jian, ‘The Application of the CISG in International Commercial Arbitration in China’, Wuhan 
University International Law Review, Iss. 2 (2008).


92
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
circumstance, ‘Chinese law’, as understood by the tribunals, mainly refers to the 
Contract Law and other domestic laws and regulations of China. Does that mean 
the complete exclusion of the application of the Convention? The application of 
‘Chinese laws’ (the Contract Law) naturally excludes the Convention over matter 
stipulated in both of them, such as whether there constitutes the fundamental 
breach of contract. Further distinction should be made to answer the question 
whether the Convention may supplement over matters not stipulated in ‘Chinese 
laws’ (the Contract Law), such as the calculation of damages for breach of 
contract. Normally, the tribunals would like to supplement ‘Chinese laws’ with 
the Convention when the parties’ places of business are in different contracting 
states.
45 In such cases, the Convention would autonomously apply when the parties 
have not agreed on the applicable law. There is room for interpretation whether 
the Convention is excluded by the parties’ agreement on Chinese laws as the 
applicable law. The tribunals sustained the supplementary role of the Convention 
on the ground that the parties had not expressly excluded the application of the 
Convention. However, the tribunals did not accept the Convention as supplement 
to Chinese Laws in the circumstance that one party’s place of business was not in 
contracting state.
46
45　The CIETAC award on 9 September 2008 (mechanical equipment, Chinese buyer v. Israeli seller). 
The CIETAC award on 4 June 2009 (Neodecanoyl chloride, Chinese buyer v. Japanese seller). Another 
similar one is the CIETAC award on 15 May 2009 (Ferrosilicon, Swiss buyer v. Chinese seller). But the 
tribunal made a further step in the hearing of the case, letting the parties reach agreement on the application 
of mainland China laws, thus excluding the application of the Convention. The CIETAC award on 20 July 
2010 (mechanical equipment, Chinese buyer v. South Korean seller). 
46　The CIETAC award on 16 July 2010 (iron ore, Chinese buyer v. Indian seller). The tribunal refused 
the application of the Convention though the agent of the party whose place of business was not in a 
contracting state invoked the Convention in arbitration, but applied Chinese laws instead. Another one is 
the CIETAC award on 13 April 2011 (hot-rolled strip, Hong Kong seller v. South Korea buyer). It is under 


93
CHAPTER 3
However, it may be inferred from some awards that the tribunals held the ‘monism’ 
position. For example, the tribunal, in the CIETAC award on 22 January 2010 
(Copper pipe, American buyer v. Chinese seller), deemed that the Convention 
should prevail when it contained different provisions from Chinese laws since 
the parties’ places of business were in different contracting states as per Article 
142 of the General Principles of the Civil Law based on the parties’ agreement in 
the Sales Contract that ‘the validity, interpretation, performance and execution of 
this agreement shall be governed by the P.R.C. laws’.
47 Another example is the 
CIETAC award on 27 September 2011 (hollow shape steel, Irish buyer v. Chinese 
seller) in which the tribunal deemed that the Convention should prevail when it 
was different from Chinese laws as pre Article 142 of the General Principles of 
the Civil Law after the parties had agreed on Chinese laws as the applicable law 
during the hearing.
48
Different opinions are found in case laws and academic research of other nations 
regarding whether general reference of a contracting nation’s laws include the 
Convention. However, the prevailing view is such general reference should 
be regarded as including the Convention unless the parties explicitly refer to a 
debate whether the Convention autonomously apply to Kong Kong which is part of China. The tribunal was 
against such autonomous application and strictly limited the applicable law to mainland China laws. 
47　The CIETAC award on 22 January 2010 (Copper pipe, American buyer v. Chinese seller). If the case 
is not interpreted as ‘monism’, ‘The law governing foreign-related contracts in civil and commercial matters 
shall refer to the substantive law in a relevant country or region, excluding the conflict law and procedural 
law’ as per Article 1 of the Rules of the Supreme People's Court on the Relevant Issues concerning the 
Application of Law in Hearing Foreign-Related Contractual Dispute Cases in Civil and Commercial 
Matters [Fa Shi (2007) No.14] which was effective at the time of hearing. If Article 142 of the General 
Principles of the Civil Law were regarded as ‘the conflict law and procedural law’, the legitimacy of the 
tribunal’s application thereof would be under doubt. 
48　The CIETAC award on 27 September 2011 (hollow shape steel, Irish buyer v. Chinese seller).


94
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
nation’s domestic trading laws.
49 Some scholars have named the circumstance 
where the parties’ choice of a contracting state’s national law results in the 
application of the Convention as ‘indirect choice’.
50 The same position is found in 
the CISG Advisory Council Opinions
51 and is widely supported by international 
commercial arbitration practice.
52 Under such trend, the dualism that treats 
‘Chinese laws’ and the Convention as separate things in Chinese practice should 
be changed. Though the Convention is not ‘natural birth’ of Chinese legislative 
authorities, it should be treated as ‘natural birth’ after the ratification and 
‘incorporation’ into Chinese legal system and should be treated with priority over 
general domestic civil laws. 
Furthermore, there is the circumstance where the parties specifically agree on 
the application of the law of a contracting state such as Chinese laws, despite the 
autonomous application of the Convention. Some scholars have pointed out it 
would be meaningless for the parties to expressly choose the applicable law if it 
49　P. Schlechtriem and P. Butler, UN Law on International Sales, p.15.
50　See A. Janssen and M. Spiker, The Application of the CISG in the World of International Commercial 
Arbitration, RabelsZ 77, 131-157, 135 (2013).
51　The CISG Advisory Council is not an official organization. Its members are experts and scholars 
specialized in the CISG research from different nations. It has continuously issued the Opinions to solve 
difficult problems in the practice of adjudicating with the CISG, committed to promoting the unified 
application and interpretation of the Convention internationally, and kept close cooperative relationship 
with UNCITRAL. The Opinions are getting more and more international influence. For example, the 
German Federal Court quoted the No. 13 Opinion of the Advisory Council in its judgment on 28 May 2014. 
The Hague International Court invoked the same opinion in its latest judgment. Related information may 
be found on the official website http://www.cisg-ac.org/. According to Article 4(b)(i) of the latest Advisory 
Council Opinion,i.e. ‘Exclusion of the CISG’, released in South Africa with Dr. L. Spagnolo from the Law 
School of Monash University in Australia as the reporter, the extent to exclude, diminish or change the 
CISG could not be inferred merely from the choice of the law of a contracting state. 
52　Such as the ICC case No. 6653 awarded on 26 March 1993 (steel), involving the sales agreement 
between a German steel company and a Syrian buyer. See http://cisgw3.law.pace.edu/cases/936653il.html.


95
CHAPTER 3
is not to exclude the Convention. Such view seems to be reasonable. However, as 
responded by Professor Schlechtriem, the parties usually have reasons to choose 
the law in the contract. For example, the Convention only provides for special 
matters of sales contracts without covering other matters such as set-off, credit 
assignment and contract validity, thus the choice of law clause in sales contracts 
is always worth recommending. Even under circumstances where the Convention 
is applicable as per Article 1.1 (a), it is important for the parties to choose 
the applicable law since the applicable law is to be determined under private 
international law rules for matters not covered by the Convention.
53 The above 
response is noteworthy. Obviously, Professor Schlechtriem’s position is to wish 
that the Convention can be applied more in international sales of goods. Even if 
the parties have agreed on the applicable law, such agreement shall be interpreted 
as having the only role of supplementing the Convention as long as there is room 
for such interpretation,  
③ Alteration to the Agreed Choice of law
It is found in a CIETAC award that the parties, having expressly chosen the 
Convention and the UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial 
Contracts,
54 agreed in the hearing to change the applicable law to the Contract 
Law of China and relevant Chinese laws. Thus, the tribunal deemed the applicable 
law be the Contract Law and relevant Chinese laws. Such alteration is rare and the 
reasons behind it cannot be found in the award. One possible reason is the tribunal 
53　P.Schlechtriem and P.Butler, UN Law on International Sales, p.16.
54　The CIETAC award on 10 September 2009 (mold, Hong Kong buyer v. Mainland China seller).


96
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
and agents are not familiar with the laws chosen by the parties, thus prefer 
Chinese laws which they know better.
2) Parties’ Implied Choice of the Convention
It refers to the circumstance where the parties have never agreed on the application 
of the Convention in writing or orally, but the willingness to such application is 
reflected in their respective acts. The most typical way is to show such intention 
through the statements by the parties’ lawyers. For example, the lawyers invoke 
provisions of the Convention to support their views. In such circumstance, some 
tribunals are willing to apply the Convention when handling cases.
55
A contrary example is when the parties had not agreed on the applicable law, the 
tribunal, under the precondition set in Article 1.1(a) of the Convention, deemed 
it appropriate to apply Chinese laws since both parties had invoked the Contract 
Law in their submission and made no objection to the application of Chinese 
laws, and further found the Convention applicable since there was no exclusion of 
the Convention in the contract.
56
3. Application of Domestic Laws under Private International Law 
Rules
Among the 81 awards, domestic laws were applied to 6 of them according to 
55　The CIETAC award on 3 December 2010 (Polyvinyl chloride resin, Afghanistan buyer v. Chinese 
seller).
56　The CIETAC award on 25 February 2008 (beef slaughtering production line, Chinese buyer v. 
Netherlands seller).


97
CHAPTER 3
private international law rules.
57 In most of these cases, one party’s place of 
business is in a contracting state while the other party’s place of business is 
in a non-contracting state, which leads to the reflection whether China should 
withdraw its reservation to Article 1.1(b) of the Convention. 
The Chinese government made reservation to Article 1.1(b) of the Convention. 
It is not easy to find the reasons for such reservation. However, more and more 
scholars are calling for the Chinese government to withdraw this reservation
58 
like its withdrawal of the reservation to Article 11 of the Convention (flexible 
requirement on contract form). Due to the reservation, there were tribunals 
determining relevant domestic laws as the applicable laws under private 
international law rules if the parties had not agreed on the applicable law in the 
circumstance that one party’s place of business was in China while the other 
party’s place of business was in a non-contracting state.
59
57　The CIETAC award on 25 December 2008 (iron ore, Chinese buyer v. Indian seller, Chinese laws and 
the Convention were applied wrongly). The CIETAC award on 11 September 2009 (copper ore, Chinese 
buyer v. Filipino seller, the Convention was applied wrongly). The CIETAC award on 7 December 2009 
(chrome ore, Chinese buyer v. Pakistan seller, Chinese laws were applied). The CIETAC award on 19 
February 2010 (chrome ore, Chinese buyer v. Turkish seller, Chinese laws were applied). The CIETAC 
award on 31 March 2010 (air-cushion transportation system, Chinese buyer v. American seller, Chinese 
laws and the Convention were applied).
58　Chen Zhidong, Wu Jiahua, ‘Discussion on the Application of the CISG in China, Journal of Law, 
Iss.10 (2004). Yang Fan, ‘China’s Reservation to the CISG and the Convention’s Application in the 
CIETAC Arbitration, Wuhan University International Law Review, Iss. 2 (2008). Li Wei, ‘Discussion on 
China’s Withdrawal of the Reservation to Article 1.1 (b) of the CISG’, Jurists, Iss.5 (2012).
59　Such as the CIETAC case on 7 December 2009 (chrome ore, Chinese buyer v. Pakistan seller, default) 
and the CIETAC award on 19 February 2010 (chrome ore, Chinese buyer v. Turkish seller, default). Turkey 
acceded to the convention on 7 July 2010 and the Convention has been effective to Turkey as from 1 August 
2011. The CIETAC award on 20 July 2011 (Sodium tripolyphosphate, Tuikish buyer v. Chinese seller). Of 
courses, there were cases in which the tribunals autonomously applied the Convention by mistake while 
the applicable law should have been determined under private international law rules, such as the CIETAC 


98
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
Looking up the legislative history of Article 1.1(b) of the Convention, Mr. Kopac, 
the representative from Czechoslovakia, pointed out during the First Committee 
Deliberations, that there were special legal rules governing international trade 
contracts in his country ( and some other countries as well), so it would create 
difficulties in the application of subparagraph (b), comparing with other countries 
where internal and international contracts were governed by the same rules. His 
position was supported by Mr. Wagner, the representative from the Democratic 
Republic of Germany.
60 The Chinese delegation did not make any specific 
comment thereon. At the beginning of the fifth Meeting, Mr. Li Chih-min, the 
representative from China mentioned that the Chinese delegation found that the 
five articles deliberated were basically acceptable, but the Chinese delegation 
would certainly suggest or support some amendments.
61 From the above, we find 
no specific opinion or reason regarding Article 1.1(b) of the Convention. 
On 11 December 1986, U.S.A and China approved or ratified the Convention, 
making the Convention enter into force on 1 January 1988. It is well-known that 
the Chinese government and the American government agreed on acceding to 
the Convention and bringing it into force together. Since both countries made 
reservation to Article 1.1(b) as per Article 95 of the Convention when acceding to 
award on 4 November 2011 (Isononyl alcohol, Turkish buyer v. Chinese seller). The Convention was not 
effective on Turkey when the contract was signed, thus the Convention should not apply autonomously as 
per Article 100.2 thereof. 
60　See the Minutes of the First Committee Meeting (in the afternoon of 10 March 1980. See J. O. 
Honnold, Documentary History of the Uniform Law for International Sale: The studies, deliberations and 
decisions that led to the 1980 United Nations Convention with introductions and explanations, Deventer: 
Kluwer Law and Taxation Publishers, 1989, pp. 458-459.
61　The fifth meeting (3pm 13 March 1980). Ibid., p.475.


99
CHAPTER 3
it, people may reasonably speculate the above reservation be part of the agreement 
between the two governments.
62
The key point mentioned by the Czechoslovakia representative above constitutes 
the substantial reason for the Convention to permit contracting states to make 
reservation to Article 1.1(b). The reservation may ensure special domestic laws 
governing international trade contracts to be applied in such circumstance. 
Specific to China, it is to ensure the application of China’s Law on Economic 
Contracts Involving Foreign Elements to trade contracts by and between Chinese 
legal persons whose places of business are in China and foreign legal persons 
whose places of business are in non-contracting states.
63 This special law was 
abolished on 1 October 1999 and the circumstances have changed. There is no 
need to ensure the application of the Law on Economic Contracts Involving 
Foreign Elements which was replaced by the Contract Law. Comparing with 
the Convention, the Contract Law can be described as a general law while the 
Convention is the special law. Naturally, for international sales of goods contracts 
involving foreign elements, the Convention shall apply and there is no special 
need for the application of the Contract Law. Surely, the Contract Law, as the 
‘uniform law’ unifying three preceding contract laws, exercise its governing 
role over both domestic and foreign-related contracts. It still applies to foreign-
related contracts other than those governed by specific conventions such as the 
62　This was pointed by Professor P. Winship, an American scholar, the international seminar for the 
35th anniversary of the Convention (35 Years CISG and Beyond) on 29-30 January 2015 in Swiss for the 
purpose of this Report. His view was supported by Professor A. Garro from Columbia Law School, U.S. It 
is hereby noted with appreciation to them. 
63　The law was promulgated on 21 March 1985 and came into force on 1 July 1985.


100
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
CISG in the circumstance that Chinses law is the applicable law. At this point, the 
substantial reason for China’s reservation to Article 1.1 (b) of the Convention has 
disappeared. 
In addition, China has been integrated into global community since the beginning 
of reform and opening-up thirty years ago. China acceded to the WTO and the 
foreign trade administration system has undergone great changes. These changes 
have served to inspire reflection on China’s last reservation to the Convention. 
The reservation has both advantages and disadvantages. With the changing 
situation, the advantages have dissipated while the disadvantages remain or even 
become more. It is time for China to withdraw its reservation to Article 1.1 (b) of 
the Convention.
4. HMT(Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan) and the CISG
After the return of Hong Kong and Macao to China, the Chinese government 
has not made any declaration or submitted any relevant document concerning 
the Convention’s legal status in the two regions. It has been pointed out by some 
scholars that according to Article 93 of the Convention, if a contracting state 
has two or more territorial units with different legal systems governing matters 
stipulated by the Convention while the contracting state makes no declaration as 
per Article 93.1, the Convention shall apply to all the territory of the state. It is thus 
concluded that the Convention shall apply in Hong Kong and Macao regions. 
64
64　Han Jian, ‘The Application of the CISG in Interantional Commercial Arbitration in China’, Wuhan 
University International Law Review, Iss. 2(2008).


101
CHAPTER 3
It has also been pointed out that Hong Kong, Taiwan and Macao, as important 
trade partners of mainland China, are not members of the Convention, thus the 
Convention shall not apply to transactions between mainland China parties 
and parties from the three regions even if Chinese laws apply under private 
international law rules since such transactions were not sales of goods ‘between 
parties whose places of business are in different States’. However, disputes arising 
out of such transactions are regarded as foreign-related contract disputes under 
Chinese laws. Chinese courts shall determine the applicable law with reference to 
Chinses private international law rules while trying the cases. If the parties choose 
the Convention as the applicable law under the party autonomy principle, such 
choice shall be deemed as legal and valid as well. 
65
Concerning the above circumstance, the key element that ‘contracts of sales of 
goods between parties whose places of business are in different States’ still lacks 
even if China withdraws its reservation to Article 1.1 (b) of the Convention. Other 
practical approaches need to be considered. First, the provisions in the Convention 
are more neutral and can meet the demand in the inter-regional transactions better. 
Thus, it is obvious in policy choice that the Convention has priority over other 
proper laws determined under conflict law rules. Secondly, these cases are defined 
as ‘foreign-related’ cases in China’s judicial practice. Thus, it is only of formal 
meaning to distinguish regions from nations. Substantial consideration shall 
prevail. Therefore, as a possible solution of the problem, it is suggested to confirm 
the ‘quasi-application’ of the Convention in such circumstance by the Supreme 
65　Li Wei, ‘Discussion on China’s Withdrawal of the Reservation to Article 1.1 (b) of the CISG’, Jurists, 
Iss.5 (2012).


102
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
People’s Court’s judicial interpretation.
III. Further Analysis and Comments
1. Improvement on Invocation of Legal Provisions and Reasoning 
in Arbitral Awards
It is found through analysis of the CISG-related CIETAC awards from 2008 to 
2015 that the average number of words in an award is 12,000, equivalent to that 
of a legal thesis. Therefore, it can be said that the CIETAC awards follows long 
style. There are surely reasons for such result. One reason is the CIETAC caseload 
is not too heavy for the arbitrators, which means the arbitrators have enough time 
to hear cases and draft awards. At the same time, the CIETAC encourages well-
reasoned awards. Thus, the arbitrators, when having sufficient time, are naturally 
willing to make awards with more reasoning. 
Fact finding and law application are basic tasks for adjudicators. Only clear fact 
finding and proper law application can convince parties. The adjudicators’ main 
task in making judgments is to express the reasons clearly. They need to explain 
how they examine evidence and find facts. The author of this chapter only read 
the final awards without checking the relevant case documents, thus makes no 
comment on relevant fact finding, but focuses on law application.
Discussing the invocation of legal provisions in awards, we may make a 
comparison with Chinese courts’ invocation in their judgments. The SPC 
has released the Circular on Intensifying the Formulation of Civil Ruling 


103
CHAPTER 3
Documents, 
66 the Provisions on Citation of Such Normative Legal Documents as 
Laws and Regulations in the Judgments 
67 and the Provisions on the Issuance of 
Judgments on the Internet by the People's Courts. 
68 Now, the ‘Chinese Judgments 
Online’ website of the SPC offers access to a large number of online verdicts in 
which normative invocation of legal provisions can be found. 
The invocation of specific legal provisions are found in 69 percent  of the 81 
CIETAC awards of which 35 percent involves invocation of the Convention 
and 51 percent involves invocation of Chinese laws. The directly related issue is 
the tribunals, when invoking no specific legal provisions, had limitations in the 
reasoning of their opinions.  ‘The tribunal’s opinion’, in which the tribunals show 
their understanding of relevant legal provisions and explain their logics of finding, 
is the most valuable part for other adjudicators and scholars. Careless and over-
simplified reasoning is still very common. It is generally believed that the quality 
of arbitral awards is higher than that of court judgments, which is also a common 
sense shared by arbitration professionals. However, Chinese arbitrators appear 
to enjoy more ‘freedom’ than judges as long as the invocation of the Convention 
is concerned. There is still room for improvement for the invocation of the 
Convention in CIETAC awards. 
To understand the reason for such phenomenon, analysis of the composition of 
the CIETAC arbitrators must be made. Among the CIETAC arbitrators, there are 
66　27 June 2006, Fa Shi [2006] No. 145.
67　26 October 2009, Fa Shi [2009] No.14.
68　21 November 2013, Fa Shi [2013] No.26.


104
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
retired judges, retired legislators, senior lawyers and other practitioners and law 
professors. They have rich practical experience, which is a big advantage through 
life-long accumulation. The well-known saying ‘The life of the law has not been 
logic: it has been experience’
69 by Holmes on the first page of his publication ‘the 
Common Law’ may easily leave people with the impression that only experience 
is important while logic does not matter. However, we deeply feel through reading 
the CIETAC awards that experience alone is not sufficient. It is only reliable 
on the ground of solid logic. The CIETAC, for improvement, may consider 
appointing arbitrators with complementary advantages when forming tribunals. 
Taking judgments by judicial institutions of other contracting states as reference 
does not mean the other states’ case laws have binding force. Rather, foreign 
case laws are of persuasive value only. Essentially, this is the requirement under 
Article 7.1 of the Convention as well which stipulates ‘regard is to be had…to the 
need to promote uniformity in its application’. 
70 In another word, what matters is 
not the precedent effect of judgments by foreign courts or awards by tribunals, or 
the particular significance endowed on the award by the institution accidentally 
handling a specific legal issue for the first time, but the inclusion of existing 
relevant adjudication into the scope of consideration for the reasoning of awards. 
71
In fact, the invocation of foreign judgments in reasoning can be helpful from the 
perspective of comparative law when there are loopholes in the domestic laws. 
In contrast, in a case applying the Convention, such invocation is not to fill in 
69　O. W. Holmes, The Common Law, New York: Dover Publications, Inc. 1991, p.1.
70　See F. Ferrari and M. Torsello, International Sales Law-CISG, pp.8-9.
71　F. Enderlain and D. Maskow, International Sales Law, New York: Oceana Publications, 1992, p.56.


105
CHAPTER 3
loopholes in laws, but mainly to play the reference role in the narrow context of 
legal interpretation. From this point of view, there are further reasons in China to 
invoke judgments involving the application of the Convention by judicial bodies 
of foreign countries. First, the SPC has recently advocated a Guiding-case System. 
Although such system does not have the legal binding force as the case law of 
common law countries, it provides the internal persuasiveness 
72 which is of the 
same value as precedents to adjudicators as foreign case law. Secondly, since the 
Convention is an international uniform law and a ‘lingua franca’ of international 
sales, different Contracting States share the same rules. The Convention has been 
integrated in China’s legal system, so the relevant ‘guiding-cases’ of CISG in 
China should not be limited to Chinese CISG case laws, but cast eyes to foreign 
judicial practice.
Foreign case laws can provide reference when handling domestic cases of the 
same type. Language and information barriers are not insurmountable. At least the 
Chinses version of the UNCITRAL Digest of Case Law on the CISG and other 
literatures are easily accessible from the internet.
2. How to Evaluate the Ratio of Win
The ideal fair result of 1:1 conceived in theory by Professor Magnus faces the 
following challenges in reality. First, foreign parties may be absent from oral 
72　It is not up to the SPC whether the guidance cases have legal binding force since it involves the 
alloction of legislative power and is a policy choice in the constitutional level. The ‘persuasiveness’ has 
nothing to do with the ‘policy choice’ but is the quality any adjudication should have as an objective 
existence.


106
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
hearings due to various reasons such as knowing justice is not on his side, lacking 
of financial support or having language barriers. In the CIETAC cases, though the 
tribunals tried hard to contact the foreign parties, a large number of foreign parties 
were absent from hearings and waived their rights while Chinese parties were 
rarely absent. Secondly, foreign parties may not entrust the appropriate agents. 
The arbitration results may be influenced by actual communication barriers due to 
language or culture differences when no Chinese lawyers are involved. Thirdly, 
international trade has special structural factors. For example, there are more 
cases in which sellers claim for payment than those in which buyers claim for 
delivery of goods or quality problems. Among the two types, the former is simpler 
and easier to win. Considering the above complicated factors, the 1:1 ideal model 
of Professor Magnus is not realistic and need to be adjusted. It is difficult to find 
to what extent the adjustment should be made. After all, the psychological or 
subconscious factor ‘those who are not our kin are sure to be of a different heart’ 
exists objectively either in Asia, Europe or America. Good judges and arbitrators 
will consciously resist the interference of such factor in their judgment so as to 
ensure fairness and impartiality. Problems exist in the CLOUT cases used by 
Professor Magnus to verify his assumption. These cases are all carefully chosen 
by the correspondents of each nation and are not representative of the day-to-day 
judgments in specific jurisdictions. A persuasive verification should be like what 
is done in this Chapter, i.e. through empirical research on all the relevant cases of 
a specific institution in consecutive years. 
73
73　The material for this research, i.e. the cases provided by the CIETAC, are not specially selected but 
more like keyword search results from its file storage. The reason of such conclusion is because in some 
cases the tribunals did not apply the Convention but the parties alleged its application. 


107
CHAPTER 3
The readers may make their own judgment whether the appropriate ratio should 
be 1.5:1 or 2:1 instead of 1:1. Different institutions, as said by Mr. Hu Shi, a 
Chinese scholar, ‘please take a look at the mirror’, 
74 make judgments according 
to their own circumstances. It can never be over emphasized for institutions and 
adjudicators to be wary of ‘political interpretation’ of the Convention.
IV. Conclusions and Suggestions
1. This Chapter, based on research of the 81 Convention-related CIETAC awards 
from 2008 to 2015, reveals experience and problems in the application of the 
Convention in international commercial arbitration in China. It is shown by 
statistics that the average number of words in each award is about 12,000. The 
awards follow the “long” style. As to invocation of laws, 38 percent awards 
contain no invocation while only 35 percent  contain invocation of specific legal 
provisions. Therefore, there is still room for improvement. Concerning reasoning, 
some awards do not have refined reasoning due to the lack of specific citation of 
legal provisions. Furthermore, attention or reference of foreign cases has not been 
found in the awards. Improvement needs to be made for the application of the 
Convention as a uniform law. 
2. The ratio of winning Chinese parties to foreign ones is 1.68:1 which is different 
from the ‘theoretical ideal model’ 1:1, but is still a reasonable one considering the 
complicated factors in reality. However, emphasis on no ‘political interpretation’ 
of the Convention is never too much in order to achieve uniformity in the 
74　Hu Shi, ‘Please Take a Look at the Mirror’, Guangming Daily Publishing House.


108
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
application and interpretation of the Convention.
3. The autonomous application of the Convention was made in 7/8 of the 
cases when relevant conditions were met. For the other 1/8 cases, the tribunals 
determined the applicable law under private international law rules such as 
the closest connection doctrine instead of the autonomous application of the 
Convention. It is necessary at least for the arbitrators of these cases to update their 
knowledge of law and change their legal concepts. 
4. The Convention has been ‘incorporated’ into Chinese legal system as officially 
ratified by China. It is a formal source of law and shall have priority over general 
domestic laws in application. Adjudicators, when applying the Convention, shall 
be fully aware that they are applying a part of the domestic legal system, and shall 
never ‘discriminate’ against it in application with any excuse.
5. Misreading of Article 142.2 of the General Principles of the Civil Law shall be 
corrected. This provision clearly affirms the ‘source of law’ status of international 
treaties concluded or acceded to by China and establishes the internal hierarchical 
structure of effectiveness in China’s different sources of civil laws, i.e. 
international treaties have higher level or priority over general civil laws. It cannot 
be misinterpreted as providing a burden of proof for those alleging the application 
of international treaties, i.e. whoever claiming the application of international 
treaties shall prove the existence of ‘different provisions’. 
6. Generally, parties’ express agreement that ‘Chinese laws shall apply’ in 
contracts shall not be interpreted as excluding the application of the Convention. 


109
CHAPTER 3
In practice, Chinese domestic laws and the Convention used to be treated as two 
different things, which is in conflict with the basic position that the Convention, 
once adopted and ‘incorporated’, has been integrated in Chinese legal system. 
Relevant concepts should be updated to keep in line with the consensus of 
international theoretical and practical circles. Correspondingly, the position in 
practice that application of the Contract Law should be considered first and the 
Convention serves as supplement shall be reversed. 
7. The circumstances for China’s reservation to Article 1.1(b) have changed. 
China shall withdraw the reservation and gear itself to international standard in 
the application of the Convention.
8. Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan are important trade partners of mainland China. 
It is difficult for the Convention to regulate the inter-regional sales of goods 
unless the parties agree on its application. The SPC is suggested to issue judicial 
interpretation on the ‘quasi-application’ of the Convention on such ‘foreign-related 
contractual disputes’ and find a way out at the right moment.


110
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
Chapter Four Judicial Supervision 
of China’s International Commercial 
Arbitration
This Chapter makes comprehensive analysis and comment of the legal issues 
involved in judicial review of international commercial arbitration cases, foreign-
related arbitration cases and HMT-related arbitration cases in 2015 via the 
collection of judgments published on the China Judgments Online, the replies 
from the 4
th Civil Division of the SPC publicized in the Guidance for Trial of 
Foreign-Related Commercial and Maritime Cases and other data from the internet. 
I. Confirmation of Validity of Foreign-related and HMT-
related Arbitral Clauses
1. Applicable Law to a Foreign-Related or HMT-Related Arbitral 
Agreement
In Gao Zhengyi, a Taiwan resident, v. Guang Dong Lang Zheng Law Firm 
concerning confirmation of validity of an arbitral clause, the parties signed 
the Agency Agreement, agreeing to submit contractual disputes to Shenzhen 
Arbitration Commission. The court ascertained that it should refer to Article 18 
of the Law on Choice of Law for Foreign-related Civil Relationships to determine 
the applicable law in reviewing the validity of the Taiwan-related arbitration 
agreement. The laws at the place of the arbitration commission, i.e. the P.R.C. 


111
CHAPTER 4
laws, should apply in the confirmation of the validity of the arbitral clause since 
the parties had not agreed on the applicable law thereof.
1
In CNPC Bohai Drilling Engineering Co. Ltd. Petroleum EPC Branch and Far 
East Energy (Bermuda), Ltd. concerning confirmation of validity of an arbitral 
agreement, the parties signed the Fracturing Service Contract, agreeing that ‘any 
party may submit disputes or claims to arbitration…Any arbitral award will be 
final…The award is enforceable in any relevant nation including but not limited 
to P.R.C.’, without mentioning a specific arbitration institution or the applicable 
law for the confirmation of validity of the arbitral clause. Afterwards, they could 
not reach supplementary agreement on the arbitration institution or the applicable 
law. The court ascertained that the lex fori, i.e. the P.R.C. laws, should apply in 
the determination of validity of the foreign-related arbitration agreement when the 
parties had not agreed on the applicable law thereof, the place of arbitration or the 
arbitration institution, or made no clear agreement thereon according to Article 18 
of the Law on Choice of Law for Foreign-related Civil Relationships and Article 
14 of the SPC’s Interpretations on Several Issues Concerning Application of the 
Law on Choice of Law for Foreign-Related Civil Relationships(I). The parties, 
though expressing the intent to arbitrate, had not agreed on a specific arbitration 
institution or place of arbitration and could not reach a supplementary agreement 
thereon, so the court applied the P.R.C. laws in the confirmation.
2
1　(2015)Shen Zhong Fa She Wai Zhong Zi No. 134 Civil Ruling by Shenzhen Intermediate People’s 
Court.
2　(2015)San Zhong Min (Shang) Te Zi No.04910 Civil Ruling by Beijing 3rd Intermediate People’s 
Court.


112
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
It is found from the above cases that the law applicable to an arbitration 
agreement is ascertained in the following sequence according to Article 18 of the 
Law on Choice of Law for Foreign-related Civil Relationships and Article 14 of 
the SPC’s Interpretations on Several Issues Concerning Application of the Law on 
Choice of Law for Foreign-Related Civil Relationships(I). The law chosen by the 
parties shall apply first. The law at the place of arbitration or the location of the 
arbitration institution shall apply when there is no chosen applicable law. The lex 
fori, i.e. the P.R.C. laws, shall apply only when there is no chosen applicable law, 
place of arbitration or arbitration institution or no clear agreement. 
2. Interpretation of the Choice of Arbitration Institutions in 
Arbitral Clauses
1) Interpretation of Inaccurate Choice of Arbitration Institution
In China Overseas Holdings Limited etc. v. Elite Honest Investment Limited 
concerning confirmation of validity of an arbitration agreement, the arbitral 
clause involved refers the arbitration institution to ‘China Trade Arbitration 
Commission Beijing Sub-commission’. The court ascertained that though the 
name of the institution was different from ‘China International Economic and 
Trade Arbitration Commission’, it may be presumed from the parties’ intention 
expressed in the contract that their real intent was to choose the CIETAC. 
Furthermore, China Overseas Holdings Limited etc. did not submit evidence to 
prove the existence of other arbitration institutions whose name was similar to 
‘China Trade Arbitration Commission Beijing Sub-commission’. It is provided in 


113
CHAPTER 4
Article 3 of the SPC’s Interpretation concerning Some Issues on Application of 
the Arbitration Law ‘Where the name of an arbitration institution as stipulated in 
the agreement for arbitration is inaccurate, but the specific arbitration institution 
can be determined, it shall be ascertained that the arbitration institution has been 
selected’. Thus, the court found CIETAC as the selected institution and the 
arbitral clause valid. 
2) Ascertainment between Two Arbitral Institutions in One City
In Gao Zhengyi, a Taiwan resident, v. Guang Dong Lang Zheng Law Firm 
concerning confirmation of validity of an arbitral clause, the court adopted the 
method of ascertaining the arbitral institution with the most similar name. The 
court ascertained that ‘Shen Zhen Arbitration Commission’ was the most similar 
one to ‘Shen Zhen City Arbitration Commission’ in the arbitral clause while other 
institutions in the same city had an apparently different name. The connotation 
and denotation of ‘the arbitration commission in Shenzhen City’ or ‘Arbitration 
Commission in Shenzhen’ were different from the meaning of the clause. The 
court found ‘Shenzhen Arbitration Commission’ as the chosen arbitral institution 
and the arbitral clause valid.
3
3) Interpretation When Only the Choice of the Place of Arbitration was 
Agreed
In Changyu Construction Co., Ltd. v. Singapore Sembawang Engineers 
3　(2015) Shen Zhong Fa She Wai Zhong Zi No. 134 Civil Ruling by Shenzhen Intermediate People’s 
Court.


114
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
and Constructors Pte Ltd. etc. concerning jurisdictional objection over the 
construction project subcontract dispute, the parties’ contract agrees that ‘disputes 
or notifications shall be finally settled through arbitration in Zhuhai in accordance 
with the effective arbitration rules of the institution listed in Appendix 1’, whereas 
Appendix 1 states ‘Arbitration Rules of China International Arbitration Centre’ 
in Chinese and ‘Arbitration Rules of China’ in English. The court ascertained that 
the chosen place of arbitration was Zhuhai. According to Article 2 of the SPC’s 
Interpretations on Several Issues Concerning Application of the Law on Choice 
of Law for Foreign-Related Civil Relationships (I) and Article 16 of the SPC’s 
Interpretation concerning Some Issues on Application of the Arbitration Law, the 
lex fori, i.e. the P.R.C. laws, should apply in the confirmation of validity of the 
arbitral clause. No conclusion could be drawn from the Appendix that the selected 
arbitral institution was China International Arbitration Centre. There is only one 
arbitration commission at Zhuhai, the chosen place of arbitration, i.e. Zhuhai 
Arbitration Commission. According to Article 6 of the SPC’s Interpretation 
concerning Some Issues on Application of the Arbitration Law, Zhuhai 
Arbitration Commission can be ascertained as the selected arbitral institution. 
The court found the arbitral clause valid with the requirement in Article 16 of the 
Arbitration Law met and rejected the case.
4
In China Shipping Logistics (Northern) Co., Ltd. v. Benxi Beiying Iron & Steel 
Group Imp.& Exp.Co., Ltd. concerning the confirmation of validity of the foreign-
related arbitral clause in the voyage charter party, the parties signed the charter 
party, agreeing ‘GENERAL AVERAGE/ARBITRATION IF ANY IN BENXI 
4　(2013) Zhu Jin Zhu Min Er Chu Zi No.35-2 Civil Ruling by Zhuhai Jinwan District People’s Court.


115
CHAPTER 4
AND CHINESE LAW TO BE APPLIED’. The SPC  replied that though Benxi 
Arbitration Commission was the only arbitral institution in Benxi City, the clause 
was only a special agreement on the place of arbitration and the law applicable 
to arbitration. It neither constituted an agreement on the sole means for dispute 
resolution nor excluded litigation. The arbitral clause should be found invalid as 
per Article 16.2 of the Arbitration Law.
5 The SPC adopted strict interpretation and 
refused to infer a clear and exclusive agreement of arbitration commission from 
the agreement on the place of arbitration. 
The above cases show a unified practice of respecting the parties’ intent 
to arbitrate, determining a specific arbitral institution through the courts’ 
interpretation and trying to realize the parties’ intent to arbitrate as much as 
possible within the current legal framework, but there is still room for further 
unification of the courts’ interpretation on whether there is a clear and exclusive 
agreement on the arbitration institution. 
3. Interpretation of the Scope of an Arbitration Agreement
In the retrial case Yanmar Engine (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. (Yanmar) v. Xiamen 
Hagaric Enterprise (Hagaric) and Yanmar Co., Ltd. concerning jurisdictional 
objection over the right of reputation infringement, the issue of determining 
the scope of arbitration arose.
6 Yanmar alleged that the infringement of the 
right of reputation claimed by Hagaric was actually a dispute arising out of the 
cancellation of the Export and Distribution Agreement signed by and between the 
5　(2015) Min Si Zhong Zi No. 15 Civil Ruling by the SPC.
6　(2015) Min Si Ta Zi No. 21, 22 Repliesby the SPC.


116
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
two parties while the arbitral clause therein had been confirmed valid by binding 
judgment. The Higher People’s Court of Fujian ascertained the case as an action 
for infringement of the right of reputation instead of contractual disputes arising 
out of the execution of the Export and Distribution Agreement, and rejected 
the jurisdictional objection. The SPC in the retrial, found the agreed arbitration 
matters of the case was ‘any or all disputes arising out of the agreement or 
transactions under the agreement’ which covered two aspects according to 
common understanding. Firstly, the nature of arbitration matters was any disputes 
including contractual, infringement or other disputes. Secondly, the disputes to be 
arbitrated must arise out of the Export and Distribution Agreement or transactions 
under the agreement. The infringement claimed by Hagaric was about Yanmar’s 
delivery of false information concerning the cancellation of Hagaric’s distribution 
right, etc. to Hagaric’s business network members who were not parties of the 
agreement which happened after the cancellation of the agreement. Though the 
claimed infringement had certain factual connection with Yanmar’s cancellation 
of the agreement, the infringement itself was neither within the scope of 
contractual rights and obligations under the agreement nor due to the exercise of 
rights and obligations thereunder, but rather an independent civil action. Thus, it 
is appropriate for the Higher Court of Fujian to find the disputes involved in the 
case falling out of the scope of arbitration agreement. The SPC maintained the 
ruling thereof. Meanwhile, the SPC pointed out that in the interpretation of the 
scope of arbitration, when the infringement dispute resulting from the breach of 
contractual obligations led to overlapping of the liability for breach of contract 
and infringement, the plaintiff was bound by the arbitral clause in the contract 


117
CHAPTER 4
even if he chose to file an action on infringement. The arbitral clause’s application 
in disputes between the plaintiff and the defendant who were parties thereof 
should not be influenced if the plaintiff added defendants who were not parties to 
the arbitral agreement. The fundamental principle of contract interpretation was 
adopted in judging the parties’ consent to arbitrate in the case, which is of positive 
meaning in the determination of the scope of arbitration. The express denial 
of parties’ avoidance of arbitral clauses through afterwards choice of cause of 
action or adding defendants also clearly shows the principle that valid arbitration 
agreements exclude courts’ jurisdiction. 
II. Annulment or Non-enforcement of Foreign-Related or 
HMT-Related Arbitral Awards
1. Scope of Judicial Review on Arbitration
In East Well International Trading Co. Ltd. case concerning the application 
for enforcement of a foreign-related arbitral award,
7 one party alleged the non-
conformity of the arbitration procedure with the arbitration rules because Article 
39 of the CIETAC Arbitration Rules setting proof of burden on parties for facts 
stated in their claims, defenses and counterclaims was violated due to the other 
party’s failure to provide quality inspection report and use of false evidence to 
deceive the arbitral tribunal. The SPC found in its reply that the ground for non-
enforcement of the award was unsustainable since the above allegation involved 
evidence admission, fact finding and responsibility determination in the arbitration 
7　(2015) Min Si Ta Zi No. 53 Reply by the SPC.


118
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
case which were neither arbitral procedural matters nor within the scope of courts’ 
judicial review and was not the circumstance of ‘non-conformity between the 
arbitration procedure and the arbitration rules’ stipulated in Article 274.1.3 of the 
Civil Procedure Law. 
2. Confirmation of Validity of Arbitration Agreements
1) The Binding Force of an Arbitral Clause over the Dispute Arising out of 
the Enforcement Settlement Agreement
In Singapore Luminent Enterprise Pte., Ltd. (Luminent) v. Xiamen Lujinghai 
Taiwan Shipping Cargo Supply Co., Ltd. (Lujinghai) concerning the application 
for setting aside an arbitral award, the parties signed the sales contract, agreeing 
‘any dispute arising out of or relevant to this contract…if not settled, any party 
shall be entitled to submit the dispute to the CIETAC’. Luminent applied for 
setting aside the award on the ground that Lujinghai fraudulently signed the 
Enforcement Settlement Agreement during the enforcement of the arbitral 
award, and disputes arising out of the Enforcement Settlement Agreement were 
not bound by the arbitral clause in the Sales Contract. The court ascertained 
‘any dispute arising out of or relevant to this contract’ should be understood in 
a broad sense to cover any disputes between the parties on the existence, the 
formation time, the interpretation, the performance, the liability for breach, the 
amendment, suspension, assignment, cancellation or termination of the contract. 
The Enforcement Settlement Agreement made clearer the rights and obligations 
formed on the basis of the payment liability determined in the arbitral award 


119
CHAPTER 4
for the purpose of settling problems left over from the performance of the Sales 
Contract by making a specific plan with the consideration of the party’s actual 
payment ability. Thus, the court found the dispute arising out of the Enforcement 
Settlement Agreement was relevant to the Sales Contract and should be bound 
by the dispute resolution method agreed therein, and rejected the application for 
setting aside the award.
2) The Binding Force of an Arbitration Agreement on Non-signatories
In Shanghai Kuma Huangxing Shopping Centre Management Co., Ltd.(Kuma), 
Shijia Co., Ltd.(Shijia) v. Germany Union Co.( Union)) and Defa Shopping 
Centre Management (Shanghai) Co., Ltd.(Defa) concerning the application 
for setting aside a foreign-related arbitral award,
8 the application ground was 
that Defa was not a party to the arbitral clause since it was a non-signatory to 
the Framework Agreement containing the arbitral clause while the condition 
for contract assignment was not fulfilled since Kuma had never received any 
letter of assignment or notification when it was stipulated in the agreement that 
Union, when appointing a buyer, should send letter of notification and letter of 
confirmation to Kuma. The SPC found in its rely that Defa was not established 
at the time of the signing of the Framework Agreement so it did not sign on the 
agreement. The SPC further stipulated that Defa was a party of the Framework 
Agreement with no need to re-sign the arbitral clause. According to the agreement 
and its appendix, i.e. the Real Estate Sales Contract, that Kuma and Shijia knew 
and agreed that Union would perform the agreement by appointing a newly-
8　(2015) Min Si Ta Zi No.8 Reply by the SPC.


120
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
established company, thus they should have expected sufficiently on the arbitral 
clause’s binding force on disputes arising out of the agreement between them and 
the appointed newly-established company. Furthermore, Kuma, in its application 
for arbitration in another case, also confirmed that Union had appointed Defa 
as the purchaser. The SPC found the issue whether the time and method Union 
appointed the purchaser met the specific requirement under the agreement 
involving substantial rights and obligations and beyond the scope of judicial 
review, hence rejected the application for setting aside the award. The case is of 
positive meaning since an arbitral clause’s binding force on non-signatories is 
supported from the perspective of respecting parties’ intent to arbitrate, protecting 
legitimate expectation and upholding the principle of estoppel. 
3. Relevant Issues in Arbitration Procedures
1) Foreign Parties’ Authorization of Arbitration Agents
In Trunkbow Asia Pacific (Shandong) Co., Ltd.(Trunkbow) v. America Super 
Micro Computer Co., Ltd. (Super Micro) concerning the application for setting 
aside an arbitral award (the Trunkbow case),
9 the main ground for the application 
is the Super Micro’s claims should have been regarded as withdrawn for its 
absence from the oral hearing since the power of attorney of Super Micro’s 
representative in the oral hearing had not been notarized and certified. The 
court ascertained that Super Micro had proved its authorization in accordance 
with the CIETAC Arbitration Rules by submitting the power of attorney issued 
9　(2015) Min Si Zhong (Shang) Zi No.263 Civil Ruling by Beijing 4
th Intermediate People’s Court.


121
CHAPTER 4
for the arbitration case and the receipt of the CIETAC Secretariat, etc. as per 
Article 20 of the Arbitration Rules stating ‘A party may be represented by its 
authorized Chinese and/or foreign representative(s) in handling matters relating 
to the arbitration. In such a case, a Power of Attorney shall be forwarded to 
the Arbitration Court by the party or its authorized representative(s)’. There is 
no specific stipulation on the application of the provision on notarization and 
certification of power of attorneys in Article 264 of the Civil Procedure Law in 
arbitration procedures. Thus, Super Micro’s authorization was valid though it had 
not been notarized and certified. 
2) Evidence Production and Examination
In Germany Gauna Glass and Plastic Devices Plant v. Germany Bushier 
Industrial Investment Co., Ltd. concerning the application for setting aside an 
arbitral award,
10 the ground for the application is the arbitration procedure is in 
serious violation of law due to the appraisal report by the appraiser under one 
party’s entrustment. The court ascertained that the evidence effect of the report 
and whether the tribunal could rely thereon to make the award were not directly 
related to the violation of arbitration rules. The court rejected the application 
on the ground that Article 44 of the Arbitration Law allows arbitral tribunals 
to submit special matters to appraisal institutions agreed upon by parties or 
appointed by tribunals without depriving parties’ rights to entrust appraisers to 
make appraisal reports and submit such reports as evidence. 
10　(2015) Min Si Zhong (Shang) Zi No.118 Civil Ruling by Beijing 4
th Intermediate People’s Court.


122
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
In the above mentioned Trunkbow case, Trunkbow had another ground for the 
application that it had been deprived of the right to produce evidence due to the 
tribunal’s rejection of its application for extending the time limit. The court found 
the tribunal’s handling of the evidence production procedure appropriate since the 
tribunal had the power to decide on the extension application in accordance with 
the situation of the case under Article 39.2 of the Arbitration Rules and rejected 
the application. 
3) Issues on Whether the Tribunals’ Collection of Evidence Violates Due 
Process
In Haiyang Dafeng Ren Auto Service Co., Ltd.(Haiyang), Japan HAYAmA Co., 
Ltd. v. Zhongshan Mingyi Environment Engineering Co., Ltd. concerning the 
application for setting aside an arbitral award,
11 Haiyang alleged that the tribunal’s 
failure in investigating and collecting the originals of the four monitoring reports 
issued by Zhongshan Environmental Monitoring Station of which it had submitted 
copies led to mistakes in fact finding of the case. The court ascertained the 
tribunal’s non-collection of the originals was within the tribunal’s discretion and 
not against due process since it was provided in the applicable arbitration rules 
that the tribunal may undertake investigation and collect evidence as it considers 
necessary or upon its approval of the party’s application. 
4. Clerical Errors in Arbitral Awards
11　(2015) Shen Zhong Fa She Wai Zhong Zi No.239 Civil Ruling by Shenzhen Intermediate People’s 
Court.


123
CHAPTER 4
In Shanghai Yifeng Group (Huai’an) Investment Co., Ltd. (Yifeng) v. UVD 
Enterprise Limited (UVD) concerning the application for setting aside an arbitral 
award,
12 Yifeng alleged the award void due to the unclear statement of UVD’s 
name therein. The court ascertained that the misstatement of ‘UVD Enterprise 
Limited’ which was UVD’s registered name in Hong Kong as ‘Enterprise 
Limited’ was in fact a clerical error. It was clear that the corresponding subject 
should be UVD. The error was also corrected by the arbitration institution in the 
form of correction of award. Thus, the court found such ground unsustainable and 
rejected the application.
5. Arbitrators’ Obligation to Disclose Conflict of Interest
In Chung Han Gi, a South Korea resident, v. Shanghai Junyi Haipeng Venture 
Investment Centre, etc.(Junyi) concerning the application for setting aside an 
arbitral award,
13 the application ground was the presiding arbitrator had not 
disclosed the fact that he was in the same law firm with Junyi’s arbitration agent 
and they had been responsible for several projects together as the signing lawyers. 
The court ascertained that the presiding arbitrator and Junyi’s arbitration agent 
were not in the same firm during the arbitration process though they had once 
practiced in the same firm. The presiding arbitrator’s signature on securities 
documents prepared by the firm as the person responsible did neither indicate his 
actual participation in the projects nor prove the existence of relationship which 
could have sufficiently influenced the impartiality of arbitration. Thus, the court 
12　(2015) Si Zhong Min (Shang) Te Zi No.00320 Civil Ruling by Beijing 4
th Intermediate People’s Court.
13　(2015) Si Zhong Min (Shang) Te Zi No.00218 Civil Ruling by Beijing 4
th Intermediate People’s Court.


124
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
rejected the application.
6. Implementation of the Reply
In Hindustan Clean Energy Limited (Hindustan) v.  LDK Solar Hi-tech (Suzhou) 
Co., Ltd. concerning the application for setting aside an arbitral award,
14 it 
is stated in the letter of guarantee issued by Hindustan that disputes shall be 
submitted to ‘China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission 
(CIETAC) in Shanghai’. Hindustan alleged that the CIETAC was not the chosen 
arbitration institution and the application of the 2012 CIETAC Arbitration Rules 
was wrong. The court ascertained that the arbitral clause clearly referred to the 
CIETAC as the chosen arbitration institution. To say the least, even if the chosen 
arbitration institution was another local institution in Shanghai, the court should 
reject the application as per Article 3 of the Reply stating that ‘Where, before the 
Reply came into force, the CIETAC, the CIETAC South China Sub-Commission 
or the CIETAC Shanghai Sub-Commission had accepted cases which they should 
not have accepted as per Article 1 of the Reply, the parties apply for annulment or 
non-enforcement after the arbitral awards were made on the jurisdiction ground, 
the people's court shall not support them’. The court found no apparent procedural 
error in the CIETAC’s application of its 2012 Arbitration Rules and rejected 
Hindustan’s application.
It is found from current cases that various judicial review cases resulting from 
the jurisdictional disputes among the CIETAC and its former sub-commissions 
14　(2015) Si Zhong Min (Shang) Te Zi No.00189 Civil Ruling by Beijing 4
th Intermediate People’s Court.


125
CHAPTER 4
including cases concerning the application for annulment or non-enforcement of 
arbitral awards have been properly resolved in general after the Reply came into 
force.
III. Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral 
Awards
1. Validity of Arbitration Agreements
In Ecomusa, Inc.(Ecomusa) v. Foshan City Nanhai Zhaoli Textile Co., Ltd. 
(Zhaoli) concerning the application for recognition and enforcement of a foreign 
arbitral award,
15 Zhaoli alleged that the arbitral clause in the Sales Contract had 
no binding force on Zhaoli since Zhaoli had neither signed or stamped the Sales 
Contract nor reached agreement with Ecomusa on the purchase of raw cotton. 
The court ascertained the contract was signed by fax and expressed in the form 
of fax. Ecomusa claimed it had submitted the fax to the arbitration institution and 
could not get it back, and submitted a declaration from John Gibson, Chairman 
of the arbitration institution, stating that the contract attached was a copy of the 
fax. The bank account contained in Zhaoli’s stamp on the contract was once used 
by Zhaoli. The fax time and number at the top of the copy of the fax supported 
Ecomusa’s allegation on the signing process of the contract. The testimony by 
Ecomusa’s witness at the oral hearing could also prove the signing process. Thus, 
the court found there was sufficient evidence to support the fact the parties had 
entered into the contract and agreed on the arbitral clause. Accordingly, the court 
15　(2014) Fo Zhong Fa Min Er Chu Zi No.125 Civil Ruling by Foshan Intermediate People’s Court of 
Guangdong Province on 29 June 2015.


126
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
ruled to recognize and enforce the award.
In the case concerning the application for recognition and enforcement of a 
foreign arbitral award by Louis Dreyfus Australia Co. (Louis),
16 the arbitral 
clause in the contract sates that all disputes relevant to the contract shall be settled 
through arbitration in Liverpool according to the International Cotton Association 
(the ICA) Rules and Bylaws. There was a signature of ‘Zhang Yongzhong’ in 
the column of buyer’s representative with no official stamp of Nijiaxiang Co. 
(Nijiaxiang). Nijiaxiang, in its defense of the arbitration case, alleged it had neither 
signed contract with Louis or Allenberg Cotton Co. (Allenberg), or authorized 
anyone to sign the contract. The court ascertained that Zhang Yongzhong, though 
recognizing the inclusion of both Nijiaxiang and its subsidiary Tiangong Co. 
(Tiangong) in his name card, was only the general manager of Tiangong and 
had no position in Nijiaxiang. Nijiaxiang, though controlling Tiangong, never 
intervened in Tiangong’s daily operation. The court held that Louis should have 
proved Nijiaxiang’s agreement on reaching the arbitral clause with it when there 
was no stamp of Nijiaxiang on the contract while Zhang Yongzhong denied his 
signature on the contract containing the arbitral clause. Louis, though submitting 
the fax of the contract, failed to further prove the authenticity of the signature of 
‘Zhang Yongzhong’ thereon. Even after the court’s explanation, Louis still clearly 
refused the appraisal of the signature. Even if the signature was truly by Zhang 
Yongzhong, the name card of Zhang Yongzhong alone was not sufficient to make 
Louis reasonably believe his authorization from Nijiaxiang to sign the contract 
16　(2013) Xi Shang Wai Zhong Shen Zi No.0009 Civil Ruling by Wuxi Intermediate People’s Court of 
Jiangsu Province on 14 January 2015.


127
CHAPTER 4
since the parties’ previous trade practice was signing contracts in hard copies 
with official stamps. Thus, the court ruled non-recognition and non-enforcement 
of the award as per Article V. 1(a) of the New York Convention. In another case 
initiated by Allenberg, the court refused the recognition and enforcement on the 
same ground. 
In Ecom Agroindustrial Asia Ptd., Ltd. Singapore (Ecom) v. Qingdao JCJ Penglai 
Textile Co., Ltd. concerning the application for recognition and enforcement 
of a foreign arbitral award,
17 the court ascertained that Ecom could not submit 
the originals of the Sales Confirmation and the Sales Contract since they were 
signed by fax while Ecom submitted no further evidence to prove the authenticity 
thereof. Thus, the court refused the recognition and enforcement of the award 
since it could not find the existence of a written arbitration agreement between 
the two parties. The SPC replied to Shandong Higher People’s Court after it 
reported the case,
18 that the key issue was whether the parties had signed an 
arbitration agreement. Such issue was within the scope of fact finding. According 
to Article 2 of the SPC’s Notice on Issues concerning Requests for Instructions 
in Trials, higher people’s courts should be responsible for issues involving facts 
and evidence of reported cases. Thus, the people’s court accepting the case should 
make its determination on whether the parties had signed an arbitration agreement 
after the hearing of the case, and should make the ruling on non-recognition and 
non-enforcement of the award if it found the parties had not signed it. 
17　(2014) Yan Min She Chu Zi No.15 Civil Ruling by Yantai Intermediate People’s Court of Shandong 
Province on 2 November 2015.
18　(2015) Min Si Ta Zi No.29 Reply by the SPC.


128
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
Along with the development of e-commerce, facsimile and other data telegrams 
have been more and more widely used due to their efficiency and convenience. 
It is provided in Article 11 of the Contract Law that written form refers to a form 
such as a written contractual agreement, letter, electronic data text (including 
a telegram, telex, fax, electronic data exchange and e-mail) that can tangibly 
express the contents contained therein. Thus, in the application of evidence 
rules, the admissibility of evidence in the form of fax should not be denied solely 
because of the form. The probative value of a facsimile should be determined 
in light of its content and relevance to other evidence. The rule for evaluating 
facsimiles is well-explained in the Ecom v. Zhaoli case. Furthermore, it may be 
found from the above cases that the issue regarding the existence and validity of 
arbitration agreements not only is a legal one but also involves a lot of fact finding 
and evidence evaluation. The current internal reporting system for judicial review 
on foreign-related arbitration with the basic structure of request for instruction on 
legal issues is in urgent need of improvement since it imposes difficulties in fact 
finding and influences the functions of review and supervision.
2. Extensive Interpretation of Foreign-related Elements
Under current Chinses laws, domestic disputes shall not be arbitrated outside 
mainland China. Therefore, whether the nature of the dispute is defined as 
domestic or foreign-related is of vital importance in the determination of the 
validity of an arbitral clause. In Siemens International Trading Ltd., Shanghai 
(Siemens) v. Shanghai Golden Landmark Co., Ltd. (Golden) concerning the 


129
CHAPTER 4
application for recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitral award,
19 the court 
ascertained that the contract appeared to have no typical foreign-related element 
since both parties were legal persons registered in China while the agreed place of 
delivery and the location of the equipment, the subject matter of the contract, were 
both in China. However, the contract had the following distinct characteristics 
compared with normal domestic contracts. Firstly, both parties, though being 
Chinese legal persons, were wholly foreign-owned enterprises registered in 
Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone which generally had close connection with 
foreign investors in aspects such as capital sources and ultimate interest 
attribution. Secondly, there were certain international sales of goods features 
in the flow of the subject matter of the contract. The subject matter had been 
delivered from abroad to the pilot free trade zone which was under the customs’ 
supervision. The import formalities were completed when it flowed from within to 
outside the zone after the customs clearance and tax payment had been performed 
timely as per the contract. Furthermore, the performance of the contract involved 
the application of special customs’ supervision measures in the pilot free trade 
zone. Thus, the court found the legal relationship involved was foreign-related 
according to Article 1.5 of the SPC’s Interpretations on Several Issues Concerning 
Application of the Law on Choice of Law for Foreign-Related Civil Relationships 
(I) regarding ‘other circumstances under which the civil relationship may be 
determined as foreign-related civil relationship’ and the arbitral clause valid, and 
ruled the recognition and enforcement of the award.
19　(2013) Hu Yi Zhong Min Ren (Wai Zhong) Zi No. 2 Civil Ruling by Shanghai 1st Intermediate 
People’s Court on 27 November 2015.


130
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
It may be found from the SPC’s reply concerning the case that one essential 
consideration in determining the foreign-related civil relationship is both parties’ 
actual participation in the whole arbitration procedure since Siemens, after Golden 
had initiated the arbitration case, submitted its counterclaims after the tribunal 
had rejected its jurisdictional objection while Golden, after the award had been 
rendered, performed part of its obligations thereunder.
20 The flexible determination 
of foreign-related elements to support the validity of arbitral clauses can better 
reflect the principles of good faith and estoppel. Meanwhile, it must be noticed 
that the lack of definition of ‘foreign-related civil relationships’ in the Law on 
Choice of Law for Foreign-Related Civil Relationships and the discretion granted 
under Article 1.5 of the SPC’s Interpretations on Several Issues Concerning 
Application of the Law on Choice of Law for Foreign-Related Civil Relationships 
(I) regarding ‘other circumstances under which the civil relationship may be 
determined as foreign-related civil relationship’ may result in flexible criteria for 
the determination of foreign-related elements and more uncertainty in the validity 
of arbitral clauses. Thus, the circumstances under which such miscellaneous 
provision may be applied need to be stylized through judicial precedents so as to 
make clear the corresponding judgment rules. 
3. Relevant Legal Issues in Arbitration Procedures
1) Non-delivery of an Award to a Party
In Jesssmith & Sonscotton, LLC. V. Jihua 3509 Textile Co., Ltd. (Jihua) 
20　(2015) Min Si Ta Zi No.5 Reply by the SPC.


131
CHAPTER 4
concerning the application for recognition and enforcement of an international 
arbitral award,
21 Jihua objected on the ground that ICA had not delivered the 
arbitral award to it. The court ascertained that the amended arbitral clause in the 
Sales Contract stated that ‘if any dispute occurs, the seller is entitled to choose 
arbitration. The law of England shall apply’. It is stipulated in Article 55.3 of 
the U.K. Arbitration Act 1996 that ‘Nothing in this section affects section 56 
(power of the tribunal to withhold award in case of non-payment)’ and in Article 
56.1 that ‘The tribunal may refuse to deliver an award to the parties except upon 
full payment of the fees and expenses of the arbitrators’. Article 308.7 of the 
ICA Rules and Bylaws provides that ‘The award will only be released on the 
payment of the stamping fee and any outstanding fees, costs and expenses’. The 
court found the ICA’s non-delivery of the award to Jihua due to its non-payment 
of relevant fees was not against the U.K. Arbitration Act or the ICA Rules and 
Bylaws. Thus, the court ruled to recognize and enforce the award.
2) Due Notification of Arbitration
In Krasilnikov v. Heilongjiang Dadao Auto Trading Co., Ltd. concerning the 
application for recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitral award,
22 the 
International Commercial Arbitration Court at the Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry of the Russian Federation sent the notices on the formation of arbitral 
tribunal, the oral hearing, the arbitral award to the respondent by post, which 
21　(2014) E Xiao Gan Zhong Min Wai Chu Zi No.00001 Civil Ruling by Xigan Intermediate People’s 
Court of Hubei Province on 20 August 2015.
22　(2015) Hei Zhong She Wai Shang Cai Zi No.1 Civil Ruling by Heihe Intermediate People’s Court of 
Heilongjiang Province on 23 December 2015.


132
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
was confirmed by the post receipts and Russian post office website records. 
The court found the delivery way in accordance with Articles 16.3 and 16.6 
of the Arbitration Rules of the International Commercial Arbitration Court at 
the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of the Russian Federation regarding 
arbitration notification.
In Ecomusa v. Zhaoli,
23 as to whether Zhaoli had been properly notified of the 
arbitration matters, the court held that Zhaoli’s address contained in the stamp 
and listed at the top of the contract was the main place of business of Zhaoli last 
known to the arbitration institution and the address used by the institution for 
arbitration correspondence. The delivery by post was in accordance with relevant 
provisions on notification in the agreed arbitration rules while FedEx’s tracking 
record showed the successful delivery. Thus, the court found Zhaoli was properly 
notified in the arbitration procedure. 
In Noble Resources International Pte Ltd v. Kairuide Holding Co., Ltd. 
concerning the application for recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitral 
award,
24 the court ruled on the recognition and enforcement of the award on 
the ground that the delivery of relevant arbitration documents by post or email 
was legal and valid under the lex loci arbitri while the delivery record showed 
successful delivery. 
3) Application for Non-enforcement after the Ruling on Recognition of an 
23　(2014) Fo Zhong Fa Min Er Chu Zi No.125 Civil Ruling by Foshan Intermediate People’s Court of 
Guangdong Province on 29 June 2015
24　(2015) De Zhong Min Chu Zi No.3 Civil Ruling by Dezhou Intermediate People’s Court of Shandong 
Province on 3 March 2015. 


133
CHAPTER 4
Arbitral Award
In Tianjin Zhongchen Tomato Product Co., Ltd. (Zhongchen) v. Conagra foods 
(Mauritius) Limited (Conagra),
25 Zhongchen applied for the non-enforcement on 
the ground that the court, when hearing Conagra’s application on recognition and 
enforcement, did not explain the difference between the arbitration claims stated 
in the award and those in Conagra’s Request for Arbitration. The arbitral tribunal, 
with no legal ground, had changed Conagra’s claims in the award and requested 
Zhongchen pay huge amount of compensation to Conagra. The enforcement 
application should have been rejected under Article V.1(c) of the New York 
Convention since the tribunal had exceeded its authority in issuing the award. 
The court held that it had affirmed the non-existence of circumstances for non-
recognition and non-enforcement and approved the recognition and enforcement 
of the SIAC award involved in the case in the effective ruling, and rejected 
Zhongchen’s application for non-enforcement on the same ground according 
to Article V of the New York Convention, Articles 260 and 274 of the Civil 
Procedure Law for its lack of legal basis.  
4) Connection between Foreign Arbitration and Domestic Litigation 
Procedures
In South Korea Daewoo Shipbuilding & Marine Engineering Co., Ltd. (Daewoo) v. 
Panama Glory Advance Corporation on affirmation of ship mortgage right,
26 the 
25　(2015) Er Zhong Zhi Shen Zi No.0002 Civil Ruling by Tianjin 2
nd Intermediate People’s Court.
26　(2014) Xia Hai Fa Que Zi No.1 by Xiamen Maritime Court. See ‘Connection between Domestic 
Litigation and Foreign Ad Hoc Arbitration Procedures in Foreign-related Ship Contractual Disputes’, 
People's Judicature (Cases) Iss. 5 (2016).


134
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
connection between the domestic property preservation procedure and the foreign 
arbitration procedure as well as the recognition and enforcement procedure was 
involved. Daewoo applied for credit registration in Xiamen Maritime Court after 
the court had legally seized and auctioned the ship involved. Daewoo initiated 
this case over the ship mortgage right in Xiamen Maritime Court which had 
jurisdiction as the court at the location of the seized ship. Thereafter, Daewoo 
initiated arbitration in London according to the arbitral clause in the ship building 
contract and submitted its application for pending of this case to Xiamen Maritime 
Court which approved the application and ruled the pending. Xiamen Maritime 
Court resumed the hearing of this case after the award had been rendered in 
London and recognized by the court. The court, after hearing, held that the ship 
mortgage right claimed by Daewoo was valid since the credit right secured by 
the mortgage right had expired and such fact had been affirmed by the London 
award and the court’s ruling on recognition thereof. Accordingly, the court made 
the judgment confirming the validity of Daewoo’s mortgage right and priority 
of repayment from the ship auction. Xiamen Maritime Court, before the award 
was rendered in the foreign arbitration procedure over the main contract dispute, 
had suspended its case on the accessory contract dispute. Such practice embodies 
the principle of judicial restraint and comity, avoids conflicts which may arise 
between domestic and foreign procedures or litigation and arbitration procedures, 
and reflects the people's courts’ support of the enforcement of foreign awards in 
China.
4. Public Policy


135
CHAPTER 4
In Jacobson Golf Course Design Inc. (Jacobson) v. Sihui Zhenhuiyuan Property 
Development Co., Ltd, Sihui City Huiguan Investment Co., Ltd. (Huiguan),
27 
Huiguan’s defense ground was a foreign enterprise undertaking a design of 
construction project in China must choose at least one Chinese design enterprise 
with the qualification in construction project design to cooperate in the design 
while the construction unit should be responsible for the prequalification of the 
foreign enterprise. Jacobson’s violation of China’s mandatory provision for 
finding no Chinese cooperator and obtaining no prequalification constituted the 
violation of public policy stipulated in Article V.2 of the New York Convention. 
The court found Huiguan’s allegation on non-recognition and non-enforcement of 
the award due to the violation of public policy unsustainable since the violation of 
China’s mandatory legal provisions was not completely equivalent to the violation 
of China’s public policy while the recognition and enforcement of the award 
would not constitute the violation of China’s fundamental social interest and basic 
legal principles. 
In Noble Resources International Pte Ltd. (Noble) v. Shenzhen Cereals Group 
Co., Ltd. (Shenzhen Group) concerning the application for recognition and 
enforcement of a Hong Kong arbitral award (the Noble case),
28 the General 
Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine (the General 
Administration), during the performance of the contract, required the suspension 
of imports of soybeans from Brazil and entry of qualified ones only after 
27　(2015) Zhao Zhong Fa Min Yi Zhong Zi No.26 Civil Ruling by Zhaoqing Intermediate People’s Court 
on 19 October 2015.
28　(2011) Shen Zhong Fa Min Si Chu Zi No.270 Civil Ruling by Shenzhen Intermediate People’s Court 
on 30 March 2015.


136
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
selection for in-transit soybeans in its announcement regarding soybean seed-
coating. Shenzhen Group argued that the tribunal’s determination of the General 
Administration’s announcement for public health safety as quarantine restriction 
and request on the Chinese importer to bear the risk thereof was against China’s 
social public interest. The court ascertained that the soybeans involved in the case 
were in line with the entry inspection and quarantine requirements and not among 
those prohibited goods. The court rejected the public policy defense since there 
was neither evidence showing the soybeans involved would cause serious safety 
and health problems nor facts of any damage to public health while the award was 
on Shenzhen Group’s payment obligation to Noble. 
5. Awards Exceed the Tribunals’ Power
In the Noble case,
29 the parties signed the Sales Contract of soybeans, agreeing 
that if Shenzhen Group was the buyer, the dispute should be submitted to HKIAC. 
Thereafter, the parties signed the Supplementary Agreement concerning the 
relevant expenses of ship detention and abnormal unloading due to the General 
Administration’s requirement, agreeing disputes thereunder be submitted to 
Chinese courts under Chinese laws. Shenzhen Group in its defense alleged that 
the tribunal had exceeded its power. The court ascertained that the Supplementary 
Agreement had amended the stipulations in the Sales Contract. After such 
amendment, Noble instead of Shenzhen Group should bear the charges due to the 
quarantine limitation/ detention at the port of discharge while disputes thereof 
29　(2011) Shen Zhong Fa Min Si Chu Zi No.270 Civil Ruling by Shenzhen Intermediate People’s Court 
on 30 March 2015.


137
CHAPTER 4
should be settled through litigation instead of arbitration. The tribunal’s decision 
on the compensation of additional charter cost due to the extended stay in the 
port of discharge, i.e. Qingdao Port, involved matters under the Supplementary 
Agreement which were beyond the scope of arbitration and the scope of the 
arbitral clause in the Sales Contract, thus constituted the circumstance for non-
enforcement under Article 7.1.3 of the SPC’s Arrangements on the Mutual 
Enforcement of Arbitral Awards between the Mainland and the Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region.
6. Jurisdictional Issues in the Recognition and Enforcement of 
Foreign Arbitral Awards
In Swiss Marine Service Ltd. (Swiss Marine) v. Yueyufeng International Co., 
Ltd. concerning the application on recognition of a foreign arbitral award,
30 the 
court held that Swiss Marine, though only applied for the recognition, should 
comply with Article 11 of the Special Maritime Procedure Law which stipulates 
that the party applying for enforcement of a maritime arbitral award shall file the 
application with the maritime court of the place where the property subjected to 
execution or of the place where the person subjected to execution has its domicile. 
The court found no jurisdiction and rejected the application since Swiss Marine 
had submitted no evidence to prove the property subjected to execution or the 
domicile of the person subjected to execution was in the area under the court’s 
jurisdiction. As to Swiss Marine’s submission of the performance guarantee for 
30　(2014) Guang Hai Fa Ta Zi No.2 Civil Ruling by Guangzhou Maritime Court of Guangdong Province 
on 2 February 2015.


138
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
the affreightment contract issued by a third party, Zhuhai Yueyufeng Co., the 
court found the guarantor was not a party of the award while the guarantee was 
not a property subjected to execution as well.
In the retrial case concerning the application for recognition of a foreign arbitral 
award by Seoil Shipping Co., Ltd. (Seoil), Ganglu Iron & Steel Co., Ltd. (Guanglu) 
after Seoil had applied for the maritime injunction to detain the goods of LMJ 
International Ltd. (LMJ), took the goods after its provision of security. The first-
trial court refused to accept Seoil’s application for recognition of the foreign 
award between Seoil and LMJ in its ruling which was sustained by Tianjin Higher 
People’s Court. Seoil applied for the SPC’s retrial on the ground that the first-trial 
court’s ruling on non-acceptance involved mistakes in application of law since 
LMJ has property available for execution in the area under the court’s jurisdiction 
while Ganglu’s security was replacement of the detained goods. The SPC found in 
the retrial
31 that Seoil’s evidence was not sufficient to prove that LMJ had property 
for execution in the area under the first-trial court’s jurisdiction. The buyer of 
LMJ’s goods was a third party, Tongmao Co. (Tongmao), while the buyer of 
Tongmao was Ganglu.  Thus, Tongmao instead of LMJ had the creditor’s right 
over the accounts receivable under the doctrine of privity of contract. Ganglu’s 
provision of security was to avoid Seoil’s loss due to wrong application of the 
maritime injunction. Thus, the security was provided for Seoil instead of LMJ. 
The SPC found the non-acceptance of Seoil’s application by the first-trial court on 
the ground that the domicile of LMJ and the property subjected to execution were 
not in the court’s area of jurisdiction under Article 283 of the Civil Procedure 
31　(2015) Min Shen Zi No.3170 Civil Ruling by the SPC on 18 December 2015.


139
CHAPTER 4
Law and Article 11 of the Special Maritime Procedure Law appropriate and ruled 
to reject the retrial application.
It should be noted that Article III of the New York Convention stipulates that ‘Each 
contracting state shall recognize arbitral awards as binding and enforce them 
in accordance with rules of procedure of the territory where the award is relied 
upon, under the conditions laid down in the following articles’. Some scholars 
hold that this article distinguishes the recognition procedure and the enforcement 
procedure. The former shall be directly based on the Convention while the later 
shall comply with the courts’ special provisions on enforcement procedures at the 
place of enforcement besides the Convention’s stipulations.
32 Furthermore, each 
state’s understanding of whether the enforcement of awards under the Convention 
is under the precondition of the existence of property at the place of enforcement 
is not the same.
33 There is clear distinction between recognition procedure and 
enforcement procedure in Article 547 of the judicial interpretation on the Civil 
Procedure Law. Whether jurisdiction over cases on the recognition of foreign 
arbitral awards could be appropriately expanded under the spirit of ‘favorable 
for the enforcement of awards’ in Article III of the Convention awaits for further 
judicial interpretations.
32　Albert van den berg, The New York Convention of 1958: An Overview, www.arbitration-icca.org.
33　It is found in precedents of U.K., U.S. and India that the applicant may submit its application for 
recognition and enforcement to the court at the place of the debtor’s property or at a contracting state where 
the applicant believes the monetary award may be realized. But a German court refused the enforcement 
on the ground that there was no debtor’s property in Germany (Kammergericht [KG] Berlin, Germany, 
10 August 2006, 20 Sch 07/04), published in UNCITRAL 1958 New York Convention Guide, www.
newyorkconvention1958.org.


140
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
Annual Summary
Sixty years have passed since international commercial arbitration first started 
in China in the 1950s. China’s international commercial arbitration has 
achieved remarkable growth along with China’s significant improvement of its 
comprehensive national strength and international status, the comprehensive 
deepening of its economic and trade exchange with foreign countries as well as 
the implementation and promotion of the Belt and Road Initiative. Arbitration 
has been accepted as one of the primary methods to resolve international 
commercial disputes. Chinese international commercial arbitration institutions 
have won international reputation while the CIETAC has been recognized as one 
of the world-renowned international arbitration institutions alongside with the 
International Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce 
(ICC), the Arbitration Institute of Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (SCC), etc.
In retrospect of the year 2015, the development of China’s international 
commercial arbitration can be summarized from the following five aspects.
First, the number of China’s international commercial arbitration cases has 
increased steadily, but the development is unbalanced. 2015 marks the 20
th 
anniversary of the implementation of the Arbitration Law as well as the 20
th 
anniversary of the establishment of the first-batch experimental re-constructed 
Chinese arbitration institutions. In 2015, 244 arbitration commissions in China 
accepted a total of 136,924 cases. Among them, 62 arbitration commissions 


141
ANNUAL SUMMARY
accepted 2,085 foreign-related, HMT-related cases, accounting for 1.5 percent of 
the national total caseload. The development of the 62 arbitration commissions 
concerning the handling of international commercial arbitration cases is very 
unbalanced as well.
Second, China’s legal system of international commercial arbitration is 
improving while the judicial interpretations and normative documents issued 
and implemented by the SPC provide favourable judicial environment and 
safeguard for the encouragement and support of the development of arbitration. 
The provisions on arbitration in the new judicial interpretation on the Civil 
Procedure Law cover almost all aspects of arbitration, including the coordination 
of jurisdictional conflicts between tribunals and courts, the recognition and 
enforcement of interim awards made outside mainland China, and the calculation 
of the term for the application of award enforcement, etc. so that arbitral awards 
can be enforced more efficiently and conveniently in China. The SPC’s Several 
Opinions on Providing Judicial Services and Safeguards for the Construction of 
the “Belt and Road” by People's Courts is of great declaratory significance for the 
judicial review by the people’s courts.
Third, China’s international commercial arbitration institutions have comparative 
advantages and have gained more and more recognition internationally. They 
have apparent advantages in the efficiency of dispute resolution while the cases 
accepted involve diversified types of disputes. Parties have more choices in 
appointing arbitrators with more foreign arbitrators involved in case handling 
and the gradual release of restrictions under the panel system. The increase of 


142
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
cases in which Chinese international commercial arbitration institutions apply 
foreign arbitration rules and cases involving both parties from outside mainland 
China shows parties’ trust in their professional case administration capability 
and service level as well as the improvement of credibility of arbitration. The 
CIETAC, through its initiative of implementing the Guidelines on Evidence, is the 
forerunner of commercial arbitration institutions in publishing and implementing 
evidence rules, fills the gap in Chinese laws and has further pushed forward the 
internationalization of China’s commercial arbitration.
Fourth, the application of law is clearer in China’s international commercial 
arbitral awards and the application of the CISG is gradually mature, but there is 
still room for improvement. According to incomplete statistics, the tribunals of 
7/8 cases could autonomously apply the CISG as requested when the condition 
of autonomous application is met. The CISG, as the uniform law in international 
sales of goods, needs unified interpretation and application. It is a development 
trend to follow the international practice and improve the unified application of 
the CISG.
Fifth, the fundamental principle of “pro-arbitration” or “arbitration-friendly” is 
further reflected in the judicial support and supervision of China’s international 
commercial arbitration. The people’s courts fully respect the finality of arbitral 
awards and strictly follow the principle of judicial review over issues stipulated 
in laws and exclude substantial matters such as burden of evidence, evidence 
admissibility and fact finding, etc. from the review. The people’s courts only 
review the grounds relied on and evidence submitted by the parties with no 


143
ANNUAL SUMMARY
voluntary enlargement of the review scope except for those the courts may review 
on its own initiatives such as the violation of public interest and non-arbitrable 
matters, which shows the value guidelines of encouraging and supporting the 
development of arbitration. Meanwhile, the people’s courts effectively perform 
the judicial supervision function, maintain and promote the credibility of 
arbitration through the timely annulment and non-enforcement of arbitral awards 
when circumstances stipulated in law such as no jurisdiction of arbitration 
commissions, violation of due process, etc. occur.
The Vision and Actions on Jointly Building Silk Road Economic Belt and 
21st-Century Maritime Silk Road jointly issued by the National Development 
and Reform Commission, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of 
Commerce on 28 March 2015 marks the comprehensive implementation of 
the Belt and Road Initiative. The signing ceremony of the Asian Infrastructure 
Investment Bank Agreement on 29 June 2015 marks the new development phase 
of the Initiative. There are over 60 nations along the belt and road. Once disputes 
occur in the economic and trade exchanges among these nations, international 
commercial arbitration will be the most important dispute resolution method. 
Therefore, a healthy and comprehensive international commercial arbitration 
system is an important judicial guarantee for the implementation of the Belt and 
Road Initiative. 
For further development of China’s international commercial arbitration, the 
following endeavors should be made: to continue to develop and improve 
arbitration-related legislation, to strengthen the judicial support and supervision 


144
Annual Report on International Commercial Arbitration in China (2015)
favorable to international commercial arbitration, to enhance theoretical research, 
talent training and the building of arbitration culture, to actively encourage 
reform of Chinese arbitration institutions, constantly update arbitration rules 
and practice, to proceed with a dynamic integration of internationalization and 
localization, to exploit the advantages of institutional administration to the full, 
enhance the service capabilities and levels, to keep improving the arbitration 
system and promoting the credibility of arbitration, to actively participate in rule-
making in international arbitration, to enhance the power of influence and have 
a better say in international community, to give full play to the important role of 
China’s international commercial arbitration in international commercial dispute 
resolution, to build China as an international and regional arbitration center, 
to facilitate economic and trade development and cooperation among China 
and other countries in the world, and to promote the healthy development of 
international economic order.