Universality of Tip Singularity Formation in Freezing Water Drops
1Institute for Aerodynamics and Fluid Mechanics, Bundeswehr University Munich, 85577 Neubiberg, Germany
2Physics of Fluids Group, Faculty of Science and Technology, Mesa+Institute,
University of Twente, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
3Laboratoire Matière et Systèmes Complexes UMR CNRS 7057, 10 rue Alice Domon et Léonie Duquet 75205 Paris Cedex 13, France
4Université Libre de Bruxelles, Laboratory TIPs, Fluid Physics Unit, CP 165/67, F. D. Roosevelt Ave. 50, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
5Department of Applied Physics, Eindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
(Received 25 April 2014; published 31 July 2014)
A drop of water deposited on a cold plate freezes into an ice drop with a pointy tip. While this
phenomenon clearly finds its origin in the expansion of water upon freezing, a quantitative description of
the tip singularity has remained elusive. Here we demonstrate how the geometry of the freezing front,
determined by heat transfer considerations, is crucial for the tip formation. We perform systematic
measurements of the angles of the conical tip, and reveal the dynamics of the solidification front in a Hele-
Shaw geometry. It is found that the cone angle is independent of substrate temperature and wetting angle,
suggesting a universal, self-similar mechanism that does not depend on the rate of solidification. We
propose a model for the freezing front and derive resulting tip angles analytically, in good agreement with
the experiments.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.054301
PACS numbers: 47.20.Ft
Liquid solidification can lead to intricate morphological
structures, from dendritic growth [1] to the fascinating
complexity of snowflakes [2]. In an apparently much
simpler situation of a water drop freezing on a cold
substrate, it has been observed that the final shape of the
ice drop is pointy [3–6], with a sharp tip that is reminiscent
of the domes of orthodox churches (Fig. 1). Intriguingly,
the sharp tip appears despite the presence of liquid surface
tension, which usually tends to smooth out sharp features.
These singular ice drops can be observed in frozen water
accretion on aircraft cabins during flights [7], during
solidification for freeze drying purposes [8], and in recent
studies on supercooling [9] and icing of substrates [10]. A
similar mechanism is thought to be at the origin of the
formation of spiky microstructures following the irradiation
by high-power ultrashort lasers in germanium and silicon
substrates [11], which like water are materials that expand
upon freezing.
Though the formation of pointy ice drops has been
attributed to the expansion of water upon freezing, there
is still no satisfactory explanation for this phenomenon.
Previous studies revealed that the freezing can indeed yield
a tip singularity, by modeling a planar solidification front
reaching the top of the drop [3,5]. However, these theories
predict a singularity only when the ratio of solid and liquid
densities is below 0.75: this clearly does not explain the
appearance of conical ice drops, since for water ν≡ρs=ρl ¼
0.92. The paradox can be resolved by assuming that the
freezing dynamics induces a contact angle, with a slope
discontinuity at the solid-liquid-air trijunction point that
depends on the freezing rate [3].
Alternatively, the singularity was also recovered for
realistic ν when numerically treating the solidification
dynamics in full detail, but without the assumption of a
dynamic co
FIG. 1 (color online).
Experimental setup. (a) Water drops are
deposited on a copper plate immersed in a cooling bath of
ethylene-glycol, ethanol, and dry ice. (b) The shape of the
advancing freezing front can be observed using a 2D-like
Hele-Shaw setup. (c) A freezing water droplet with red dye.
The position of the trijunction point is clearly visible, while the
images give also give a qualitative impression of the geometry of
the freezing front.
PRL 113, 054301 (2014)
P H Y S I C A L
R E V I E W
L E T T E R S
week ending
1 AUGUST 2014
0031-9007=14=113(5)=054301(5)
054301-1
© 2014 American Physical Society


ntact angle [4,12]. The true mechanism behind the tip
singularity has therefore remained elusive, in particular
since there is a lack of systematic experiments to which any
of the theories can be compared.
In this Letter we reveal that the geometry of the freezing
front, essentially determined by the final stages of a
quasisteady heat transfer problem, is responsible for the
formation of pointy ice drops. First, we experimentally
show that the cone angles at the tip are universal, and do
not depend on the substrate temperature, excluding the
influence of the solidification rate. Next, we reveal the
boundary conditions of the solidification front by tracking
the freezing process in a Hele-Shaw geometry. It is found
experimentally, and explained theoretically from heat con-
duction, that the front develops a spherical shape that ends
perpendicularly to the solid-air interface. Taking this into
account into the mass balance during solidification, we then
show how the singularity emerges for any density ratio
ν < 1. The theory predicts a cone angle α ¼ 131° for water
drops [α defined in Fig. 1(c)], which falls within the range
of experimental observations.
Experiments.—Droplets
of
pure
water
(milli-Q,
degassed) were frozen on a copper structure that is partially
immersed in a cooling bath composed of ethylene-glycol,
ethanol, and dry ice [Fig. 1(a)]. With this mixture, the
temperature can be controlled in the range −78 to −17 °C
by modifying the volume fraction of the two liquids [13].
Droplets of volume 4–8 μl were deposited using a syringe
pump (Harvard Apparatus PHD ULTRA) and a 200 μm
capillary. The temperature on the plate was measured near
the droplet using a thermocouple. We focus here on
temperatures above −44 °C, for which reproducible experi-
ments could be performed. At lower temperatures nondi-
rectional freezing and multiple freezing fronts appear.
The freezing process was recorded, using a PCO camera
(Sensicam QE), a long distance microscope (Edmund
Optics VZM1000), and diffused back lighting, until the
tip was formed.
We extracted the final shape of the drops through image
analysis and fitted third-order polynomials to the left-hand
and right-hand regions close to the tip. The angle of the tip
is then computed as the intersecting angle of the poly-
nomials, with an experimental error bar of 5° on average.
The total time for the solidification is on the order of
1 sec for the coldest cases and 10 sec for the warmest.
Importantly, the liquid near the contact line freezes long
before reaching the equilibrium contact angle, so that
different contact angles can be achieved by varying the
height of deposition. This results in drops of different
aspect ratio H=R, where H is defined as the final height of
the ice drop and R the radius of the wetted area [see Fig 2(a)
for geometric definitions and Fig. 2(b) for typical droplet
shapes]. Various movies of the freezing process can be
found as Supplemental Material [14].
Figure 2(b) shows typical shapes of ice drops, as
obtained for different temperatures and contact angles.
Despite the large disparity of drop shapes, the formation of
the tip singularity appears to be independent of contact
angle and substrate temperature. This can be inferred from
Fig. 2(c), where we report the cone angle α for more than
200 experiments, carried out at different temperatures
(horizontal axis) and for different aspect ratios (upward
or downward symbols). All measurements fall within a
well-defined range of tip angles, characterized by an
average and standard deviation α ¼ 139°  8°. The data
give no evidence for any correlation of α with temperature
and aspect ratio. The experiments thus show that the tip
formation is not influenced by global geometry of the drop,
FIG. 2 (color online).
Tip formation on freezing drops. (a) Sketch of the geometry during the final stages of the freezing process. θ is
the angle formed by the liquid interface with the horizontal, ϕ is that formed by the solid-frozen interface with the horizontal, and α is the
final tip angle. The drop radius R, and the “downward volume” Vd are also defined. (b) Drops with different contact angles (i.e., aspect
ratios) are achieved by changing the deposition height, at different temperatures. (c) Measurement of the tip angle α for the full range of
temperatures explored. Base-down triangles represent data from droplets at high contact angles and therefore a height-to-radius aspect
ratio H=R > 1. Base-up triangles represent drops with low contact angle characterized by aspect ratios H=R < 1. We find no systematic
dependence of α with global drop shape and substrate temperature. The gray line indicates the theoretical prediction (4).
PRL 113, 054301 (2014)
P H Y S I C A L
R E V I E W
L E T T E R S
week ending
1 AUGUST 2014
054301-2


or by the rate at which the solidification occurs—the latter
suggesting that the singularity is the outcome of a quasi-
static process. The observed variability in α is beyond the
accuracy of the measurement, and appears to be due to the
conditions in which the experiments were performed, i.e.,
with the droplet exposed to air currents and vapor from the
cooling bath.
Freezing front.—To obtain further insight in the tip
formation, we next investigate the shape of the solidifica-
tion front. The still images in Fig. 1(c) suggest that the
front does not remain planar, as was also discussed in
Refs. [15,16]. However, in order to achieve quantitative
access to the advancing front, we constructed a Hele-Shaw
cell with two microscope slides separated by a 1 mm spacer
[Fig. 1(b)]. The cell was placed on the copper plate and the
capillary carefully maneuvered between the walls. The
gap is wide enough for the drop to form a conical tip, but
this is not always visible due to the presence of a wetting
meniscus. To minimize image distortion due to this
meniscus, the glass is treated such that the wetting contact
angle ≈90°. This gives a clear view on the quasi-two-
dimensional freezing process—typical videos can be found
in the Supplemental Material [14].
Figure 3(a) shows that the solidification front in the
Hele-Shaw cell grows towards the top of the drop in a
similar fashion to the unconfined experiment, although the
time scale of the process is a bit faster. In the first instants of
the process, vapor condensates on the glass slides resulting
in a “frost halo” [9] around the drop. Such an event occurs
simultaneously as the partial and kinetically controlled
recalescent freezing [17], also visible in Fig. 3(a) as a
brighter area above the freezing front.
Our prime interest here is to extract quantitative infor-
mation on the geometry of the freezing front. The front
shown in Fig. 3(a) has a convex shape at the early stage of
the freezing, while at the last stages the curvature it is
inverted towards a concave geometry. Interestingly, these
profiles closely resemble two-dimensional numerical sim-
ulations [4]. At all times, the experimentally observed
freezing front appears to be perpendicular to the ice-air
interface. This is confirmed in Fig. 3(c), where we present
the angle γ ¼ θ þ ϕ defined in Fig. 3(b), as a function of
the height z of the trijunction point. The red line corre-
sponds to the average over 20 experiments, performed at
temperatures ranging from −30 to −15 °C. We find that the
front is nearly perpendicular during the entire experiment.
During the final stages we find an average and standard
deviation γ ¼ 87°  8°.
Heat-transfer-limited self-similar freezing dynamics.—
Coming back to the axisymmetric case we now derive the
shape of the solid-liquid front from the heat transfer in the
late stages of the freezing process [cf. Fig. 2(a)]. We neglect
any small-scale kinetic undercooling or Gibbs-Thomson
effect (as considered, e.g., in Ref. [12]), such that the front
here always remains at the equilibrium melting temperature
Tm. As the air surrounding the drop has a much smaller
thermal conductivity than the solid (and the liquid), the
latent heat released by the advancing front must be
FIG. 3 (color online).
Freezing experiments with droplets sandwiched in a Hele-Shaw cell. (a) Evolution of the freezing front (green
line) in different stages of the process. (b) Sketch and definitions of angles and distances. (c) Front-to-interface angle γ plotted against
the relative height of the freezing front z=H. Within experimental variations, we find γ ≈90°.
PRL 113, 054301 (2014)
P H Y S I C A L
R E V I E W
L E T T E R S
week ending
1 AUGUST 2014
054301-3


evacuated via the solid, while the liquid remains at uniform
temperature Tm. The fact that heat cannot cross the solid-air
boundary has an important consequence: it implies that the
isotherms, in particular the freezing front at Tm, are locally
perpendicular to the solid-air boundary, i.e., γ ¼ 90°. This
simple argument is in good agreement with the Hele-Shaw
cell experiments, even though heat transfer via the glass
slides might not be entirely negligible there.
The final stages of the heat transfer are expected to be
self-similar. Namely, the angle γ made by the front with the
external surface remains approximately constant, and the
freezing is characterized by a single length scale r, the radius
at the triple junction [Fig. 2(b)]. Based on this length, one
can derive a scaling law for the normal velocity vn of the
front, which is proportional to the rate at which latent heat
released by the front is evacuated. This gives vn ∼−dr=dt∼
λsδT=ρsLmr, where λs is the solid thermal conductivity,
Lm is the latent heat of melting, and the undercooling
δT ¼ Tm −T. Here we assumed that the heat transfer
process in the solid is quasisteady, i.e., that the time scale
of front motion r=vn is much larger than the thermal
diffusion time scale r2=κs, where κs is the thermal diffusivity
of the solid. Taking into account that κs ¼ λs=ρscp;s, where
cp;s is the thermal capacity of the solid, this is equivalent to
assuming that the Stefan number S ¼ cp;sδT=Lm is small
[4]. Actually, we find S ¼ 0.27 for the maximal value of
δT ¼ 44 K in our experiments, such that this quasisteadi-
ness assumption is sufficiently accurate here [as also con-
firmed in Fig. 2(c)]. Note that solving the above energy
balance for r leads to a classical r2 law; i.e., r2 decreases
linearly with time during tip formation.
The above theory also provides the self-similar shape of
the freezing front, which is crucial for understanding the tip
formation. The heat transfer problem amounts to solving
∇2T ¼ 0 in the solid, with the boundary condition that
the isotherms make an angle γ ¼ 90°. When the solid
approaches a conical shape, the resulting isotherms are
portions of concentric spheres centered at the final cone
tip [Fig. 2(a)]. The two-dimensional equivalent is that the
freezing front is a portion of a circle—in good agreement
with the concave shape in the final stage [Fig. 3(a)]. This
solution is stable with respect to dendrite formation given
that cooling is from the solid side [1]. Hence, the front will
remain spherical during the self-similar final stages of tip
formation.
Geometric theory for tip formation.—The results above
point towards a scenario where the tip is formed by a
quasistatic mechanism. Based on this, we propose a model
in the spirit of Ref. [3], but taking into account the self-
similar spherical geometry of the freezing front. The
starting point is mass conservation
d
dz ðVl þ νVsÞ ¼ 0;
ð1Þ
here expressed in terms of liquid and solid volumes
Vl;s and density ratio ν. Since temporal dynamics is
unimportant, the conservation law has been written in
terms of a derivative with respect to z, the height of the
trijunction. The total liquid volume can be decomposed into
a spherical cap of angle θ and a downward volume Vd
[cf. Fig. 2(a)]. The liquid and solid volumes then are
Vl ¼ r3fðθÞ þ Vd;
Vs ¼ −Vd þ
Z z
0
dz0πrðz0Þ2;
ð2Þ
where rðzÞ and θðzÞ are the local radius and angle of the
frozen drop, and the geometry of a spherical cap gives
fðθÞ ¼ π
3
2–3 cos θ þ cos3θ
sin3θ

:
ð3Þ
Closing the problem requires an expression for Vd, which
in general implies a full solution of the solidification
front. For the final stages, however, we can take advantage
of our previous observation that the front develops a
spherical shape with downward angle ϕ ¼ γ −θ, such that
Vd ¼ r3fðγ −θÞ. With this, and taking into account
that dr=dz ¼ −1= tan θ, Eqs. (1)–(3) give a closed set of
equations for rðzÞ, indeed predicting a sharp tip as r→0
[18]. At the singularity, θ obeys
fðγ −θÞ þ fðθÞ ¼ ν

fðγ −θÞ þ π
3 tan θ

;
ð4Þ
from which we can infer α ¼ π −2θ, for any density ratio.
The central result of this analysis is that, combined with
our result that γ ¼ 90°, Eq. (4) gives a parameter-free
prediction for the tip angle of ice drops: α ¼ 131°. This is
consistent with our experimental observation α ¼ 139°8°,
though most experiments are slightly above the theoretical
prediction. We tentatively attribute the experimentally
observed variability in the cone angle to variations of γ.
Inserting the γ variations measured in the Hele-Shaw cell in
Eq. (4) indeed gives α ¼ 133°  5°, in close agreement
with experiments.
Equation (4) has an elegant interpretation in terms of
the volumes before and after freezing. After multiplication
by r3, the left-hand side represents the unfrozen liquid
volume, consisting of two spherical caps. This mass is to
be transformed into ice, where due to the expansion factor
ν the upward liquid sphere is transformed into a cone of
volume ðπ=3Þr3 tan θ. The tip angle is thus determined
from purely geometrical considerations. Interestingly,
the model does not display a critical density ratio: a tip
is formed even for 0 < 1 −ν ≪1. This can be seen by
expansion of Eq. (4), yielding a nonzero angle θ ¼
ð12=πÞfðγÞð1 −νÞ, in radians. This is in marked contrast
with the model where the solidification front was assumed
PRL 113, 054301 (2014)
P H Y S I C A L
R E V I E W
L E T T E R S
week ending
1 AUGUST 2014
054301-4


planar [3,5], which predicted tip formation only for ν below
a critical value 3=4.
Outlook.—This offers a fundamentally new view of
freezing phenomena near free surfaces, valid beyond the
ice-cone formation studied here: our findings provide the
first direct measurement of the boundary condition for
the freezing front, and highlight that geometric aspects are
more critical than dynamical effects. The confinement of
heat transfer within the solid-liquid system is a generic
feature of solidification near free surfaces. The results are
therefore expected to have impact on a broad variety of
applications, such as icing, drop impact on cold surfaces,
and solidification during 3D printing.
A. G. M. and O. R. E. contributed equally to the Letter
and their names in the author list are interchangeable.
We thank Koen Winkels for many discussions. J. H. S.
acknowledges financial support from NWO through
VIDI Grant No. 11304. P. C. acknowledges financial sup-
port from FRS-FNRS and BELSPO (IAP 7/38 μ-MAST).
[1] M. E. Glicksman, Principles of Solidification (Springer,
New York, 2002).
[2] K. G. Libbrecht, Rep. Prog. Phys. 68, 855 (2005).
[3] D. M. Anderson, M. G. Worster, and S. H. Davis, J. Cryst.
Growth 163, 329 (1996).
[4] V. S. Ajaev and S. H. Davis, J. Comput. Phys. 187, 492
(2003).
[5] J. H. Snoeijer and P. Brunet, Am. J. Phys. 80, 764 (2012).
[6] O. R. Enriquez, A. G. Marin, K. G. Winkels, and J. H.
Snoeijer, Phys. Fluids 24, 091102 (2012).
[7] See, for example, SKYbrary, “In-Flight Icing,” http://www
.skybrary.aero/index.php/In‑Flight_Icing.
[8] J. D.
Mellor
et
al.,
Fundamentals
of
Freeze-Drying
(Academic Press, London, 1978).
[9] S. Jung, M. K. Tiwari, and D. Poulikakos, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 109, 16073 (2012).
[10] S. Jung, M. Dorrestijn, D. Raps, A. Das, C. M. Megaridis,
and D. Poulikakos, Langmuir 27, 3059 (2011).
[11] K. W. Kolasinski, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci. 11. 76
(2007).
[12] V. S. Ajaev and S. H. Davis, J. Cryst. Growth 264, 452
(2004).
[13] C. M. Jensen and D. W. Lee, J. Chem. Educ. 77, 629
(2000).
[14] See
Supplemental
Material
at
http://link.aps.org/
supplemental/10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.054301 for several
experimental videos of the freezing drops.
[15] M. Nauenberg, Am. J. Phys. 81, 150 (2013).
[16] J. H. Snoeijer and P. Brunet, Am. J. Phys. 81, 151 (2013).
[17] F.
Tavakoli,
A.
Sarkissians,
and
P.
Kavehpour,
arXiv:1210.3759.
[18] The tip formation is obtained by taking r →0. In this limit,
the asymptotic solution is of the form θðrÞ −θcone ¼ Arb,
where the sought for cone angle θcone is given by condition (4).
PRL 113, 054301 (2014)
P H Y S I C A L
R E V I E W
L E T T E R S
week ending
1 AUGUST 2014
054301-5


Self-Lifting Droplet Driven by the Solidification-Induced Solutal Marangoni Flow
Feng Wang , Li Chen, Yuqi Li, Peng Huo, Xi Gu , Man Hu, and Daosheng Deng
*
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
(Received 12 October 2023; accepted 6 December 2023; published 2 January 2024)
Multicomponent droplets are pertinent to diverse applications ranging from 3D printing to fabrication of
electronic devices to medical diagnostics and are typically inherent with the occurrence of the phase
transition in the manifestation of evaporation and solidification. Indeed, the versatile transformations and
fascinating morphologies of the droplets have been identified, which primarily arise from the evaporation-
induced flow. Here, we report the self-lifting behavior of a frozen binary droplet, resulting in a nearly
doubling in height, in a fashion that defies against the gravitational effect. This counterintuitive observation
is attributed to an internal solutal Marangoni flow up to 1 mm=s, which is driven by the enriched solute
concentration locally in the vicinity of the solidification front. Moreover, we perform theoretical analysis by
incorporating the propagation of solidification front, and the calculated spatiotemporal evolution of droplet
shape agrees with experiments excellently. The effects of several key physical parameters on self-lifting are
elucidated quantitatively, providing guidance to control the self-lifting. These results will further advance
our understanding of underlying physicochemical hydrodynamics in the multicomponent liquid systems
subjected to heat transfer and phase change, consequently shedding light on the relevant technological
applications.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.132.014002
Multicomponent droplets consisting of more than one
liquid component [1–3] are indispensable for diverse appli-
cations, including 3D printing [4,5], fabrication of electronic
devices [6], and medical diagnostics [7]. Since being
inherent with the rich physicochemical hydrodynamics,
multicomponent droplets are typically characterized by
the occurrence of the phase transition in the manifestation
of evaporation and solidification [1]. Particularly, the
evaporation at the air-liquid interface of the droplets has
been extensively investigated recently. This evaporation
generates the gradient of the solute concentration and the
gradientof surface tension,and the internal flow accordingly
leads to the intriguing dynamics and exotic phenomena. For
example, in a volatile colloidal droplet, an outward capillary
flow carries dispersed particles, which accumulate toward
the pinned contact line, and deposits them into a line to form
the residual coffee rings [8]. The evaporation-induced
Marangoni flow within a binary-mixture liquid droplet is
strong enough to generate a micron-thick pancakelike shape
[9]. Because of selective evaporation and the density
gradient, the flow within droplets is effectively controlled
by the gravitational effect [10]; a protein-containing droplet
experiences the shape morphing to a flattened and wrinkled
encapsulated state due to the gravity and evaporation [11].
Concurrently, the study of frozen droplets undergoing
supercooling has been emerging [12]. Since the advancing
solidification front is immanent in phase change, heat
transfer, and mass transport, generating an intimate inter-
action with the dispersed objects submerged within the
liquid, many fascinating behaviors can appear. For example,
a water droplet on a supercooling substrate will form an ice-
cone shape associated with the geometry of the freezing
front as determined by heat transfer [13]. For an oil-in-water
emulsion during freezing process, the increased solute
concentration at the solidification front can enhance pre-
melting for the engulfment of droplets [14], and the droplet
can be formed into a pointy-tip shape as mediated by
nanometer-thick interfacial flows [15]. Despite the signifi-
cant progresses of evaporation-induced solutal Marangoni
flow for the multicomponent liquid, the effects of solidifi-
cation on the probable flow and shape transformation in the
multicomponent liquids have been less investigated.
In this Letter, by utilizing the high-speed imaging and
thermal imaging, we observe a counterintuitive self-lifting
behavior for a water-ethanol binary droplet subjected to
supercooling, resulting in a nearly doubling in height, in a
fashion that defies the gravitational effect. This phenome-
non is attributed to an internal solidification-induced solutal
Marangoni flow, which deforms the shape to be elevated
upward. A theoretical model agrees with the experiments
remarkably, and the effects of several key physical param-
eters on the self-lifting are elucidated quantitatively. These
results would inspire more future research to explore
solidification-induced flow for the relevant technological
applications.
Observation of the self-lifting behavior.—A binary
ethanol-water droplet (the initial volume concentration of
ethanol c0) was gently deposited on a supercooled surface
(the substrate temperature Ts), and the freezing dynamics is
sketched in Fig. 1(a) (Supplemental Material [16], Note 1).
PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 132, 014002 (2024)
0031-9007=24=132(1)=014002(5)
014002-1
© 2024 American Physical Society


By utilizing high-speed camera and thermal camera, the
spatiotemporal evolution of the freezing dynamics was
recorded at various ethanol concentrations [Figs. 1(b)–1(e),
Supplemental Material, Movie S1–4). For a pure water
droplet [Fig. 1(b)], during the whole freezing process from
t ¼ 0 to tf, the transition between the solid-gas interface
and the liquid-gas interface at the solidification front is so
smooth that the initial droplet profile is nearly preserved in
the final frozen shape, although the volume expansion
causes a sharp tip at the apex of the droplet [13].
However, for a binary droplet [Figs. 1(c)–1(e)], the
interface transition at the solidification front is so sharp
that the different contact angles at the solid-gas interface
(θlow) and the liquid-gas interface (θup) form a pronounced
dynamic growth angle (Δθdyn), as indicated in the sketch of
Fig. 1(a) [17]. The top residual droplet above the solidi-
fication front undergoes deformation and lifting up.
Eventually at tf, the final height of a frozen binary droplet
(Hf) is much greater than the initial height (H0).
From the high-speed imaging, the total height (Ht) of the
droplet as a function of time is obtained, as shown in
Fig. 2(a), and the final self-lifting behavior as characterized
by a dimensionless height ratio, Hf=H0, has a nonmono-
tonic relation with the concentration c0, and reaches a peak
at a medium concentration (c0 ¼ 0.05) [Fig. 2(b)]. Since
the surface tension of the ethanol-water binary mixture
decreases with ethanol concentration c0 (Supplemental
Material, Note 2), the initial apparent contact angle of
the binary droplet θ0 on the supercooled surface is expected
to decrease with c0 accordingly, consistent with the experi-
ments [Fig. 2(c)].
Propagation of solidification front.—In order to under-
stand the freezing dynamics of a binary droplet, the
solidification front is simplified to be flat hereafter [dashed
lines in Figs. 1(c)–1(e)]. By considering the balance
between the latent heat released at the solidification front
and the heat transfer across the solid, the height of
solidification front (Hs) grows with time as follows [13,18]:
Hs ¼ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Dst
p
;
ð1Þ
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
FIG. 1.
Self-lifting of a frozen binary droplet on a supercooled surface. (a) Sketch for a frozen binary droplet for the initial state
(t ¼ 0), the self-lifting state (0 < t < tf), and the final state (t ¼ tf), respectively. H0, R0, θ0 for the initial height, radius, and apparent
contact angle of the binary droplet; Ht, Hs, Hf for the time-dependent total height, the height of the solidification front, and the final
height of the frozen binary droplet; θlow, θup, and Δθdyn for the contact angle at the solid-gas interface, liquid-gas interface, and the
dynamic growth angle. High-speed imaging and thermal imaging snapshots for (b) pure water droplet c0 ¼ 0, Ts ¼ −23.5 °C; (c) binary
droplet c0 ¼ 0.01, Ts ¼ −22.5 °C; (d) binary droplet c0 ¼ 0.05, Ts ¼ −21.5 °C; (e) binary droplet c0 ¼ 0.10, Ts ¼ −20.1 °C. The red
dashed line for the solidification front in high-speed images, and the white dashed line for the isotherm T ¼ Tf (for the freezing point of
the binary liquid) in thermal images. Scale bar for 1 mm.
(a)
(d)
(e)
(b)
(c)
FIG. 2.
Dynamics of self-lifting for a binary droplet. (a) The
time evolution of self-lifting ratio Ht=H0 at different c0. (b) The
final self-lifting ratio Hf=H0 of a binary droplet at different c0.
(c) The initial apparent contact angle θ0 of a binary droplet at
different c0. (d) The propagation of the solidification front with a
1=2 scaling law at different c0. (e) The effective diffusivity of the
solidification front (H2
f=tf ¼ 4Ds) linearly proportional to ΔT,
but independent of c0. The shadow in (b) and (c) for the standard
deviation of at least five measurements.
PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 132, 014002 (2024)
014002-2


where Ds ¼ 2ksΔT=ðρsLÞ is a diffusion coefficient, ks, ρs
are the thermal conductivity and the density of the
solidified liquid, respectively; L is the latent heat of solidi-
fication per unit mass; ΔT ¼ Tf −Ts is the supercooling
temperature, and Tf is concentration-dependent freezing
point of the binary droplet (Supplemental Material, Note 2).
The propagation of the solidification front [Fig. 2(d)] still
can be well described by this 1=2 scaling law for the ice
front propagation in a pure liquid. Additionally, this scaling
law is experimentally validated by the effective diffusivity
H2
f=tf ¼ 4Ds ∼ΔT at different supercooling temperatures
ΔT, while being independent of ethanol concentration c0,
as shown in Fig. 2(e) [18,19].
Solutal Marangoni flow.—For a multicomponent droplet
such as a binary ethanol-water droplet investigated here, as
shown in the sketch [Fig. 3(a)], during the freezing process,
the solute (ethanol) is extruded from the solidification front
due to the lower freezing point [14]. By this fashion, the
solutal concentration is accumulated locally near the
vicinity of the solidification front in the liquid phase, so
the solute concentration is enhanced near the solidification
front (chigh), while the concentration at the top liquid is less
(clow). Since the surface tension decreases with ethanol
concentration, accordingly the local surface tension at the
bottom liquid (γlow) is reduced to be lower than the surface
tension at the top liquid (γhigh). Consequently, a solutal
Marangoni flow is generated within the liquid phase,
resulting in an upward solutal Marangoni flow at the
droplet interface while a downward flow inside the droplet,
as marked by yellow arrows in Fig. 3(a).
In order to validate the solutal Marangoni flow, particle
image velocimetry (PIV) measurement is performed during
the freezing process of a binary droplet. Figure 3(b) shows
a typical snapshot of flow field in a frozen binary droplet
(c0 ¼ 0.05), and a pronounced downward flow field at the
center of the droplet is observed. In contrast, the flow field
inside a frozen pure water droplet is opposite to the binary
case, and this upward flow at the center of the droplet
[Fig. 3(c)] arises from the thermal Marangoni effect due to
the interfacial temperature gradient [20]. Furthermore, the
downward flow pattern at the center of a freezing binary
droplet [Fig. 3(d)] is validated by the simulation involving
the solutal Marangoni flow due to concentration gradient
[Fig. 3(e) and Supplemental Material, Note 3). Also, the
simulation presents the flow structure near the interface,
which is challenging to be measured accurately for the
curved or distorted interface [20].
Because
of
the
existence
of
the
upward
solutal
Marangoni flow, the profile of droplet differs pronouncedly
from the initial profile. The apparent contact angle of the
droplet on the ice substrate (θup) becomes larger than the
angle of the ice substrate (θlow), and a dynamic growth
angle Δθdyn ¼ θup −θlow is identified (Fig. 3(a)). The
typical solutal Marangoni velocity Um inside a freezing
binary droplet is defined as the maximum velocity at the
center of the droplet, marked by the white dash box in
Fig. 3(d). As shown in Fig. 3(f), both Δθdyn and Um
decrease with the propagation of the solidification front
experimentally.
From the perspective of scaling analysis, by balancing
the viscous force with the surface tension gradient [1,9], the
typical velocity of the Marangoni flow can be expressed as,
UM ∝Δγðc; TÞHl
μRl
;
ð2Þ
where Δγðc; TÞ is the difference of surface tension, which
can be induced by a temperature gradient or a concentration
gradient, μ is the viscosity of the liquid, Hl and Rl are the
height and radius of the remaining droplet in the phase of
liquid, respectively.
Additionally, the competition between the thermal
Marangoni effect ΔγT and the solutal Marangoni effect
Δγc can be expressed as follows:
ΔγT
Δγc
∼jdγ=dTj · ðT0 −TfÞ=R0
jdγ=dcj · c0=δc
;
ð3Þ
where jdγ=dTj¼2×10−4 N=ðmKÞ, jdγ=dcj ¼ 0.1 N=m
are the surface tension gradients dependent on temperature
(a)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(b)
(c)
FIG. 3.
Solutal Marangoni flow near thevicinity of solidification
front in the liquid phase for a frozen binary droplet. (a) Sketch for
the self-lifting behavior. θlow, θup, and Δθdyn for the contact angle
at the solid-gas interface, liquid-gas interface, and the dynamic
growth angle; Hl, Rl for the height and radius of the remaining
liquid phase during the droplet freezing; the green shadow for the
concentration distribution of ethanol. During the propagation of
the solidification front, the solute (ethanol) concentration at the
front (chigh) is accumulated and enriched, becoming greater than
the concentration at the apex (clow). Consequently, the concen-
tration-dependent surface tension (red arrow) generates a solutal
Marangoni flow (yellow arrow), forming an upward solutal
Marangoni flow UM along the interface. (b) PIV measurement
of a frozen binary droplet, c0 ¼ 0.05, Ts ¼ −37.8 °C. (c) PIV
measurement of a frozen water droplet, c0 ¼ 0, Ts ¼ −33.6 °C.
(d) Flow field in (b). (e) Solutal Marangoni flow field obtained by
simulation. (f) The evolution of Um and Δθdyn obtained from
experiments. Scale for 1 mm.
PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 132, 014002 (2024)
014002-3


and concentration, respectively. δc is the thickness of the
concentration boundary layer, which is typically much
smaller than the radius of droplet R0 [14]. Hence, the
resultant ΔγT=Δγc ≪1 evidently indicates the dominant
role of the solutal Marangoni effect in the frozen binary
droplet as investigated here.
According to Eq. (2), the decrease of Um as the
solidification front propagates [Fig. 3(f)] may result from
the decreased aspect ratio Hl=Rl and the reduced surface
tension gradient dγ=dc associated with the increased
concentration inside the remaining droplet (Supplemental
Material, Note 2). This scaling relation of the solutal
Marangoni flow UM [Eq. (2)] is further validated by the
simulation (Supplemental Material, Note 3).
Moreover, we explore the self-lifting behavior on an
inclined surface with tilt angle θs ¼ 45° (Supplemental
Material, Note 4), and the dimensionless time-dependent
height of the freezing droplet Ht=H0 exhibits a similar
behavior, implying the negligible gravitational effect and
further highlighting the essential role of the solutal
Marangoni flow to be responsible for the self-lifting.
Dynamic growth angle.—After understanding the char-
acteristic of the solutal Marangoni flow inside a freezing
binary droplet, we further investigate the dynamic growth
angle Δθdyn at different volume concentration c0. From the
high-speed images [Figs. 1(c)–1(e)], the evolution of the
apparent contact angle of the remaining droplet θup and the
ice substrate θlow are extracted at different concentrations c0
[Figs. 4(a)–4(c)]. Remarkably, despite the complicated
evolution of the apparent contact angles during the frozen
process, the dynamic growth angle Δθdyn is still pro-
nounced [Fig. 4(d)].
Figure 4(e) indicates that the time-averaged Δθdyn reaches
a peak at a medium concentration (c0 ¼ 0.05). According to
Eq. (2), for a lower concentration (c0 < 0.05), the surface
tension difference Δγ is dominant, which increases with the
initial concentration c0, promoting the solutal Marangoni
flow and dynamic growth angle Δθdyn. On the other hand,
for a higher concentration (c0 > 0.05), the aspect ratio
Hl=Rl, which is dependent on the initial apparent contact
angle θ0, becomes much smaller with the increased con-
centration c0, suppressing the solutal Marangoni flow
and Δθdyn.
Model for self-lifting.—In order to understand the self-
lifting behavior quantitatively, we proceed to perform the
theoretical calculation for the evolution of the droplet shape
during the freezing process. The dynamic growth angle
associated with the self-lifting is required to be considered
carefully. Actually, a general framework to describe solidi-
fication was established by including the dynamic growth
angle, which is the angle between the tangents to the solid-
vapor and liquid-vapor interfaces at the tri-junction [17,21].
Here, by combining the mass conservation, the propaga-
tion of solidification front [Eq. (1)], and the geometrical
relation [Fig. 3(a)] (Supplemental Material, Note 5), the
contour of a frozen binary droplet can be calculated with the
initial profile of the droplet R0, θ0, and the constant Δθdyn
[17,21]. Here, to simplify the model, the dynamic growth
angle Δθdyn correlated with the solutal Marangoni flow is
assumed to be a constant during the freezing process, and its
value is obtained from the experiments [Fig. 4(e)].
Remarkably, Fig. 5(a) shows the theoretical calculation
of droplet profiles agrees with the experimental observation
(a)
(d)
(e)
(b)
(c)
FIG. 4.
Dynamic growth angle of a frozen binary droplet. (a)–
(c) The evolution of the apparent contact angle of the remaining
droplet θup and the ice substrate θlow at different concentration c0.
(d) Evolution of the dynamic growth angle Δθdyn ¼ θup −θlow at
different c0. (e) The time-averaged dynamic growth angle Δθdyn
for t=tf < 0.5 in (d) at different c0, triangles for the experimental
results, the solid line for the fitting result to guide the eye, and
error bars for the standard deviation of at least five data points.
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIG. 5.
Theoretical model for the self-lifting behavior. (a) For
the spatiotemporal evolution of droplet profile, the numerical
model consistent with the experiment [for c0 ¼ 0.01 in Fig. 1(c)].
(b) The calculated self-lifting height ratio, Hf=H0, dependent on
density ratio ρs=ρl and Δθdyn for a given θ0 ¼ 90°. (c) Calculated
Hf=H0 (transparent curved surface) as a function of initial
contact angle (θ0) and the dynamic growth angle (Δθdyn) for
water ρs=ρl ¼ 0.917; experimentally measured values (bars) and
theoretically estimated values exhibit similar trends.
PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 132, 014002 (2024)
014002-4


excellently during the solidification process (Supplemental
Material, Movie S5). More physical parameters can be
examined for the final self-lifting height ratio in the model.
Taken as an example, Fig. 5(b) demonstrates the self-lifting
height ratio (Hf=H0) as a function of the ratio of solid and
liquid density ratio (ρs=ρl) for different Δθdyn. The red
and blue regimes denote for the self-lifting (Hf=H0 > 1)
and self-shrinking (Hf=H0 < 1). Clearly, for water with
ρs=ρl ¼ 0.917, the self-lifting effect becomes much higher
at a large Δθdyn.
From the model calculation, Fig. 5(c) displays the self-
lifting ratio Hf=H0 associated with the initial contact angle
(θ0) and the dynamic growth angle (Δθdyn). The self-lifting
value at different concentrations (c0), corresponding to
(θ0, Δθdyn) as observed experimentally, exhibits excellent
agreement with calculation.
In conclusion, we report a counterintuitive self-lifting in
a frozen binary droplet in a fashion that defies the
gravitational effect. This observation is attributed to an
internal solutal Marangoni flow, which is driven by the
enriched solute concentration locally in the vicinity of the
solidification front. We perform theoretical analysis of
spatiotemporal evolution of frozen droplet, consistent with
experiments excellently. These results will further advance
our understanding of the rich physicochemical hydrody-
namics in the multicomponent liquid systems subjected to
heat transfer and phase change, consequently shedding
light on the relevant technological applications for the
advanced manufacturing.
We are thankful for the fruitful discussions with
Professor H. A. Stone and Professor K. L. Chong. This
work is supported by the funding from the National
Program in China, start-up in Fudan University, and
State Key Laboratory of Airliner Integration Technology
and Flight Simulation.
*dsdeng@fudan.edu.cn
[1] D. Lohse and X. H. Zhang, Physicochemical hydrodynam-
ics of droplets out of equilibrium, Nat. Rev. Phys. 2, 426
(2020).
[2] N. Blanken, M. S. Saleem, M. J. Thoraval, and C. Antonini,
Impact of compound drops: A perspective, Curr. Opin.
Colloid Interface Sci. 51, 101389 (2021).
[3] Z. Y. Wang, D. Orejon, Y. Takata, and K. Sefiane, Wetting
and evaporation of multicomponent droplets, Phys. Rep.
960, 1 (2022).
[4] M. Vaezi, H. Seitz, and S. F. Yang, A review on 3D micro-
additive manufacturing technologies, Int. J. Adv. Manuf.
Technol. 67, 1721 (2013).
[5] Y. Zhang, Z. C. Dong, C. X. Li, H. F. Du, N. X. Fang, L.
Wu, and Y. L. Song, Continuous 3D printing from one
single droplet, Nat. Commun. 11, 4685 (2020).
[6] J. A. Lim, W. H. Lee, H. S. Lee, J. H. Lee, Y. D. Park, and K.
Cho, Self-organization of ink-jet-printed triisopropylsilyle-
thynyl pentacene via evaporation-induced flows in a drying
droplet, Adv. Funct. Mater. 18, 229 (2008).
[7] D. Brutin, B. Sobac, B. Loquet, and J. Sampol, Pattern
formation in drying drops of blood, J. Fluid Mech. 667, 85
(2011).
[8] R. D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. F. Dupont, G. Huber, S. R.
Nagel, and T. A. Witten, Capillary flow as the cause of ring
stains from dried liquid drops, Nature (London) 389, 827
(1997).
[9] A. A. Pahlavan, L. S. Yang, C. D. Bain, and H. A. Stone,
Evaporation of binary-mixture liquid droplets: The forma-
tion of picoliter pancakelike shapes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127,
024501 (2021).
[10] Y. X. Li, C. Diddens, P. Y. Lv, H. Wijshoff, M. Versluis, and
D. Lohse, Gravitational effect in evaporating binary micro-
droplets, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 114501 (2019).
[11] D. Riccobelli, H. H. Al-Terke, P. Laaksonen, P. Metrangolo,
A. Paananen, R. H. A. Ras, P. Ciarletta, and D. Vella,
Flattened
and
wrinkled
encapsulated
droplets:
Shape
morphing induced by gravity and evaporation, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 130, 218202 (2023).
[12] S. Jung, M. K. Tiwari, N. V. Doan, and D. Poulikakos,
Mechanism of supercooled droplet freezing on surfaces,
Nat. Commun. 3, 615 (2012).
[13] A. G. Marin, O. R. Enriquez, P. Brunet, P. Colinet, and
J. H. Snoeijer, Universality of tip singularity formation
in freezing water drops, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 054301
(2014).
[14] D. Dedovets, C. Monteux, and S. Deville, Five-dimensional
imaging of freezing emulsions with solute effects, Science
360, 303 (2018).
[15] J. G. Meijer, P. Kant, D. Van Buuren, and D. Lohse, Thin-
film-mediated deformation of droplet during cryopreserva-
tion, Phys. Rev. Lett. 130, 214002 (2023).
[16] See
Supplemental
Material
at
http://link.aps.org/
supplemental/10.1103/PhysRevLett.132.014002 for the de-
tails of the experimental setup, the liquid properties, the
numerical simulation, the dynamic model, and the self-
lifting on an inclined surface. Also, see Supplemental
Movies 1–6.
[17] D. M. Anderson, M. G. Worster, and S. H. Davis, The case
for a dynamic contact angle in containerless solidification,
J. Cryst. Growth 163, 329 (1996).
[18] M. Hu, F. Wang, Q. Tao, L. Chen, S. M. Rubinstein, and
D. S. Deng, Frozen patterns of impacted droplets: From
conical tips to toroidal shapes, Phys. Rev. Fluids 5, 081601
(R) (2020).
[19] E. Ghabache, C. Josserand, and T. S´
eon, Frozen impacted
drop: From fragmentation to hierarchical crack patterns,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 074501 (2016).
[20] Linn Karlsson, Henrik Lycksam, Anna-Lena Ljung, Per
Gren, and T Staffan Lundström, Experimental study of the
internal flow in freezing water droplets on a cold surface,
Exp. Fluids 60, 182 (2019).
[21] H. Zeng, S. J. Lyu, D. Legendre, and C. Sun, Influence of
gravity on the freezing dynamics of drops on a solid surface,
Phys. Rev. Fluids 7, 103605 (2022).
PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 132, 014002 (2024)
014002-5



View
Online 
Export
Citation
RESEARCH ARTICLE |  APRIL 08 2021
Freezing of a nanofluid droplet: From a pointy tip to flat
plateau 
Y. Zhao  
 ; C. Yang  
 ; P. Cheng
Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 141602 (2021)
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0044935
 08 May 2024 10:11:45


Freezing of a nanofluid droplet: From a pointy tip
to flat plateau
Cite as: Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 141602 (2021); doi: 10.1063/5.0044935
Submitted: 20 January 2021 . Accepted: 17 March 2021 .
Published Online: 8 April 2021
Y. Zhao,1,2,a)
C. Yang,3,a)
and P. Cheng1,4
AFFILIATIONS
1Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow and Heat Transfer in Power Engineering, School of Energy and Power Engineering,
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai 200093, People’s Republic of China
2Key Laboratory of Icing and Anti/De-icing, China Aerodynamics Research and Development Center, Mianyang Sichuan 621000,
People’s Republic of China
3School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798, Singapore
4MOE Key Laboratory of Power Machinery and Engineering, School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University,
Shanghai 200240, People’s Republic of China
a)Authors to whom correspondence should be addressed: zh0065ng@e.ntu.edu.sg and mcyang@ntu.edu.sg
ABSTRACT
Understanding the dynamics during freezing of nanoﬂuid droplets is of importance from both fundamental and practical viewpoints. It is
known that a universal pointy tip is formed on the top of a frozen water droplet [Mar
ın et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 113(5), 054301 (2014)]. Here,
we report that the formation of a pointy tip is broken down due to the presence of nanoparticles; instead, the top of a frozen nanoﬂuid
droplet exhibits a ﬂat plateau shape and such a plateau becomes larger at higher particle concentrations. We show that the phenomenon of
such shape changes in freezing nanoﬂuid droplets is universal, independent of contact angle, droplet volume, particle size, and particle
material. We propose an analytical model to attribute the plateau formation to a capillary driven compensating ﬂow due to segregated
particles moving along the freezing interface.
Published under license by AIP Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0044935
Liquid solidiﬁcation in droplet form has been widely studied to
understand the phenomenon of heat transfer with phase change. In
particular, the freezing of a water droplet on a cold substrate has been
studied intensively over decades due to its relevance to nature and
many application processes such as aircraft icing, freezing drying, frost
formation in the refrigeration, and cryogenic systems.1–5 Existing stud-
ies have shown the complex physics and unorthodox behaviors of
water during solidiﬁcation.6–15 Intriguingly, a unique behavior is that
the frozen water droplet expands, yielding a tip singularity despite the
presence of liquid surface tension.16 Moreover, several interesting phe-
nomena were reported: the frost halos formed from freezing a sessile
subcooled water droplet,17 the explosion of a partially frozen droplet,18
and the self-dislodging of water droplets upon freezing19 are a few to
name.
The freezing of colloidal (i.e., the liquid ﬂuid with dispersed
nanoparticles) droplets is relatively an unexplored research area, mak-
ing it an intriguing topic from the physical viewpoint. Only a few very
speciﬁc cases have been explored, for instance, the freezing of liquid
marbles, i.e., liquid cores covered with a layer of solid particles.20,21
The more general case, where solid particles distribute uniformly in
the liquid phase, is still a mystery. Based on existing studies, the kinetic
interplay of solid particles and the advancing solidiﬁcation front in
bulk are quite established, i.e., particles are either engulfed or segre-
gated depending on local thermophysical conditions.22–25 However,
what will occur in the presence of another interface (air/water free
interface) is quite an unsolved question. The interaction between solid
particles, the solidiﬁcation front and the free interface, and how it will
affect the outcome of droplet freezing are important points that drive
us to dig more on this topic. On top of that, the most intriguing part is
whether a frozen nanoﬂuid droplet is still of the shape of a truncated
sphere with a pointy tip atop.
Here, we report a discovery of shape changes during the freezing
of a nanoﬂuid droplet. We ﬁnd that the top of a nanoﬂuid ice droplet
exhibits a ﬂat plateau shape and such a plateau gets larger with increas-
ing particle concentrations. This is very different from the case of a
frozen pure water droplet with a pointy tip formed on the top.16 We
demonstrate that the formation of such a ﬂat plateau in frozen nano-
ﬂuid droplets is universal because the phenomenon also occurs for
Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 141602 (2021); doi: 10.1063/5.0044935
118, 141602-1
Published under license by AIP Publishing
Applied Physics Letters
ARTICLE
scitation.org/journal/apl
 08 May 2024 10:11:45


different contact angles, droplet volumes, nanoparticle sizes, and parti-
cle materials. To explain this phenomenon, we develop a physical
model to reveal the underlying mechanism and qualitatively represent
the dependence of the shape change on the initial droplet contact angle
and particle concentration.
We built up an experimental setup to visually study the freezing
process of a single nanoﬂuid droplet on a smooth substrate that was
maintained at a ﬁxed subcooled temperature of 20 6 0.5 C. More
details about the preparation and characterizations of nanoﬂuids and
the substrate surface, as well as the description of the experimental
setup, are provided in the Materials and Methods section (see the sup-
plemental material, Materials and Methods S1–S3, and supplementary
material Figs. S1 and S2).
A DI water or nanoﬂuid droplet with volume 7.7 6 0.2ll (with a
typical radius of R0  1.2 mm) was gently released to deposit on a
smooth silicon substrate. The substrate was cleaned following a stan-
dard protocol26,27 and maintained at a constant temperature of
20 6 0.5 C. The volume of droplets has little dependence on particle
concentration [see supplementary material Fig. S3(a)]. The droplets
started freezing upon in contact with the substrate surface as a result
of the heterogeneous nucleation occurring spontaneously at the liquid/
solid substrate interface. Figures 1(a)–1(d) show the extracted images
of the completely frozen droplets having various particle volumetric
concentrations. For the DI water droplet [Fig. 1(a)], the resultant ice
droplet is a truncated sphere with a pointy tip, which has been already
reported in the literature,16,28 and such a pointy tip is believed to result
from the expansion of water upon freezing. The intricate part, how-
ever, is a ﬂat plateau formed on the top of ice droplets for the case of
nanoﬂuids, even for a small particle concentration of 0.05% v/v [Fig.
1(b)]. The plateau size increases dramatically with an increase in the
nanoparticle concentration [Figs. 1(c) and 1(d)]. The equivalent
“contact angle” of the ice droplet was h ¼ 52.5 6 3, and it was found
to not depend on particle concentration. Though the freezing time is
slightly dependent on particle concentration, all droplets freeze
completely within no more than 5 s [see supplementary material Fig.
S3(b)]. We found that the formation of such a ﬂat plateau for frozen
nanoﬂuid droplets is universal because the phenomenon also occurred
under other experimental conditions by varying the contact angle [see
supplementary material Figs. S4(a) and S4(b)], droplet volume
[see supplementary material Figs. S4(c) and S4(d)], particle size [see
supplementary material Figs. S4(e) and S4(f)], and particle material
[see supplementary material Figs. S4(g), S4(h), and S4(i)].
We also made a comparison of the freezing dynamics between a
DI water droplet and a nanoﬂuid droplet that has a moderate particle
concentration of 0.3% v/v. Figures 2(a) and 2(b) (Multimedia view),
respectively, show the selected snapshots at four different instants
during the freezing processes of the DI water and nanoﬂuid droplets.
To have a quantitative description of the droplet shape change during
the freezing process, we extract the droplet proﬁles by digitalizing
the obtained optical images. The extracted proﬁles of the DI water
droplet and nanoﬂuid droplet are presented in Figs. 2(c) and 2(d),
respectively. For the DI water droplet, the droplet apex propagates
upward as a result of the volume expansion upon water freezing.
In contrast, for the nanoﬂuid droplet, the droplet apex moves down-
ward and even ﬂattens after the freezing completes. Speciﬁcally, it is
noted that there is a volume redistribution from the droplet interior
to its vertexes for the nanoﬂuid droplet.
To explain our experimental ﬁndings shown in Fig. 1, we devel-
oped a physical model to illustrate the mechanism underlying this
shape change, as shown schematically in Fig. 3(a) (Multimedia view).
We formulate the phenomenon to a two-dimensional (3D circular
symmetric) Stefan problem with two moving boundaries: active
advancing liquid/solid interface and passive air/liquid interface, meaning
the morphology of air/liquid interface is modulated by the moving
liquid/solid interface. This model includes three steps. First, a consider-
able amount of particles is segregated and accumulated in front of the
freezing interface, leading to the formation of a porous matrix
layer. Second, we assume that this porous matrix layer only moves
along the freezing propagation direction, while the liquid residual can
spontaneously adjust its proﬁle to minimize the system interfacial
energy. This behavior causes the solid component (nanoparticles) to
keep pushing over the air/water interface, while the liquid component
(base ﬂuid) is solidiﬁed into ice, as shown schematically in Fig. 3(a) and
the inset. Finally, a compensating ﬂow is triggered to keep the solid
component immersed in liquid, otherwise generating an appreciable
amount of additional interfaces, which is energetically unfavorable.
Thereby, we attribute the shape change of freezing nanoﬂuid droplets to
a net mass transfer (compensating ﬂow) from the droplet interior to its
vertexes during the freezing process, matching the dynamic droplet
behavior, as indicated in Fig. 2.
FIG. 1. Optical images showing the ﬁnal shapes of frozen de-ionized water droplet (a) and 5 nm titanium oxide nanoﬂuid droplets (b)–(d) with three different particle
concentrations.
Applied Physics Letters
ARTICLE
scitation.org/journal/apl
Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 141602 (2021); doi: 10.1063/5.0044935
118, 141602-2
Published under license by AIP Publishing
 08 May 2024 10:11:45


Two important ingredients of this model, i.e., the porous matrix
layer composed of segregated nanoparticles and the compensating
ﬂow, are veriﬁed by direct experimental evidence. We speciﬁcally
designed a Hele–Shaw cell on the cryostage and investigated the freezing
of nanoﬂuid droplets in this device (see supplementary material
Fig. S5). Figure 3(b) (front light) was captured adjacent the moving
edge of a freezing nanoﬂuid droplet in the Hele–Shaw cell, showing
that most of the nanoparticles are segregated as the freezing interface
advances and form an observable solid layer.29,30 By adding very
diluted (104% v/v) tracing particles (3.5lm polystyrene beads,
Sigma Aldrich), we observe a ﬂow that moves along the freezing inter-
face, from droplet interior to its vertexes. A schematic illustration of
this radial compensating ﬂow is provided in Fig. 3(c). This mechanism
is quite similar to the case of the pining effect induced by the particles
in an evaporating colloidal droplet, i.e., the classic “coffee ring”
effect.31,32 In both cases, a compensating ﬂow is stimulated due to the
presence of accumulated particles. However, the difference is that the
liquid component is consumed by the advancing freezing interface in
this work, while the liquid component is consumed via vaporization at
the air/water interface in the case of the coffee ring effect.
Based on this physical description, we can further derive a quan-
titative description of the shape change (see the supplementary
material model details). Theoretically, we evaluate the magnitude of
the compensating ﬂow,
dVeff
dh  1  v
1  / 2prk cot h;
(1)
where dVeff is the amount of colloidal suspension that is transported
from the droplet interior to its vertexes during the propagation of the
freezing interface of a distance of dh; / is the initial particle volume
concentration when the system is still homogeneous; v is the particle
packing density of the solid matrix layer and usually described as a
constant in a list of Refs. 33 and 34; and r, h; and k are the dynamic
radius of liquid residual, the dynamic contact angle at the tri-junction,
and
the
thickness
of
the
solid
matrix
layer,
respectively.
Experimentally, we use a dimensionless geometric factor b to describe
the shape change quantitatively,
b  As  Al
As
;
(2)
where Al and AS are the dynamic cross-sectional area of a droplet
before and after freezing, respectively. The value of b can be readily
obtained from experimental measurements as shown in supplemen-
tary material Fig. S6. As modeling deﬁned dVeff
dh and measured result b
FIG. 2. Freezing dynamics of a DI water droplet and a nanoﬂuid droplet. (a) Selected snapshots showing the freezing process of a DI water droplet. (b) Selected snapshots
showing the freezing process of a 5 nm titanium oxide nanoﬂuid droplet with a particle concentration of 0.3% v/v (c) and (d) the droplet proﬁles extracted from the optical
images in (a) and (b), respectively. Multimedia views: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0044935.1; https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0044935.2
Applied Physics Letters
ARTICLE
scitation.org/journal/apl
Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 141602 (2021); doi: 10.1063/5.0044935
118, 141602-3
Published under license by AIP Publishing
 08 May 2024 10:11:45


both represent the amount of mass transfer per unit advancing dis-
tance of the freezing interface, we can thus build a direct correlation
combining Eqs. (1) and (2), b  dVef f
dh . Some dynamic shape change
behaviors thereby can be understood. For example, from the model
prediction, we can conclude that the mass transfer occurs only when
the dynamic contact angle h < p/2, which indicates the larger the ini-
tial contact angle h0, the later this mass transfer begins. This feature is
veriﬁed by direct experimental measurements, as shown in Fig. 4(a),
FIG. 3. Mechanism of the outward ﬂow during the freezing of a nanoﬂuid droplet (a) with the inset (below) showing schematically an increment of freezing a nanoﬂuid droplet
adjacent of the tri-junction viewed in cross section. Solid and dashed horizontal lines denote the locations of the freezing interface, which moves a small displacement Dh.
Solid and hollow spheres denote nanoparticles that are pushed along the propagation direction of the freezing interface. The porous particle layer of thickness k is partially
exposed to air, triggering an outward ﬂow that replenishes the shaded region. v r
ð Þ is the depth-averaged velocity. Panel (b) is a direct experimental observation of a freezing
nanoﬂuid droplet in a Hele–Shaw cell adjacent of the tri-junction, showing that segregated particles form a compact porous layer in front of the freezing interface. Panel (c)
shows a sketch of a freezing nanoﬂuid droplet in the 3D isometric view. White arrows denote the outward ﬂow that moves the liquid from the droplet interior to the tri-junction.
Multimedia view: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0044935.3
FIG. 4. Dependence of the shape change (described by the geometric factor b) of frozen nanoﬂuid droplets on the initial contact angle (a) and particle volumetric concentration
(b). The insets show the corresponding experimental images. Error bars are obtained from ﬁve independent measurements. Scale bars in the insets are 1 mm.
Applied Physics Letters
ARTICLE
scitation.org/journal/apl
Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 141602 (2021); doi: 10.1063/5.0044935
118, 141602-4
Published under license by AIP Publishing
 08 May 2024 10:11:45


where h0 is the height of the frozen droplet. For the case of h0 ¼ 147,
the dynamic contact angle h evolves from h0 to p/2 only after the
freezing interface propagates over a certain distance. However, for the
other two cases of h0 ¼ 89 and h0 ¼ 42, the dynamic contact angle h
is smaller than p/2 in the whole freezing process, explaining why a net
mass transfer occurs much earlier, i.e., a detectable b. Also, the porous
matrix layer thickness k increases with the initial particle concentra-
tion / and thus bmax increases with the initial particle concentration.
Note bmax here is the maximum value of b obtained at h0. This shape
change is independent of particle size, as shown in Fig. 4(b).
Additionally, we can forecast that such a compensating ﬂow is
stimulated as long as a porous matrix layer locates at the tri-junction
region and moves along with the freezing interface. Correspondingly,
the droplet shape changes, even when the porous matrix layer is pre-
deposited on the surface of liquid droplets, which explains, to date, the
mysterious shape change behavior of freezing liquid marbles.21
We have reported that the shape of an ice droplet can vary from a
tip singularity for DI water to a truncated cone with different plateau
sizes for nanoﬂuids when altering the nanoparticle concentration. By
analyzing the evolution of droplet proﬁles and particle segregation
dynamics, we attribute the shape change to an outward compensating
ﬂow driven by advancing of the accumulated particle layer. The phe-
nomenon and the study on its mechanism represent an important
advance in our understanding of the droplet phase change in complex
systems. This shape control strategy can be generally applied to the solid-
iﬁcation of other complex ﬂuids in multifunctional applications, such as
solder printing, additive manufacturing, and metallic alloy casting.
See the supplementary material for the integral multimedia
legends 1–3, materials and methods, supplementary material Figs. 1–6,
and model details.
AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTIONS
Y. Z. and C.Y. designed the experiment and formulated the theo-
retical model. C.Y. and P. Cheng. proposed and supervised this work.
We all have contributed to writing the manuscript and agreed on the
results presented.
This paper is sponsored by the Experiments for Space
Exploration Program and the Qian Xuesen Laboratory, China
Academy of Space Technology (Grant No. 202001001), to Y.Z., the
Open Fund of Key Laboratory of Icing and Anti/De-icing (Grant No.
IADL20200103) to Y.Z., the Ministry of Education of Singapore via
Tier 2 Academic Research Fund (No. MOE2016-T2-1-114) to C.Y.,
and the Program for Professor of Special Appointment (Eastern
Scholar) at Shanghai Institutions of Higher Learning to Y.Z.
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available
within
the
article
and
its
supplementary
material
and
arXiv:1712.04268.
REFERENCES
1T. Cebeci and F. Kafyeke, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 35(1), 11–21 (2003).
2H. A. Stone, ACS Nano 6(8), 6536–6540 (2012).
3X. Chen, R. Ma, H. Zhou, X. Zhou, L. Che, S. Yao, and Z. Wang, Sci. Rep. 3,
2515 (2013).
4P. Guo, Y. Zheng, M. Wen, C. Song, Y. Lin, and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater. 24(19),
2642–2648 (2012).
5C. Hao, Y. Liu, X. Chen, J. Li, M. Zhang, Y. Zhao, and Z. Wang, Small 12(14),
1825–1839 (2016).
6Y. Zhao, R. Wang, and C. Yang, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 108, 1048–1056
(2017).
7T. Li, D. Donadio, L. M. Ghiringhelli, and G. Galli, Nat. Mater. 8(9), 726–730
(2009).
8D. Ehre, E. Lavert, M. Lahav, and I. Lubomirsky, Science 327(5966), 672–675
(2010).
9Y. Zhao and C. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 108(6), 061605 (2016).
10J. B. Boreyko and C. P. Collier, ACS Nano 7(2), 1618–1627 (2013).
11S. Jung, M. K. Tiwari, N. V. Doan, and D. Poulikakos, Nat Commun 3, 615
(2012).
12T. M. Schutzius, S. Jung, T. Maitra, G. Graeber, M. K€
ohme, and D. Poulikakos,
Nature 527(7576), 82–85 (2015).
13S. F. Ahmadi, S. Nath, C. M. Kingett, P. Yue, and J. B. Boreyko, Nat. Commun.
10(1), 2531 (2019).
14E. Jambon-Puillet, N. Shahidzadeh, and D. Bonn, Nat. Commun. 9(1), 4191
(2018).
15F. Chu, S. Gao, X. Zhang, X. Wu, and D. Wen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 115(7), 073703
(2019).
16A. G. Mar
ın, O. R. Enr
ıquez, P. Brunet, P. Colinet, and J. H. Snoeijer, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 113(5), 054301 (2014).
17S. Jung, M. K. Tiwari, and D. Poulikakos, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
109(40), 16073–16078 (2012).
18S. Wildeman, S. Sterl, C. Sun, and D. Lohse, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118(8), 084101
(2017).
19G. Graeber, T. M. Schutzius, H. Eghlidi, and D. Poulikakos, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 114(42), 11040–11045 (2017).
20A. Hashmi, A. Strauss, and J. Xu, Langmuir 28(28), 10324–10328 (2012).
21D. Zang, K. Lin, W. Wang, Y. Gu, Y. Zhang, X. Geng, and B. P. Binks, Soft
Matter 10(9), 1309–1314 (2014).
22S. Deville, E. Maire, G. Bernard-Granger, A. Lasalle, A. Bogner, C. Gauthier, J.
Leloup, and C. Guizard, Nat. Mater. 8(12), 966–972 (2009).
23S. S. L. Peppin, J. A. W. Elliott, and M. G. Worster, J. Fluid Mech. 554,
147–166 (2006).
24J. A. W. Elliott and S. S. L. Peppin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107(16), 168301 (2011).
25A. M. Anderson and M. G. Worster, Langmuir 28(48), 16512–16523 (2012).
26N. Miljkovic, R. Enright, Y. Nam, K. Lopez, N. Dou, J. Sack, and E. N. Wang,
Nano Lett. 13(1), 179–187 (2012).
27N. Miljkovic, D. J. Preston, R. Enright, and E. N. Wang, Nat. Commun. 4, 2517
(2013).
28H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, R. Lv, and C. Yang, Int. J. Therm. Sci. 101, 59–67 (2016).
29H. Zhang, I. Hussain, M. Brust, M. F. Butler, S. P. Rannard, and A. I. Cooper,
Nat. Mater. 4(10), 787–793 (2005).
30U. G. K. Wegst, H. Bai, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia, and R. O. Ritchie, Nat. Mater.
14(1), 23–36 (2015).
31R. D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. F. Dupont, G. Huber, S. R. Nagel, and T. A.
Witten, Nature 389(6653), 827–829 (1997).
32P. J. Yunker, T. Still, M. A. Lohr, and A. G. Yodh, Nature 476(7360), 308–311
(2011).
33A. M. Anderson and M. G. Worster, J. Fluid Mech. 758, 786–808 (2014).
34S. Deville, E. Saiz, R. K. Nalla, and A. P. Tomsia, Science 311(5760), 515–518
(2006).
Applied Physics Letters
ARTICLE
scitation.org/journal/apl
Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 141602 (2021); doi: 10.1063/5.0044935
118, 141602-5