Watch Features
Shock resistance. 20BAR (200-meter) water resistance
G-SHOCK shock resistance makes it possible for your watch to withstand the
rough conditions encountered in extreme sports. Your watch is also the first
CASIO smartwatch to be 200-meter water resistant. This means you can wear
your watch while engaging in extreme sports, marine sports, and more.
Multiple Built-in Sensors
Your watch has GPS, a pressure sensor, an accelerometer, a gyrometer, a
magnetic sensor, and an optical sensor (heart rate) built in. A variety of
different types of data can be measured by your watch. Data measured
depends on the activity being measured.
Dual-layer Display for Improved Readability
A dual-layer display can produce visual feedback in either color or
monochrome. The high-resolution color display makes complex data easier
to understand, while the monochrome display provides lower power
consumption and easier readability when outdoors.
Using Your Watch
Changeable Watch Faces (Display Items, Design)
You can select either digital timekeeping or analog timekeeping to suit your
needs or lifestyle. You can even select what items you want to be displayed
on the watch face.
“Using a Different Watch Face”
EN-1


DIGITAL
“Using the “DIGITAL” Watch Face”
ANALOG
“Using the “ANALOG” CASIO Watch
Face”
2 Layers
“Using the “2 Layers” CASIO Watch
Face”
Watch face for measuring fitness data
while engaged in activities, and to
measure calories burned, steps, and
other data during everyday life.
Analog watch face whose design you
can change in accordance with your
daily needs.
Clean, easy-to-read watch face that
consumes less battery power.
EN-2


Checking Exercise Results After Engaging in an Activity
Data is measured and recorded by the watch’s sensors as you engage in
activities. Later you can view check and analyze the data using the “G-SHOCK
MOVE” phone app. This is true for a wide range of activities, from running, cycling
and other outdoor activities, to weight training and more.
“Selecting an Activity for Measurement”
Reducing Battery Power Consumption
You can reduce battery power consumption by turning off Wear OS by
GoogleTM.
“Reducing Power Consumption (Timepiece)”
EN-3


Contents
Watch Features ................................................................................. EN-1
Using Your Watch ........................................................................  EN-1
Safety Precautions ...........................................................................  EN-7
Introduction ..................................................................................... EN-20
Powered with Wear OS by Google ............................................. EN-21
Attention iPhone Owners! ........................................................... EN-21
Package Contents ..........................................................................  EN-22
Component Names ......................................................................... EN-23
Getting Ready for First Use ...........................................................  EN-24
STEP 1: Charge the watch .........................................................  EN-25
STEP 2: Pair the Watch with Your Smartphone .......................... EN-28
STEP 3: Update Your Apps to Their Latest Versions .................. EN-31
STEP 4: Install the CASIO “G-SHOCK MOVE” App on Your Phone
.................................................................................................... EN-32
Turning Power On or Off, and Restarting ..................................... EN-33
Turning Power On or Off ............................................................. EN-33
Restarting ................................................................................... EN-33
Initial Settings and Fastening the Watch to Your Wrist .............. EN-35
Configuring Initial Default Settings for Heart Rate Measurement  EN-35
Fastening the Watch to Your Wrist .............................................  EN-36
Basic Button and Display (Touch Screen) Operations ............... EN-39
Restoring the Display Screen ..................................................... EN-39
Basic Button Operations ............................................................. EN-39
Basic Screen Operations (Swiping Up, Down, Left, and Right) ..  EN-41
EN-4


Basic Functions ..............................................................................  EN-45
Adjusting the Current Time Setting ............................................. EN-45
Alarm, Timer, Stopwatch, etc. ....................................................  EN-45
App Updates ..............................................................................  EN-45
Using the “DIGITAL” Watch Face .................................................. EN-46
DIGITAL Display ......................................................................... EN-47
Changing DIGITAL Screen Items ...............................................  EN-49
Using the Display Item Selection Menu ......................................  EN-50
Changing the DIGITAL Background ...........................................  EN-53
DIGITAL Screen Item Example ..................................................  EN-54
Quick Recall of Main Functions (CASIO's APPS) ........................ EN-58
Recalling Functions with CASIO's APPS .................................... EN-58
Selecting an Activity for Measurement ........................................  EN-62
Activity Measurement (Excluding Workouts) .............................. EN-63
Activity Measurement (Workouts) ..............................................  EN-68
Activity Measurement Setting Menu ........................................... EN-78
Changing Screen Items Displayed During Activity Measurement  EN-79
Download Map and Import Route .................................................  EN-80
Download Map ...........................................................................  EN-80
Import Route ............................................................................... EN-83
Using a Different Watch Face ........................................................ EN-86
Changing to Another Watch Face ..............................................  EN-86
Using the “ANALOG” CASIO Watch Face .................................. EN-87
Using the “2 Layers” CASIO Watch Face ...................................  EN-93
EN-5


Reducing Power Consumption (Timepiece) ................................ EN-96
Timepiece Screen Items ............................................................. EN-97
Changing to Timepiece ..............................................................  EN-98
Reducing Timepiece Altitude and Barometric Pressure Measurement
Error ...........................................................................................  EN-99
What you can do when not connected with a phone ................ EN-100
Troubleshooting ...........................................................................  EN-101
Restoring Watch Operation ...................................................... EN-101
If you cannot pair after changing to another phone model ........ EN-101
Returning the Watch to Its Initial Factory Defaults ....................  EN-103
Error Code and Error Message List .......................................... EN-104
Precautions During Use ............................................................... EN-106
Measurement Function Precautions ......................................... EN-109
Other Product Precautions .......................................................  EN-113
User Maintenance ......................................................................... EN-120
Other Precautions ........................................................................  EN-122
Chargeable Battery Handling (Please recycle!) ........................ EN-122
Personal Information Protection Precautions ............................ EN-122
IMPORTANT SAFETY INSTRUCTIONS .................................. EN-123
Main Specifications ...................................................................... EN-124
Supplementary Information ......................................................... EN-128
EN-6


Safety Precautions
Before use, be sure to read these “Safety Precautions”. Use the watch
correctly.
Danger
Indicates information that warns against a
major risk of death or serious personal injury.
Warning
Indicates information that warns against a
risk of death or serious personal injury.
Caution
Indicates information that warns against a
risk of minor injury or material damage.
Icon Examples
 indicates a situation against which you need to exercise
caution. The example shown here indicates you should take
precaution against electric shock.
 indicates information about an action that you should not
perform. The specific action is indicated by the figure inside the
circle. The example shown here means disassembly is
prohibited.
 indicates information about an action that you must perform.
The specific action is indicated by the figure inside the circle.
EN-7


Danger
Use of the watch
Be sure to observe the points below when using this watch.
Failure to do so creates the risk of heat generation, fire, and
explosion.
●Do not throw the watch into fire or expose it to heat.
●Do not try to modify the watch, step on it or otherwise subject it
to strong impact.
●Do not place the watch inside a microwave oven, drier,
pressurized container, etc.
●Do not try to take the watch apart.
Do not use, charge, or store the watch near an air
conditioner, on an electric carpet, in a location exposed to
direct sunlight, in a motor vehicle parked in the sun, or any
other location subjected to high temperatures.
Doing so creates the risk of heat generation, fire, and explosion.
EN-8


Danger
Charging
Use only the prescribed method for charging.
Use of a charging method other than the method specified for this
watch creates the risk of heat generation, fire, and explosion.
Rechargeable Battery
Do not try to remove the rechargeable battery from the
watch.
Doing so creates the risk of heat generation, fire, and explosion.
If the rechargeable battery is ever accidentally removed from the
watch, take care to ensure that it is not swallowed. Special care
is required when young children are present. Should a battery
ever be swallowed, contact a physician immediately. Swallowing
a battery can rapidly cause chemical burns, mucosal tissue
penetration, and other serious problems that create the risk of
death.
Always request rechargeable battery replacement from a
CASIO Service Center or your original retailer.
Use of a non-specified type of battery or improper replacement
creates the risk of battery overheating, fire, and rupture.
EN-9


Warning
Use of the watch
Do not use this watch while scuba diving.
This watch is not a diving watch. Improper use of this watch can
lead to serious accident.
If radio wave interference or other problems are generated
in other equipment when using this watch, enter the watch
Airplane Mode or turn off the watch.
This watch may affect operation of or cause problems with the
other equipment, which creates the risk of accident.
In a medical facility or aircraft, be sure to obey instructions
provided by staff or flight personnel. Do not use this watch
in any area where its use is prohibited.
Electromagnetic waves and other signals emitted by this watch
may affect instrumentation, which may create the risk of accident.
People fitted with a cardiac pacemaker or any other
implantable medical device should keep this watch and
charger cable away from their body.
Radio waves and magnetism can affect the operation of cardiac
pacemakers and other medical devices. Should you or another
person ever start to feel any abnormality, immediately move the
watch and charger cable away and consult a physician.
EN-10


Warning
Use of the watch
Enter the watch’s Airplane Mode or turn off the watch when
on a crowded train or in any other crowded location.
Failure to do so creates the risk of malfunction of a nearby cardiac
pacemaker or other medical device due to radio interference.
Continued use of the watch while it is smoking, emitting foul
odor, generating heat, or otherwise demonstrating
abnormal symptoms creates the risk of fire and electric
shock. Immediately take the actions below.
1. If a charging is in progress, unplug the USB cable from the
watch.
2. Turn off power.
3. Contact an authorized CASIO Service Center.
Regardless of the information displayed by the watch, be
sure to keep aware of your physical condition and keep
your exertion level within your own personal capabilities.
Whenever working out while using the watch to monitor your heart
rate or to perform any other type of training measurement, take
care that you do not over-exert yourself in order to achieve a
particular value or reading. Overexertion creates the risk of
unforeseen accident. Always keep your workouts well within your
physical capabilities.
Should you ever feel ill or otherwise sense a change in for physical
well-being, immediately consult a physician.
EN-11


Warning
Charging
When charging with the USB-AC adaptor and charger cable,
be sure to observe the precautions below in order to avoid
the risk of heat generation, fire, explosion, and electric
shock.
●Use only the charger cable that comes with the watch.
●Never try to use the charger cable to charge another device.
●Never use a USB-AC adaptor that does not meet the specified
adaptor specifications.
●Do not use a power source that has a different voltage and/or
frequency from those specified for this watch.
●Do not use a power outlet that is shared by multiple devices.
●Do not use the watch while covered with bedding or a blanket,
and do not use it near a heater.
●Do not place any heavy object on the USB-AC adaptor and/or
charger cable, and do not charge with the charger cable while
it is bundled.
●Do not expose the USB-AC adaptor and/or charger cable to
heat, do not try to modify them, and do not allow them to become
damaged.
●Do not subject the USB-AC adaptor and/or charger cable to
excessive bending, twisting, or pulling.
●Always keep the charger cable connector and/or the USB-AC
adaptor power plug clean. Wipe away any dust that collects on
them.
●Use a dry cloth to clean the USB-AC adaptor and charger cable.
Do not use detergent for cleaning.
EN-12


Warning
Charging
●Do not touch the USB-AC adaptor and/or charger cable while
your hands are wet.
●Make sure no liquid (water, sports drink liquid, seawater, animal
urine, etc.) gets on the USB-AC adaptor and/or charger cable
during use.
●Do not charge while the watch is wet.
●Never touch the watch, USB-AC adaptor, or charger cable
during an electrical storm.
Should the watch, USB-AC adaptor, or charger cable
become damaged, immediately stop using them and
unplug the USB-AC adaptor from the power outlet. Next,
contact an authorized CASIO Service Center.
Continued use of a damaged item creates the risk of fire and
electric shock.
Do not charge the watch while wearing it on your wrist.
Doing so creates the risk of low-temperature burn injury.
EN-13


Warning
Display
Do not press on the display with undue force or subject it
to strong impact.
Doing so can break the display glass.
Should the display glass break, do not directly touch the
liquid inside it.
Display liquid can cause skin irritation.
●Should display liquid ever get into the mouth, consult a
physician immediately.
●Should display liquid get in your eyes or on your skin, rinse with
clean water and then contact your physician.
EN-14


Caution
Use of the watch
Make sure you are in a safe place before viewing the watch's
display.
Failure to do so creates the risk of personal injury and accident.
Looking at the watch while running or jogging on the open road,
while riding a bicycle, or operating a motor vehicle can lead to
accidents. Take care to avoid running into others.
Take care to avoid conditions that cause skin rash.
The watch and the band come into direct contact with the skin, so
the usage conditions below may cause skin rash.
●Metal or leather allergies
●Dirt, rust, or sweat on the watch or band
●Poor physical condition, etc.
ーA band that is snugly tightened for heart rate monitoring can
cause you to sweat and make it difficult for air to pass under
the band, which can lead to skin irritation. During normal
wear, when you do not need to monitor your heart rate, make
sure the band is loose enough to allow you to insert a finger
between it and your wrist.
ーShould you ever notice any abnormality, immediately stop
using the watch and consult a physician.
EN-15


Caution
Use of the watch
Remove the watch from your wrist before going to bed.
Failure to do so creates the risk of unexpected personal injury,
and/or allergic skin rash.
Be sure to keep the case and band clean at all times.
●Wash the case and band with tap water or other clean water to
remove sweat and dirt, and then wipe dry with a soft cloth.
●Sweat and/or dirt on the watch case or band can cause skin
rash or other problems. Should you ever notice any skin
abnormality, immediately stop using the watch and consult a
physician.
Before picking up or otherwise coming into contact with a
child, remove the watch from your wrist.
Failure to do so creates the risk of personal injury to children and/
or allergic skin rash.
Young children should be allowed to use this watch only
under the supervision and guidance of an adult. Store the
watch out of the reach of small children.
EN-16


Caution
Use of the watch
Keep the charger cable away from magnetic cards (credit
cards, cash cards, prepaid cards, magnetic back tickets,
etc.)
The magnetic plug end tip of the charger cable can render a
magnetic card or recording medium unusable if they get too close
to each other.
Magnetic
Be sure to observe the precautions below when using the
charger cable.
Failure to do so creates the risk of malfunction.
●Do not apply undue force to, insert items into the plug, or forcibly
push the plug in.
Do not leave keys, necklaces, paper clips, or other metal
items in close proximity to the charger cable plug.
Doing so can cause the metal to affix to the magnetic plug and
cause a short.
When not using the charger cable, unplug the AC adaptor
from the power outlet.
The sensor in the center of the back cover emits an LED
light. Avoid looking directly into the light.
EN-17


Caution
Charging
When charging with the USB-AC adaptor and charger cable,
be sure to observe the precautions below in order to avoid
the risk of heat generation, fire, explosion, and electric
shock.
●Plug the USB-AC adaptor into the power outlet as far as it will
go.
●Unplug the USB-AC adaptor from the power outlet before
leaving it unattended for long periods, such as when going on
a trip, etc.
●At least once a year, use a dry cloth to clear away any dust build-
up between the prongs of the USB-AC adaptor plug.
●Do not use or store the USB-AC adaptor and/or charger cable
in areas where large amounts of moisture or dust are present,
in food preparation areas or other areas where there is exposure
to oil smoke, or areas where temperatures are high.
If the watch does not charge within the normal charging
time, stop charging.
Continued charging creates the risk of heat generation, fire, and
explosion by the built-in battery.
●For details about the charging time, see “Main Specifications”.
EN-18


Caution
User Maintenance
Be sure to keep the case and band clean at all times.
A dirty or rusty case or band can soil the sleeve of your clothing.
Rust tends to form easily after the watch is exposed to seawater
and then left without cleaning.
EN-19


Introduction
●The contents of this manual are subject to change without notice.
●CASIO COMPUTER CO., LTD. shall not be held liable for any lost profits
or claims from third parties arising out of the use of this product or this
manual.
●CASIO COMPUTER CO., LTD. shall not be held liable for any loss or lost
profits due to loss of data caused by malfunction or maintenance of this
product, or any other reason.
●The watch and sample screens depicted in the illustrations in this manual
may be different from the actual appearance of the watch.
EN-20


Powered with Wear OS by Google
This watch can be used while paired with an Android™ or iOS phone. It also
has a large collection of standalone functions that can be used when not
paired with a phone. Supported functions depend on your platform and
country. For information about supported phones, visit the CASIO support
site below.
https://support.casio.com/gsw/en/GSW-H1000/
Wear OS by Google Functions
Powered with Wear OS by Google, this smartwatch has the following
capabilities:
●Dictation
●Messaging and incoming call notifications
●Alarms, stopwatch, timer, agenda and translation
●Google Fit™ and other Google apps
●Download apps and watch faces using Google Play
●Adjustable settings
This user’s guide does not contain any information about the above functions.
For details about these functions, visit the websites below.
https://support.google.com/wearos/
Attention iPhone Owners!
When using this watch while it is paired with an iPhone, be sure to have the
Wear OS by Google app open and running in the background. If the Wear OS
by Google app is not operating when using your device, functions that require
communication with the iPhone do not operate.
EN-21


Package Contents
Watch
Charger Cable
“Read This First”
 
Warranty
 
EN-22


Component Names
A
D
E
F
G
H
B
C
A Charger terminal
B Pressure sensor
C Microphone
D START button
(upper button)
E Power button
F APP button
(lower button)
G Touch screen
(display)
H Optical sensor
(PPG Heart Rate)
EN-23


Getting Ready for First Use
Before using this watch for the first time, perform the steps below in sequence
to charge the watch and configure its settings.
 
 
“STEP 1: Charge the watch”
 
 
 
 
 
 
“STEP 2: Pair the Watch with Your
Smartphone”
 
 
 
 
 
 
“STEP 3: Update Your Apps to Their Latest
Versions”
 
 
 
 
 
 
“STEP 4: Install the CASIO “G-SHOCK
MOVE” App on Your Phone”
 
 
EN-24


STEP 1: Charge the watch
Be sure to charge the watch before using it.
Use the charger cable that comes with the watch to charge using a USB-AC
adaptor, or by connection to a computer or other device.
●Note that the setup of a computer may not support charging from its USB
port.
Connect to a USB (Type A) port
●Make sure the charger cable connector is oriented correctly when plugging
it into a USB port.
Charger cable 
(included with watch)
USB (Type A) port
Voltage: 5 V
Current: 0.5A min.
The connection is magnetic.
Important!
●The USB-AC adaptor or other USB power supply device you use must
meet certain specifications. Do not use an inferior adaptor or device that
does not meet the required specifications. Doing so can cause
malfunction and breakdown of the watch and USB power supply device.
Also note that use of a USB-AC adaptor may be subject to local
standards imposed by the country where you are located. CASIO
COMPUTER CO., LTD. shall be held in no way liable for any malfunction
or break down of the watch and/or USB power supply device caused by
use of an inferior adaptor or device that does not meet the required
specifications.
EN-25


Precautions When Charging
●Make sure that the charger cable connector is oriented correctly when
connecting it to a USB port.
●When using a computer for charging, connection to a USB2.0 or higher USB
(Type-A) port only is supported. Depending on the computer model,
connection environment and other factors, charging may take a long time
or may not be possible. Charging is not performed while a computer is
hibernating.
●Operation on a custom computer or a computer that has been modified from
its original configuration is not guaranteed. Even in the case of an
unmodified commercially available computer, USB port specifications may
make charging impossible.
●An error message may appear when the watch is connected to a computer
with the charger cable.
If this happens, disconnect the charger cable from the computer and then
re-connect it.
●If you cannot charge using the above procedure, try a different USB port or
use a USB-AC adaptor.
Genuine CASIO USB-AC Adaptor
To obtain a genuine CASIO USB-AC adaptor, access the URL below and
then contact a CASIO Service Center in the country where you live.
 
https://s.casio.jp/w/10061en/
EN-26


Charge Level Indication While Charging
●The charge level indicator will appear after watch charging starts.
●If the battery is dead when you start charging, the charge level indicator will
not appear until after the charge reaches a preset level.
●Hold down the power button for at least two seconds to turn on the watch.
Other Charging Precautions
●Charging time depends on the remaining battery capacity and your usage
environment.
●Should water get onto the watch, the charger cable, or the USB power
supply device during charging, immediately disconnect the charger cable
and stop charging.
●If an ongoing charging operation stops, disconnect the watch from the
charger cable. After checking for and eliminating problems, try charging
again.
●In an area where it is extremely cold or hot, you may not be able to charge
the watch or the watch may not charge completely. Charge the watch in an
area where the ambient temperature is between 10°C and 35°C (50°F and
95°F).
●Charging may cause radio and/or television interference. If this happens,
use a power outlet that is further away from the TV or radio for charging.
●To help promote longer battery life, regular charging of the watch (about
once a month) is recommended even if you do not use it for a long time.
●Charging may take longer or may not be possible at all if there is dirt or other
foreign matter on the charger terminal or on the charger cable connector.
Use a clean, dry cloth or cotton swab to occasionally wipe the charger
terminal and charger cable connector.
EN-27


STEP 2: Pair the Watch with Your Smartphone
●This procedure is current as of April 2021.
1. 
Use your phone settings to turn on Bluetooth®.
2. 
On your phone, install the Wear OS by Google app.
Android Phone Users
On your phone, open Google Play and install the Wear OS by Google
app.
iPhone Users
On your iPhone, open the App Store and install the Wear OS by Google
app.
3. 
If you don’t already have one, create your Google
Account.
A Google Account gives you access to a variety of different Google
services. Be sure to create a Google Account before using this watch.
●If you already have a Google Account, have it's email and password
accessible.
●If you are using an iPhone and don’t have a Google Account, follow the
instructions that appear on your phone’s screen during step 4 below to
acquire an account.
4. 
Pair the watch with your phone.
Important!
●The pairing procedure you need to use depends on the version of
Wear OS by Google running on your watch and phone. For the latest
information on procedures, visit the website below.
https://support.casio.com/gsw/en/GSW-H1000/
●When configuring pairing settings, it is recommended that you have the
phone and watch within one meter of each other.
●A Wi-Fi environment is required to use an iPhone.
EN-28


1. If the watch is turned off, hold down the power button for at least two
seconds to turn it on.
2. Tap the watch display. On the screen that appears, select a language.
3. Swipe the screen upwards to display the watch name (GSW-H1000).
4. On your phone, start up the Wear OS by Google app.
The term “watch” in the text below refers to a smartwatch powered with
Wear OS by Google.
5. If this is the first time you are pairing your phone and watch, start up
the Wear OS by Google app on your phone. Next, tap “Set it up”.
●Now, follow the instructions that appear on your phone screen to
complete the pairing procedure.
If you are using an existing phone that is paired with a watch, you need to
perform one of the procedures below in place of step 5 above. The
procedure you should use depends on your phone type.
Android Phone Users
You can have multiple watches paired with an Android phone at the same
time.
In the upper left corner of the Wear OS by Google app screen, tap the
watch name. On the menu that appears, tap “Add a new watch”.
●Now, follow the instructions that appear on your phone screen to
complete the pairing procedure.
EN-29


iPhone Users
With an iPhone, you can have only one watch paired per phone. Use the
procedure below to unpair the currently paired watch from the iPhone so
you can pair with this watch.
1. On your iPhone home screen, tap the following in sequence:
“Settings” > “Bluetooth”.
2. In the “MY DEVICES” list, tap the 
 mark to the right of the name of
the currently connected Wear OS by Google watch.
3. Tap “Forget This Device”.
4. Start up the Wear OS by Google app.
5. Tap the menu icon (
) in the upper left corner of the screen. On the
menu that appears, tap “Set up a new watch”.
●Now, follow the instructions that appear on your phone screen to
complete the pairing procedure.
Changing the Phone Model Paired with This Watch
(The information below also applies when changing from one paired phone
model to another.)
Only one phone can be paired with the watch at a time. If you want to pair the
watch with a different phone, you first need to unpair it from the existing phone.
To unpair from a phone, perform the procedure under “Returning the Watch
to Its Initial Factory Defaults”.
EN-30


STEP 3: Update Your Apps to Their Latest
Versions
In order to use all of the functionality provided by this watch, be sure to update
all of your apps to their latest versions before using your watch.
●This procedure is current as of April 2021.
●A Wi-Fi environment is required to use an iPhone.
1. 
While the watch is displaying a watch face (normal
timekeeping screen, not an app screen or setting
screen), short-press the power button to display the app
list.
2. 
Scroll the list of apps upwards or downwards until “Play
Store” is displayed, and then tap it.
3. 
Swipe the touch screen from top to bottom to display the
Play Store menu and then tap the “My Apps” (R) icon.
●If the above operation does not work, swipe the touch screen from
bottom to top and then tap “My Apps”.
4. 
If there is any app for which an update is available, its
name will be shown under “Updates Available”. Tap
“Update all”.
EN-31


STEP 4: Install the CASIO “G-SHOCK MOVE”
App on Your Phone
You can use the CASIO app to view training logs.
●You need to register a CASIO ID to use a CASIO app. Registering a CASIO
ID also lets you use other online services provided by the CASIO Group.
1. 
Install the “G-SHOCK MOVE” app on your smartphone.
Android Phone Users
On your Android smartphone, start up Google Play Store, search for the
“G-SHOCK MOVE” app, and then install it.
iPhone Users
On your iPhone, start up App Store, search for the “G-SHOCK MOVE”
app, and then install it.
After the “Getting Ready for First Use” procedure is complete, the “DIGITAL”
watch face will appear on the display. For details about DIGITAL, see “Using
the “DIGITAL” Watch Face”.
EN-32


Turning Power On or Off, and
Restarting
Turning Power On or Off
To turn power on
1. 
Hold down the power button for at least two seconds.
To turn power off
1. 
While a watch face is displayed swipe the screen from
top to bottom.
2. 
Tap in the following sequence D > “System” > “Power
off”. On the confirmation screen that appears, tap 
.
Restarting
You can re-start the watch using Wear OS by Google or by using a watch
button operation.
To re-start using Wear OS by Google
1. 
While a watch face is displayed swipe the screen from
top to bottom.
2. 
Tap in the following sequence D > “System” > “Restart”.
On the confirmation screen that appears, tap 
.
EN-33


To force a re-start
Important!
●Try using the procedure below only in the case of operational problems
such as watch screen freeze up. In other cases, we recommend using
the procedure under “To re-start using Wear OS by Google”.
1. 
Hold down the power button until the display goes white.
●It takes up to 12 seconds for the screen to go white. The screen going
white indicates that the system is restarting, so you can remove your
finger from the power button.
EN-34


Initial Settings and Fastening
the Watch to Your Wrist
This section explains how to configure the initial settings of the watch, which
are necessary for activity measurement. We also explain how to fasten the
watch to your wrist for more accurate measurement.
Configuring Initial Default Settings for Heart
Rate Measurement
This setting is essential for calculating performance, including your heart rate
zone and VO2Max.
1. 
While the “DIGITAL” watch face is displayed, hold down
your finger in the center of the touch screen for about
two seconds.
●This shrinks the watch face and displays D below it.
2. 
Tap in the following in sequence: D > “Heart Rate
Setting”.
●This displays the “Heart Rate Setting” menu.
3. 
Input the following in sequence: “Birth Day”, “Heart rate
at rest”, “Gender”, “Height”, and then “Weight”.
4. 
To quit the setting procedure and return to the watch
face display, press the power button.
EN-35


Fastening the Watch to Your Wrist
How you wear the watch on your wrist affects the accuracy of heart rate
monitor values. Position the watch as described below.
1. 
With the watch fastened loosely on your wrist, place at
least one finger to the right of the power button.*
* If you wear the watch on your right wrist, place your finger(s) to the left
of the pressure sensor (left side of the watch).
●If the watch covers the protruding bone of your wrist (your ulna, which
is circled in the nearby figure), keep adding fingers until it doesn’t
anymore.
●The location and shape of this bone differ from person to person.
EN-36


2. 
Position the watch so there is at least one finger width
between it and your wrist joint when you bend your hand
back.
3. 
After you determine the best wrist position, tighten the
band snugly so the watch does not slide on your wrist.
Important!
●A band that is snugly tightened for heart rate measurement can make it
difficult for air to pass under the band and cause you to sweat, which
can lead to skin irritation. During normal wear, when you do not need to
monitor your heart rate, make sure to maintain enough band looseness
so you can insert a finger between it and your wrist.
●Avoid using sunblock, hand cream, cosmetics, and other skin
applications on the wrist where you will wear the watch for heart rate
measurement. Such creams and gels can soil the sensor window of the
watch and reduce heart rate measurement accuracy. Avoid using such
agents on the wrist where you will wear the watch.
EN-37


Caution
The data from each sensor is used to estimate whether the watch is worn
on the wrist, and your heart rate is measured when it is detected that the
watch is being worn. If you do not want to measure your heart rate while
you are wearing the watch, select “OFF” for the “Detect wear on the
wrist”* setting. Note, however, that if you are performing a measurement
operation using a CASIO activity app, measurement is performed
regardless of this setting.
* To display the “Detect wear on the wrist” setting, swipe the watch face
screen downwards. On the screen that appears, tap the following in
sequence: D > “Accessibility” > “Heart Rate Measurement”.
EN-38


Basic Button and Display
(Touch Screen) Operations
Operations of this watch are performed using three side buttons and the
screen (touch screen).
Restoring the Display Screen
If the screen of this watch is dark, tap the screen or press the power button.
Wait until the screen lights up before performing operations.
Basic Button Operations
This section describes button operations you can perform while a watch face
is displayed.
A
B
C
A START button (upper button)
B Power button
C APP button (lower button)
EN-39


A START button (upper button)
Pressing this button while the watch face is displayed starts activity
measurement and/or displays the START screen for selecting
measurement items.
For details, see “Selecting an Activity for Measurement”.
B Power button
Pressing this button while a watch face is displayed will display
the Wear OS by Google app list. You can swipe the app list up or
down to scroll it. Tap on an app to select and start it up.
If an app screen, setting screen or any other screen besides a
watch face is displayed, pressing the power button returns to the
watch face.
C APP button (lower button)
Pressing this button while a watch face is displayed displays the
CASIO's APPS screen, which you can use to quickly call up
various CASIO original functions.
For details, see “Quick Recall of Main Functions (CASIO's
APPS)”.
Important!
●You can use Wear OS by Google to change the functions of the START
and APP buttons. However, when using the “DIGITAL” watch face, use
the default button operations without changing them.
In this user’s guide, operations are explained assuming that default
settings are being used.
EN-40


Basic Screen Operations (Swiping Up, Down,
Left, and Right)
While a watch face is displayed, you can access various Wear OS by Google
functions by swiping the screen up, down, left, and right.
Note
●The procedure below is current as of April 2021. Note that the operations
described here are subject to change due to updates of Wear OS by
Google and other factors. For details about Wear OS by Google
operations, visit the website below.
https://support.google.com/wearos/
EN-41


Swipe from top to bottom
A
B
E
H
I
C
D
F
G
J
This displays the Wear OS by Google setting screen.
A Settings
B Brightness
C Battery Saver
D Find my phone
E Theater mode
F Do Not Disturb
G Airplane mode
H
 Displayed
while there is a
Wi‑Fi connection.
I
 Displayed
while there is a
Bluetooth
connection
between the watch
and a phone.
J
 Remaining
battery charge
EN-42


Swipe from bottom to top
This displays notifications.
●You can display other notifications by swiping the notification screen from
bottom to top.
●Swiping a notification to right or left will cause it to disappear.
Swipe from left to right
This displays the current date and other information.
●Swiping this screen from bottom to top displays various types of
information.
EN-43


Swipe from right to left
Each swipe displays the next Tile*.
* Tiles make it easy to take quick actions and access important information
at a glance. Tiles include weather forecast, news, workout tracking,
guided breathing, and more. Select and edit the Tiles you want to have
on your watch.
EN-44


Basic Functions
Adjusting the Current Time Setting
While there is a Bluetooth connection between the watch and a paired phone,
the watch’s current time will be synced with the time of the phone. You can
also adjust the watch’s current time setting manually.
Alarm, Timer, Stopwatch, etc.
These functions can be used by Wear OS by Google standard apps.
While a watch face is displayed, short press the power button. On the app list
that appears, tap the app you want.
For details about the above settings and how to use them, visit the
websites below.
https://support.google.com/wearos/
App Updates
Important!
To ensure that your watch can function at the high level for which it is
designed, be sure to keep all apps up to date. It is recommended that you
turn on the watch and keep it connected to your phone and Wi-Fi when
charging so app updating can be performed automatically. Also, if there
are any CASIO apps that can be updated in MyApps on Google Play, be
sure to update them. For details, visit the support site below.
https://support.casio.com/gsw/en/GSW-H1000/
EN-45


Using the “DIGITAL” Watch
Face
“DIGITAL” is the initial default watch face of this watch. In addition to being
useful for activity measurements, it is an important and essential watch face.
There are two major display formats, “daily” and “activity”. When you start a
measurement operation for running, skiing, strength training, or some other
activity, the display changes from the daily watch face to a design that shows
the optimum functions for the activity you are measuring. You can also change
the functions of the upper, middle, and lower display areas of the watch face.
In addition to functions, you can also select any one of a wide variety of face
designs.
The explanations in this chapter basically use the daily screen.
Important!
●“DIGITAL” is an important watch face that functions as a starting point
for every operation of this watch. Though your watch comes with a
number of different watch faces built in, you should normally use this
watch face, especially when performing activity measurements.
EN-46


DIGITAL Display
Daily screen
This is the normal screen for daily use when you are not performing activity
measurement.
A
B
D
C
A Upper display area: Calories Burned / Step Count / Heart Rate
B Middle display area: Clock
C Lower display area: Calories Burned / Weekly Stats
D Background
●You can select from among various different variations for the upper,
middle, and lower display areas of the watch face. You can select from
among various different backgrounds, or you can use the map of your
current location as the background.
●Even if another watch face is in use, the watch automatically switches to
the “DIGITAL” watch face when you start an activity measurement
operation, which remains displayed until the measurement operation is
complete. Items that are displayed depend on the activity measurement
operation you perform.
For details, see “Selecting an Activity for Measurement”.
EN-47


Activity Measurement in Progress Screens
This is the screen when you are performing activity measurement.* Your
watch supports timing of dozens of activity and workout types, and lets you
switch to the appropriate information display for each stage.
For the “Running” and “Road Biking” sports activities, you can select from
among various different display items (upper area, middle area, lower
display areas) and background variations that are available for each of
these sports activities.
* For details about activity measurements, see “Selecting an Activity for
Measurement”.
Example screen when “Running” is selected
EN-48


Changing DIGITAL Screen Items
1. 
On the DIGITAL watch face, tap the display area (upper,
middle, and lower) whose display item you want to
change.
●This displays a screen for changing the contents of the display area you
tapped.
DIGITAL daily screen
Display item selection screen
2. 
Tap 
 or 
 to change the display items.
●You cannot change display items by swiping left or right.
●To display a menu of the selected display items, tap 
. You can use
the menu to change settings related to display contents and other
settings. For details, see “Using the Display Item Selection Menu”.
EN-49


Using the Display Item Selection Menu
On the display switching screen, you can display a menu of the selected
display content. From there you can use functions related to the display
content and change settings.
1. 
On the DIGITAL watch face, tap one of the display areas
(upper, middle, or lower).
●This displays a screen for selecting the display items of the area you
tapped.
Example: When “Calories Burned / Step Count / Heart Rate” is selected
for the upper display area
EN-50


2. 
Tap 
.
●This displays a menu.
A
A
B
C
A Menu items
B Tap (or swipe the screen from right to left) to display the next menu page.
C Tap (or swipe the screen from left to right) to display the previous menu
page.
EN-51


3. 
Tap a menu item.
●For example, the menu items below are available on the “Calories
Burned / Step Count / Heart Rate” menu.
Menu items
Description
Daily calories
burned target
Specifies a daily calories burned target.
Daily step count
target
Specifies a daily step count target.
Gauge Reset
Resets the maximum value of currently displayed
step count or calories burned meter.
Heart Rate Graph
Displays a daily heart rate graph.
Daily Measurement
Specifies recording of non-activity daily heart rate
measurements.
Heart Rate Setting
For configuring settings required for heart rate zone
and VO2Max. (See “Configuring Initial Default
Settings for Heart Rate Measurement”)
Accurate heart rate
monitoring
Displays tips on how to fasten the watch to your
wrist during heart rate measurements.
Energy
Consumption Unit
Specifies the calories burned unit.
4. 
To return to the watch face display, press the power
button.
EN-52


Changing the DIGITAL Background
1. 
Press the APP button (lower button).
●This displays a menu of main functions (CASIO's APPS screen).
2. 
Run your finger around the outer periphery of the display
to rotate through icons until the “Watch Face
Background” icon is displayed in the center of the
screen.
3. 
Tap the icon in the center of the screen.
●This displays the watch face background selection screen.
4. 
Swipe the screen left or right and select a background.
EN-53


DIGITAL Screen Item Example
This section explains some of the display items you can select for the DIGITAL
daily screen.
Upper display area example
This section explains “Calories Burned / Step Count / Heart Rate”. In addition,
you can also select “Heart Rate”, “Barometer / Fishing Time” and “Barometer /
Barometer Graph”.
Calories Burned / Step Count / Heart Rate (Initial Default)
A
B
C
A The six segments of this indicator represent 100% of the daily
maximum calories burned value (starting from midnight to the
current time) that you specified on the watch. None of the indicator
segments are displayed if your daily calories burned value is less
than one sixth of the preset maximum, while all six segments are
displayed when it is greater than the preset maximum.*
B Shows your current heart rate between 40 and 220 BPM.
C Shows your daily step count (from midnight to the current time).
“----” is displayed in place of a value when measurement fails.*
* During an activity, this value shows the current calories burned or the
step count starting from the beginning of the activity.
EN-54


Middle display area example
In this section explains about “Clock” and “Heart Rate”.
Clock (Initial Default)
A
B
C
A Current time
B Current location (time zone name)
C Day, day of week
EN-55


Heart Rate
A
B
C
D
A 10 segments that indicate heart rate zones. The displayed
segment shows the heart rate zone that corresponds to the value
shown by D.
B Shows your Target Heart Rate Zone*.
C This heart icon flashes while a heart rate measurement operation
is in progress. It does not flash when there is no heart rate
measurement. While this icon is flashing, D shows your current
heart rate. When it is not flashing, D shows the last measured
heart rate value.
D Heart rates (current and last measured) are displayed within a
range of 40 and 220 BPM. “---” is displayed in place of a value if
the measurement is out of range or if measurement is not possible.
* “Target Heart Rate Zone” Settings can be configured using the
CASIO “G-SHOCK MOVE” app.
EN-56


Lower display area example
This section explains “Calories Burned / Weekly Stats”. Besides this type of
display, you can also select “Heart Rate”, “Schedule”, “Altitude / Compass”
and “Altitude / Altitude Graph”.
Calories Burned / Weekly Stats (Initial Default)
A
B
A The letters indicate days of the week. This graph shows your daily
energy consumption for the week that includes today. The bar on
the right shows today’s calories burned. The height of each graph
bar indicates the percentage of your preset maximum calories
burned value that you achieved each day. The preset maximum
energy value is 100%.
If you have set a “Daily calories burned target*1”, the part that
exceeds the target is displayed in the Theme Color*2.
B Shows how many calories your burned today (since midnight).
“----” is displayed in place of a value when measurement fails.
*1 You can change the display items that appear here by tapping the
lower display area. Next, tap 
 and then select the items you want
from the menu that appears.
*2 “Theme Color” is one of the setting items of this watch. It specifies
the color of specific characters and the design of the display.
EN-57


Quick Recall of Main
Functions (CASIO's APPS)
From the icon menu that appears when you press the APP (lower) button,
you can quickly access the main CASIO original functions installed on this
watch.
Recalling Functions with CASIO's APPS
1. 
While a watch face is displayed, press the APP button
(lower button).
●This displays the CASIO's APPS screen.
2. 
Run your finger around the outer periphery of the display
to rotate through icons until the icon you want to recall
is displayed in the center of the screen.
EN-58


3. 
Tap the icon in the center of the screen.
●The table below shows the functions you can recall.
Function
Description
Activity
Displays the START screen to start Activity
measurement.
If an Activity measurement is already in progress,
watch will return to the measurement screen that
was displayed before step 1 of this procedure.
History
Displays a history list of Activity measurement
results.
Watch Face
Background
Selects the background image of the “DIGITAL”
watch face.
Theme Color
Tap to select a uniform theme color for the watch’s
screen. The color you select is used for icons and
cursors (CASIO apps only).
Map
Displays a map using the full display area of the
watch.
EN-59


Function
Description
Heart Rate Graph
Displays your latest heart rate reading along with a
Heart Rate Graph of the previous 24 hours.
If an Activity is in progress, the display will show
your current heart rate and graph of your readings
during the current Activity.
Sensor Overlay
Measures data during an Activity to overlay it on a
movie or still image shot during the Activity.
●The “G-SHOCK MOVE” phone app is required to
overlay measurement data onto a movie or still
image.
Timepiece
Transition from Wear OS by Google to the
Timepiece mode.
Timepiece disables smart functionality and instead
displays only the monochrome time and sensor
operations in order to maximize the watch's battery.
Tide Graph
Displays the current tide level and a Tide Graph of
the previous 12 hours and the next 12 hours. The
current tide level and the high and low tide levels of
the next 12 hours are displayed along with their
times.
●You can select the port whose information you
want to display using the Tide Graph menu on the
lower display switching screen of the “DIGITAL”
watch face. For information about the procedure,
see “Changing DIGITAL Screen Items”.
Altimeter
Displays your current altitude and an altitude graph
of the previous 24 hours.
If an Activity is in progress, the display will show
your current altitude and an altitude graph of your
readings during the current Activity.
EN-60


Function
Description
Barometer
Displays your current barometric pressure and a
Barometric Pressure Graph of the previous 24
hours.
If an Activity is in progress, the display will show
your current barometric pressure and a barometric
pressure graph of your readings during the Activity.
Compass
Displays the compass (bearing indicator).
G-SHOCK MOVE
Connects to or disconnects from the “G-SHOCK
MOVE” phone app.
While connected to “G-SHOCK MOVE”, you can
use your phone to view Activity records and
configure phone settings.
EN-61


Selecting an Activity for
Measurement
Your watch supports measurement and recording of dozens of different
activities. The table below shows a partial list of supported activities.
Walking
Arm curls*
Cycling
Abdominal crunches*
Skiing
Shoulder presses*
Sailing
Squats*
Trail running
Treadmill*
Trekking
Push ups*
Fishing
Planks*
Pool swimming
Bench presses*
Mountain biking
Leg presses*
Running
Lower back*, etc.
Road biking, etc.
 
* Activities included in the “Workouts” item of the watch’s activity selection
screen. Operations for these activities are slightly different from operations
of other activities.
Important!
●Note the precautions below to ensure correct heart rate measurement
by the watch.
ーBefore starting measurement, use the procedure under “Configuring
Initial Default Settings for Heart Rate Measurement” to enter your
birthday, gender, and other profile information.
ーBe sure to properly fasten the watch to your wrist. (See “Fastening
the Watch to Your Wrist”.)
●When you start measurement of an outdoor activity such as running, go
outdoors to an open space where the sky is visible.
EN-62


Note
●While the watch is connected with the “G-SHOCK MOVE” phone app,
you can use your phone to view Activity records.
ーTo connect to “G-SHOCK MOVE”, press the APP button on the watch
face (lower button). On the screen that appears, tap “G-SHOCK
MOVE” icon in the center of the screen.
For details, see “Quick Recall of Main Functions (CASIO's APPS)”.
Activity Measurement (Excluding Workouts)
This section describes the measurement operations for running and other
activities that are mainly performed outdoors.
For details about Workouts measurement, see “Activity Measurement
(Workouts)”.
Starting, Pausing, and Stopping an Activity Measurement
Starting an Activity Measurement Operation
Note
●Display of the “DIGITAL” watch face is recommended when performing
step 1 of the procedure below.
●Regardless of the type of watch face you have displayed, starting an
activity measurement operation switches to the “DIGITAL” activity
measurement in progress screen.
EN-63


1. 
While a watch face is displayed, press the START button
(upper button).
●This displays the activity measurement START screen, which shows
the currently selected activity.
●To change the sports activity, go to step 2. To start measurement using
the currently selected sports activity, advance to step 4 of this
procedure.
2. 
Press the APP button (lower button) to display the
activity selection screen.
3. 
Swipe the screen up or down until you find the activity
you want, and then tap it.
EN-64


4. 
To start measurement, press the START button.
●If you are using an activity that records location information, the
message “Location info being acquired...” appears at this time. Move
outdoors to a location with an unobstructed view of the sky and wait
there without moving until location information can be acquired.
●If a countdown appears, start the workout when the countdown reaches
zero. If you want to start without waiting until the countdown reaches
zero, press the START button.
●For some activities (such as Skiing), the following message appears on
the display: “Standing by. To restart recording, press the GO button.”.
In this case, you can start measurement by pressing the START button.
●When the measurement starts, the watch transitions to the “DIGITAL”
watch face’s activity measurement in progress screen.
Example screen when “Running” is selected
 
For information about the screen items, see “Activity Measurement in
Progress Screen”.
EN-65


To pause or stop activity measurement
1. 
To pause a measurement operation, display the Activity
measurement in progress screen and then press the
START button (upper button).
●This pauses measurement and displays the measurement paused
screen.
●To restart measurement, press the START button.
2. 
To quit measurement, hold down the APP button (lower
button) for about two seconds.
3. 
This displays the message “Save history?”. Tap “Save
(upper button)” or press the START button.
●To discard the measurement history, tap “Discard (lower button)” or
press the APP button.
●Tapping “Save (upper button)” performs the save operation and then
displays the stats screen. You can scroll the stats screen contents by
swiping up or down.
●To view saved statistical data later, select the CASIO's APPS option of
“History”.
Note
●Changing the “Location Recording Frequency” setting from “MAX
(Every second)” (initial default) to “MID (Every 5 seconds)” or “LOW
(Every 120 seconds)” reduces battery power consumption, but it also
reduces the accuracy of various measurements, and disables Auto
Pause and other functions.
EN-66


Activity Measurement in Progress Screen
This section explains how to interpret the contents of the activity
measurement screen. The “Running” screen is used as an example for this
explanation.
A
B
C
D
Example screen when “Running” is selected
 
A The 10 segments of this ring represent 100% of your personal best
pace based on your history of past runs (10% each). The initial
default setting for the personal best pace is 4:00 minutes per
kilometer. As you run, segments are displayed to show what
percentage of your personal best your current pace is.
The items below are displayed near the ring.
●PACE: Your current pace
●MAX: You maximum pace measured so far
●AVG: Your current measured average pace
B Shows your Heart Rate. See “Heart Rate” under “Middle display
area example”.
C Shows the current time, day of the week, and date.
D A map around your current location and a track of your movements
are displayed as the background.
EN-67


Activity Measurement (Workouts)
To ensure acquisition of effective Workouts measurements and recorded
data, determine your own personal training amounts and the goals for each
sports activity, and input the information on the watch.
Example:
 
Push ups
Reps: 20 Sets: 3
Interval between sets: 1 minute
 
 
Sit ups
Reps: 40 Sets: 3
Interval between sets: 1 minute
 
 
Planks
Hold Time: 30 seconds Sets: 3
Interval between sets: 30 seconds
 
EN-68


Inputting Training Amounts, Goals, and Other Data on
Your Watch
Note
●Display of the “DIGITAL” watch face is recommended when performing
step 1 of the procedure below.
●Regardless of the type of watch face you have displayed, starting an
activity measurement operation switches to the “DIGITAL” activity
measurement in progress screen.
1. 
While a watch face is displayed, press the START button
(upper button).
●This displays the activity measurement START screen, which shows
the currently selected activity.
2. 
Press the APP button (lower button) to display the
activity selection screen, and then tap “Workouts”.
3. 
On the workout activity selection screen, tap the item
whose training volume, goal, or other information you
want to input.
●This returns to the activity measurement START screen, which shows
the activity you tapped.
●If you swipe the screen from bottom to top here, the setting menu for
the displayed sports activity will appear. For details about menus, see
“Activity Measurement Setting Menu”.
EN-69


4. 
Swipe the screen from bottom to top. On the menu that
appears, tap “Settings”.
●This displays a setting menu in accordance with the workout activity
you selected in step 3.
5. 
Enter each of the setting items as required by the
workout activity.
●The setting items that need to be input depend on the selected workout
activity.
6. 
After entering all the required items, perform the steps
below to return to the START screen.
1. Swipe the setting menu screen from left to right to return to the menu
screen displayed in step 4 of this procedure.
2. Swipe the screen from top to bottom.
7. 
If you want to enter information for another workout
activity, repeat steps 2 through 6 of this procedure.
EN-70


Performing Measurements According to the Workouts
Type
The operations you need to perform when performing Workouts
measurements are slightly different depending on whether you are
performing strength training, Fat Burning training, or Core training. For details
about the Workouts category, see “Inputting Training Amounts, Goals, and
Other Data on Your Watch”.
To start strength training measurement
Note
●Reps, Sets, Interval settings have an effect on strength training (Push
Ups, sit-ups, Bench Presses, etc.) measurements.
1. 
While a watch face is displayed, press the START button
(upper button).
2. 
Press the APP button (lower button) to display the
activity selection screen, and then tap “Workouts”.
●This displays the workout selection screen for Workouts.
3. 
Tap the item for which you want to start measurement.
●This returns to the START screen of the tapped item.
4. 
To start measurement, press the START button.
●If you selected the first item for the start of an indoor workout, the
message “Obtaining sensor information” appears. Remain still, with the
watch in close contact with your skin for about 15 seconds.
●The watch screen shows the Sets, Reps, and Weight settings (when
the workout includes such settings) for a few seconds.
●Immediately after that, the screen switches to the “DIGITAL” watch face
activity measurement in progress screen, and measurement of the first
set starts. Start Workouts.
EN-71


5. 
After completing the Reps setting, press the START
button.
●This displays a confirmation screen.
6. 
On the confirmation screen, select one of the operations
described below.
To save the measurement data of this set and proceed to the next
set:
Tap “Save Sets”. Go to step 7.
To discard the measurement data of this set and proceed to the
next set:
Tap “Discard Sets”. On the confirmation screen that appears, tap the trash
icon and advance to step 7.
To save the measurement data of this set and quit the Workouts:
Tap “Save complete.”. Go to “Following Completion of One Workouts,
Selecting Whether to Continue with the Workouts or to Quit”.
To discard the measurement data of this set and quit the Workouts:
Tap “Discard and stop measurement”. Go to “Following Completion of
One Workouts, Selecting Whether to Continue with the Workouts or to
Quit”.
●If you press the START button after completing the final set, the only
options that appear are “Save complete.” and “Discard Sets and Exit”.
EN-72


7. 
On the interval screen that appears on the display, wait
until the countdown time reaches zero.
●For example, if the Interval setting is 30 seconds, the countdown time
is 30 seconds. Take a break until the start of the next set.
●To resume the Workouts without waiting for the countdown time to
reach zero, press the START button.
●The countdown time reaching zero or pressing of the START button
causes measurement of the next set to start. Restart Workouts and go
back to step 5 of this procedure.
To start Core training measurement
Note
●With Core training (Planks, etc.) measurement, the Hold Time, Sets,
and Interval settings affect operation when measurement is performed.
1. 
While a watch face is displayed, press the START button
(upper button).
2. 
Press the APP button (lower button) to display the
activity selection screen, and then tap “Workouts”.
●This displays the workout selection screen for Workouts.
3. 
Tap the item for which you want to start measurement.
●This returns to the START screen of the tapped item.
EN-73


4. 
To start measurement, press the START button.
●If you selected the first item for the start of an indoor workout, the
message “Obtaining sensor information” appears. Remain still, with the
watch in close contact with your skin for about 15 seconds.
●The watch screen shows the Sets and Hold Time settings for a few
seconds.
●Immediately after that, the screen switches to the “DIGITAL” watch face
activity measurement in progress screen, and measurement of the first
set starts. At this time, the display shows the countdown time to the Hold
Time that you set. Start Workouts.
5. 
After the Hold Time elapses and the countdown time
reaches zero, press the START button.
●This displays a confirmation screen.
6. 
On the confirmation screen, select one of the operations
described below.
To save the measurement data of this set and proceed to the next
set:
Tap “Save Sets”. Go to step 7.
To discard the measurement data of this set and proceed to the
next set:
Tap “Discard Sets”. On the confirmation screen that appears, tap the trash
icon and advance to step 7.
To save the measurement data of this set and quit the Workouts:
Tap “Save complete.”. Go to “Following Completion of One Workouts,
Selecting Whether to Continue with the Workouts or to Quit”.
To discard the measurement data of this set and quit the Workouts:
Tap “Discard and stop measurement”. Go to “Following Completion of
One Workouts, Selecting Whether to Continue with the Workouts or to
Quit”.
●If you press the START button after completing the final set, the only
options that appear are “Save complete.” and “Discard Sets and Exit”.
EN-74


7. 
On the interval screen that appears on the display, wait
until the countdown time reaches zero.
●Take a break until the start of the next set.
●To resume the Workouts without waiting for the countdown time to
reach zero, press the START button.
●The countdown time reaching zero or pressing of the START button
causes measurement of the next set to start. Restart Workouts and go
back to step 5 of this procedure.
To start Fat Burning training measurement
1. 
While a watch face is displayed, press the START button
(upper button).
2. 
Press the APP button (lower button) to display the
activity selection screen, and then tap “Workouts”.
●This displays the workout selection screen for Workouts.
3. 
Tap the item for which you want to start measurement.
●This returns to the START screen of the tapped item.
4. 
To start measurement, press the START button.
●If you selected the first item for the start of an indoor workout, the
message “Obtaining sensor information” appears. Remain still, with the
watch in close contact with your skin for about 15 seconds.
●The watch screen shows the Target Time and Target Calories settings
for a few seconds.
●Immediately after that, the screen switches to the “DIGITAL” watch face
activity measurement in progress screen, and measurement of the first
set starts. At this time, the screen shows the elapsed time from the start
of measurement. Start Workouts.
EN-75


5. 
To pause a measurement operation, display the Activity
measurement in progress screen and then press the
START button.
●This pauses measurement and displays the measurement paused
screen.
●To restart measurement, press the START button.
6. 
To quit measurement, hold down the APP button for
about two seconds.
●This displays the running distance input screen.
7. 
On the running distance input screen, select one of the
operations described below.
To save the running distance and quit:
Input the running distance and then tap “Save the distance and exit”.
To quit without saving the running distance:
Tap “Exit without saving the distance”.
●This saves measurement data other than the running distance.
To discard current measurement data and quit:
Tap “Discard the record and exit”. On the confirmation screen that
appears, tap the trash can icon.
8. 
Go to “Following Completion of One Workouts,
Selecting Whether to Continue with the Workouts or to
Quit”.
EN-76


Following Completion of One Workouts, Selecting
Whether to Continue with the Workouts or to Quit
The procedure below should be performed after completing a Workouts
by performing the operation under “To start strength training
measurement”, “To start Core training measurement”, or “To start Fat
Burning training measurement”. It cannot be performed as a stand-alone
operation.
1. 
When the “Way to go!! Continue with another workout?”
message appears, perform one of the operations below.
To continue with another Workouts activity:
Tap “Yes. Continue.”.
●This returns to the Workouts activity selection screen.
●Next, select the workout activity you want to start in step 3 of “To start
strength training measurement”, “To start Core training
measurement”, or “To start Fat Burning training measurement”.
To quit Workouts:
Tap “No. Cancel.”.
●This displays the history save confirmation screen. Tap “Save (upper
button)” or “Discard (lower button)”.
●This displays a screen of statistics for of all the Workouts you have
completed. You can scroll the stats screen contents by swiping up or
down.
●To return to the watch face that was displayed before you started
Workouts, press the power button.
●To view saved statistical data later, select the CASIO's APPS option of
“History”.
EN-77


Activity Measurement Setting Menu
Swiping the activity measurement START screen from bottom to top displays
a setup menu for the currently displayed activity.
Menu Item
Description
History
Displays a history list of activity measurement
results. The log provides a detailed, optimized view
of each workout activity.
Display
Using the submenu that appears when you tap this
item, you can customize the measurement in
progress display for the currently selected workout
activity.
“Display Item”... Selects the display items for the
upper, middle, and lower display areas.
“Background Image”... Selects a background.
Download Map
Download maps ahead of time while you have
internet connection, to ensure accessibility when
there is no network connection. The watch can have
data for up to five Mapbox* maps in watch memory
at a time.
Show map
Displays a map using the full display area of the
watch.
Import Route
This item lets you import route data saved in watch
memory as activity measurement history or
external route data (GPX or KML files) saved on
Google Drive, and display it as a reference route.
Settings
Displays a submenu that includes various setting
items that are common to all types of sports
activities.
Cancel
Cancels activity measurement and returns to the
watch face prior to the START screen.
* Your watch supports use of two types of maps: “Google Maps” and
“Mapbox”. Only Mapbox map data can be downloaded for use. In places
where network communication is possible, perform the following operation
in sequence: “Settings” (above)> “Map App”> “Map Type”. Next select
“Google Maps” or “Mapbox”.
EN-78


Changing Screen Items Displayed During
Activity Measurement
Since the activity measurement in progress screen is one of the display
formats of the “DIGITAL” watch face, you can use the same operations as
those for the DIGITAL daily screen to change the display items for the upper,
middle, and lower display areas. For information about the procedure, see
“Changing DIGITAL Screen Items”.
Note
●The display item selection screen that appears when you tap the activity
measurement in progress screen has an on-screen pause button
(
). This is different from the screen that appears when you tap the
daily screen. Tap this button to pause measurement.
EN-79


Download Map and Import
Route
This section explains the operations below.
●How to download maps in advance so you can display them even when the
watch is off-line
●How to import route data for display on a map during an activity
measurement operation
Note
●Your watch supports use of two types of maps: “Google Maps” and
“Mapbox”. Only Mapbox map data can be downloaded for use.
Download Map
If you are planning to go to a location where there is no net access but you
still want to use maps, you can download Mapbox maps ahead of time while
you still have net access.
EN-80


Important!
●Except when you want to cancel a download operation, do not perform
any watch operation until map downloading is complete. Performing an
operation may stop the download.
●Map data is dense, so use of a Wi-Fi connection is recommended.
●Zoom levels are limited while a downloaded map is displayed. The
smaller the area of the map you display in step 4 of the procedure below,
the greater the detail that will be shown when you enlarge the map. In
step 4, specifying the smallest map area you might possibly need is
recommended.
●The watch can have up to five Mapbox maps in watch memory at a time.
If you attempt to download more map data while there are already five
maps memory, a message will appear prompting you to delete existing
downloaded map data. Delete map data you no longer need and try
downloading the new data again.
1. 
On the CASIO's APPS screen, tap “Map” to display a
map.
2. 
Tap the bottom of the screen. On the menu that appears,
tap “Download Map”.
●This displays a map with your current location in the center.
3. 
Scroll the map so the location that you want to be in the
center of the map you download is in the center of the
watch screen.
●You can use the APP button (lower button) to reduce the size of the map
and increase the display area, and then scroll the map on the display.
The area in circle in the center of the screen at this time shows the
maximum downloadable area.
EN-81


4. 
Use the START button (upper button) and APP button
(lower button) to zoom in and out the map so the area
you want to download fills the screen.
●The area that is displayed at this time is the approximate area that will
be downloaded.
5. 
Tap “Fix”.
●This starts map downloading, with the download progress shown on
the display. To cancel the download, tap 
.
●The downloaded map will appear on the display after download is
complete.
Changing the Map Type
In an environment where network communication is available, you can
perform the procedures in this section to download maps.
1. 
On the CASIO's APPS screen, tap “Map” and display a
map.
2. 
Tap the bottom of the screen. On the menu that appears,
tap the following items in sequence: “Map App” > “Map
Type”.
●Each tap of “Map Type” toggles between “Google Maps” and
“Mapbox”.
Note
●Maps displayed while “Mapbox” is selected use geographic information
from OpenStreetMap. OpenStreetMap geographic information can be
freely edited by anyone, which means that information displayed on a
map may not be correct.
●Immediately following execution of a Download Map operation, the
watch will automatically switch to “Mapbox”.
EN-82


Import Route
Use the operations in this section to import route data saved in watch memory
or external route data* saved on Google Drive, and display it as a reference
route during an activity measurement operation. Imported routes are
displayed as gray lines on the map during Activity measurement operations.
* KML and GPX format files are supported. However, depending on how a
file is created, format incompatibilities and import errors may occur.
Note
●The watch has enough memory to store a single file of route data for
display on a map. The imported route data currently in memory is
overwritten if you import new route data.
To import route data from activity history and display it
on a map
1. 
On the CASIO's APPS screen, tap “Map” to display a
map.
2. 
Tap the bottom of the screen. On the menu that appears,
tap the following items in sequence: “Import Route” >
“History”.
●This displays the activity measurement history list of dates, times, and
activity types.
3. 
Tap the history record whose route data you want to
import.
●This displays the map screen for the history record you tapped, with the
route displayed on the map.
●To import the route data for this map record, go to step 4 of this
procedure. If you want to view data for a different history record, swipe
the screen from bottom to top. On the menu that appears, tap “Return
to Date Selection”.
EN-83


4. 
Swipe the screen from bottom to top. On the menu that
appears, tap “Import Route”> “Import” in sequence.
●This starts the import operation. The progress of the operation will be
shown on the display. To cancel the import operation, tap 
.
●After importing is complete, the watch will display a map screen with
the imported route data.
5. 
To return from the map to the watch face display, press
the power button.
To import route data to a map from Google Drive
1. 
On the CASIO's APPS screen, tap “Map” to display a
map.
2. 
Tap the bottom of the screen. On the menu that appears,
tap the following items in sequence: “Import Route” >
“Google Drive”.
●This displays the Google Account selection screen.
3. 
Tap the name of the account you want to use.
●This will display the file selection screen, which lists the files and folders
stored on Google Drive.
4. 
Tap the KML file or GPX file you want to import.
●This displays the following confirmation message: “Browse this data?”.
To return to the file selection screen here, tap “Cancel”.
5. 
To import the file you tapped, tap “Import”.
●This starts the import operation. The progress of the operation will be
shown on the display. To cancel the import operation, tap 
.
●After importing is complete, the watch will display a map screen with
the imported route data.
6. 
To return from the map to the watch face display, press
the power button.
EN-84


To show or hide route data
Note
●By default, route data you import is displayed on the map. You can also
hide the route data, if you want. Use “View Routes Display” to toggle
between show and hide.
1. 
On the CASIO's APPS screen, tap “Map” to display a
map.
2. 
Tap the bottom of the screen. On the menu that appears,
tap the following items in sequence: “Settings” > “Map
App” > “View Routes Display”.
●Each tap of “View Routes Display” toggles between “OFF” (hide route
data) and “ON” (show route data).
●Even if you select “OFF”, the imported route data will remain in watch
memory.
EN-85


Using a Different Watch Face
In addition to the watch’s initial default “DIGITAL” watch face, the Wear OS
by Google function can be used to select any one of a number of other
different watch faces. You can add CASIO, Google, and third-party watch
faces.
Important!
●If you are using a non-CASIO watch face, you cannot return to it
following an activity measurement operation. If you want to return to a
non-CASIO watch face, long-press the screen and then re-select the
watch face .
●Even if you change to another watch face, the watch face automatically
switches to “DIGITAL” during activity measurement operations.
Changing to Another Watch Face
1. 
While a watch face is displayed, hold your finger down
in the center of the screen for about two seconds.
●This displays the watch face list.
2. 
Swipe the touch screen left or right to scroll though the
available watch faces. When the one you want is
displayed tap it.
●For example, tap the “2 Layers” CASIO watch face. For details about
“2 Layers”, see “Using the “2 Layers” CASIO Watch Face”.
Note
●You can tap “See more watch faces” on the watch face list that appears
in step 1 above and install other watch faces.
EN-86


Using the “ANALOG” CASIO Watch Face
The CASIO ANALOG watch face is an analog face that prioritizes readability.
The information displayed by this watch face changes automatically
according to your current location and activity.
ANALOG Screen Items
This screen enhances viewing of the current time, with the automatically
changing information in the background.
Tapping the display causes the background to become easy to view for about
5 seconds.
Current time
Background information
EN-87


Background Information
After you specify your Home Time Zone and “Daily Activity Range*”, the
screen's background information automatically switches in accordance with
your current location and activity.
* The “Daily Activity Range” is the area where you conduct your daily life. You
specify a range by setting a center point, like your home, and the radius of
a circle on a map displayed by the watch.
Not exercising
Exercising
When you are within your 
daily activity range
(A)
(B)
Not exercising
Exercising
When you are outside your 
daily activity range
(C)
(D)
EN-88


Background Information Details
This section explains the background information that changes automatically.
The example screens shown in this section are those that appear when you
tap the display to make the background information easy to view.
Screen (A)
This screen appears when you are not exercising and you are within your
Daily Activity Range. You can use it to check your heart rate, your daily step
count, etc.
Background Information Example
EN-89


Screen (B)
While Screen (A) is displayed, continuing to walk, run, ride a bicycle, or
perform some other activity for some preset time causes this screen to
appear. With this screen, heart rate zones and your step count are enlarged,
making them easier to view.
Background Information Example
EN-90


Screen (C)
This screen appears when you are not exercising and you are outside of the
Daily Activity Range. The background of the watch face changes to a map.
●If you move outside of your Home Time Zone, the watch display switches
to the current time in your current location, and the current time in your Home
Time Zone is shown in the lower display area.
Within Home Time Zone
Outside of Home Time Zone
Background Information Example
Background Information Example
●If the time does not switch to the time at your current location, swipe the
watch face downwards. On the setting screen that appears, perform the
following steps: D > “System” > “Date & time”. Next, makes sure that “ON”
is selected for the “Automatic time zone” setting.
EN-91


Screen (D)
While Screen (C) is displayed, continuing to walk, run, ride a bicycle, or
perform some other activity for some preset time causes this screen to
appear. The background of the watch face change to a map that shows more
details of your current location.
Within Home Time Zone
Outside of Home Time Zone
Background Information Example
Background Information Example
EN-92


Using the “2 Layers” CASIO Watch Face
Digital watch face that combines easy-to-read monochrome LCD and a color
LCD. You can customize the information that appears in the upper and lower
display areas of the display. While this watch face is displayed, tapping the
screen will start a manual heart rate measurement operation.
2 Layers Screen Items
With the 2 Layers watch face, you can combine the display information below
as required.
Upper display area: Date, barometric pressure, heart rate
Lower display area: Step count, battery level, altitude, Calories Burned
Display example
(Upper display area: heart rate,
Lower display area: Calories Burned)
The middle display area normally shows the day of the week and current time,
while the outer ring shows the remaining battery charge. For information
about the display during heart rate measurement, see “To measure your heart
rate manually”.
EN-93


To change the 2 Layers watch face display items
1. 
While the “2 Layers” watch face is displayed, hold your
finger down in the center of the touch screen for about
two seconds.
●This shrinks the watch face and displays D below it.
2. 
Tap in the following in sequence: D > “Display”.
3. 
Tap “Upper”. On the menu that appears, tap the item
(Date, Barometer, or Heart Rate) that you want to display
in the Upper display area.
4. 
Tap “Lower”. On the menu that appears, tap the item
(Steps, Battery Level, Altimeter, or Calories Burned) that
you want to display in the Lower display area.
5. 
To quit the setting procedure and return to the watch
face display, press the power button.
EN-94


To measure your heart rate manually
1. 
While the “2 Layers” watch face is displayed, tap the
screen.
2. 
This displays the message “Start heart rate
measurement.”. Tap 
.
●This starts a heart rate measurement operation. This returns to the
watch face display, with your heart rate shown in the middle display
area. The outer ring of the display shows your heart rate zone.*1
●Manual heart rate measurement stops automatically after the time you
set for “Manually Measured Heart Rate Time*2” (1 to 3 minutes). To
manually stop heart rate measurement part way through, tap the screen
again. If the message “End heart rate measurement.” appears, tap
.
*1 For this measurement, you need to use the procedure under
“Configuring Initial Default Settings for Heart Rate Measurement” to
enter your birthday, gender, and other profile information.
*2 You can change this setting by tapping the following operation in step
2 of the procedure under “To change the 2 Layers watch face display
items”: D > “Manually Measured Heart Rate Time”.
EN-95


Reducing Power
Consumption (Timepiece)
Timepiece is a watch mode that disables smart functionality and instead
displays minimal information in order to maximize the watch's battery. Only
watch and sensor operations are performed.
Use Timepiece to save power while sleeping, with no network connection,
etc.
Important!
●With Timepiece, apps, location information, Wi-Fi, and phone linking
(notification reception, etc.) are all disabled.
●With Timepiece, you will not be able to change any settings related to
the current time and date (time zone auto switching, phone time and
date sync, including summer time adjustment, etc.) To update the time
setting, every couple of days you should quit Timepiece and establish
a connection with a phone.
EN-96


Timepiece Screen Items
With the Timepiece watch face, you can combine the display information
below as required.
Upper display area: Date, barometric pressure
Lower display area: Step count, battery level, altitude
Display example
(Upper display area: Barometric pressure,
Lower display area: Altitude)
●The middle display area always shows the current time and day of the week.
The outer ring always shows the remaining battery level.
●Assigning your step count to the lower display area shorten the battery
operating time.
EN-97


Changing to Timepiece
1. 
On the CASIO's APPS screen, tap “Timepiece”.
●This displays the Timepiece start screen.
2. 
Tap “Settings” and then configure the settings below as
required.
Monochrome
Display
Selects either “Bright” (black text on a white
background) or “Dark” (white text on a black
background).
Display Items
Tap to display a sub-menu. The sub-menu can be used
to select the display items for the upper and lower
display areas of the Timepiece screen.
Unit
Select “Metric” or “Imperial”.
●This setting does not appear when TYO (Tokyo) is
selected as your Time Zone.
●After settings are the way you want, swipe the screen from left to right
to return to the Timepiece start screen.
3. 
Tap “Start”.
●This exits Wear OS by Google and transitions to Timepiece.
To quit Timepiece and return to normal function (start up
Wear OS by Google)
Hold down the power button for at least two seconds. This starts up Wear OS
by Google and returns to normal function.
EN-98


Reducing Timepiece Altitude and Barometric
Pressure Measurement Error
You need to manually correct the altitude and barometric pressure values
displayed by the watch’s Timepiece watch face with accurate elevation and
barometric pressure values in order to minimize reading errors. Use the
operation below to input altitude values based on elevation values from other
sources, and/or barometric pressure values measured using an accurate
barometer.
The procedure below applies when barometric pressure and altitude values
are both displayed on the Timepiece screen. When only one of these two
values is displayed, this procedure affects only the displayed value.
1. 
While Timepiece is displayed, hold down the START
button (upper button) for at least two seconds.
●This will cause the “ALTI” (altitude) value in the lower display area to
flash.
2. 
Use the START button and APP button to increase or
decrease the value as desired.
3. 
Hold down the START button for at least two seconds.
●This will cause the “BARO” (barometric pressure) value in the upper
display area to flash.
4. 
Use the START button and APP button to increase or
decrease the value as desired.
5. 
Hold down the START button for at least two seconds.
●This exits the calibration mode and returns to normal operation.
EN-99


What you can do when not
connected with a phone
If your watch is paired with a phone, you will be able to use most of its functions
even if it is not connected with your phone. Some of the things you will be able
to do in this case are listed below.
●Activity Measurement
●Almost all functions that can be called up from CASIO's APPS
●Changing the display items of the “DIGITAL” watch face and using menus
●Checking the current Time and Date
●Alarm, stopwatch, timer
●Changing the watch face
●Airplane Mode switching
Some apps, services, and other functions that require phone linking will not
be available when the watch is not connected with a phone. For details, visit
the website below.
https://support.google.com/wearos/
You can also visit the website below, enter “What can I do with the watch
without connection with a phone?”, and then tap the [Search] button.
https://s.casio.jp/w/10016en/
EN-100


Troubleshooting
Refer to this section whenever you are experiencing problems with watch
operation.
If you don’t find the solution to your problem here, visit the website below.
https://s.casio.jp/w/10016en/
Restoring Watch Operation
If you find yourself unable to obtain proper operation from the watch for some
reason, restart it and then try performing the operation again. For information
about the restart procedure, see “Restarting”.
If you cannot pair after changing to another
phone model
The information below also applies when changing from one paired phone
model to another.
Android Phone and iPhone Users
Only one phone can be paired with the watch at a time. If you want to pair the
watch with a different phone, you first need to unpair it from the existing phone.
To unpair from a phone, perform the procedure under “Returning the Watch
to Its Initial Factory Defaults”.
EN-101


iPhone Users
With an iPhone, you can have only one watch paired per phone. If you want
to pair this watch back with a phone or pair this watch with an iPhone that is
already paired with another watch, first perform the procedure below on the
phone to delete the current watch’s pairing information from the phone, and
then pair with this watch.
1. 
On your iPhone home screen, tap the following in
sequence: “Settings” > “Bluetooth”.
2. 
In the “MY DEVICES” list, tap the 
 mark to the right of
the name of the currently connected Wear OS by Google
watch.
3. 
Tap “Forget This Device”.
4. 
Start up the Wear OS by Google app.
5. 
Tap the menu icon (
) in the upper left corner of the
screen. On the menu that appears, tap “Set up a new
watch”.
●Now, follow the instructions that appear on your phone screen to
complete the pairing procedure.
EN-102


Returning the Watch to Its Initial Factory
Defaults
Resetting the watch to its initial factory defaults unpairs it from its currently
paired phone. It also initializes (deletes) all data (activity measurement history
records, installed apps, etc.) that you have stored in watch memory, and
resets any settings configured by you.
1. 
While a watch face is displayed swipe the screen from
top to bottom.
2. 
Tap the following in sequence: D > “System”.
3. 
Tap “Disconnect and reset”.
●When a confirmation screen appears, scroll the screen downwards to
read its contents.
4. 
Tap 
.
●To cancel the operation, tap 
.
EN-103


Error Code and Error Message List
Error Code
Error Message
Required Action
1001, 1009
Normal charging is
not possible for
some reason. If this
message keeps
appearing, request
servicing.
Remove the charger cable from the watch, turn off
the watch, and then try charging again. Be sure to
use the charger cable that comes with the watch to
charge it as described under “STEP 1: Charge the
watch”.
If this message/error code keeps appearing, it
could mean that the chargeable battery has
deteriorated. Request servicing by your original
retailer or an authorized CASIO Service Center.
1003
Too cold to charge.
Charge the watch in an area where the ambient
temperature is between 10°C and 35°C (50°F and
95°F).
1004, 1007
Too hot to charge.
1021
Data acquisition
from the sensor may
have failed. Use the
Settings screen to
perform a System
Restart operation.
Data acquisition from one of the following sensors
may have failed for some reason: pressure sensor,
accelerometer, gyrometer, magnetic sensor,
optical sensor (PPG Heart Rate). Restart the watch
by performing the following steps: To restart, swipe
the watch face from top to bottom. On the screen
that appears, tap D, “System”, and then “Restart”.
If this message/error code keeps appearing after
restart, request servicing by your original retailer or
an authorized CASIO Service Center.
EN-104


Error Code
Error Message
Required Action
9000
Some problem
occurred with the
watch. Power will
turn off shortly.
To restart the watch, first charge it for at least one
hour. Next, hold down the power button for about
12 seconds until the display goes white.
9001, 9002, 9003
Some problem
occurred with the
watch. Power will
turn off shortly.
Take your watch to an authorized CASIO Service
Center or to your original retailer for inspection and
repair.
9010
Watch temperature
is high. Power will
turn off to protect it.
Remove the watch from your wrist and leave it in a
location that is not exposed to direct sunlight, where
the temperature is between 10°C and 30°C (50°F
and 86°F) to allow the watch to cool down. You will
be able to turn the watch on again after it reaches a
lower temperature.
EN-105


Precautions During Use
Display Information Accuracy
Tide Graph Precautions
For Japan area oceans, tide times and level changes are predictively
calculated using harmonic constant data obtained from Bibliography 742
Tidal Harmonic Constants Tables, Japanese Coast (February 1992)
published by the Hydrographic Department of the Japan Coast Guard, and
from the List of Tidal Stations (2015) published by the Japan Meteorological
Agency. For other area oceans, tide times and level changes are predictively
calculated using harmonic constant data obtained from UKHO ADMIRALTY
TIDE TABLES NP 201-05, UKHO ADMIRALTY TIDE TABLES NP 201-208,
NOAA, NOAA CO-OPS, and the NOAA Tides & Currents website, and the
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE / COAST AND GEODETIC SURVEY
January 1942 TH-1.
Actual tidal phenomena fluctuate in accordance with weather, the season,
and various other factors, and may give rise to irregularities not in accordance
with calculated values. Certain conditions may result in some deviation from
actual tides. Because of this, the information produced by the Tide Graph
function of this app and watch should be treated as approximate reference
information only. Never use it for navigation or any other decisions about tide
that may put safety at risk.
Sunrise/Sunset Precautions
Sunrise and sunset calculations are performed using the following azimuths:
North: 0 degrees, East: 90 degrees, South: 180 degrees, West: 270 degrees.
Calculation results include error of multiple seconds, and error becomes
greater at higher latitudes. Calculations assume a level horizon, and local
topography is not taken into consideration.
EN-106


Moon Age Precautions
Moon ages displayed by this watch are based on the calculation described
below.
(1) Elongation is calculated using solar and lunar coordinates produced by
functional calculus.
(2) Moon age is calculated based on the correlation between the elongation
and average moon age.
Though the lunar period averages 29.53 days, it actually fluctuates by as
much as ±1 day, so this calculation produces an error of up to ±1 day.
Water Resistance
This watch is water resistant up to 20BAR, which means it can be worn while
working around water, surfing, skindiving, etc. However, note the information
below.
●Even if a watch is water resistant, note the usage precautions described
below.
ーAvoid using this watch while scuba diving (with air cylinder).
ーDo not operate the buttons while your watch is submersed in water or
wet.
ーDo not charge the watch while it is in water or wet.
ーAvoid wearing your watch while in the bath.
ーDo not wear your watch while in a sauna or any other high temperature/
high humidity environment.
ーDo not wear this watch while washing your hands or face, or while
performing any other task that includes the use of soap or detergent.
●The touch screen does not work while the watch is submerged in water.
●Heart rate monitor accuracy may be reduced while washing, swimming, or
performing other activities involving water.
●Certain conditions while washing or swimming can make it impossible to
acquire location information or reduce information accuracy.
EN-107


●After using the watch where it is submerged in either seawater or fresh
water, or where it is soiled by sand or mud, rinse it with clean water as
described below and then thoroughly dry it.
1. Fill a bucket or other container with tap water or other clean water.
2. Place the watch into the water.
3. Gently move the watch back and forth in the water to remove any salt,
dirt, mud, sand, etc.
ーShould the touch screen become dirty, rinse it off with fresh water. If
soiling remains, wipe it off with a soft cloth.
ーShould the charger terminal become dirty, rinse it off with fresh water. If
soiling remains, wipe it off with the tip of a thin cotton swab, etc.
ーAfter washing the watch, use a clean, dry, soft cloth to wipe away any
remaining water. Next, leave the watch in a well-ventilated, shaded
location to dry thoroughly.
ーTo clean dirt from the surface of the sensor in the center of the back cover,
wipe it with a soft cloth, taking care not to damage the surface.
●To maintain water resistance, have the gaskets of your watch replaced
periodically (about once every two or three years). Should gasket
replacement become necessary, be sure to request it from a CASIO Service
Center or your original retailer.
●Be sure to leave battery replacement up to an authorized CASIO Service
Center or your original retailer. Unauthorized battery replacement may
cause problems with the waterproof performance of the watch.
●The inside surface of the watch glass may fog when the watch is exposed
to a sudden drop in temperature. No problem is indicated if the fogging
clears up relatively quickly. Sudden and extreme temperature changes
(such as coming into an air conditioned room in the summer and standing
close to an air conditioner outlet, or leaving a heated room in the winter and
allowing your watch to come into contact with snow) can cause it to take
longer for glass fogging to clear up. If glass fogging does not clear up or if
you notice moisture inside of the glass, immediately stop using your watch
and take it to an authorized CASIO Service Center or to your original retailer.
EN-108


Measurement Function Precautions
Your watch is able to measure and display location information, barometric
pressure, altitude, bearing, your heart rate, and other data. Note that this
watch is not a special purpose measuring instrument. Readings produced by
measurement functions are intended as general reference information only.
Using GPS
Your watch can use radio signals from Global Positioning System (GPS)
satellites to determine your current location anywhere on the globe. This GPS
function can be used to receive radio waves from GPS satellites and calculate
your current location and the current time. The process for determining your
current location is called “positioning”.
Appropriate and Inappropriate Signal Reception Location
●A good location for signal reception is outdoors where the sky is visible and
not blocked by buildings, trees, or other objects.
●You may experience GPS signal reception problems in the areas described
below.
ーWhere the view of the sky above is narrow
ーNear trees or buildings
ーNear a train station, airport, or other congested area, or where there is a
large amount of vehicular traffic
ーNear railway aerial wires, high-voltage lines, TV towers, etc.
●GPS signal reception is not possible in the areas described below.
ーWhere the sky is not visible
ーUnderground, in a tunnel, underwater
ーIndoors (Reception may be possible near a window.)
ーNear wireless communication equipment or other devices that generate
electromagnetism.
●GPS satellites are in constant motion, so your location, the time of day, or
other factors may cause a delay in the positioning operation or may even
make positioning impossible.
EN-109


Built-in GPS
This watch has GPS*1 built in, and you can acquire location information
without connecting with a phone. The watch alone can display a map*2 of
your current location, measure and record data for a variety of training
activities, and more.
*1 In addition to GPS (U.S.), your watch also supports GLONASS (Russia)
and QZSS (Japan) positioning. This manual uses “GPS” to refer to all of
these positioning systems.
*2 To display a map when you do not have a phone, you need to have the
map data downloaded beforehand or the watch needs to be connected
to a Wi-Fi network.
Using GPS Outside Your Country
Some countries or geographic areas put legal restrictions on the use of GPS,
on the collection and logging of location information, etc. Your watch has built-
in GPS functionality, so before embarking on international travel to a country
or area outside of the country where you purchased your watch, you should
check with the embassy of the countries you plan to visit, your travel agency,
or some other reliable source of information to find out if there are any
prohibitions or restrictions on bringing in devices with GPS functionality, the
logging of location information, etc.
Long Periods of Non-use
If you allow the watch to remain discharged and unused for a long period, it
will take a long time to acquire GPS signals and perform positioning
immediately after you charge the watch and start using it again.
EN-110


GPS Function Precautions
●Whenever you are in any area where radio wave reception is prohibited or
restricted, perform the operation below to turn off the “Location” setting.
1. While a watch face is displayed, swipe the touch screen from top to
bottom and then tap D.
2. Scroll downwards and tap “Connectivity” and then “Location”.
3. On the screen that appears, disable “Location”.
●Map data may include information that is incorrect. Also, all countries and
geographic areas may not be provided in the map data.
●Some location and address names may not display correctly due to
applicable laws and restrictions in certain countries and geographic areas.
●The location information provided by the GPS function of this watch is
intended for reference purposes only and locations shown may not be
accessible or difficult to access. Also, map information may show
mountains, jungles, deserts, and other dangerous or lawless locations.
Before going to an unknown location, be sure to check on the latest
information available about laws and safety.
●Using this watch in the vicinity of a mobile phone or other device that uses
1.5 GHz band radio waves may make signal reception impossible.
●Depending on reception conditions, GPS positioning information may
include error up to several hundred meters.
●Location information is not acquired while flying on an aircraft or otherwise
moving at very high speed.
●Never use the GPS function of this watch for surveying or any other
measuring that requires high accuracy.
●Never use the GPS function of this watch for navigation of boats, aircraft,
motor vehicles, individuals, etc.
●Location measurements are performed using satellites that are operated
and managed by the United States (GPS), Russia (GLONASS), and Japan
(QZSS). Because of this, there is always the possibility that access to its
information may be disabled at the discretion of these countries.
EN-111


Compass (Bearing Measurement)
For serious mountain climbing and other activities that require accurate
bearing readings, take along a highly reliable compass to use in combination
with the watch’s compass.
Important!
●Note that accurate compass readings and/or correction will not be
possible in the areas described below.
ーIn the vicinity of a permanent magnet (magnetic accessory, etc.),
metal objects, high-voltage wires, aerial wires, or electrical household
appliances (TV, computer, cellphone, etc.)
ーOn trains, on boats, on aircraft, etc.
ーIndoors, especially inside of reinforced concrete structures.
Altimeter, Barometer
The watch’s Altimeter uses a pressure sensor to measure barometric
pressure, and then calculates and displays relative altitude based on the
measured value. Because of this, readings taken at different times at the
same location may produce different altitude values due to changes in
temperature, humidity, barometric pressure, and other factors. Also note that
values displayed by the watch may be different from elevations indicated for
areas where you are located. When using the watch’s altimeter while
mountain climbing, it is recommended that you perform regular correction in
accordance with the local altitude (elevation) indications.
Tide Graph (Graphic Display of Tide Information)
The Tide Graph feature of your watch is intended to provide a rough image
of current tide conditions. Do not use its tide information for navigation
purposes. For navigation purposes, be sure to use official tide charts issued
by a reliable agency or authority for the area you are navigating. Displayed
tide levels are approximations intended for reference only. Geographic
features and weather in your current location may cause errors in readings.
EN-112


Heart Rate Monitor
●The back cover of the watch has a built-in photosensor that detects your
pulse. This is used to calculate and display an approximate heart rate value.
The factors below can cause error in the displayed heart rate value.
ーHow the watch is fastened to the wrist
ーIndividual wrist characteristics and conditions
ーTraining type and/or intensity
ーSweat, dirt, and/or other foreign matter near the sensor
ーBeing submersed while swimming, etc.
All of this means that heart rate values displayed by the watch are
approximate, and no guarantees are made concerning their accuracy.
●The heart rate monitor function of this watch is intended for recreational
purposes, and should not be used in any way for medical purposes.
Other Product Precautions
Wi-Fi connectivity
Note that when using a Wi-Fi connection you need to be aware of the watch’s
battery level and your surrounding environment. A low battery or extreme cold
can cause Wi-Fi operation to shut down automatically to protect the watch’s
system.
Protective stickers
●Be sure to remove all protective stickers and/or paper tags that may be
affixed to your watch (including its back cover) and/or its band when you
purchase it. Using the watch without removing protective stickers and/or
paper tags may result in the build-up of dirt between the watch/band and
the sticker/paper tag, which creates the risk of rust and skin rash.
EN-113


Charging
●The watch and AC adaptor may become warm to the touch during charging.
This is normal and does not indicate malfunction.
●Do not charge the watch while its charge level is high enough for watch
operation. Waiting until the charge level is low until you charge will help to
extend battery life. Disconnecting the charger cable from the watch after it
reaches a full charge is recommended. Any of the following can hasten
battery deterioration and should be avoided.
ーFrequent charging while the battery is fully charged or near fully charged
ーContinuing to charge over a long period (multiple days)
ーConnecting and disconnecting the charger cable multiple times during a
single day even though the battery is fully charged
●Do not charge the watch if the watch or charger cable is wet. Wipe off all
moisture and make sure the watch and charger cable are dry before
charging.
●Do not charge the watch in a location where large amounts of moisture,
dust, or fine metal particles are present, in a location subjected to vibration,
or near a hard line telephone, a TV, a radio, etc.
●The charger cable of this watch is magnetic. Contact with sand containing
iron particles can make it unusable for charging. Should the charger
terminal or cable become soiled with mud or sand, thoroughly wipe off all
foreign matter before charging.
●In an area where it is extremely cold or hot, you may not be able to charge
the watch or the watch may not charge completely. Charge the watch in an
area where the ambient temperature is between 10°C and 35°C (50°F and
95°F).
EN-114


Wrist Heart Rate Measurement
●The back cover of the watch has a built-in sensor that detects your wrist
pulse. This is used to calculate and display an approximate heart rate value.
The factors below can cause error in the displayed heart rate value.
ーHow the watch is affixed to the wrist
ーIndividual wrist characteristics and conditions
ーTraining type and/or intensity
ーSweat, dirt, and/or other foreign matter near the sensor
All of this means that heart rate values displayed by the watch are
approximate, and no guarantees are made concerning their accuracy.
●The conditions below may make accurate pulse detection impossible.
ーExercising in a low-temperature environment or under other conditions
that reduce blood flow to the arms
ーArm tattoos
ーUse of sunblock cream or lotion, insect repellent, or other skin
applications
●The heart rate monitor function of this watch is intended for recreational
purposes, and should not be used in any way for medical purposes.
Band
●A band that is snugly tightened for heart rate monitoring can cause you to
sweat and make it difficult for air to pass under the band, which can lead to
skin irritation. During normal wear, when you do not need to monitor your
heart rate, make sure the band is loose enough to allow you to insert a finger
between it and your wrist.
●Deterioration, rust, and other conditions can cause the band to break or
come off of your watch, which in turn can cause band pins to fly out of
position or to fall out. This creates the risk of your watch falling from your
wrist and becoming lost, and also creates the risk of personal injury. Always
take good care of your band and keep it clean.
●Immediately stop using a band if you ever notice any of the following: loss
of band flexibility, band cracks, band discoloration, band looseness, band
connecting pin flying or falling out, or any other abnormality. Take your
watch to an authorized CASIO Service Center or to your original retailer for
inspection and repair (for which you will be charged) or to have the band
replaced (for which you will be charged).
EN-115


Temperature
●Never leave your watch on the dashboard of a car, near a heater, or in any
other location that is subject to very high temperatures. Do not leave your
watch where it will be exposed to very low temperatures. Doing so can
cause malfunction.
●Leaving your watch in an area hotter than +60°C (140°F) for long periods
can lead to problems with its display panel. The display panel may become
difficult to read at temperatures lower than 0°C (32°F) and greater than
+40°C (104°F). Watch operation that is stopped due to high temperatures
will not resume until the watch cools sufficiently. Wait for a while to allow
the watch to cool.
Use in Cold Environments
●Under cold conditions, the operating time provided by a battery is shorter
than normal, even if the battery is fully charged.
●Extreme cold can cause Wi-Fi operation to shut down automatically to
protect the watch’s system.
Magnetism
●Some watch functions may not operate normally in a location where
magnetism is present. Very strong magnetism (from medical equipment,
etc.) should be avoided because it can cause malfunction of your watch
and damage to electronic components.
Chemicals
●Do not allow your watch to come into contact with thinner, gasoline,
solvents, oils, or fats, or with any cleaners, adhesives, paints, medicines,
or cosmetics that contain such ingredients. Contact with such agents can
cause discoloration of or damage to the resin case, resin band and other
parts.
●Sunblock, hand cream, cosmetics, and other applications coming into
contact with the back cover of the watch can soil the sensor window, which
can decrease heart rate accuracy. Avoid use of such skin applications when
performing heart rate measurement.
EN-116


Storage
●If you do not plan to use your watch for a long time, thoroughly wipe it free
of all dirt, sweat, and moisture, and store it in a cool, dry place.
●Disconnect the charger cable from the AC adaptor and unplug the AC
adaptor from the power outlet when not charging. Store them in a safe place
for later use. The charger cable is magnetic, so keep it away from magnetic
cards, precision equipment, and analog watches.
Resin Components
●Allowing your watch to remain in contact with other items or storing it
together with other items for long periods while it is wet can cause color on
resin components to transfer to the other items, or the color of the other
items to transfer to the resin components of your watch. Be sure to dry off
your watch thoroughly before storing it and make sure it is not in contact
with other items.
●Leaving your watch where it is exposed to direct sunlight (ultraviolet rays)
for long periods or failure to clean dirt from your watch for long periods can
cause it to become discolored.
●Friction caused by certain conditions (strong external force, sustained
rubbing, impact, etc.) can cause discoloration of painted components.
●If there are printed figures on the band, strong rubbing of the printed area
can cause discoloration.
●Daily use and long-term storage of your watch can lead to deterioration,
breaking, or bending of resin components. The extent of such damage
depends on usage conditions and storage conditions.
Watch Sensors
●A watch sensor is a precision instrument. Never try to take it apart. Never
try to insert any objects into the openings of a sensor, and take care to
ensure that dirt, dust, or other foreign matter does not get into it. After using
your watch where it has been immersed in saltwater, rinse it thoroughly with
fresh water.
EN-117


Metal Components
●Failure to clean dirt from metal components can lead to formation of rust,
even if components are stainless steel or plated. If metal components
exposed to sweat or water, wipe thoroughly with a soft, absorbent cloth and
then place the watch in a well-ventilated location to dry.
●Use a soft toothbrush or similar tool to scrub the metal with a weak solution
of water and a mild neutral detergent, or with soapy water. Next, rinse with
water to remove all remaining detergent and then wipe dry with a soft
absorbent cloth. When washing the band, wrap the watch case with kitchen
plastic wrap so it does not come into contact with the detergent or soap.
Display Panel
●Display figures may be difficult to read when viewed from an angle.
●The display panel of this watch uses high-precision technology that
provides a pixel yield in excess of 99.99%. This means that some very small
number of pixels may not light or may remain lit at all times. This is due to
the characteristics of the display panel, and does not indicate malfunction.
Viewing the Display
Make sure you are in a safe place before viewing the
watch’s display.
Note that failure to do so creates the risk of falling over, personal injury, and
accident. Also, take sufficient care to avoid running into others.
EN-118


Skin Irritation
Take care to avoid conditions that cause skin rash.
The watch and the band come into direct contact with the skin, so certain
usage conditions may cause skin rash.
●Metal or leather allergies
●Dirt, rust, or sweat on the watch or band
●Poor physical condition, etc.
ーWhen fastening the watch to your wrist, make sure it is loose enough so
you can insert a finger between it and your wrist.
ーShould you ever notice any abnormality, immediately stop using the
watch and consult a physician.
Charger Cable
Be sure to observe the precautions below when using the charger cable.
Failure to do so creates the risk of malfunction.
●Do not apply undue force to the charger cable plug, insert items into the
plug, or forcibly push it into the connector.
●Do not leave keys, necklaces, paper clips, or other metal items in close
proximity to the charger cable plug. Doing so can cause the metal to affix
to the magnetic plug and cause a short.
●When not using the charger cable, unplug the USB-AC adaptor from the
power outlet and disconnect the cable.
EN-119


User Maintenance
Caring for Your Watch
Remember that you wear your watch next to your skin, just like a piece of
clothing. To ensure your watch performs at the level for which it is designed,
keep it clean by frequently wiping with a soft cloth to keep your watch and
band free of dirt, sweat, water and other foreign matter.
●Whenever your watch is exposed to sea water or mud, rinse it off with clean
fresh water.
●For a resin band, wash with water and then wipe dry with a soft cloth. Note
that sometimes a smudge like pattern may appear on the surface of a resin
band. This will not have any effect on your skin or clothing. Wipe with a cloth
to remove the smudge pattern.
●To clean the metal parts on a resin band, use a soft toothbrush or similar
tool to scrub the band with a weak solution of water and a mild neutral
detergent, or with soapy water. Next, rinse with water to remove all
remaining detergent and then wipe dry with a soft absorbent cloth. When
washing the band, wrap the watch case with kitchen plastic wrap so it does
not come into contact with the detergent or soap.
●Not operating buttons for long periods can lead to operation problems.
Press buttons occasionally to maintain proper operation.
●Charging may take longer or may not be possible at all if there is dirt or other
foreign matter on the charger terminal or on the charger cable connector.
Use a clean, dry cloth or cotton swab to occasionally wipe the charger
terminal and charger cable connector.
EN-120


Dangers of Poor Watch Care
Rust
●Though the metal used for your watch is highly rust-resistant, rust can form
if your watch is not cleaned after it becomes dirty.
ーDirt on your watch can make it impossible for oxygen to come into contact
with the metal, which can lead to breakdown of the oxidization layer on
the metal surface and the formation of rust.
●Rust can cause sharp areas on metal components and can cause band
pins to fly out of position or to fall out. If you ever notice any abnormality
immediately stop using your watch and take it to an authorized CASIO
Service Center or to your original retailer.
●Even if the surface of the metal appears clean, sweat and rust in crevasses
can soil the sleeves of clothing, cause skin irritation, and even interfere with
watch performance.
Premature Wear
●Leaving sweat or water on a resin band or bezel, or storing your watch in
an area subject to high moisture can lead to premature wear, cuts, and
breaks.
Skin Irritation
●Individuals with sensitive skin or in poor physical condition may experience
skin irritation when wearing a watch. Such individuals should keep their
leather band or resin band particularly clean. Should you ever experience
a rash or other skin irritation, immediately remove your watch and contact
a skin care professional.
EN-121


Other Precautions
Chargeable Battery Handling (Please recycle!)
The built-in lithium-ion battery includes valuable resources. When you are
ready to discard your watch, follow proper procedures in order to recycle
resources. For information about the proper procedure to follow when
discarding the watch, contact an authorized CASIO Service Center or your
original retailer.
Personal Information Protection Precautions
To protect your personal information, be sure to unpair the watch from your
smartphone before transferring ownership of the watch to another party or
before disposing of the watch. To unpair from a phone, perform the procedure
under “Returning the Watch to Its Initial Factory Defaults”.
EN-122


IMPORTANT SAFETY INSTRUCTIONS
SAVE THESE INSTRUCTIONS
DANGER
TO REDUCE THE RISK OF FIRE OR ELECTRIC SHOCK, CAREFULLY
FOLLOW THESE INSTRUCTIONS
For connection to a supply not in the U.S.A., use an attachment plug adapter
of the proper configuration for the power outlet.
The socket outlet shall be installed near the equipment and easily accessible.
EN-123


Main Specifications
Display:
3.05 cm (1.2-inches), Dual Layer LCD, Color TFT LCD (360 × 360 pixels)
+ Monochrome LCD
Touch panel:
Capacitive touch panel
Other:
Microphone, Vibration
Battery:
Type: Lithium-ion battery
Charging time:
Approximately 3 hours at room temperature (Be sure to use the special
charger cable.)
Bluetooth:
Bluetooth® V4.1 (Low Energy support)
Wi-Fi (Wireless LAN):
IEEE802.11b/g/n
Memory:
4 GB internal storage, 768 MB RAM
Charging method:
Magnetic crimped charging terminal
Buttons:
START button, power button, APP button
Water Resistance:
20BAR (200-meter) water resistant*1
Sensors:
GPS, Pressure sensor, Accelerometer, Gyrometer, Magnetic sensor,
Optical sensor (PPG Heart Rate)
EN-124


Watch:
Auto time correction:
By communication with smartphone (Time can be adjusted manually.)
By GPS information (Can be corrected manually.)
Time zones (world time function):
Supports multiple world time zones. (Types depend on system time
zones.)
12/24-hour timekeeping
Full auto-calendar:
Auto switching by linking with smartphone
Summer time:
Auto switching by linking with smartphone
Watch Face Types:
Three CASIO watch faces: DIGITAL, ANALOG, 2 Layers
Additional watch faces can be installed.
Map Function:
Map screen, route screen, selectable map skin, map downloading (off-line
maps), voice memo, landmark, history screen
Compass:
Measurement range: 0° to 359°
Measurement unit: 1°
Continuous measurement duration: 1 minute
North indication hand, Magnetic declination calibration, Bearing memory,
Gradient calibration
Altimeter:
Measurement range: –700 to 10,000 m (–2,300 to 32,800 ft)
Measurement unit: 1 m (5 ft)
Measurement accuracy: within ±75 m (within ±250 ft) (When frequent
manual calibration is performed)
Shortest measurement interval: 1 minute
Altitude graph: Past 24 hours
Manual altitude calibration, Auto altitude calibration using location
information*2
EN-125


Barometer:
Measurement range: 260 to 1,100 hPa (7.6 to 32.5 inHg)
Measurement unit: 1 hPa (0.1 inHg)
Measurement accuracy: within ±3 hPa (within ±0.1 inHg)
Atmospheric pressure tendency graph: Past 24 hours
Barometric pressure measurement interval: 1 minute
Manual barometric pressure calibration
Tide and Fishing:
Tide graph: Past 12 hours + Next 12 hours
Fishing time (Calculated according to current location, and moon hour
angle and age.)
Sunrise/sunset:
Sunrise/Sunset times (Current location sunrise/sunset)
Activity Types:
Running, Trail Running, Road Biking, Cycling,
Mountain Biking, Indoor Workouts, Pool Swimming, Surfing,
Sailing, Kayaking, SUP, Skiing,
Snowboarding, Trekking, Fishing, Walking
Screen brightness setting:
Five levels
Battery Level Indication:
Integers from 0 to 100%
Charger cable:
Length: Approximately 0.75 m (2.46 ft)
Type: AC adaptor USB Type A
Operating time on full charge*1:
Normal use: Approximately 1.5 days or more
Timepiece Mode: Approximately one month*3
Operating temperature:
-10°C to 40°C (14℉ to 104℉)
EN-126


Crystal:
Mineral glass (dirt resistant coating)
Size (Body H × W × D):
Approximately 65.6 × 56.3 × 19.5 mm (2.58" × 2.22" × 0.77")
Thickness when sensor area is included: Approximately 21.3 mm (0.84”)
Weight (including band):
Approximately 103 g (3.6 oz)
Included accessories:
Special Charger Cable
*1 CASIO test conditions
*2 GPS altitude information is used, so the indicated altitude may not exactly
match the actual above sea level elevation or altitude.
*3 Displaying the step count reduces the battery operating time.
*4 Limited functionality when connected to iOS device.
EN-127


Supplementary Information
Open Source Information
CASIO uses GPL, LGPL and other source code that comes under an open
source license in this product. CASIO discloses the source code in
accordance with each open source license. For source codes and details
about each open source license, visit the CASIO website. Source code is
provided “as-is” without any guarantees. However, this does not affect
warranty conditions by CASIO concerning product defects (including defects
in the source code).


Regulatory information
Your watch is a device that supports electronic way of display. To display
Regulatory information, perform the steps below.
1. 
While the watch face is displayed, swipe the touch
screen from top to bottom and then tap D.
2. 
Scroll the screen downwards. Tap “System” and then
“Regulatory information” in sequence.
Your watch complies with or has been approved in accordance with the
radio laws of various countries and geographic areas.
Use of this watch in areas where it does not comply with or has not been
approved may be punishable under local laws.
For details visit the website below.
https://s.casio.jp/w/10122en/
This device complies with part 15 of FCC Rules and Industry Canada’s
licence-exempt RSSs. Operation is subject to the following two
conditions: (1) this device may not cause harmful interference, and (2) this
device must accept any interference received, including interference that
may cause undesired operation.
FCC CAUTION
Changes or modifications not expressly approved by the party
responsible for compliance could void the user’s authority to operate the
equipment.
EN-129


Note
This equipment has been tested and found to comply with the limits for a
Class B digital device, pursuant to part 15 of the FCC Rules. These limits
are designed to provide reasonable protection against harmful
interference in a residential installation. This equipment generates, uses
and can radiate radio frequency energy and, if not installed and used in
accordance with the instructions, may cause harmful interference to radio
communications. However, there is no guarantee that interference will not
occur in a particular installation. If this equipment does cause harmful
interference to radio or television reception, which can be determined by
turning the equipment off and on, the user is encouraged to try to correct
the interference by one or more of the following measures:
ーReorient or relocate the receiving antenna.
ーIncrease the separation between the equipment and receiver.
ーConnect the equipment into an outlet on a circuit different from that
to which the receiver is connected.
ーConsult the dealer or an experienced radio/TV technician for help.
This transmitter must not be co-located or operated in conjunction with
any other antenna or transmitter.
EN-130


The available scientific evidence does not show that any health problems
are associated with using low power wireless devices.
There is no proof, however, that these low power wireless devices are
absolutely safe. Low power Wireless devices emit low levels of radio
frequency energy (RF) in the microwave range while being used. Whereas
high levels of RF can produce health effects (by heating tissue), exposure
of low-level RF that does not produce heating effects causes no known
adverse health effects. Many studies of low-level RF exposures have not
found any biological effects. Some studies have suggested that some
biological effects might occur, but such findings have not been confirmed
by additional research. The GSW-H1000 has been tested and found to
comply with FCC/IC radiation exposure limits set forth for an uncontrolled
environment and meets the FCC radio frequency (RF) Exposure
Guidelines and RSS-102 of the IC radio frequency (RF) Exposure rules.
EN-131


Declaration of Conformity According to EU Directive
Manufacturer:
CASIO COMPUTER CO., LTD.
6-2, Hon-machi 1-chome 
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 151-8543, Japan
Responsible within the European Union:
Casio Europe GmbH
Casio-Platz 1, 22848 Norderstedt, Germany
www.casio-europe.com
The copy of the Declaration of Conformity can be found on
http://doc.casio.com.
To comply with the relevant European RF exposure compliance
requirements, the GSW-H1000 must not be co-located or operating in
conjunction with other transmitters.
Note: This equipment is intended to be used in all EU and EFTA countries.
Outdoor use may be restricted to certain frequencies and/or may require a
license for operation.
For more details, contact your customer service representative.
Hereby, Casio Europe GmbH, Casio-Platz 1, 22848 Norderstedt, Germany,
declares that this Model GSW-H1000 is in compliance with the essential
requirements and other relevant provisions of Directive 1999/5/EC or
2014/53/EU.
This product is subject to the Export Administration Regulations (EAR) of
the United States, and so it cannot be exported to or brought into countries
that fall under U.S. Embargoes and Other Special Controls.
Frequency band and maximum output power
●GSW-H1000
IEEE802.11b/g/n:2.4GHz band≦19dBm
Bluetooth(2.4GHz)≦10.5dBm
EN-132


CAUTION
●Risk of explosion if battery is replaced by an incorrect type.
Dispose of used batteries according to the instructions.
●Do not leave the battery and GSW-H1000 in a high or low temperature
environment while using, storing or transporting the battery. Explosion,
flammable liquid, gas may leak.
●Battery and GSW-H1000 subjected to extremely low air pressure may
result in an explosion or the leakage of flammable liquid or gas.
●Be sure to observe the points below when using this watch.
Failure to do so creates the risk of heat generation, fire, and explosion.
ーDo not throw the watch into fire or expose it to heat.
ーDo not try to take the watch apart, modify it, step on it or otherwise
subject it to strong impact.
ーDo not place the watch inside a microwave oven, drier, pressurized
container, etc.
Product Quality Information
CASIO collects information about watch usage in a way that keeps users
anonymous. This information is securely stored on CASIO servers and is not
accessible by third-parties. It is used to improve product quality and
functionality.
EN-133


CASIO COMPUTER CO., LTD.
6-2, Hon-machi 1-chome
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 151-8543, Japan
MA2312-D