ET5 User Manual
User Manual
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
1/295


Disclaimer for ET5
Thank you for choosing NIO ET5 smart electric vehicle (hereinafter referred to as
“ET5”). We will provide you with considerate and thoughtful user services during
your green journey with ET5.
Before embarking on a journey with ET5, it is recommended that you read the
“User Manual” on the central display to learn all the information required for the
use of the vehicle.
Without legal and effective authorization, no one may make copies of or
modify the contents of this manual in whole or in part.
Without legal and valid authorization, no one may refit, adjust, or disassemble
vehicle parts, so as to prevent the occurrence of function failures or personal
injury.
The labels, signs and pictures used in, as well as the contents of this Manual
are for illustration only.
The actual equipment, configuration, functions etc. of your vehicle may be different
from the description and illustration in this manual. They may be upgraded with the
change of the vehicle software version. Please refer to the actual equipment,
configuration, functions etc. of your vehicle. For the avoidance of doubt, NIO has
the right to decide whether and when to upgrade your vehicle's equipment,
configuration, functions and related software for safety, compliance with laws and
regulations and other considerations.
Please strictly abide by the warning information referred to in this Manual. It will
help you use the vehicle more safely. Pay attention to any other warning information
released to you by NIO. Please make sure that you read the latest version of this
manual carefully and familiarize yourself with the functions of ET5 before using. If
ET5 is not operated correctly, it may cause injury to you or others or lead to
vehicle damage or property loss. NIO shall undertake no responsibility in such an
event.
Warning: This content is closely related to personal safety. Please always
comply with it! Failure to comply may result in injury or a serious accident.
Caution: This is to advise you on how to avoid possible vehicle damage or
property loss.
Notice: This is to suggest to you how to make better use of your vehicle.
If you have any questions about this Manual or need emergency assistance, please
call the NIO Hotline, or contact NIO via E-mail.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
2/295


NIO Hotline
E-mail
Denmark
00 8000 999 6699 contact.dk@nio.io
Sweden
00 8000 999 6699 contact.se@nio.io
Netherlands
00 8000 999 6699 contact.nl@nio.io
Germany
00 8000 999 6699 contact.de@nio.io
Norway
00 47 800 24 789 contact.no@nio.io
Locks and Keys
Unlocking/Locking with Smart Key
Replacing Smart Key Fob Battery
NFC Unlocking and Locking
Locking and Unlocking with Bluetooth
Key
Find My Car
Unlocking and Locking with the NIO App
Keyless Unlocking and Locking
Unlocking and Locking on the Center
Console
Emergency Unlocking and Locking
Walk Up Unlock
Auto Unlock When In PARK
Walk Away Locking
Drive Away Locking
Anti-theft Alarm System
Doors and Windows
Door Handle
Liftgate
Window Control
Stone Guard Film
Charging
Charging Instructions
Charging Operations
Battery Level and Charging Display
Lights
High and Low Beams
Turn Lights
Fog Lights
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
3/295


Battery Preconditioning
Smart Charging
Position Lights
Welcome Lighting
Follow Me Home
Exterior Lighting Interaction
Outer Door Handle Courtesy Lights
Puddle Lights
Interior Reading Lights
Smart Ambient Lighting
Vanity Mirror Lighting
Rear trunk Lighting
Minimal Lighting
Full Brightness
Soft Glow
Account and Memory
Linking Key to Account
Switching Accounts
Authorized Unlocking
Guest Mode
Service Authorization
Driver Seat Position Memory Adjustment
Front Passenger Seat Position Memory
Adjustment
Steering Wheel Position Memory
Adjustment
Side Mirrors Position Memory Adjustment
Seats
Driver Seat Adjustment
Front Passenger Seat Adjustment
Rear Seat Adjustment
Seat Headrest Adjustment
Seat Massage Mode
Seat Heating Mode
Seat Ventilation Mode
Seat Relief Mode
Easy Entry
Storage
Front Storage
Rear Storage
Safety Storage Box
Rear Trunk
Hitched Trailer
Roof Racks
Steering Wheel
Start Adjustment
Using Right Steering Wheel Button
Using Left Steering Wheel Button
Steering Wheel Heating
Double-button Restart of Steering Wheel
In-car Power Supply
USB Port
Wipers and Rearview Mirror/Side Mirrors
Front Windshield Wiper
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
4/295


12V Power Supply
Wireless Charging
Side Mirrors Position Adjustment
Side Mirrors Folding
Side Mirrors Heating
Rearview Mirror and Side Mirrors Auto-
Dimming
Air Conditioning
Climate Control
Air Purification
Intelligent Fragrance System
Personalized Entertainment
NOMI Smart Assistant
Music
Navigation
Photos
Phone
Connect to Mobile Device
Tide
Smart Action
Instrument and Central Control System
Instrument Cluster Indicators
Controls on Center Display
Event Data Recorder (EDR)
System Update
Resetting All Settings
Driving Experience
Basic Operations
Feature Settings
Drive Mode
Scenario Assist
Pet Mode
Power-Keep Mode
Camping Mode
Digital Video Recorder
Acoustic Vehicle Alerting System (AVAS)
Vehicle Safety
Seat Belts
Airbag
Child Locks
Child Safety Seat
Multi Collision Braking (MCB)
Speed Limit Mode
Child Presence Detection
Alcohol Interlock
Safety Assist Features
Forward Collision Warning
Autonomous Emergency Braking
Lane Departure Warning
Lane Keeping Assist
Emergency Active Stop
Emergency Lane Keeping
Blind Spot Detection
Door Open Warning
Front Cross Traffic Alert
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
5/295


Rear Cross Traffic Alert
Advanced Driver Monitoring System
Driver Assist Features
Auto High Beams
Active Lane Change
Lane Centering Control
Adaptive Cruise Control
Predictive Speed Control
Dynamic Environment Simulation and
Display
Parking Camera and Parking Assist
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with
Fusion
Power Swap with Assisted Parking
Side Distance Indication System
Vehicle Maintenance
Vehicle Health Status
Maintenance Instructions
Routine Maintenance
Front Wiper Blade Replacement
Windshield Washer Fluid Refill
Coolant Refill
Brake Fluid Refill
Tire Inspection and Maintenance
Brake Pad and Disc Inspection and
Maintenance
Air Filter Inspection and Maintenance
12V Battery Care
High-voltage Battery Maintenance and
Recycling
Fuse Box under the Hood
Instrument Panel Fuse Box
Rear Trunk Fuse Box
Pre-fuse Box
Exterior Cleaning and Maintenance
Interior Cleaning and Maintenance
Protective Films
Application of Antibacterial Product
General Information
Vehicle Information
Instrumentation and Controls
Warning Sign Information
Vehicle Identification Number (VIN)
Drive motor identification mark
Recommended Fluids and Capacities
E-Powertrain System Information
Specifications and Parameters
Vehicle Dimension
Mass Parameters
Wheel and Tire Specifications
Motor Parameters
Brake and Suspension Specs
High-voltage Battery Parameters
Wheels and Tires
Owner Emergency Information
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
6/295


Unlocking/Locking with Smart Key
Before entering the vehicle, you can use the smart key to unlock the vehicle.
Depending on the state of the smart key and the surrounding environment of the
vehicle, the furthest effective range of the smart key is 30-70 meters outside the
vehicle.
The buttons and features of the smart key are as follows:
1. Vehicle Unlock Button
Tire Inflation
Direct Tire Pressure Monitoring System
(dTPMS)
Anti-skid Chain
AutoSock
Winter Tires
Tire Repair
Tire Replacement
Set Up Warning Signs
Call for Road Assistance
Jump Start
Emergency Unlocking from the Outside
Open the Door from the Inside in an
Emergency
Emergency Opening of Liftgate
Emergency Evacuation
First Aid Kit
Rescue Service
Protective Equipment for Rescue
Operations
Cut off the High-voltage Circuit
Towing a Vehicle that Had an Accident
Rescuing the Vehicle in Water
Rescuing the Vehicle on Fire
Rescuing the Vehicle with Battery
Leakage
Vehicle Cutting Area
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
7/295


When the vehicle is in P gear, press this button to unlock the vehicle.
After unlocking, the turn lights on both sides of the vehicle will flash
three times to indicate successful unlocking. After successful unlocking,
the outer door handles will automatically pop up.
After unlocking the four doors with the smart key, the liftgate can be
opened from the outside without a key.
Press+hold the unlock button to open all the windows at the same time;
release the unlock button during the movement of the windows and the
windows will stay at the current position.
You can set the unlocking method of the smart key through the center
display: enter the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of
the center display, and tap Doors and Windows Lock > Doors > Vehicle
Unlock Mode.
If you select "Unlock the Whole Vehicle", you only need to press the
key‘s unlock button once to unlock all the doors at the same time;
If you select "Unlock the Driver's Door", you can press the key's
unlock button once to open only the driver's door and once again to
open the other three doors is possible.
2. Vehicle Lock Button
When the vehicle is in P gear and all doors (including the hood and
liftgate) are closed, press this button to lock the whole vehicle. After the
whole vehicle is locked, the turn lights on both sides will flash once and
the horn will sound once to indicate the successful locking. At the same
time, the outer door handles are retracted, and the side mirrors are
automatically folded (enter the Settings interface in the control bar at the
bottom of the center display, and tap Position Adjustment > Side
Mirrors > Auto-Fold When Vehicle is Locked to set the automatic
folding of side mirrors).
The locked liftgate can only be opened from the outside with the smart
key.
You can set the on/off of the horn prompt sound through the center
display by entering the Settings interface in the control bar at the bottom
of the center display, and tapping Sound > RINGER and ALERTS > Lock
Confirmation Sound.
Press+hold the lock button to close all the windows at the same time;
release the lock button during the window movement and the windows
will stay in the current position.
When the vehicle is not in driving state and the valid smart key is within
70 meters from the vehicle, you can press it twice within 3 seconds to
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
8/295


start the Find My Car feature, and the turn lights and horn will give
prompts. Pressing this button once more within 5 seconds, Find My Car
will not remind you again; otherwise, it will turn off on its own after 10
seconds.
When all the doors are closed, you can press the lock button of the
smart key outside the car. At this time, the car is locked. The turn lights
will flash once and the horn will sound once to indicate that the locking
is successful. If any door is not closed, the vehicle cannot be locked by
pressing the lock button at this time, and you will receive a reminder
message from the NIO App, reminding you that the vehicle has not been
successfully locked.
3. Liftgate Open Button
When the liftgate is closed, press+hold this button to open the liftgate; when
the liftgate is open, press+hold this button again to close the liftgate.
Warning
When leaving a person or a pet in the vehicle, you must ensure that you have your
smart key fob with you. Failure to do so may result in injury or death.
Caution
The Smart Key is an electronic device. Please avoid hitting it, disassembling it
or leaving it in a place with high temperatures, humidity and strong vibrations.
If passengers are still in the vehicle when you lock it, you can perform the
smart key lock operation and passengers can still open the door from inside
the vehicle, but the anti-theft alarm will be triggered.
If a smart key or mobile phone with Bluetooth lock/unlock function is still in
your vehicle after the vehicle has been locked, the smart key lock operation
can still be performed for your vehicle and the mobile app will inform you that
there is a key in your vehicle.
If a passenger takes a smart key or mobile phone with Bluetooth unlock/lock
function more than 3 meters from your vehicle, your vehicle will inform you
that a key has left your vehicle.
If no door or tailgate is opened within 30 seconds of your vehicle being
unlocked, all doors and the tailgate are automatically relocked.
If a key is lost or damaged, please contact the NIO Service Centre immediately
and take all current keys with you for key binding operations and apply for a
new key.
Caution
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
9/295


When the key fob battery is low, use the emergency key to lock the driver’s door.
All other doors will be locked at the same time.
Note
If you forget to take the Smart Key out of your vehicle and proceed to close and
lock the driver door, the anti-lockout feature will be triggered. As a result, the
vehicle will automatically unlock, accompanied by three flashes of the turn lights
and three horn sounds.
To facilitate the operation of locking the vehicle when the vehicle is in the parked
state, you can enter the Settings interface in the control bar at the bottom of the
center display, and tap Doors and Windows Lock > Windows > Auto Close When
Locking, so that when you use the external locking method (such as smart key,
NFC, NIO App, Keyless Locking and Walk Away Lock) to lock the vehicle, it can
automatically close all the windows of the vehicle, and has an anti-pinch feature
during the closing process. The window closing operation will halt if the smart key
or the Unlocking and Locking with NIO App button is pressed in the middle of it.
Caution
Make sure the vehicle is locked before activating the automatic window
closing function.
For occupant safety, the windows will not close if a front seat is occupied
when the vehicle is locked. Do not leave passengers or pets in the locked
vehicle.
If the car is locked while a window is being raised, the window will not be
raised. In this case, unlock the vehicle first, then lock the vehicle again and the
windows will close automatically.
Replacing Smart Key Fob Battery
The smart key fob uses a CR2477 coin cell battery. To replace the battery, please
pinch the sides of the key fob firmly between fingers, and slide your fingernail or a
thin plastic sheet from the bottom gap along the side slit of the key fob until the
rear cover can be opened.
Dispose of used batteries according to instructions and local laws. Please see the
NIO website for details.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
10/295


Install the coin cell battery with the positive terminal facing down. After installing,
align the battery's contacts, and then close the rear cover properly to ensure proper
use of the key fob.
Caution
When the key fob battery is low, its remote unlock feature may be affected. In this
case, you can try to unlock the vehicle from a shorter distance. If it still doesn’t
work, please use other methods (e.g. the mobile app or emergency key) to unlock
the vehicle.
Caution
Radio waves may affect the performance of the key fob. Keep other electronic
devices (e.g. phones, laptops and tablets) at least 30 cm away from the key fob.
NFC Unlocking and Locking
You, or the authorized user, can also use an NFC-enabled mobile phone or NFC
card to unlock or lock the vehicle, and once the vehicle is unlocked, the liftgate can
be opened from the outside. You can easily manage the NFC key and perform
deletion operations on the key management interface.
To unlock or lock the vehicle from your phone:
1. Open My Vehicle > Vehicle Info > NFC Key in the mobile App, install the "NIO
NFC Key" app and turn the "Local NFC Key" on, then you will see the "NFC"
logo in the upper left corner of the "My Vehicle" interface.
2. Turn on the NFC feature of the mobile phone, and set NIO as the default
payment App.
3. Keep the phone screen unlocked, put the NFC sensing area of the phone close
to the NFC sensing area of the B-pillar on the driver's side, then the app will
prompt "NFC key is being used". Once the vehicle is unlocked, the door handle
will pop up automatically, and will automatically retract if the vehicle is locked
along with a "click" locking sound.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
11/295


Hold the NFC card close to the NFC sensing area of the B-pillar on the driver's side
and hold it there for a while, then the vehicle will be automatically unlocked or
locked. Once the vehicle is unlocked, the door handle will pop up automatically, and
will automatically retract if the vehicle is locked along with a "click" locking sound.
Caution
The NFC detection range is less than 10 millimeters. It is recommended that
you hold your mobile phone or NFC card near the NFC detection area for a
short time to unlock or lock the car.
After unlocking the car with NFC, you can still lock the car using other
methods (such as your smart key fob or emergency key). We recommend that
you carry your smart key fob or phone with you.
Please keep your NFC card in a safe place. Protect it from shock, bending,
high temperatures, strong vibrations, and damage from liquids.
You cannot use the NFC function during vehicle updates. Please carry the
smart key fob with you to unlock the vehicle.
When unlocking or locking the vehicle via NFC, please log in to the NIO app
and re-download the NFC key if you are unable to obtain an authenticated
NFC key. If an authenticated NFC key is not detected, please ensure that the
vehicle matches the NFC account. Then reopen the NFC application and
unlock the phone screen to unlock or lock the vehicle again. If NFC still
doesn't work, please contact NIO.
Locking and Unlocking with Bluetooth Key
The Unlocking and Starting via Bluetooth feature enables you to easily and quickly
unlock/lock the vehicle without a smart key fob.
First, open the NIO app. Tap My Vehicle > Settings >Bluetooth Digital Key to
create a Unlocking and Starting via Bluetooth service. Then enable this service and
Bluetooth on your phone, and keep your phone close to an unlocked vehicle to pair
the vehicle with your phone and activate this service. After successful activation,
the top of the My Vehicle page will show that your phone has been connected to
the vehicle via Bluetooth digital key, and then you can use the Bluetooth digital key
to replace the smart key fob for unlocking and locking your vehicle. Then your
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
12/295


phone will be automatically connected to your vehicle when approaching. You can
also go to the Key Management page to manage the Bluetooth digital key or delete
it as needed.
If the vehicle is in PARK, when you approach it (about 30–70 meters at maximum,
which may vary according to the status of Bluetooth connection) with your phone's
Unlocking and Starting via Bluetooth enabled, you can perform the following
operations:
Tap the Unlock/Lock button on the My Vehicle page of the NIO app to
unlock/lock the vehicle, with the door handles extending or retracting
automatically.
After unlocking your vehicle successfully with the Bluetooth digital key, you
just need to get seated and close the driver's door and then press the brake
pedal to start the vehicle.
Carry your phone and touch the designated area on the door handle to
unlock/lock the vehicle.
After enabling the Walk-Up Unlocking feature on the center display, when you
enter the specified range area around the vehicle with your phone, the vehicle
will unlock automatically.
After enabling the Walk-Away Lock feature on the center display, when you
leave the vehicle for the specified distance with your phone, the vehicle will
automatically lock.
You can press the trunk switch or go to the My Vehicle page of the NIO app to
open/close the truck.
You can find your vehicle, adjust windows, your vehicle via the My Vehicle
page of the NIO app.
Caution
If a Bluetooth connection error prevents you from locking/unlocking the
vehicle with the Bluetooth key, rectify the error and try again.
If the Bluetooth connection error prevents you from starting the vehicle with
the Bluetooth key, please reconnect via Bluetooth and try again.
Both the car owner and authorized users can create a Bluetooth digital key,
but the number of Bluetooth digital keys that can be paired with the vehicle is
limited.
Both the vehicle owner and authorized users can create a Bluetooth key, but
the number of Bluetooth keys that can be paired with the vehicle is limited.
You can still lock the vehicle with the Bluetooth key even if there are
passengers in the vehicle. The occupants can exit the vehicle, if necessary,
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
13/295


but the alarm will be triggered.
If a smart key fob or phone with the Bluetooth digital key is left in the vehicle,
you can still lock the vehicle with the smart key fob and the NIO app will
remind you that a key is left in the vehicle.
If a smart key fob or phone with the Bluetooth digital key is left in the vehicle,
you can still lock the vehicle with the smart key fob and the NIO app will
remind you that a key is left in the vehicle.
Find My Car
Finding the vehicle when it is far away
You, or the authorized user, can check the parking location information of the
vehicle in the mobile App to experience the convenience of finding the vehicle.
When the vehicle is connected to the network, you can check the current location
where the vehicle is parked at the top of the "My Vehicle" interface in the mobile
App. Tap this location information to view the current location of the vehicle on the
map interface.
Finding the vehicle when it is nearby
When the vehicle is not in driving state and the valid key is within 70 meters of the
vehicle (varies depending on the status of the smart key and the surrounding
environment of the vehicle), press the lock button on the smart key twice within a
span of 3 seconds, and the vehicle horn will emit a sound and the turn lights will
flash to alert you of the precise location of the vehicle. Pressing this button once
more within 5 seconds, Find My Car will not remind you again; otherwise, it will turn
off on its own after 10 seconds.
When the Bluetooth key feature of the mobile phone is turned on or the vehicle is
connected to the network, you can also tap the "Find My Car" button on the "My
Vehicle" interface in the mobile App to search for the vehicle, which will trigger the
vehicle's horn to emit a sound and the turn light to flash. Press this button again to
cancel the Find My Car prompting.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
14/295


Unlocking and Locking with the NIO App
When you are far away from the vehicle, you can go to My Vehicle interface on the
App, and tap Door Locks to remotely unlock or lock the doors. At this time, you can
lend your vehicle to someone else.
To unlock or lock the vehicle on the NIO App, make sure that the following
requirements are met:
1. The user must be the vehicle's owner or authorized by the owner.
2. The vehicle is in P gear with all doors closed.
3. The mobile phone and vehicle are connected to the network.
4. The phone's Unlocking/Locking via Bluetooth feature is disabled (otherwise
this feature will be preferred).
Note
If users are unable to unlock their vehicles via the mobile App, they can contact the
NIO Service Center for assistance.
Keyless Unlocking and Locking
When you carry a valid smart key with you, or have the Bluetooth key turned on
from your mobile phone (like in your pocket or bag), you can unlock or lock the
vehicle by touching the corresponding part of any outer door handle without taking
out the key.
 
If you leave the key in the vehicle, or when any door is open (including the hood and
liftgate), and when you press the lock button on any door to perform the keyless
locking action outside the vehicle, the vehicle will not be fully locked in such a
situation, and the horn will sound to alert you to take the key out of the vehicle or
close the corresponding door.
Caution
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
15/295


To unlock/lock the vehicle without using a key, ensure that the vehicle is in PARK
and that all doors, hood and liftgate are closed.
Caution
When locking the vehicle without a key, avoid pressing too hard on the exterior door
handle.
Warning
Patients who are dependent on pacemakers should stay at least 22 centimeters
away from the interior antennas, to avoid their cardiac pacemakers from being
interfered by the keyless unlocking system’s antenna.
Location of the interior Bluetooth antenna:
1. Under the rearview mirror cover
2. Above the B-pillar on the left side of the body
3. Above the B-pillar on the right side of the body
4. Rear roof
5. Above rear bumper bracket
Unlocking and Locking on the Center Console
You can unlock or lock the vehicle with the lock button on the center console.
When the vehicle is fully unlocked and all doors are closed, press the lock button on
the center console to lock the vehicle. The center display will display the locked
status of the vehicle, and the LED on the button will light up green.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
16/295


When the vehicle is fully locked (not from the outside) or only the driver's door is
unlocked, press the lock button on the center console to unlock the vehicle. The
center display will display the unlocked status of the vehicle, and the LED on the
button will go off.
Emergency Unlocking and Locking
Unlocking/Locking the Vehicle from Outside in an Emergency
When the vehicle cannot be unlocked or locked using the above conventional
methods from the outside, you can use the physical emergency key to unlock or
lock the driver's door.
Caution
Do not leave the emergency key in your vehicle. Please keep it safe in case of
emergency.
How to use the physical emergency key:
1. Toggle the slider on the physical emergency key, and pull out the metal key
part of the emergency key.
2. Press and hold the front part of the outer door handle of the driver's door to
unfold the outer door handle.
3. Hold the unfolded outer door handle with one hand while inserting the physical
emergency key into the keyhole in the outer door handle with the other hand,
and turn the key counterclockwise to unlock the driver's door.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
17/295


4. When locking, press and hold the front part of the outer door handle, turn the
physical emergency key counterclockwise for one unlocking action, and then
turn the key clockwise to lock the driver's door.
Caution
After unlocking the driver door using the physical emergency key, if you need to
lock the doors using the Smart Key, you must first toggle the driver door once to
reset the door lock cylinder. This will prevent the driver door from remaining in an
unlocked state and ensure the security of the vehicle.
When the battery of the vehicle is depleted, the physical emergency key can only
lock the driver's door. If you want to lock the other doors, toggle down the door
lock hole, and simply close the door to lock it. However, in such a situation, the
door cannot be opened from the outside.
Emergency Unlocking from Inside
When the whole vehicle is locked, if you need to open the door in an emergency
(such as when the door handle electronic switch fails, or the vehicle is soaked in
water), pull the mechanical switch of the inner door handle once to open the
corresponding side door.
GUM185927
Caution
When the 12V battery of the vehicle is low on power, the physical emergency
key can only be used to unlock the door on the driver side. At such moments it
cannot be used to unlock the whole vehicle. The other doors can only be
unlocked and opened by pulling the mechanical switch for the inner door
handle.
The windows cannot be lowered when the door is opened using the
mechanical switch for the inner door handle because doing so would risk
damaging the window trim panel.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
18/295


Neither rear door can be opened from inside when the child safety lock
function is enabled. They can only be opened from outside once the whole
vehicle is unlocked.
In the event of an accident that is of sufficient gravity to trigger airbag
deployment, the child safety lock on the rear door will unlock automatically.
Walk Up Unlock
Walk Up Unlock works when you carry a valid smart key or a mobile phone with the
Unlocking and Starting via Bluetooth feature enabled. Without taking out the key,
the vehicle will be automatically unlocked when you are within 1.5 meters from its
B-pillar.
To enable or disable this feature, go to the Settings interface from control bar at
the bottom of the center display, and tap Doors and Windows Lock > Doors >
Walk Up Unlock.
Auto Unlock When In PARK
The vehicle can be automatically unlocked in PARK without using the lock function
on the center display.
If the vehicle was locked automatically by Drive Away Lock (at a speed over 8
km/h), after the driver applies the brake to bring the vehicle to a halt and shifts into
P gear, the vehicle will be automatically unlocked. After the vehicle is unlocked, the
liftgate can be opened from the outside without a key.
You can configure how the vehicle will be automatically unlocked in PARK on the
center display: go to the Settings interface from the bottom of the center display,
and tap Doors and Windows Lock > Doors > Auto Unlock When In PARK.
Walk Away Locking
Walk-away lock works when you carry a valid smart key or a mobile phone with the
Unlocking and Starting via Bluetooth feature enabled. Without taking out the key,
the vehicle will be automatically locked when you are 3-7 meters away from it.
When the vehicle is locked by walk-away lock, a lock confirmation sound will be
produced, the turn lights will flash, and if Auto-Fold When Vehicle is Locked is
enabled, the side mirrors will be folded automatically.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
19/295


To enable this feature, you can go to the Settings interface from control bar at the
bottom of the center display, and tap Doors and Windows Lock > Doors > Walk
Away Lock. Please only use Walk Away Lock in familiar and safe parking areas.
After Walk Away Lock is enabled, make sure to carry a valid smart key or enable
the Unlocking and Starting via Bluetooth feature on your mobile phone, and check
that the vehicle is successfully locked as you walk away.
Warning
When Walk-Away Lock is turned on, ensure that no child or pet is left in the
vehicle so as to avoid any accidents.
When using Walk-Away Lock, please ensure the vehicle is locked via the lock
sound or visual checks (headlights, side mirrors or the NIO app), so as to
protect the property inside your vehicle.
When there is another authenticated smart key fob in the vehicle or any other
condition for locking is not met (such as a door, the hood, or the liftgate not
being closed or turning Walk-Away Lock off on the center display), Walk-
Away Lock will fail.
Please do not place your smart key fob close to a mobile phone, Bluetooth
headset, or other communication devices. Otherwise, the vehicle may be
locked by mistake due to signal interference.
Equipment with a strong magnetic field such as DC chargers or high voltage
substations may interfere with the smart key fob’s signal, which may lock the
vehicle by mistake in certain cases. It is recommended to carry your smart key
fob with you to avoid any inconvenience caused by the unintended locking of
the vehicle.
Drive Away Locking
Your vehicle can automatically lock while driving.
When the vehicle is unlocked and all doors, the front hood, and the tailgate are
closed, the vehicle automatically locks all doors when the driving speed exceeds 8
km/h.
Note
Drive Away Locking will only be activated once the vehicle transitions from being
stationary to moving.
Anti-theft Alarm System
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
20/295


Once the vehicle is locked from the outside (including the hood and tailgate) with
the smart key, mobile app, NFC feature or physical emergency key, the anti-theft
alarm system will be automatically activated.
If someone tries to open the door in the absence of a valid smart key (or without
valid authorization), the anti-theft alarm will be activated, and the turn lights and
horn will both emit an alarm. You can unlock the vehicle from outside through the
smart key, NIO app, and NFC feature to turn off the anti-theft alarm.
Door Handle
The outer door handles pop out automatically when the vehicle is unlocked, you can
touch the inner side of the door handle to open the door handle by sensing, then
the door pops slightly, and you can open the door easily. When closing the door,
just give it a push and the door will be magnetically closed from a half-closed
position, achieving an easy and convenient door opening and closing experience.
You can turn the door handle sensing feature on/off on the center display: enter the
Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center display, and tap
Doors and Windows Lock > Doors > E-Latch Door Handles.
The outer door handles retract automatically when the vehicle is locked or the
vehicle speed exceeds 8 km/h.
You can configure the automatic door handle retraction on the center display. Go to
the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center display, and
tap Doors and Windows Lock > Doors > Door Handle Auto-Retraction. After
enabling the feature, the door handles will automatically retract in 20s after the
vehicle is unlocked. This will prevent the handles from scratching pedestrians or the
doors being opened by strangers. The door handles can pop out again by touching
the sensing region on the handles.
Warning
When the door automatically closes or the exterior door handles automatically
retract, please ensure that occupants (especially children) keep their hands away
from the door handles. Failure to do so may result in personal injury.
Note
If the door handle does not extend because you are wearing insulated gloves, you
can pull it slightly to open the door.
Caution
If the outer door handle cannot be extended, please hold the front part of the
corresponding outer door handle to manually extend it.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
21/295


You can open the door from inside by pressing the electronic switch on the
corresponding inner door handle. Press once if the door is unlocked, or press twice
if the door is locked, then the corresponding door will pop open.
Caution
When the vehicle speed is higher than 3km/h, the electronic switch for the
inner door handles will be automatically disabled. Pay attention to driving
safety.
The electronic switch for the inner door handles can only be turned on when
there is a need to unbuckle the seat belt.
Liftgate
Opening and Closing the Liftgate by Pressing the Button
When you carry the smart key, lightly press the button on the handle of the liftgate
to open the liftgate.
During the opening of the liftgate, press+hold the liftgate button for a few seconds,
and the height of the liftgate at that moment can be automatically memorized.
Caution
Before opening the liftgate, ensure that it is clear of objects such as snow and ice.
Otherwise, the liftgate may suddenly close on its own.
Your vehicle is equipped with a one-button liftgate closing feature.
Press the button on the liftgate to automatically close and lock the liftgate, and you
will hear a "click" to confirm the closure.
Opening and Closing the Liftgate with the Center Display
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
22/295


Swipe right on the left edge of the center display to enter the Quick Access
interface, then tap Rear Trunk to open the liftgate.
Opening the liftgate: press+hold Press+Hold to Open, and the liftgate will open
automatically.
Closing the liftgate: press+hold Press+Hold to Close, and the liftgate will close
automatically.
During the opening or closing of the liftgate, tap the liftgate opening or closing
button, and the movement will stop.
Opening and Closing the Liftgate with the Smart Key
Opening the liftgate: press+hold the liftgate button on the smart key, and the
liftgate will open automatically.
Closing the liftgate: press+hold the liftgate button on the smart key, and the liftgate
will close automatically.
Caution
This feature is unavailable when the smart key fob battery is low. Please replace the
battery as soon as possible.
Opening and Closing the Liftgate in the Mobile App
When the vehicle is put in Park and the doors are closed, you can open the My
Vehicle interface in the NIO mobile App, and tap the Rear Trunk button to open the
liftgate. It will prompt you that rear trunk has been opened. Tap the highlighted
Rear Trunk button again to close the rear trunk. If it is blocked during the closing
process, it will prompt you that the rear trunk has failed to close.
Caution
This operation is only available when the vehicle is connected to the Internet.
Opening and Closing the Liftgate by a Kicking Action
When your hands are occupied or it is inconvenient for you to take out the key, you
can open the liftgate by kicking under the rear bumper.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
23/295


In the middle of the rear bumper, lift a foot up close to the rear bumper and kick
the forefoot into the rear bumper at least 10 cm deep, then retract quickly to open
the liftgate; or sweep your forefoot sideways from one side to the other at least 10
cm below the rear bumper to open the liftgate.
You must have your mobile Bluetooth key or smart key with you to open the liftgate
with a kicking action.
To avoid accidental opening caused by someone near the rear trunk, you can enter
the Settings interface from the bottom of the center display, tap Doors and
Windows Lock > Hands-Free Liftgate, and turn off the liftgate kick open/close
feature.
Note
When kicking transversely, please kick in one direction and do not move back
and forth frequently.
Do not park your feet under the bumper. Otherwise, the liftgate will not be
activated.
Do not touch the liftgate before it stops moving.
This feature may be temporarily disabled in situations that include but are not
limited to the following:
Frequent opening and closing
A lingering leg
When the kicking is not within the valid detection range
If the liftgate does not respond, wait a few seconds and try again, or use other
methods to open or close the liftgate.
Caution
Ensure that the vehicle is stationary.
Ensure that the range of the kicking motion is roughly in the middle of the rear
bumper.
Opening and Closing the Liftgate Manually
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
24/295


If the liftgate is not opened/closed properly, you need to manually open/close the
liftgate in a slow and smooth motion.
Warning
Avoid opening and closing the liftgate vigorously and quickly, as this may result in
component damage.
Anti-pinch Protection of the Liftgate
Your vehicle is equipped with liftgate anti-pinch protection.
If an obstacle restricts the movement of the liftgate during automatic opening or
closing, the opening or closing motion will stop and the anti-pinch feature will be
activated.
The opening process is interrupted, the liftgate stops and you will hear a long
warning tone.
The closing process is interrupted, the liftgate stops, a long warning tone
sounds, and the liftgate rises again for a certain distance.
Warning
To reduce the risk of being pinched, ensure that no one is near the liftgate
operating area before opening or closing the liftgate.
Caution
Please ensure that the liftgate is closed while your vehicle is in motion.
Window Control
There are four buttons on the inside of the driver's door to control the four
windows, which are placed there to make it convenient for the driver to control all
the windows.
1. Driver's window
2. Front passenger window
3. Rear right window
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
25/295


4. Rear left window
There are also corresponding window buttons on the interior armrests of the other
three doors, which are placed there to make it convenient for passengers to
operate the windows.
Toggle the window button forward to control the opening position of the
window; quickly toggle this button forward all the way to the end and release
it to fully open the window (one-touch window down).
Toggle the window button backward to control the closing position of the
window; quickly toggle this button backward all the way to the end and release
it to fully close the window (one-touch window up).
In addition, you can also tap Doors and Windows Lock > Windows from the center
display Settings interface, and select Close, Ajar and Open to control the entire car
windows.
Close: When this function is turned on, all windows will be closed.
Open: When this function is turned on, all windows will be opened.
Ajar: When this function is turned on, all windows will be opened for about
25mm.
Favorite: Press+hold it to remember the current positions of all windows, and
once it is turned on, the windows will move to the memorized positions.
When the vehicle is put in Park and no one is in the driver's seat, you can control
the windows using the smart key: when the doors, hood and liftgate are all closed,
press+hold the unlock button on the smart key to lower all the windows; then
press+hold the lock button to lift all the windows; during the lifting or lowering of
the windows, release the unlock or lock button to stop the windows at the current
position.
The vehicle's four windows all have anti-pinch protection. When there is a foreign
object blocking the movement of the window, the closing motion will stop and the
window will be lowered down again for a certain distance.
The area subject to anti-pinch protection is shown in the figure below:
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
26/295


When the following situations occur, the anti-pinch protection of the corresponding
window will be temporarily disabled, and the one-touch window up feature will also
be disabled (these two features will be automatically restored after 10 seconds):
1. When the window ices up and the closing motion is interrupted.
2. When the closing motion is interrupted three times in a row within a span of
15 seconds due to anti-pinch protection.
If the automatic window lifting/lowering and anti-pinch protection feature fails (by
restarting after the depletion of the 12V battery, for example), you can re-initialize
it as follows:
1. Toggle the corresponding window button backward to lift the window glass
until it rises to the top.
2. Release the button and the window glass will drop a little bit. Toggle the
button backward again until the window glass rises to the top.
3. Press the window button to lower the window glass until it reaches the
bottom.
Stone Guard Film
The stone guard film is located on both sides of the wheels at the rear of the body,
which can effectively prevent the body paint from being scratched by hard granular
objects such as gravel during fast driving, so as to maintain the integrity and
aesthetics of the paint.
Note
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
27/295


Never remove the film partially or completely without any additional protection,
otherwise the body paint may be damaged.
Charging Instructions
In order to maintain the vehicle in good condition, please promptly charge the
vehicle when the battery level is low.
Caution
The vehicle can only be charged in PARK. It cannot be charged in DRIVE or
REVERSE, or during software updates.
The charge port is on the left side of the vehicle. The vehicle can be charged with
DC or AC.
Warning
To avoid accidents, do not charge the vehicle near any flammable gases or
liquids and make sure to charge the vehicle in a ventilated area.
During charging, stay a safe distance from the charger to avoid any risks due
to high voltage. Do not touch the charging connector’s metal pins or the
charge port. Doing so may result in injury.
Minors are prohibited from using the charging equipment or approaching it
during charging.
Charging equipment which shows signs of damage, rust, moisture or foreign
matter should not be used for charging the vehicle.
Unauthorized modification or disassembly of the charging connector or
equipment is prohibited.
Please use charging equipment that complies with local standards when
charging the vehicle. Otherwise, it may result in a charging failure or cause
damage to the vehicle, the charging equipment, or personal injury.
Do not charge the vehicle in heavy rain or extreme weather conditions. Doing
so may result in a charging failure or cause damage to either the vehicle or
the charging equipment.
Before charging, please check the charging connector and the vehicle’s
charge port for any deformation, burn marks, or erosion. If any abnormality is
found, do not charge the vehicle. Otherwise, it may result in damage to the
vehicle, the charging device, or personal injury. Please contact NIO if
necessary.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
28/295


Before charging, please check the charging connector and the vehicle’s
charge port for any dirt or foreign matter. The connector should be kept clean
and failure to do so may result in a charging failure or damage to the vehicle’s
charge port.
If the charging equipment malfunctions, please contact the charging
equipment manufacturer. Do not attempt to fix it yourself.
After rain, please check if there is water in the charge port before charging
the vehicle. Do not charge the vehicle when there is an obvious indicator of
water in the charge port. Doing so may result in a charging failure or cause
damage to either the vehicle or the charging equipment.
Do not use high pressure washers to clean the charge port while charging.
Doing so may result in a charging failure or cause damage to either the
vehicle or the charging equipment.
During fast charging, patients who are dependent on cardiac pacemakers
should stay away from the vehicle in order to avoid electromagnetic
interference between the cardiac pacemaker and the charging equipment. .
If the vehicle has a peculiar smell or emits smoke while charging, stop
charging and contact NIO immediately.
Do not remove the charging connector before charging is completed. Doing so
may cause an electric arc.
Caution
If the environmental temperature is too high or too low, the charging time will be
affected. If the vehicle is kept in a low temperature environment for a long period of
time, the battery capacity will be affected.
Charging Operations
You can charge the vehicle on both Power Home and Power Charger.
Charging Process
1. Put the vehicle in Park, press the charge port cover to open it, or swipe right
on the main interface of the center display to enter Quick Access and tap
Charge Port, and the charge port cover will automatically open. The indicator
of the charge port will light up white steadily.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
29/295


Caution
Do not forcefully adjust the charge port cover when it is active or open. Doing
so may damage the cover.
2. Check whether the charging connector and charging equipment are in good
condition, align the charger to the charge port of the vehicle, then the charger
and the charge port will start matching: if the indicator of the charge port
flashes and then lights up blue, the charge port is working properly; if the
matching fails or times out, the indicator of the charge port will flash blue and
then go out, and you will need to connect the charger again.
3. Turn the charging equipment on and start charging. You can tap Battery on
the Settings interface of the center display or use the mobile App to check the
current charging status. The indicator of the charge port should be blue during
charging to indicate that it is charging.
4. If you are to manually stop charging midway, tap Battery on the Settings
interface of the center display after the vehicle is fully unlocked to stop
charging, and wait for the indicator of the charge port to light up green
steadily to unplug the charger.
When the charging is completed, press the unlock button of the charger
before unplugging the charger.
Caution
In the process of DC fast charging, you can unlock the vehicle first, and
then press+hold the OFF button at the charging port to manually stop
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
30/295


charging.
When inserting and removing the charger, please face the charging
socket. If the charger is stuck, try to lift it slightly. Do not forcibly shake
the charger while inserting or removing it to prevent the charger or
charging socket from being damaged.
During the charging process, do not forcefully pull out the charger
directly. Otherwise, there may be sparks and smoke on the charging
socket, endangering personal safety.
After charging is complete, please wait 3 seconds before disconnecting
the charger, to avoid pulling it out too quickly, which may cause an arc
and result in personal injury.
5. If the indicator of the charge port flashes red during charging, switch to
another Power Home and try again. If the indicator is still flashing red, stop
charging immediately and contact the NIO Service Center.
6. After unplugging and putting away the charger, press down on the charge port
cover, press the charge port close button, or tap Charge Port on the center
display, and the charge port cover will be automatically closed.
Note
When you charge your vehicle using NIO Power Home, the charge port cover
will automatically open if you remove the charger from the port and will
automatically close if you remove the charger from your vehicle. If the charge
port cover is stuck on the charger while rotating to close automatically,
press+hold the close button for 5 seconds, and the charge port cover will
open automatically.
Unable to Unplug the Charger after Charging
If you are unable to unplug the charger after the vehicle is fully unlocked, try
unplugging charger according to the steps below:
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
31/295


1. Re-plug in the charger to ensure that the unlock button of the charger pops
up, and re-lock and unlock the whole vehicle, then press and hold the unlock
button of the charger for 1 to 2 seconds, wait until the indicator of the charge
port lights up green steadily and then unplug the charger.
2. Open the rear trunk cover, pull the emergency unlocking cable of the
electronic lock of the charge port, and then try to unplug the charger.
3. If you still cannot unplug the charger, stop charging immediately and contact
the NIO Service Center.
Battery Level and Charging Display
The status of the current high-voltage battery and some warning information
related to the battery can be displayed on the digital instrument cluster.
1. Current Power Display
It indicates the current power value of the high-voltage battery when it
provides power or recovers energy from regenerative braking.
2. High-voltage Battery Energy Bar
This energy bar indicates the power provided by the high-voltage battery; a
green energy bar indicates the power during regenerative braking.
3. Range
It indicates the remainder range supported by the high-voltage battery in the
current state.
When the remainder range is less than 60 km (the value is configurable), the
icon turns yellow; when it is less than 10 km, the icon turns red.
Before charging or after stopping the vehicle, you can configure the desired
charging settings on the center display. When the predetermined charge limit is
reached, the charging will be automatically stopped and a reminder will be
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
32/295


displayed on the instrument cluster, which fulfills the needs of users in different
scenarios and delivers a truly user-friendly charging experience. The charging
upper limit of this feature is set to 90% by default; however, you may access the
Settings interface in the control bar at the bottom of the center display, and tap
Battery to slide the battery in the vehicle model for adjustment; the adjustment
range is 50%-100%.
You can access the Vehicle Information option through the menu button on the
right side of the steering wheel, and view the current and voltage values of the
current high-voltage battery.
The indicators related to the battery level on the digital instrument cluster are as
follows:
Displayed Icon on Instrument
Cluster
Description
Normal indicator of high-voltage battery
This indicator indicates that the current high-
voltage battery is operating normally.
Low battery indicator of high-voltage battery
This indicator indicates that the current high-
voltage battery is low on power. Please charge it
in time. Please contact the NIO Service Center if
necessary.
High-voltage battery cut-off warning light
At this time, your vehicle is not energized by the
high-voltage battery. Please contact the NIO
Service Center if necessary.
Low voltage battery charging fault warning light
If this warning light illuminates, please contact
the NIO Service Center immediately.
High-voltage battery fault warning light
If this warning light illuminates, please stop the
car immediately and contact the NIO Service
Center.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
33/295


High-voltage battery over-temperature warning
light
If this warning light illuminates, please stop the
car immediately and contact the NIO Service
Center.
Ice- and snow-covered road indicator
This indicator lights up to indicate that the
current ambient temperature is too low, which
may affect the performance of the high-voltage
battery.
Charging cable connected indicator
This indicator lights up to indicate that the
charging cable is currently connected.
Battery Preconditioning
The charging speed of high-voltage batteries slows down in cold conditions such
as winter. When the Battery Preconditioning feature is enabled, the high-voltage
battery can be warmed up to a certain extent in advance before the vehicle reaches
the energy replenishment point (Power Home ) to improve the charging speed of
the vehicle.
On-Route Battery Warmup
The On-Route Battery Warmup feature is enabled by default. You can go to the
Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center display, and
select to enter the Battery interface to disable the feature. After this feature is
enabled, when the destination or waypoint in the navigation state is the charging
station , the vehicle will automatically start the high-voltage battery preconditioning
on the premise that it can ensure arrival at the destination, so as to improve the
charging efficiency. On-Route Battery Warmup only advances the battery warming
step and does not waste additional charging energy.
In the navigation state, the On-Route Battery Warmup feature will be automatically
activated under the following conditions. The current preconditioning status will be
displayed on the status bar at the top of the center display:
The navigation destination or waypoint is a Charging Station , or a service
area with a Charging Station .
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
34/295


The driver is seated.
The current remainder range is more than 120 km.
The vehicle is not in ECO+ mode.
You can manually disable the On-Route Battery Warmup feature by selecting
"Disable This Time" (enabled by default next time) or "Keep Disabled".
This feature will automatically deactivate the preconditioning process (the switch
remains on) in one of the following conditions:
Connect a charger.
Turn off the navigation or stop navigating to the Charging Station .
The current remainder range does not support a preconditioning to the
destination with 20 km remaining.
The vehicle enters ECO+ mode.
Manual Battery Warmup
The Manual Battery Warmup feature is disabled by default. If you are familiar with
the charging route and do not need to follow the navigation guide to the charging
point, it is recommended to enter the Battery interface on the center display in a
low temperature environment and enable the Manual Battery Warmup feature. The
vehicle will enable the high-voltage battery preconditioning to improve charging
efficiency. When starting Manual Battery Warmup, it is necessary to ensure that the
ambient temperature is below 20 ℃ and the vehicle's remainder range is greater
than 10 kilometers.
You can enable or disable the Manual Battery Warmup feature on the center display
. The status bar at the top of the center display shows the current preconditioning
status.
This feature will automatically deactivate the preconditioning process (the switch is
off now) in one of the following conditions:
Connect a charger.
The On-Route Battery Warmup feature is enabled.
The battery has been warmed up to the set temperature and maintained for 1
hour.
The vehicle enters ECO+ mode.
Caution
Activating the battery preconditioning feature will increase power consumption
to a certain extent. Please plan your trip in a reasonable manner or use this
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
35/295


feature appropriately.
After the On-Route Battery Warmup feature is activated, the Manual Battery
Warmup feature will not be available.
The Manual Battery Warmup feature cannot determine the impact of
preconditioning on the range to the destination on its own. Please pay
attention closely to whether the current range supports reaching the
destination before activating this feature.
Smart Charging
Smart charging can reduce cost in home charging for those users, who have a
dynamic or day/night energy tariff at their home by automatically charging vehicle
at cheaper times.
Two types of smart charging as follows:
NIO smart charging: works with every energy provider.
Tibber smart charging: works only with Tibber, user needs to subscribe to
their energy contract.
As NIO smart charging and Tibber smart charging might influence each other, users
should have activated only one smart charging solution per location.
NIO Smart Charging
Feature can be activated in vehicle settings and will be remembered in this location.
How does it work:
1. User plugs in vehicle at an AC charger, preferred at home.
2. User activates feature via vehicle settings (Vehicle Settings > Battery) .
3. User selects charging strategy:
Dynamic price optimization chooses the cheapest hours to charge the
required energy amount until the end time set by the user.
Preferred charging times delays charging to the user configured time.
4. User sets time when charging should be done on a daily basis (example 7:30
am). NIO will create charging plan based on the settings and user information.
The vehicle will start and stop automatically according to the plan.
Dynamic price optimization will start and stop charging to catch the
cheapest hours until the end time that was set by the user.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
36/295


Preferred charging times delays charging to the user configured time.
If the charging light turns orange, it means that the smart charging reservation
is successful and the car is ready for charging. If the light turns white, it
means the charging is completed.
5. Vehicle will be done charging the next day at the time that user set.
6. All the smart charging settings will be saved specifically in each Smart
Charging location. If the users reenters the locations, all the settings will be
automatically recovered.
7. Smart charging function supports the creation of up to 10 locations. Unwanted
locations can be removed on the navigation page - Favorites Management
page. This function only activates for AC charging.
Tibber Smart Charging
User needs to subscribe to the Tibber electricity contract and have a smart meter
at home. Activation is possible with every AC charging station/home charging
cable.
How does it work:
1. User subscribes to Tibber.
2. User is onboarded by Tibber, opens the App.
3. User activates the Power-Up "NIO" in the Tibber App.
4. User logs in once with the NIO credentials.
5. User sets the departure times per weekday day in Tibber App.
6. Vehicle charging at the Tibber Home location will be controlled by Tibber from
now on.
7. User can always control the charging in the Tibber App. To stop Tibber from
controlling your vehicle altogether - go to the Power-ups section in the Tibber
app and disconnect the NIO Power-up. Or contact the Tibber support.
Specifically for problems (App doesn't work, charging doesn't work, etc...) or
general questions (how do I sign up, when will my account be active, etc...), please
direct them to the local Tibber.com, which redirects to the local website.
High and Low Beams
You can adjust the state of the high and low beams through the light control lever
on the left side of the steering wheel.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
37/295


GUM191090
Push the light control lever forward to turn on the Auto High Beams (AHB);
push it forward again to turn on the high beams.
Pull the light control lever backward to turn off the high beams; push the lever
back and forth to control the flashing.
Note
Auto High Beams are only available when the headlights are set to the Auto mode
or the feature is turned on.
Caution
The headlights and taillights of your vehicle may produce fog, frost, etc. in low
temperature or high humidity environments, which are normal physical phenomena.
After your vehicle is parked at room temperature for a period of time, the fog or
frost will disappear.
To make manual adjustments, use the light control lever on the left side of the
steering wheel.
GUM228191
To enable Auto High Beams (AHB), push the light control lever forward, and
the instrument cluster displays the Auto High Beams (AHB) icon 
; pushing
the lever forward again activates the high beam headlights and displays its
icon 
 on the instrument cluster.
If the Auto High Beams (AHB) feature is turned off, moving the light control
lever forward will switch only between the high and low beams.
To turn off the high beams and Auto High Beams (AHB), move the light control lever
backward and release it.
Note
Auto High Beams are only available when the headlights are set to the Auto mode
or the feature is turned on.
After the light control lever is moved backward and released, the high beams will
flash once.
Caution
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
38/295


The headlights and taillights of your vehicle may produce fog, frost, etc. in low
temperature or high humidity environments, which are normal physical phenomena.
After your vehicle is parked at room temperature for a period of time, the fog or
frost will disappear.
Turn Lights
GUM191091 
GUM228215
Turn left: move the light control lever down.
Turn right: move the light control lever up.
The turn signal lights go off when the steering wheel returns, or when you move the
control lever back to the middle.
When the turn lights light up, the corresponding indicator light on the digital
instrument cluster will light up as well, accompanied by a "tick-tock" sound.
Fog Lights
You can turn on the front and rear fog lights by pressing the button on the top of
the light control lever. When the fog lights light up, the position lights will be
automatically turned on as well.
The sequence by which the lights turn on is:
Press the first time: turn on front fog lights.
Press the second time: turn on rear fog lights.
Press the third time: turn off rear fog lights.
Press the fourth time: turn off front fog lights.
If pressed again, the above sequence will be repeated.
When the fog lights light up, the corresponding indicator light on the digital
instrument cluster will light up as well, indicating the status of the feature being
turned on.
Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Lights > Exterior Lighting. Press Front Fog Lights and Rear Fog
Lights to turn on/off the front/rear fog lights.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
39/295


Alternatively, swipe right from the left of the center display to enter the Quick
Access interface, and press Front Fog Lights and Rear Fog Lights to turn on/off
the front/rear fog lights.
Position Lights
Enter Settings from the bottom of the center display, tap Lights > Exterior Lighting
> Headlights, and select 
 to enable Auto High Beams. During the daytime, the
front position lights are illuminated as daytime running lights, and the rear position
lights are automatically turned on; During nighttime, both the front and rear position
lights are automatically illuminated.
cEnter Settings from the bottom of the center display, tap Lights > Exterior
Lighting > Headlights, and select 
 to manually turn on the position lights. At this
setting, both the front and rear position lights will remain continuously illuminated.
Welcome Lighting
When you approach the vehicle with a valid Smart Key or authorized mobile phone
(within a range of approximately 8 meters) or unlock the vehicle, the front
headlights and position lights will automatically illuminate (when the ambient light is
dim, the puddle lights on the side mirrors will also light up), welcoming your
presence. At this time, the vehicle will match your account information and
automatically retrieve your personalized settings to make corresponding
adjustments (such as seat settings, air conditioning settings, media settings, and
interior lights settings) in advance.
Follow Me Home
The vehicle is equipped with the Follow Me Home feature. When you lock your
vehicle and are ready to leave it at night, the low beams, the side mirror puddle
lights and position lights will be turned on to illuminate the road ahead for you.
Go to the Settings interface from the bottom of the center display, and tap Lights >
Exterior Lighting > Follow Me Home to set the duration of the headlights.
Exterior Lighting Interaction
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
40/295


The vehicle's exterior lights will exhibit different dynamic interaction effects based
on various vehicle states, establishing a communication between the vehicle and
you.
Unlocking and locking
The headlights and taillights of the vehicle illuminate with animated light
patterns.
Vehicle locating (Find My Car)
The vehicle's turn lights will flash, and the horn will sound for 10 seconds.
Charging
The position lights of the vehicle illuminate with animated breathing patterns.
High-speed emergency brake
The vehicle's brake lights will flash rapidly.
Outer Door Handle Courtesy Lights
Each outer door handle is equipped with a door handle courtesy light. The outer
door handles will automatically pop out when the entire vehicle is unlocked, and the
outer door handle courtesy lights will be turned on to illuminate the area around the
door for you. The outer door handle courtesy lights will be turned off when the outer
door handles are retracted.
Puddle Lights
There is a puddle light under each of the four vehicle doors, providing convenience
for entry and exit at night; there are also two puddle lights on the liftgate to help
you see the ground conditions clearly (such as mud pits, water puddles, etc.) when
putting things away.
By opening the door or liftgate, the corresponding puddle light will be turned on.
The puddle light will go out 10 minutes after the door is opened, or when the door is
closed.
GUM190794
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
41/295


Interior Reading Lights
Auto Control of Reading Lights
When you unlock the whole vehicle or open any door (including the liftgate), the
interior reading lights will automatically light up to illuminate the inside of the
vehicle. The reading lights will be automatically turned off in one of the following
situations, by then you can manually turn the reading lights on by touching the
reading light touch switch on the roof:
Driving;
Locking the vehicle from the outside;
10 minutes after the door is opened;
15 seconds after all doors are closed.
Enter the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Lights > Interior Lighting > Auto Reading Lights to control the
automatic turning on of the reading lights.
Manual Control of Reading Lights
You can turn the interior reading lights on manually to provide lasting illumination
for the passenger compartment for you to tidy up, and read maps or documents.
There are touch switches to control the reading lights on the roof. By touching the
reading light switch, you can control the turning on/off of each reading light
separately. There is also a master switch on the center display for controlling all the
reading lights. You can enter the Settings interface from the control bar at the
bottom of the center display, and tap Lights > Interior Lighting > Reading Lights to
turn all interior reading lights on/off at the same time with this master switch.
GUM190792 
GUM190793
When you lock the vehicle from the outside (using the smart key or mobile App
feature), all interior reading lights will be turned off at the same time.
Note
If the front reading lights are turned on through a separate switch in the
headliner, they cannot be turned on or off through the main reading light
switch, and can only be controlled through the separate switch. If the front
reading lights are turned off, the front and rear reading lights can be turned on
or off simultaneously through the main reading light switch.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
42/295


When your vehicle is not locked externally, if the front reading lights are
turned on manually through the touch switch in the headliner, they will not be
turned off automatically and need to be turned off manually.
Smart Ambient Lighting
The vehicle is equipped with adjustable smart ambient lighting on the door panels,
storage, and floorboard. You can choose your favorite ambient lighting effect to
create a pleasant driving experience.
GUM190795 
GUM190796
After you are seated, you can enable the ambient lighting feature on the center
display. The vehicle will show the default ambient lighting effect in the current drive
mode. Enter the Settings interface of the center display, and tap Lights > Ambient
Lighting to select the color and brightness for the ambient lighting of different
position (main colors, auxiliary colors, and floorboard). This setting will be saved in
your personal profile. You can also set different ambient lighting modes, such as
Breathing and Rhythmic. This setting will be saved on the center display.
The ambient lighting is integrated with the side door open warning. When any door
is about to be opened and triggers the warning, the corresponding side door's
ambient lighting on the door panel will illuminate in red and flash.
Vanity Mirror Lighting
There are two sun visors on the roof of the vehicle, where a vanity mirror is
provided, which can provide lighting when it is opened.
GUM190797
Rear trunk Lighting
The storage space lights come on automatically when the tailgate is opened.
The storage space light switches off automatically when the tailgate is closed or
after 10 minutes of being on.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
43/295


Minimal Lighting
When the vehicle is parked, you can go to Settings from the bottom of the center
display, and tap Lights > Interior Lighting > Minimal Light to enable the feature. All
ambient lighting, reading lights, and headlights will be turned off to achieve one-
click minimal lighting.
When the minimal lighting is activated, all ambient lighting adjustment features will
be disabled.
If you manually adjust the exterior lights when minimal lighting is activated, the
minimal lighting will be automatically deactivated.
If you switch gears or manually exit the minimal lighting, the exterior lights and
ambient lighting will return to their previous state, and the reading lights will remain
off.
Full Brightness
To enable the feature, go to the Settings interface via the control bar at the bottom
of the center display and tap Lights > Interior Lighting > Full Brightness. To assist
you in finding objects in the vehicle, all ambient lighting and reading lights will be
turned on to maximum brightness.
When the Full Brightness is activated, all ambient light adjustment features will be
deactivated.
If you manually adjust the exterior lights when Full Brightness is activated, the Full
Brightness will be automatically deactivated.
If Full Brightness is manually exit, the exterior lights and ambient lights will return to
their previous state, and the reading light will be turned off.
Soft Glow
To enable the feature, go to the Settings interface via the control bar at the bottom
of the center display and tap Lights > Interior Lighting > Soft Glow. To provide a
comfortable sleeping environment, the ambient lighting on the floorboard inside the
vehicle will be slightly lit, and the ambient lighting and reading lights on the doors
and storage will be turned off.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
44/295


When the night lighting is activated, all ambient lighting adjustment features will be
deactivated.
If you manually adjust the exterior lights when the night lighting is activated, the Full
Brightness will be automatically deactivated.
If you manually exit the night lighting, the exterior lights and ambient lighting will
return to their previous state, and the reading lights will remain off.
Linking Key to Account
When the vehicle is first activated and passes the verification process, the key is
automatically bound to the owner's account. Subsequently, when using the key to
unlock the vehicle, it will automatically load the owner's account data.
The owner can use the mobile App's key management interface to bind the key with
authorized accounts. As a result, when authorized users use their corresponding
keys to unlock the vehicle, the bound authorized account's content will be
automatically loaded. The owner can view the bound account information and
perform unbinding operations on the mobile App. Both the owner and user of the
bound account will receive SMS and mobile App notifications upon successful
binding or unbinding.
Note
The Key's binding to the account can only be modified by the vehicle's owner.
Before being bound to the Key, additional NIO accounts need to be authorized
first.
The bond between the authorized user and the key is automatically lifted
synchronously if the owner ceases authorizing.
Guest Mode is only available for Smart Key that is bound to the owner's
account. When a Smart Key bound to the authorized user's account is used to
unlock the vehicle, the authorized user's information will be automatically
loaded.
Switching Accounts
You or an authorized user can switch between user accounts on the center display
to load the corresponding settings (for example, seat, steering wheel, , etc.).
You, a co-user or an authorized user can switch between user accounts on the
center display and load the corresponding settings in either of the following two
ways:
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
45/295


1. When the vehicle is connected to the network, or there is currently no network
available but you have logged in in the past, tap the profile photo on the
center display or Account > Switch Accounts in Settings to view a list of all
the valid accounts (including the owner's account, co-user accounts, and
authorized user accounts). Tap the corresponding profile photo or user name
to switch to the account, and log in with this account after verification (by
scanning the QR code with the NIO app or entering the verification code
received on your phone). You can also enable Passwordless Login in Accounts
> Face ID and Password for easy login and account switch.
2. To switch accounts automatically through face recognition, tap your profile
photo on the center display or Settings > Account > Face ID and Password,
and enter face recognition data to enable this feature. After you unlock the
vehicle and enter the driver's seat, look straight ahead, and the vehicle will
automatically recognize the corresponding account information and load the
corresponding custom settings. If the recognized user's face doesn't match
the current account, but matches another valid account (for example, this may
happen if you've lent the key fob to a family member), the vehicle will
automatically switch the account to match the current user.
Caution
You can only switch accounts when the vehicle is not being driven.
In Guest Mode, the vehicle will not save any customized settings (such as the
driver’s seat position).
Authorized Unlocking
If you want to lend your vehicle to others, you can authorize users registered on the
NIO App to use your vehicle. An authorized user can access authorized features by
using their NFC key or verified NIO App.
Authorization by Owner
You can tap Profile Photo > Account Settings on the Settings interface of the NIO
App or in the upper left corner of the center display, and then enter the gesture
password of your vehicle to go to the authorization management interface.
You can authorize a user and set related authorized features by entering his/her
NIO App user name. Up to nine users can be authorized. After setting the user's
authorization, you can tap the profile photo or user name of the authorized user to
view the user's detailed information and authorized features (such as media, video
and safe box). If the current authorization is active, you can also edit the range of
authorized access or disable the user's authorization. An authorized user can only
access authorized features, and cannot manage authorization or set the guest
mode.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
46/295


After the vehicle is locked, if you unlock the vehicle using your smart key, the
vehicle will automatically log in to the owner's account.
Note
For safety reasons, if you cancel authorization when an authorized user is driving
the vehicle, it won’t take effect until the authorized user stops and locks the vehicle.
Note
If the authorized user has a NIO account, the authorization will take effect
immediately after it is completed. If the authorized user doesn’t have a NIO
account, the authorization will become effective only after the user registers a NIO
account.
Unlocking by an Authorized User
An authorized user can unlock the vehicle using his/her NFC key or NIO App. To
view the account information and authorized features of an authorized user, tap
his/her profile photo on the center display:
NFC unlocking: Open the NFC key App on the mobile phone and place it close
to the center area of vehicle body on the left side.
Remote unlocking by NIO App: Tap "Door Locks" on the "My Vehicle" interface
in NIO App.
Guest Mode
If you want to lend the vehicle to others by giving them a smart key fob, tap your
profile photo on the center display and choose Guest Mode to protect your privacy
(e.g. navigation history, contacts, videos, photos). Only default features such as
climate control, weather and navigation (with no access to History or Favorites) are
available to guests.
With the Guest Mode on, the vehicle will show the features exclusive to the Guest
Mode after the vehicle user unlocks and enters the vehicle by using the smart key.
To exit the Guest Mode, enter the gesture password of the vehicle.
Caution
1. You can only set Guest Mode when the vehicle is not being driven.
2. If a smart key fob is linked to the owner’s account and your vehicle is not in
Guest Mode, the vehicle will automatically log into the owner’s account when
a user unlocks the vehicle using a smart key fob.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
47/295


Service Authorization
You or an authorized user can send a service request to NIO on the NIO app. NIO
manages and authorizes service specialists to temporarily access the vehicle and
conduct the requested service (e.g. One Click for Power). NIO retrieves the
authorization after the service is completed.
After obtaining authorization, service specialists can unlock the vehicle using an
NFC key within a specified time frame and use authorized features. The center
display shows the account information of the authorized service specialist and the
authorized features available to them. Authorized service specialists cannot manage
authorization, set Guest Mode, link the vehicle to a key fob, or switch accounts.
Caution
After the service is completed, all doors and the liftgate should be locked. If a door
or the liftgate is not locked, you will be notified on the NIO app.
Driver Seat Position Memory Adjustment
Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Position Adjustment > Seat > Driver > Seat Position Memory to
configure your personalized settings. According to the preferences set for the user
account, the vehicle will automatically adjust the driver seat, steering wheel, side
mirrors, and to the corresponding user's habitual state. After adjusting the front
passenger seat forward or backward or its backrest position with the buttons on it,
you can press the button Drive/Alternate/Rest/Exit on the driver's seat memory
interface on the center display to set up personalized positions in different scenes
and save the modified settings to the corresponding user's personal account.
After you are seated in the driver's seat (the driver's door needs to be closed),
press the button of the corresponding position on the driver's memory interface.
The vehicle will automatically adjust the seat to the latest personalized settings in
this position saved by the user.
If the user changes the settings again during use of the vehicle (such as the
position of the driver seat), tap the Save button of the corresponding position on
the driver's memory interface, and the updated settings will be saved in the
corresponding position under the user's personal account to replace the original
settings.
Warning
To prevent accidents, do not adjust your seat position while driving.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
48/295


Caution
Before initializing the driver’s seat memory, ensure that the vehicle is in PARK
in a safe environment, the seat and steering wheel are clear of obstacles, and
the rear seats are unoccupied. Please also lower the seat height, and adjust
the headrest to the lowest position to avoid damaging the headliner.
While driving, do not operate any buttons on the memory interface on the
center display to adjust the driver’s seat, steering wheel or side mirrors and be
mindful of your safety.
Front Passenger Seat Position Memory Adjustment
Before using the front passenger seat memory feature, you are required to put the
vehicle in P gear. Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of
the center display, tap Position Adjustment > Seat > Front Passenger > Seat
Position Memory, and configure your personalized settings on this interface
(default position cannot be changed). After adjusting the position of the front
passenger seat with the buttons on it, you can press the button
Regular/Alternate/Rest/Other on the front passenger seat memory interface on the
center display to set up personalized positions in different scenes and save the
modified settings to the corresponding user's personal account.
After you are seated in the front passenger seat, press the button of the
corresponding position on the front passenger seat memory interface, and the
vehicle will automatically adjust the seat to the latest personalized settings in this
position saved by the user.
If the user changes the front passenger seat position again during use of the
vehicle, tap the Save button of the corresponding position on the front passenger
seat memory interface, and the updated settings will be saved in the corresponding
position under the user's personal account to replace the original settings.
Caution
Before initializing the driver’s seat memory, ensure that the vehicle is in PARK in a
safe environment, the seat is clear of obstacles, the footrest is stowed, and the rear
seat is unoccupied. Please also lower the seat height, and adjust the headrest to
the lowest position to avoid damaging the headliner.
Steering Wheel Position Memory Adjustment
You can go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the
center display, and tap Position Adjustment > Steering Wheel > Seat Position
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
49/295


Memory to configure your personalized settings. After adjusting the position of the
steering wheel with the buttons on it, you can press the button
Drive/Alternate/Rest/Other on the driver's seat memory interface on the center
display to set up personalized positions in different scenes and save the modified
settings to the corresponding user's personal account.
After you are seated in the driver's seat (the driver's door needs to be closed),
press the button of the corresponding position on the driver's memory interface,
and the steering wheel will be automatically adjusted to the latest personalized
settings in this position saved by the user.
If the user changes the settings again during use of the vehicle (such as the
position of the steering wheel), tap the Save button of the corresponding position
on the driver's memory interface, and the updated settings will be saved in the
corresponding position under the user's personal account to replace the original
settings.
Warning
To prevent accidents, do not adjust the position of your steering wheel while
driving.
Improper adjustment of the steering wheel position or an improper sitting
posture can cause injury. It is recommended that the distance between the
steering wheel and your chest be no less than 25 centimeters.
Caution
Before initializing the driver’s seat memory, ensure that the vehicle is in PARK
in a safe environment, the seat and steering wheel are clear of obstacles, and
the rear seats are unoccupied. Please also lower the seat height, and adjust
the headrest to the lowest position to avoid damaging the headliner.
While driving, do not operate any buttons on the memory interface on the
center display to adjust the driver’s seat, steering wheel or side mirrors and be
mindful of your safety.
Side Mirrors Position Memory Adjustment
Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Position Adjustment > Side Mirrors > Position Memory to
configure your personalized settings. After adjusting the position of the side
mirrors, you can press the button Drive/Alternate/Rest/Other on the driver's seat
memory interface on the center display to set up personalized positions in different
scenes and save the modified settings to the corresponding user's personal
account.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
50/295


After you are seated in the driver's seat (the driver's door needs to be closed),
press the button of the corresponding position on the driver's memory interface,
and the side mirrors will be automatically adjusted to the latest personalized
settings in this position saved by the user.
If the user changes the settings again during use of the vehicle (such as the
position of the side mirrors), tap the Save button of the corresponding position on
the driver's memory interface, and the updated settings will be saved in the
corresponding position under the user's personal account to replace the original
settings.
Warning
To prevent accidents, do not adjust the side mirrors while driving.
Caution
Before initializing the driver’s seat memory, ensure that the vehicle is in PARK
in a safe environment, the seat and steering wheel are clear of obstacles, and
the rear seats are unoccupied. Please also lower the seat height, and adjust
the headrest to the lowest position to avoid damaging the headliner.
While driving, do not operate any buttons on the memory interface on the
center display to adjust the driver’s seat, steering wheel or side mirrors and be
mindful of your safety.
When reversing the vehicle, the side mirrors can automatically tilt downward to
provide a clear view of the ground. To enable this feature, go to the Settings
interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center display, and tap Position
Adjustment > Side Mirrors > Auto-Tilt When Reversing. After tilting down, the
position of the side mirrors can be adjusted. The newly adjusted position will be
automatically saved to the user's personal account (no need to set it on memory
interface on the center display). When the user reverses the vehicle next time, the
side mirrors will automatically tilt down to this position. When exiting R gear, the
side mirrors will be adjusted to the driving position of the driver's memory interface.
Caution
When the side mirrors are automatically tilting to a saved position, if you adjust a
side mirror manually, the side mirrors will stop tilting and save the new position to
the corresponding account.
Driver Seat Adjustment
Adjusting the seat position via buttons
The buttons under the seat allow you to adjust the position of the driver seat.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
51/295


GUM191094
1. Length of seat cushion
Toggle the button back and forth to adjust the length of the seat cushion.
2. Front inclination angle of seat cushion
To adjust the seat cushion's front inclination angle, turn this button.
3. Lateral position of the seat
Toggle this button back and forth to move the seat forward or backward.
Height of seat
To raise or lower the seat, toggle the center portion of this button up or down.
4. Reclining of the backrest
Toggle the upper end of this button back and forth to adjust the reclining of
the seat backrest.
5. Lumbar support adjustment
Press and hold the up, down, left, or right button to adjust the lumbar support.
Adjusting the seat position via buttons
The buttons under the seat allow you to adjust the position of the driver seat.
GUM191095
1. Front inclination angle of seat cushion
To adjust the seat cushion's front inclination angle, turn this button.
2. Lateral position of the seat
Toggle this button back and forth to move the seat forward or backward.
Height of seat
To raise or lower the seat, toggle the center portion of this button up or down.
3. Reclining of the backrest
Toggle the upper end of this button back and forth to adjust the reclining of
the seat backrest.
4. Lumbar support adjustment
Press and hold the up, down, left, or right button to adjust the lumbar support.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
52/295


Warning
Make sure there is a safe space around the seat and any rear children,
passengers, pets, etc., before you make any adjustments to the seat (such as
moving the seat forward or backward, adjusting the seat's height or backrest,
etc.). Be sure not to crush or strike any children, passengers, or pets in the
back seats.
Before adjusting your seat (forward and backward, height, backrest, leg rest,
etc.), please ensure that there is a sufficient safety space in the surrounding
environment to avoid deformation and fracture risks caused by compression
and collision with surrounding components (foot rest, leg support, seat cup
holder, armrest, etc.) during the seat adjustment process.
Adjust the driver's seat position, headrest, etc. while your vehicle is parked.
While the vehicle is in motion, adjustments to the seat or other parts of the
vehicle can pose safety risks.
During the seat adjustment process (moving it forward or backward, adjusting
the seat's height or backrest, etc.), avoid putting hands or other body parts in
the seat's range of motion to prevent potential pinching or collision.
After seat position adjustment, please ensure the seat is locked.
Ensure that children do not make any adjustments to the seats, as doing so
may result in a risk of being pinched.
With Easy Entry on, make sure there is sufficient safe space in both the front
and rear rows for children, passengers, and pets. Take precautions to avoid
crushing or bumping when adjusting the seat.
Please wait until Easy Entry has been completed before starting the vehicle.
Performing any operation at this time may lead to the loss of vehicle control
and cause an accident.
It is recommended to turn off Easy Entry if children frequently occupy the
back row.
Before starting your vehicle, please ensure that your seat is adjusted to its
recommended position (refer to the recommended sitting postures and seat
positions in the User Manual).
Controlling the movement of the seat on the center display
You can control the movement of the driver's seat on the center display.
On the driver's seat control interface of the center display, tap the "Position",
"Backrest" and "Cushion" control arrows to adjust the position of the driver's seat,
the reclining of the backrest and the position of the seat cushion respectively.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
53/295


The center display provides five position options: driving position, rest position, exit
position, other position, alternate position and reclining position. Every position
needs to be set up by you, with the exception of the reclining position.
How to set up a memory position:
Enter the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, tap Position Adjustment > Seat > Driver to set up the position of the
driver's seat on this interface.
You can adjust the seat position through the seat buttons or on the center display
to set up personalized positions in different scenes by pressing the
Drive/Alternate/Rest/Exit button on the interface, and the settings will be saved
under the corresponding user account. When you need to update a set position,
adjust the seat and re-save.
Correcting sitting posture of the driver
To minimize potential risks and protect your safety, please adjust the seat as
follows:
Move the seat back and forth into a position where you can easily floor the
accelerator and brake pedals.
Adjust the seat backrest to a suitable straight-back sitting posture where your
back completely fits the backrest, and the backrest does not recline too much.
Adjust the height of the seat to an appropriate position where you can
comfortably put both hands on the steering wheel.
Adjust the steering wheel so that there is at least 25cm of distance between
your chest and the steering wheel.
Lay the middle part of the seat belt between your neck and shoulder. Fit the
lap section of the seat belt tightly across your hip joints, not across your
abdomen.
GUM191665
Warning
1. Do not use various types of seat covers on the seats or modify the upholstery
by yourself. In the event of a collision, the seat covers or the modified
upholstery can seriously limit the deployment of seat side airbags. The
protection of occupants will be greatly reduced and the risk of injury will be
increased.
2. Do not place objects under seats. Otherwise, safety risks may occur during
the seat adjustment process or in the event of a collision, rapid acceleration
and deceleration.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
54/295


3. Do not hang other objects (such as clothes hangers) on seats or headrests.
Otherwise, the risk of injury may be increased in the event of a vehicle
collision or sudden acceleration and deceleration.
4. Only one person can ride in one seat position while the vehicle is being driven.
Please do not let an infant or a child share the same seat and seat belt with
an adult. Please do not let an infant or a child sit on an adult's lap. Otherwise,
safety risks can occur in the event of collision, rapid acceleration and
deceleration, resulting in injuries to passengers, infants, children, etc.
5. If the seat backrest is excessively tilted during driving, serious injury may
occur in the event of a collision accident. Please refer to the recommended
correct seat positions.
6. People with limited pain perception due to disease or age shall use the
temperature control system and seat heating function with caution to prevent
potential low-temperature burns caused by long-term use.
GUM191666
Front Passenger Seat Adjustment
Adjusting the seat position via buttons
The buttons under the seat allow passengers to adjust the position of the front
passenger seat.
GUM191100
1. Length of seat cushion
Toggle the button back and forth to adjust the length of the seat cushion.
2. Front inclination angle of seat cushion
To adjust the seat cushion's front inclination angle, turn this button.
3. Lateral position of the seat
Toggle this button back and forth to move the seat forward or backward.
Height of seat
To raise or lower the seat, toggle the center portion of this button up or down.
4. Reclining of the backrest
Toggle the upper end of this button back and forth to adjust the reclining of
the seat backrest.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
55/295


5. Lumbar support adjustment
Press and hold the up, down, left, or right button to adjust the lumbar support.
Adjusting the seat position via buttons
The buttons under the seat allow passengers to adjust the position of the front
passenger seat.
GUM191103
1. Front inclination angle of seat cushion
To adjust the seat cushion's front inclination angle, turn this button.
2. Lateral position of the seat
Toggle this button back and forth to move the seat forward or backward.
Height of seat
Toggle the middle part of this button up or down to move the seat upward or
downward.
3. Reclining of the backrest
Toggle the upper end of this button back and forth to adjust the reclining of
the seat backrest.
4. Lumbar support adjustment
Press and hold the up, down, left, or right button to adjust the lumbar support.
Warning
Before seat adjustment (forward and backward, height, backrest, etc.), make
sure that there is sufficient safe space for the seat and children, occupants,
and pets in the rear row to avoid squeezing or smacking into children,
occupants, and pets in the rear row.
Adjust the passenger seat position and headrest when the vehicle is in PARK.
Seat position and other adjustments while driving may cause safety risks.
During seat adjustment (forward and backward, height, backrest, etc.), avoid
putting your hands or other parts of the body on the seat movement path to
prevent pinching and colliding.
Ensure that the seat is locked after position adjustment.
Children should not adjust the seat for there is a risk of being caught.
When Easy Entry is turned on, make sure that there is enough safe space for
children, occupants, and pets in the front and rear rows to prevent the seat
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
56/295


from squeezing or smacking into them when moving.
Do not start the vehicle until the Easy Entry feature is finished safely. Any
operation before that may cause the vehicle to lose control and cause
accidents.
It is recommended to turn off Easy Entry if there are often children passengers
in the rear row.
Controlling the movement of the seat on the center display
You can control the movement of the front passenger seat on the center display.
On the front passenger seat control interface of the center display, tap the
"Position", "Backrest" and "Cushion" control arrows to adjust the position of the
front passenger seat, the reclining of the backrest and the position of the seat
cushion respectively.
The center display provides four position options: the default position, regular
position, rest position and alternate position. Among which the default position
cannot be changed, and the regular position, rest position and alternate position
need to be set up by you.
How to set up a memory position:
Enter the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, tap Position Adjustment > Seat > Front Passenger to set up the position
of the front passenger seat on this interface.
You can adjust the seat position through the seat buttons or on the center display
to set up personalized positions in different scenes by pressing the
Regular/Rest/Alternate button on the interface, and the settings will be saved
under the corresponding user account. When you need to update a set position,
adjust the seat and re-save.
Correcting sitting posture of front passenger
To minimize potential risks and protect your safety, please adjust the seat as
follows:
Move the seat back and forth into a position where you can place both feet in
the footwell in front of the seat.
Adjust the seat backrest to a suitable straight-back sitting posture where your
back completely fits the backrest, and the backrest does not recline too much.
Lay the middle part of the seat belt between your neck and shoulder. Fit the
lap section of the seat belt tightly across your hip joints, not across your
abdomen.
GUM191667
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
57/295


Warning
1. Do not use various types of seat covers on the seats or modify the upholstery
by yourself. In the event of a collision, the seat covers or the modified
upholstery can seriously limit the deployment of seat side airbags. The
protection of occupants will be greatly reduced and the risk of injury will be
increased.
2. Do not place objects under seats. Otherwise, safety risks may occur during
the seat adjustment process or in the event of a collision, rapid acceleration
and deceleration.
3. Do not hang other objects (such as clothes hangers) on seats or headrests.
Otherwise, the risk of injury may be increased in the event of a vehicle
collision or sudden acceleration and deceleration.
4. Only one person can ride in one seat position while the vehicle is being driven.
Please do not let an infant or a child share the same seat and seat belt with
an adult. Please do not let an infant or a child sit on an adult's lap. Otherwise,
safety risks can occur in the event of collision, rapid acceleration and
deceleration, resulting in injuries to passengers, infants, children, etc.
5. If the seat backrest is excessively tilted during driving, serious injury may
occur in the event of a collision accident. Please refer to the recommended
correct seat positions.
6. People with limited pain perception due to disease or age shall use the
temperature control system and seat heating function with caution to prevent
potential low-temperature burns caused by long-term use.
Warning
The behaviors shown in the following figure are not allowed, such as letting a child
ride alone or holding a child in the front passenger seat:
GUM191733 
GUM191734 
GUM191735 
GUM191736
Rear Seat Adjustment
GUM191656 
GUM191657
Pull the mechanical handle of the seat backrest to unlock the backrest and then
push the backrest forward to recline the seat backrest.
Warning
When folding the seat back, ensure that there are no items on the rear seat
and that the seat belts are not connected. Otherwise, it may damage the rear
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
58/295


seat.
Before starting the vehicle, confirm that the seats are in the locked position
(forward/backward, height, backrest, etc.). Failure to lock the seats may pose
a potential risk of injury, (for example, if the rear seat backrest is folded back
but not fully locked into place, it may pose safety issues and increase the risk
of injury in the event of a vehicle collision or sudden acceleration or
deceleration.)
When the seat is in a folded position (such as the rear seat backrest folded
down), do not sit in that position while the vehicle is in motion. In the event of
a collision or sudden acceleration or deceleration, it may pose a risk of injury
or death.
When adjusting the rear seat backrest, ensure that the seat belt is not twisted
or caught in the seat backrest, as it may damage the seat belt and affect
safety.
Correct Sitting Posture of Rear Row Passengers
To minimize potential risks and protect your safety, please adjust the seat as
follows:
Adjust the headrest so that the center of the headrest is flush with your eyes.
Place your feet in the footstep space in front of the rear seats.
Place the middle part of the seat belt between your neck and shoulder, and
tightly wrap the lap part of the seat belt around your hip joint (not your
abdomen).
When driving with children in your vehicle, use appropriate child safety seats
to protect children. See the chapter on child safety seats for details.
Warning
Do not hang other objects (such as clothes hangers) on the seat or headrest.
In case of collision, sudden acceleration or deceleration, such objects may add
to the risk of injury.
Only one person can ride in each seat while the vehicle is in motion. Infants or
children should not share a seat and seat belt with an adult or sit on the lap of
an adult. In case of collision, sudden acceleration or deceleration, such
postures may pose a safety risk and cause injury to occupants, infants, and
children.
Individuals with limited pain perception due to illness, ages, or other conditions
should use the temperature control system and seat heating carefully to avoid
potential low-temperature burns due to prolonged use.
Warning
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
59/295


Passengers in the rear seats are prohibited from engaging in the following
behaviors:
GUM191743 
GUM191744 
GUM191745
Seat Headrest Adjustment
GUM191115
Press the right button under the headrest to move the headrest up and down. Move
the headrest to a set position when you hear click. This indicates the headrest is
fixed in this position.
Warning
To provide the best protection, make sure the headrest is set to an
appropriate height according to the occupant's height.
Do not use the headrest when it is at its lowest position. To use it, pull the
headrest upwards and ensure it is locked into place.
Adjust the seat headrest, and make sure that the headrest center and the
occupant's eyes are on the same level.
When the headrest is removed, do not drive the vehicle. In case of collision,
sudden acceleration or deceleration, seats without headrests may not provide
sufficient protection to the head, leading to serious consequences.
Seat Massage Mode
The front seats have a lower back massage feature, which is turned off by default.
Enter the Comfort Panel interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, tap the Seats > Massage and select the desired massage mode (mode 1,
mode 2, mode 3, mode 4, mode 5) and massage intensity (level 1, level 2).
Mode 1: Gentle
Mode 2: Rolling
Mode 3: Dynamic
Mode 4: Lower Back
Mode 5: Upper Back
Level 1: Weak
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
60/295


Level 2: Strong
The massage will automatically turn off if the massage mode is not switched within
20 minutes.
Caution
If a passenger leaves their seat for more than 30 seconds during the operation of
this feature, the feature will be deactivated.
Seat Heating Mode
The front and rear seats have a heating feature, which is turned off by default.
Enter the Comfort Panel interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, tap Seats > Heat to turn on the heating feature for the corresponding seat
and select the level. There are three levels of heating, which will heat the seat up to
the preset level within 10 minutes and remain at this temperature.
The front seats have a heating feature, which is turned off by default. Enter the
Comfort Panel interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center display,
tap Seats > Heat to turn on the heating feature for the corresponding seat and
select the level. There are three levels of heating, which will heat the seat up to the
preset level within 10 minutes and remain at this temperature.
Smart Seat Heating: This feature is turned off by default. After the feature is turned
on, when the ambient temperature is below 12℃ and the interior temperature is
below 10℃, the heating feature will be automatically turned on; the lower the
ambient temperature, the longer the heating time.
Note
If a passenger leaves the seat for more than 30 seconds during the operation
of this feature, this feature will be turned off, and the center display will save
the feature's current mode.
If someone takes the seat within 15 minutes after the passenger leaves, the
feature will be restored to the saved mode. If no one takes the seat within 15
minutes, the feature will remain in the deactivated state.
Individuals with limited pain perception due to illness, ages, or other conditions
should use the temperature control system and seat heating carefully to avoid
potential low-temperature burns due to prolonged use.
Seat Ventilation Mode
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
61/295


The front seats have a ventilate feature, which is turned off by default. Enter the
Comfort Panel interface from the control bar of the center display, tap Seats >
Ventilate to turn on the Ventilate feature for the corresponding seat. There are
three levels of ventilation available.
Note
With this feature on, the current level will be saved and the feature will turn off
when the passenger leaves the seat for over 30 seconds;
If someone is seated within 15 minutes after the passenger leaves, the feature
will resume the previously saved level; If no one is seated within 15 minutes,
the feature will stay off.
Seat Relief Mode
The front seats have lower back relax feature. You can go to the Comfort Panel
interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center display, tap Seats >
Relax, and select your desired relax mode.
Mode 1: Upper back relax
Mode 2: Middle back relax
Mode 3: Lower back relax
Mode 4: Circular relax from upper to lower back
After each mode is enabled, it will run 20 minutes as a cycle, and automatically
stop after 20 minutes.
Caution
If a passenger leaves their seat for more than 30 seconds during the operation of
this feature, the feature will be deactivated.
Easy Entry
Easy Entry offers the driver and passengers multiple options and settings to make
entering and exiting the vehicle more convenient.
Driver Easy Entry
After initializing the driver’s seat on the center display, you can set the most
convenient exit position for you to get out of the vehicle. With the vehicle stopped
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
62/295


and in PARK, the driver’s seat will move to the preset exit position (including the
cushion position and backrest inclination) when you open the driver’s door, and the
steering wheel will move to the uppermost position. This will provide you with a
larger space to get in and out of the vehicle conveniently.
You can enter Settings from the bottom of the center display, and tap Position
Adjustment > Driver Seat > Driver Easy Entry to enable or disable this feature. You
or an authorized user can personalize the exit position for the corresponding
account. After manually adjusting the driver’s seat to your desired exit position, tap
Position Adjustment > Driver Seat > Position Memory and choose Exit Position to
save the current settings. Every time you open the driver’s door or unfasten the
seat belt (which can be selected from the center display) to get out of the vehicle,
the driver’s seat will move to the corresponding exit position.
Caution
When setting the exit position, do not move the seat to the rearmost position or
recline the backrest to the lowest position. Doing so may adversely affect the rear
passengers. You can set the recommended optimal exit position on the center
display.
Note
After turning on Driver Seat Easy Entry, when you sit in the driver’s seat and close
the door (or press the brake pedal), the driver’s seat, steering wheel, side mirrors
and HUD height will automatically adjust to the settings saved in the system.
Front Passenger Easy Entry
If a passenger opens the front passenger door when the vehicle is stopped and in
PARK, the front passenger seat will move to the preset exit position (the position of
the cushion and inclination of the backrest will move to the rear, and the leg
support will automatically move to its lowest position) to make entering and exiting
the vehicle more convenient.
You can enter Settings from the bottom of the center display, and tap Position
Adjustment > Front Passenger Seat > Front Passenger Easy Entry to enable or
disable this feature. Front Passenger Easy Entry has two setting options:
Exit: When the passenger unfastens the seat belt and opens the passenger
door (which can be selected from the center display), the seat will move to the
default position; when the passenger gets into the vehicle and closes the
passenger door, the seat will remain unchanged from the default exit position.
Exit + Entry: When the passenger unfastens the seat belt or opens the
passenger door, the seat will move to the default position; when the passenger
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
63/295


gets into the vehicle and closes the passenger door, the seat will automatically
move to the default position saved in the corresponding account (which can
be edited from the center display).
Caution
When using Front Passenger Easy Entry, it is recommended that you set the default
position appropriately, and pay attention to the surrounding environment and the
safety of any passengers in the second row.
Front Storage
The vehicle provides you with a number of convenient storage spaces that can be
used to store daily necessities.
Warning
Never place flammable and combustible objects or liquids with a high risk of
splashing in the storage area. Always close the cover after placing objects in the
storage area.
Door Storage
There is a storage space at the lower part of each door, which can be used for
storing items, and is equipped with door storage lighting for illumination at night,
when the light is dim or when the position lights are turned on.
GUM191116
Caution
Do not place over-sized or sharp items in the lower storage place of the door
panel to prevent damage to the structure and surface of the door panel.
Due to the special texture of the door panel design, please wipe the surface of
the door panel regularly.
Cup Holder
There are two cup holders on the central armrest, which can be used for drinks.
GUM191117
Warning
Do not put any hot beverages in an open container. A spill can increase the
risk of injury.
Do not place any fragile items, or they may cause injury when broken.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
64/295


Center Console Open Storage
The open storage space under the center console can be used for temporary
storage of some non-important items, and there is a 12V power supply at the rear
that can be used to charge the passenger's electronic devices.
GUM191118
Rear Storage
Rear Doors
There are convenient storage spaces beside the rear seats. There is a storage
space on both rear doors, which can be used for drinks or items, and is equipped
with door storage lighting for illumination at night, when the light is dim or when the
position lights are turned on.
GUM191119
Caution
Do not place over-sized or sharp items in the lower storage place of the door
panel to prevent damage to the structure and surface of the door panel.
Due to the special texture of the door panel design, please wipe the surface of
the door panel regularly.
There are also coat hooks beside both rear doors, which can be used to neatly
store clothes.
GUM191121
Warning
Please do not hang any hard objects (such as hangers, fruits, glass bottles) on the
hat-and-coat hook near the door to prevent accidental injury.
Rear Central Armrest
When the rear middle seat is not occupied, you can flip open the central armrest on
the backrest to expose the cup holders.
GUM191122 
GUM191123
Warning
Do not place flammable, explosive, or splatter-prone items in the storage
space. Close the lid tightly when storing items.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
65/295


Avoid placing heavy, sharp, or fragile objects on the armrest during vehicle
operation. In the event of a collision or sudden acceleration or deceleration,
objects flying out can increase the risk of injury to occupants.
Safety Storage Box
Storage Box Mode
The safety storage box is in the Storage Box Mode by default. In this mode, the
safety storage box is not locked, and its flip cover can be opened through the
buttons on the left and right sides of the central armrest:
 
1. Storage box buttons
Press the button to open the flip cover. It can be used to store mobile phones,
tissues and other items (one button on each side).
2. Storage box USB Type C port (60W)
High-speed transmission port for charging mobile devices, not supporting
data transmission.
3. Storage box USB Type A port (2.5W)
Ordinary transmission port for data transmission such as USB media audio
source, Digital Video Recorder (DVR) video export, microphone access, etc.
 
1. Storage box buttons
Press the button to open the flip cover. It can be used to store mobile phones,
tissues and other items (both left and right buttons can open the cover).
2. Storage box USB Type C port (60W)
High-speed transmission port for charging mobile devices, not supporting
data transmission.
3. Storage box USB Type A port (2.5W)
Ordinary transmission port for data transmission such as USB media audio
source, Digital Video Recorder (DVR) video export, microphone access, etc.
4. Storage box USB Type C port (60W)
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
66/295


High-speed transmission port for connecting AR glasses and charging mobile
devices, not supporting data transmission.
Safe Box Mode
Swipe right on the main interface of the center display to enter the Quick Access
interface, and tap Safe Box. When the Safe Mode is turned on for the first time, a
pop-up window for setting the password will pop up on the center display, and you
need to set a password to finish setting up Safe Box Mode.
Once set, you need to enter the password on the center display to unlock the safety
storage box, then you can open the flip cover through the buttons on both sides of
the central armrest.
Mode Switch
To switch between the two modes of the safety storage box: enter the Settings
interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center display, and tap Security
> ARMREST BOX to switch between Storage Box Mode and Safe Box Mode.
Storage Box Mode > Safe Box Mode:
Add Safe Box interface
Set a password
Safe Box Mode > Storage Box Mode:
Risk prompt
Safe Box Settings interface disappears (turns gray)
Rear Trunk
When the liftgate is opened, you can load items in the storage space of the rear
trunk.
Caution
When storing liquids in the vehicle, ensure that the container is sealed. Spills or
leakages may damage the vehicle. If a spill or leakage occurs, please clean up the
liquid as soon as possible.
Rear Trunk 12V Power Supply
GUM191126
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
67/295


The 12V power supply is located at the left side of the rear trunk, which can supply
power to external devices as needed.
Hitched Trailer
Towing Accessory
The vehicle towing kit is a spherical coupling with the national standard ECR R55,
which can support towing accessories (such as trailer, caravan, bicycle).
The spherical coupling is designed to support a vertical load of up to 75 kg. When
carrying bicycles or other items in the towing device, always check to ensure that
the maximum weight is not exceeded. When calculating the weight, please
remember to include the weight of the accessory bracket. For example, if the
weight of the carrier is 14 kg, it is sufficient to carry two bicycles with a weight of
about 20 kg each or four bicycles with a weight of about 10 kg each for the weight
threshold.
Caution
The vehicle towing device is designed to bear a maximum weight of 75 kg.
Exceeding this maximum weight may cause serious damage to the device.
Do not attempt to install an accessory carrier on the vehicle without a towing
kit. Otherwise, significant damage may be incurred.
Towing a trailer and carrying accessories will increase the weight and resistance of
the vehicle, so the driving range may be significantly reduced with a trailer.
Although the vehicle range calculator tries to adjust the range estimate according
to the Trailer Mode, the actual energy consumption may vary. You need to plan your
travel distance and destination reasonably.
To install and use the accessory bracket, the towing device must be connected.
Then follow the instructions provided with the accessory bracket. You need to
comply with all regulations and legal requirements applicable to carrying
accessories. The vehicle towing kit includes the wiring of the lights required for the
accessory bracket.
When towing accessories, verify regularly that the accessory bracket and its goods
are always in a safe state, and also verify that the lights on the accessories work
properly (if any).
Note
It is recommended that you purchase your vehicle accessories from the NIO
website. Please purchase third-party products compliant with national standards if
necessary. NIO recommends and supports products approved by NIO. Before
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
68/295


installing any non-NIO accessory, please review the product information to ensure
compatibility.
Caution
The tow device may obscure the view of the side mirrors, rear cameras, and/or rear
ultrasonic sensors. In addition, some PILOT features may not function properly.
Towing Capacity
The total weight of the trailer (including all goods and additional equipment) and the
carrying capacity of the tow hitch shall not exceed the following values:
Tire
Maximum towing capacity
Maximum tow hitch
carrying capacity
19", 20"
1,400 kg
75 kg
The tow hitch carrying weight is the downward force exerted by the trailer weight
on the tow hitch. It shall not be less than 4% of the trailer load. Loading a large
number of equipment, passengers or goods in the trailer can reduce the towing
weight that it can bear, which will also reduce the maximum towing capacity.
Assuming that the trailer load does not exceed the Gross Vehicle Weight Rating
(GVWR), the maximum towing capacity can be calculated. GVWR is printed on the
vehicle nameplate.
If you drive a tractor with a C6 driver's license, you must ensure that the total mass,
including the mass of the tractor and trailer, is less than (not including) 4,500 kg.
Tire Pressure During Towing
The tire pressure must be adjusted to adapt to the additional load for towing. Keep
the tire inflated to 290 kPa. The maximum permitted uphill slope is 12% for towing.
Note
When towing, the technically permissible maximum mass on the rear axle shall not
exceed 15%, and the technically permissible laden mass of the vehicle shall not
exceed 75 kg. In these situations, the vehicle speed shall not exceed 100 km/h, and
the rear tire pressure must be at least 20 kPa higher than the normally
recommended tire pressure.
Warning
Never attempt to tow a vehicle when it has a faulty tire. Temporarily repaired tires
cannot withstand the towing load. Towing with faulty or temporarily repaired tires
may result in tire fault and vehicle unstability.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
69/295


Operations Before Towing
Before towing, the following operations must be performed:
Inflate the tire to the specified cold tire inflation pressure for towing.
Make sure you understand and comply with all local regulations and legal
requirements for towing.
Adjust the rearview mirror to provide a clear view behind you that avoids
obvious blind spots.
Enable Trailer Mode in the center display.
Confirm the following:
The tractor driver must hold a C6 driver's license.
The vehicle needs to be level when connecting to the towing device. If the
front of the vehicle is tilted upward and the rear is tilted downwards, please
confirm that the maximum towing capacity and tow hitch carrying weight
provided in the "Towing Capacity" table are not exceeded.
All towing device components, accessories, and electrical connectors (if any)
are in good condition, and are connected correctly. Do not tow if there are any
obvious problems.
The trailer lights (brake lights, turn signal lights and marker lights) work
properly.
The towing tongue is firmly connected to the towing ball.
All items inside the vehicle are secure in place.
You may use wheel chocks.
The towing load is evenly distributed so that the weight on the towing tongue
is about 4% of the total towing weight and does not exceed the maximum
bearing weight of the towing tongue provided in the "Towing Capacity" table.
Warning
The weight of the trailer tongue must be approximately 4% of the gross trailer
weight and not exceed the maximum trailer tongue load provided in the
Towing Capacity table. An unbalanced load on the wheels or a heavier load on
the rear may cause the trailer to sway, resulting in loss of vehicle control.
Please always ensure that the load is secured in the trailer and does not move.
An moving load can cause loss of vehicle control, resulting in serious injury or
death.
Trailer Mode
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
70/295


Before towing, please shift to the P gear, go to the Settings interface from the
control bar at the bottom of the center display, and tap Driving and Parking > Tow
Hitch. This will extend the tow hitch. When a trailer is towed, Trailer Mode must
always be active. When you connect the trailer's electrical harness, the vehicle will
enable Trailer Mode after you confirm. Trailer Mode is deactivated when the trailer's
electrical harness is disconnected. To manually enable or exit Trailer Mode, go to
the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center display and
tap Driving and Parking > Trailer Mode. One of the following indicators is displayed
on the instrument cluster at this time:
ICON
Description
GUM175139
The vehicle has detected the connection
of the trailer lights, but Trailer Mode is
not activated. The vehicle may already
have an accessory connected.
GUM235313
The vehicle has detected an electrical
connection fault with the trailer lights.
Some or all of the trailer lights may be
faulty. To ensure your safety, pull over as
soon as possible and check the wiring or
connection of the trailer lights for faults.
If the problem has been resolved but the
red icon is still on, please try turning off
Trailer Mode and then turning it on again.
Warning
Before towing, be sure to check that the Tow Mode is on.
Under no circumstances should the Tow Mode be exited during the towing
process. Doing so may result in serious injury and/or death.
Do not use the ride height adjustment setting on the center display to properly
match the height of the towing device to the height of the trailer.
Note
Some PILOT features (Steering Assist,Active Lane Change, etc.) as well as
kick sensors, easy entry, and ultrasonic sensors may not be available in the
Trailer Mode.
Please connect your vehicle to a trailer under the normal ride height. If you
enter the Trailer Mode under an abnormal ride height, the ride height will be
automatically adjusted to normal.
Instructions for Towing
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
71/295


Your vehicle is mainly designed as a passenger vehicle. Towing a trailer puts an
additional load on the vehicle's motor, transmission, brakes, tires and suspension
and significantly reduces its range. If you decide to tow a trailer, please drive
carefully and follow the following guidelines:
Reduce your driving speed and avoid sudden maneuvers. When a trailer is
towed, the steering, stability, turning radius, stopping distance and braking
performance are different from those without a trailer.
Keep at least twice the distance from the vehicle in front of you as when you
are not pulling a trailer. This helps to avoid situations requiring emergency
braking. Sudden braking may cause skidding or bottoming out and loss of
control.
Avoid sharp turns, which may cause the trailer to contact the vehicle and
cause damage. Since the wheels of the trailer are closer to the inside of the
turn than the wheels of the vehicle, the turn radius must be larger to prevent
the trailer from hitting the curb, road signs, trees or other objects.
Check the trailer lights and turn lights regularly to verify that they continue to
work properly.
Verify regularly that any items inside the vehicle are safe.
Verify regularly that the trailer brake works properly.
Avoid parking on a slope.
Verify regularly that all towing parts have been firmly tightened.
When a trailer is hitched, the LED taillight of the trailer may flash very slightly,
which is normal.
People are not allowed to ride in the trailer during towing.
Place weight in the trailer near the axle as much as possible to reduce
interference to the train set when swinging.
Trailer Parking
It is recommended not to park your vehicle on slopes with gradients exceeding 12%.
If you have to park the vehicle on a slope, please place wheel chocks under the
trailer wheels:
One person depresses and holds the brake pedal;
Another person places wheel chocks under the wheels on the downhill side;
When the chocks are in place, release the brake pedal and ensure that the
chocks can bear the weight of the vehicle and trailer (do not activate
Autohold).
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
72/295


Put the vehicle into the P gear and engage the parking brake.
Warning
If it is necessary to park on a slope, please always ensure that all trailer wheels are
securely fastened with wedges, as failure to do so may result in serious damage,
injury or death.
Electrical Connection
All trailers are equipped with taillights, brake lights, side indicators and turn lights.
In order to provide power for the trailer lighting, the towing device is equipped with
a built-in 13-pin electrical connector. Inserting the trailer plug into the vehicle
electrical connector will enable Trailer Mode after you confirm.
GUM170253
1. Left turn light (yellow)
2. Right fog light (blue)
3. Pin 1-8 grounding (white)
4. Right turn light (green)
5. Right taillight (brown)
6. Brake light (red)
7. Left taillight (black)
8. Reverse light (pink)
9. No output for now (orange)
10. 12V power output when the vehicle is awakened (gray)
11. Pin 10 grounding (black and white)
12. Reserved interface (light gray)
13. Pin 9 grounding (red and white)
Warning
Please use only the electrical plugs designed by NIO. Do not attempt to directly
splice the cables or connect the trailer’s cable by any other method, as this could
damage the vehicle’s electrical system and cause fault.
Caution
Before and during towing, you need to manually check and ensure that all
electrical connections are working properly and all trailer lights are working
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
73/295


correctly.
Trailer light failure during towing may be the result of a blown fuse. If the fuse
is blown, there will be no warning from your vehicle. Please contact the NIO
Service Center.
Make sure that the trailer cable does not touch or drag on the ground during
towing, and that the cable has enough slack to allow for turns.
Roof Racks
The vehicle supports a roof rack with a maximum load-bearing capacity of 50 kg
(including the roof rack and its load).
Warning
Please install and use the roof rack strictly according to the roof rack manual.
When the roof rack and its load exceed the max load, there may be serious
vehicle damage or personal injury.
The load should be evenly distributed on the roof rack.
Check the roof rack and load regularly to make sure that they are properly
secured, otherwise, there may be serious vehicle damage or personal injury.
When the roof rack is loaded heavily, please avoid violent acceleration, sharp
braking, or sharp turning to prevent any potential accidents.
The center of gravity of the vehicle will change when the roof is loaded.
Therefore, the driving speed shall not exceed the top speed specified in the
roof rack manual or 120 km/h (whichever is smaller).
Start Adjustment
GUM191168
Enter the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, tap Position Adjustment > Steering Wheel > Start Adjustment, and then
adjust the position through the buttons on the right side of the steering wheel, and
tap End Adjustment after the adjustment is completed; or swipe right on the main
interface of the center display to enter the Quick Access interface, and tap
Steering Wheel Adjustment > Start Adjustment to adjust the position of the
steering wheel.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
74/295


Adjusting the position of the steering wheel using the buttons on the right side of
the steering wheel:
Up: move the steering wheel upward;
Down: move the steering wheel downward;
Left: move the steering wheel further from the driver;
Right: move the steering wheel closer to the driver;
Press: move once;
Press+hold: move continuously.
Note
When the pop-up window is manually closed by the driver or passively closed due
to factors such as conflicts, the right steering wheel controls will exit the steering
wheel adjustment mode and resumes regular controls instead, such as answering
phone calls, and increasing/decreasing volume.
Warning
Do not adjust the steering wheel position while driving. Doing so may result in
an accident.
An improper steering wheel position or seating position may result in injury.
Make sure your chest is at least 25 centimeters from the steering wheel.
Using Right Steering Wheel Button
The buttons on the right side of the steering wheel can be used to adjust steering
wheel position, right side mirror, sound volume, etc.
GUM191170
Start Adjustment
Enter the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Position Adjustment > Steering Wheel > Start Adjusting to adjust
the position through the buttons on the right side of the steering wheel. See Start
Adjustment.
Adjusting the Right Side Mirror
Enter the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Position Adjustment > Rearview Mirrors > Start Adjusting to
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
75/295


adjust the position of the right side mirror through the buttons on the right side of
the steering wheel. See Side Mirrors Position Adjustment.
Volume Adjustment
In scenarios such as answering calls, talking with NOMI, and playing multimedia,
press the Up or Down button to adjust the volume, and press+hold the Down button
to mute the sound.
In other scenarios where there is no need for volume adjusting, holding the Up
button gives no response, and press+hold the Down button to mute the sound.
In the mute state, press the Up button to unmute.
Triggering the Custom Feature
Press+hold the Middle button on the right side of the steering wheel to trigger the
custom feature. The default triggered feature is NOMI, and you can change the
custom feature on the Settings interface by tapping Position Adjustment >
Steering Wheel > Steering Wheel Customized Keys.
Control within an Immediate Task
When the incoming call reminder is displayed, you can answer or reject the call
through the Left and Right buttons, and the Middle button is for confirming the
selection.
Switching the Normal Menu
Press+hold the Left or Right button to enter the "Switching Mode", in which you
can press the Left or Right button to switch the order of the menus.
After pressing the Middle button, or after 3 seconds with no operation on the Left
or Right button, the current menu will be selected automatically and the Switching
Mode will be exited.
Controls within the Menu
When the instrument cluster shows the Media/Third-party Software, Estimated
Range, Mileage, and Power Consumption menus, press the Left, Middle and Right
buttons on the right side of the steering wheel to switch the media/third-party
software type.
When the Media/Third-party Software menu is for Media: Left - previous track;
Right - next track; Middle - play/pause;
When the Media/Third-party Software menu is for Karaoke: Left - redo; Right -
next track; Middle - play/pause;
When the instrument cluster shows Team menu: Middle - sound record/send.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
76/295


Using Left Steering Wheel Button
The buttons on the left side of the steering wheel can be used to adjust the Left
Side Mirror and control the Driver Assistance feature.
GUM191172
Adjusting the Left Side Mirror
Enter the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Position Adjustment > Rearview Mirrors > Start Adjusting to
adjust the position of the left side mirror through the buttons on the left side of the
steering wheel. See Side Mirrors Position Adjustment.
Adjusting the Driver assistance control
Middle button: activate or exit driver assistance.
Up button: increase the cruising speed.
Down button: decrease the cruising speed.
Right button: increase the following distance.
Left button: decrease the following distance.
Press the Up or Down button: increase/decrease the cruise speed by 5 km/h;
press+hold the Up or Down button: increase/decrease the cruise speed by 1 km/h
continuously.
Press the Left or Right button: increase/decrease the following distance by 1 level;
where Level 1 is the closest, and Level 5 is the farthest.
Steering Wheel Heating
In cold weather, you can turn on the steering wheel heating feature by going to the
Comfort Panel interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center display
and tapping Seats > Heating > Steering Wheel Heating. The steering wheel will be
gradually heated to a comfortable temperature within about 10 minutes and will
maintain this temperature.
Smart Steering Wheel Heating: When the feature is enabled, the steering wheel
heating will be turned on automatically when the ambient temperature falls below
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
77/295


12°C and the interior temperature falls below 10°C; the lower the temperature, the
longer the heating period.
Double-button Restart of Steering Wheel
GUM191175
If the center display shows some abnormalities, such as screen stuttering or
unresponsive screen, try resolving by quickly restarting the vehicle system.
Instructions for Double-button Restart:
1. Turn on the hazard warning lights;
2. Park your vehicle in a safe area and put into P gear;
3. Press and hold the Right button on the left side of the steering wheel and the
Down button on the right side at the same time for about 8 seconds;
4. After about 30 seconds, all screens will light up and the system can resume
operation.
If the system has not returned to normal, please contact the NIO Service Center as
soon as possible.
Caution
The vehicle must be in PARK to use Dual-Button Restart. Please ensure that
the vehicle is parked in a safe area;
It is strictly forbidden to perform Dual-Button Restart while the vehicle is
moving;
Keep the hazard warning light on while the vehicle is in the system restart
process;
Do not perform Dual-Button Restart when the vehicle software is being
upgraded;
During the restart process, the vehicle status display, safety warning, surround
view image, map interface, and other information cannot be seen;
If the screen fails to resume normal operation after Dual-Button Restart, you
can try to lock the vehicle and put the vehicle to sleep. If the problem persists,
please contact NIO.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
78/295


USB Port
Three USB ports are provided in your vehicle, including one Type A port and two
Type C ports.
Location:
Safety Storage Box
Type A (2.5W) port: Used for exporting videos from the DVR and connecting a
microphone or a USB speaker;
Type C (60W) port: Used for charging mobile devices;
Under the Rear Row Air Conditioning Vents
Type C (60W) port: Used for charging mobile devices;
When the optional N-BOX is installed, six USB ports are provided in your vehicle,
including one Type A port and five Type C ports.
Safety Storage Box
GUM228267
② Type C (60W) port: Used for charging mobile devices;
③ Type A (2.5W) port: Used for exporting videos from the DVR and
connecting a microphone or a USB speaker;
④ Type C (60W) port: Used for connecting AR glasses and charging mobile
devices;
Under the Rear Row Air Conditioning Vents
GUM228352
Type C (60W) port: Used for connecting AR glasses and charging mobile
devices;
12V Power Supply
Your vehicle is equipped with two 12V power supplies.
Center console open storage space: located in the rear.
GUM191118
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
79/295


Rear trunk: on the left.
GUM191126
Wireless Charging
You can place your wireless charging equipment on the wireless charging board
next to the cup holder on the central armrest for wireless charging.
GUM190798
The wireless charging feature is enabled by default. You can enter the Wireless
Charging from the status bar at the top right of the center display to turn it off. The
current status is saved under the account of the owner or the authorized user. The
center display displays the current charging status.
When the NFC one-key pairing feature of interior Bluetooth is being used by the
wireless charging board, wireless charging will be temporarily stopped.
Wireless charging will stop in the following situations, and the center display will
prompt the relevant status:
The charging is completed.
Errors in the charging process, including vehicle power supply over-voltage or
under-voltage.
You can choose to disable NFC Detection, in which case the wireless charging
board won't recognize NFC cards and the card recognition prompt won't appear
when the phone is placed.
Caution
When wireless charging is enabled, any metal object (such as a key, coin or
NFC card) placed on the wireless charging board may affect its charging
efficiency or even lead to a burn.
When using wireless charging, do not place any metal objects between the
phone and the charging board, such as coins and cards with chips/battery. Do
not use phone cases with metal materials, such as those that support
magnetic charging (MagSafe).
It is normal for the phone to become hot after being charged for a long period
of time. Do not place a fully charged device on the charging board. Doing so
can cause overheating.
Do not charge two or more devices wirelessly at the same time.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
80/295


Please keep tiny items and liquids out of the cooling air vent, which is at the
bottom of the wireless charging board.
GUM192438
Front Windshield Wiper
The windshield wipers are used to clean the windshield. The different settings of
the windshield wipers can be set with the stalk on the right side of the steering
wheel.
GUM191131
Icon
Name
Feature
Operation Method
GUM155683
Single Wipe
The front wipers
enter the Single
Wipe mode
Move the wiper
stalk down quickly
GUM155688
Wipe Off
The front wipers
enter the Wipe Off
mode
Move the wiper
stalk to this position
GUM155684
Intermittent Wipe
The front wipers
enter the
Intermittent Wipe
mode
Move the wiper
stalk up to this
position
GUM155685
Continuous Wipe
The front wipers
enter the Low
Speed Wipe mode
Move the wiper
stalk up to this
position
GUM155686
The front wipers
enter the High
Speed Wipe mode
Continue to move
the wiper stalk up to
this position
GUM191132
When the wipers are in intermittent mode, adjust the speed of the windshield wipers
with the speed switch. Scroll up to increase the wipe frequency, and scroll down to
reduce the wipe frequency.
Warning
In winter, ensure that the wiper blades are not frozen and the ice or snow in front of
the windshield has been cleared before turning on the wipers.
Warning
Be sure to use sufficient washer fluid to keep the windshield wet when wiping the
windshield.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
81/295


Automatic Wipe
After the automatic front wiper feature is enabled, when the rain sensor detects
rain, the wipers start to move; when the rain stops, the wipers stop moving.
The wiper speed changes automatically in response to vehicle speed and rainfall.
GUM191133
Press the automatic wipe button 
GUM155701 at the end of the right stalk to
activate the automatic wipe feature. Press the button again or move the stalk up or
down to disable the automatic wipe feature.
Note
To avoid damage to the wipers, ensure that the auto wiper feature is disabled when
entering an automatic car wash machine.
Clean Front Windshield with Wipers
GUM191134
Pulling the wiper stalk on the right side of the steering wheel towards the driver's
face and selecting 
GUM155707 causes the wiper blades on the wiper arms to
spray water and the wipers to wipe at low speed. Release the wiper stalk to stop
the water spray.
Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display and tap Doors and Windows Lock > Wipers > Clean Plus. After this feature
is turned on, the wipers will wipe once more after the water spray. It is
recommended to turn off this feature in winter in colder regions.
Caution
To avoid damaging the washer pump, do not use the washer if the washer fluid is
insufficient.
Warning
In bad weather conditions, ensure that the wiper blades are not frozen or attached
to the windshield.
Manual Wipe
GUM229582
Toggle the wiper control lever upwards to activate the wiper. The speed of the
wiper increases with each level, reaching its maximum at level four.
Warning
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
82/295


In winter, ensure that the wiper blades are not frozen and the ice or snow in front of
the windshield has been cleared before turning on the wipers.
Warning
Be sure to use sufficient washer fluid to keep the windshield wet when wiping the
windshield.
Automatic Wipe
After the automatic front wiper feature is enabled, when the rain sensor detects
rain, the wipers start to move; when the rain stops, the wipers stop moving.
The wiper speed changes automatically in response to vehicle speed and rainfall.
GUM229583
Toggle the wiper control lever downwards to activate automatic front wiper, and the
instrument cluster indicates that Automatic front wiper is on. Toggle the lever
downwards again to turn it off, and the instrument cluster indicates that Automatic
front wiper is off.
Automatic Front Wiper Sensitivity Adjustment: Go to the Settings interface from
the control bar at the bottom of the center display, tap Doors and Windows Lock >
Wipers > Automatic Front Wiper Sensitivity, and then select a level. The level of
sensitivity increases with each level.
Note
To avoid damage to the wipers, ensure that the auto wiper feature is disabled when
entering an automatic car wash machine.
Clean Front Windshield with Wipers
GUM229584
Single wipe: Toggle the wiper control lever backward once to activate the front
wipers to wipe once.
GUM229585
Spray and wipe: Toggle and hold the wiper control lever backward, and the nozzles
on the wiper arms spray water, while the wipers wipe three times slowly. Release
the wiper control lever to stop the water spray.
Clean Plus: Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the
center display, and tap Doors and Windows Lock > Wipers > Clean Plus. After this
feature is enabled, the wipers will wipe once more after spraying water. We
recommend you turn off this feature in winter in northern regions.
Caution
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
83/295


To avoid damaging the washer pump, do not use the washer if the washer fluid is
insufficient.
Warning
In bad weather conditions, ensure that the wiper blades are not frozen or attached
to the windshield.
Front Windshield Wiper Rest Area Heating
The front windshield wiper rest area has a heating feature.
1. Controls on Center Display
When the ambient temperature is 5°C or below, turn on the Auto
Defogging from the Air Conditioning interface on the center display, and
the wiper rest area starts to heat up. When you turn off the Auto
Defogging, the wiper rest area stops heating.
When the ambient temperature is above 5°C, the wiper rest area will stop
heating.
2. App Control
When the ambient temperature is 5℃ or below, tap the One Touch Snow
Removal on the App, then the wiper rest area will start to heat up. When
you turn off the One Touch Snow Removal, the wiper rest area will stop
heating.
When the ambient temperature is above 5°C, the wiper rest area will stop
heating.
Automatic Heating of Side Mirrors and Rear Windshield
Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, tap Position Adjustment > Side Mirrors, and enable the automatic heating
feature for the side mirrors and rear windshield. When the front windshield wipers
are activated while driving on rainy days, the heating feature will be automatically
enabled to remove fog on the side mirrors and rear windshield.
Side Mirrors Position Adjustment
GUM191176
Enter the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, tap Position Adjustment > Side Mirrors > Start Adjustment, and then
adjust the position of the side mirrors through the steering wheel buttons, and tap
End Adjustment after the adjustment is completed; or swipe right from left on the
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
84/295


main interface of the center display to enter the Quick Access interface, and tap
Side Mirrors > Start Adjustment to adjust the position of the side mirrors.
The left buttons on the steering wheel is used to adjust the left side mirror, and the
right buttons on the steering wheel is used to adjust the right side mirror.
Adjustment Method:
Up and down buttons: Control the up and down rotation of the side mirrors;
Left and right buttons: Control the left and right rotation of the side mirrors;
Press: Rotate one level; Press+Hold: Continuously rotate.
Warning
Do not adjust the side mirrors while driving. Doing so may result in an accident.
Side Mirrors Folding
You can set up automatic folding for the side mirrors by going to Settings from the
bottom of the center display and tapping Position Adjustment > Side Mirrors >
Auto-Fold When Vehicle is Locked. Once the setup is complete, the side mirrors
will automatically fold when the vehicle is locked.
When you unlock the vehicle and close the driver door or press the brake pedal, the
side mirrors will automatically unfold.
If your vehicle passes through narrow roads at low speed (lower than 40 km/h), tap
Position Adjustment > Side Mirrors > Fold Side Mirrors on the Settings interface
to manually fold the side mirrors; Tap Fold Side Mirrors again, the side mirrors
extend again.
When reversing, you can turn on the Auto-Tilt When Reversing feature to see the
road better in order to assist in reversing.
Side Mirrors Heating
The side mirrors are equipped with a heating feature, which is used to heat the left
and right side mirrors to quickly remove water or snow on rainy and snowy days.
Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display and tap Position Adjustment > Side Mirrors > Side Mirrors Heating to
manually turn on the heating feature of the side mirrors.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
85/295


The heating feature of the side mirrors will be automatically turned off 60 minutes
after it was turned on, or it can be manually turned off using the center display.
Automatic Heating of Side Mirrors and Windshield
Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, tap on the Position Adjustment > Rearview Mirrors interface, and turn on
the automatic heating feature of the side mirrors and rear windshield. When the
front windshield wipers are turned on while driving on rainy days, the heating
feature will be turned on automatically to help remove fog on the side mirrors and
rear windshield.
Rearview Mirror and Side Mirrors Auto-Dimming
Go to the Settings interface in the control bar at the bottom of the center display,
and tap Position Adjustment > Side Mirrors > Rearview Mirror and Side Mirrors
Auto-Dimming to turn on the Rearview Mirror and Side Mirrors Auto-Dimming
feature.
Rearview Mirror and Side Mirrors Auto-Dimming feature helps reduce the glare in
the rearview mirror from the vehicle behind, which can improve driving safety.
Note
The auto-dimming feature is not available when your vehicle is in Reverse gear or
the front reading lights are turned on.
Climate Control
Control Bar
You can control the temperature and airflow distribution through the control bar at
the bottom of the center display.
GUM182996
1. Home
Tap to return to the home interface.
2. Settings
Tap to go to the list of settings.
3. Switching Between Recirculating Air and Outside Air
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
86/295


The current air flow mode is displayed. You can tap to select the following
three modes in sequence: recirculation 
GUM191855, automatic recirculation
or outside air 
GUM191857, and outside air 
GUM191858.
With automatic recirculation or outside air mode, if air pollution is serious,
outside air will be turned off automatically and switched to recirculation to
realize automatic control of air quality in the vehicle.
4. Driver Side Temperature Display
The target temperature on the driver side is displayed. You may tap on it to
enter the temperature control panel.
Swiping left or right adjusts the target temperature. The adjustment range on
the driver side is 15–31 ℃.
You can also press the arrow to adjust the target temperature. Each time you
press the arrow, the temperature can be adjusted by 0.5 ℃.
Select "SYNC" to adjust the air conditioning temperature for the front and rear
passengers together with the driver side. Manually adjusting the temperature
on the front passenger side or in the rear row will exit SYNC mode.
5. Air Conditioning Inlet and Air Volume Regulation
The ON/OFF status of the air conditioning is displayed. Tap to expand or
collapse the Climate Control Panel.
Press+hold and slide to adjust the level of the front fan speed. There are eight
levels, 0–8, where 0 turns off the air conditioning for the whole vehicle.h
6. Front Passenger Side Temperature Display
The target temperature on the front passenger side is displayed. You may tap
on it to enter the temperature control panel.
Swiping left or right adjusts the target temperature. The adjustment range on
the front passenger side is 15–31 ℃.
You can also press the arrow to adjust the target temperature. Each time you
press the arrow, the temperature can be adjusted by 0.5 ℃.
7. Front Windshield Defrosting/Defogging
When the front windshield defrosting/defogging feature is turned on, the
manual air conditioning (A/C) mode is turned on at the same time, the air
distribution mode is defrosting mode, and the air circulation is switched to the
automatic recirculation/outside air mode.
If the outside of the front windshield is foggy, it is recommended to turn on
the wipers and automatic climate control; if the inside of the front windshield
is foggy, it is recommended to turn on defogging for the front windshield.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
87/295


After the fog is cleared, switch to automatic climate control and turn on auto
defogging for the air conditioning.
Go to the Air Conditioning interface in the control bar of the center display,
tap 
GUM226592, and turn on Auto Defogging. Front windshield defogging
will be turned on automatically when the inside of the front windshield is about
to become foggy or slightly foggy.
8. Application Center
Applications in the center display of the vehicle.
9. Volume Adjustment
The default volume is 50%. Tap and then slide left or right to adjust the
volume.
Press+hold to mute, and press+hold again to unmute, and return to the volume
before the mute state.
Climate Control bar
To access the Climate Control Panel, tap the air conditioning button 
GUM223083
on the control bar at the bottom of the center display. You can set the air
conditioning's air volume, temperature, airflow direction and other features through
the climate control panel.
The air modes will be displayed while modifying the airflow direction of the air
vents:
Free: The air vent angles can be adjusted separately.
Balanced: The air vent angles are symmetrical.
Sweep: The air vent angles are set to sweep up and down, left and right.
Icon
Name
Feature
GUM223125
Air Conditioning Main
Switch
It controls the ON/OFF of
the air conditioning
throughout the vehicle;
GUM223129
Steering Wheel Heating
It controls the heating of
the steering wheel;
GUM223130
Cooling, Heating and
Ventilation Switch
Turn on the A/C, and the
whole vehicle's air
conditioning cools or heats;
Turn off the A/C, and the
whole vehicle's air
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
88/295


conditioning enters
ventilation mode;
GUM223081
Strong Cooling
When activated, the whole
vehicle's air conditioning
enters maximum cooling
mode;
GUM223133
Strong Heating
When activated, the whole
vehicle's air conditioning
enters maximum heating
mode;
GUM228739
Front Windshield
Defrosting and Defogging
When activated, it removes
fog from the interior of the
front windshield;
GUM223135
Rear Windshield Heating
When activated, the rear
windshield begins to heat
up, and the feature will be
turned off automatically
after 15 minutes;
GUM223140
Air Conditioning
Temperature Adjustment
It adjusts the air
conditioning temperature
within the range of 15~31℃;
GUM223141
Air Conditioning Air Volume
Adjustment
It adjusts the air
conditioning air volume
within the range of level
0~8;
GUM223142
Window Blowing Mode
The air conditioning vents
direct air to the front
windshield;
GUM223154
GUM223155
Face Blowing Mode
The air conditioning vents
direct air to the upper body
of the passenger;
GUM223156
GUM223157
Foot Blowing Mode
The air conditioning vents
direct air to the lower body
of the passenger;
GUM226592
Air Conditioning Comfort
Setting
Tap to access the Settings
interface for Ionizer, Auto
Defogging, AC
Deodorization and other
features.
Auto
Automatic Mode
In this mode, the
temperature, air volume,
airflow direction of the
front and rear rows' air
conditioning, and the
recirculation/outside air
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
89/295


mode will be adjusted
automatically according to
the temperature preset.
SYNC
Sync Mode
In SYNC mode, the cabin
temperature will be the
same as that of the
driver's.
Front Row Air Vents and Their Adjustment
The air vents in the front row of the vehicle are located at the front windshield, the
instrument panel and the leg space under the instrument panel.
GUM191135
GUM191136
1. Defrosting air vent at front windshield
2. Face blowing air vent at instrument panel
3. Foot blowing air vent under instrument panel
To adjust the air vent at the front row instrument panel, do as follows:
Press and hold the blowing area on the center display and then slide up or down to
control the vertical angle, and slide left and right to control the horizontal angle.
In the free mode, double-click the air vent position in the center display to close
the corresponding air vent. However, at least one air vent must be left open.
Rear Air Conditioning Vents and Adjustment
The rear row air vents are located behind the center armrest and at the bottom of
the driver and front passenger seats.
GUM191137
1. Rear row face blowing air vents
2. Rear row foot blowing air vents
To adjust the rear row face blowing air vents, do as follows:
GUM191138
The air conditioning on the left and right sides is managed by two knobs on the rear
row face blowing air vents.
Turn the knob up and down, left and right to adjust the airflow direction; turn the
knobs to the bottom on the left and right sides respectively to close the air vents.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
90/295


Tips for Using Air Conditioning
Make sure that the vent grille of the air conditioning is not blocked by foreign
objects (leaves, snow, etc.).
If the vehicle has been parked in the hot sun, opening the windows while
running the air conditioning can create convection, which helps the vehicle to
cool down faster.
Air Purification
PM2.5 Air Purification
View the current air quality in your vehicle at the upper right corner of the center
display, and tap to switch to the corresponding air purification mode.
OFF: Turns off air purification;
AUTO: Adjusts the purification airflow speed automatically according to the
concentration of PM 2.5 in the passenger compartment;
QUIET: Purifies the air in the passenger compartment in the low airflow speed
and silent state.
Ionizer
Go to the air conditioning comfort adjustment interface in the control bar at the
bottom of the center display, and tap 
GUM227134Ionizer to generate negative
ions while purifying the air, thereby further improving the air comfort in the vehicle.
AC Deodorization
If the air conditioning cooling is turned on in hot weather, some condensate may
remain in the climate control system when parking. Go to the air conditioning
comfort adjustment interface in the control bar at the bottom of the center display
and tap 
GUM227134 to enable AC Deodorization. When you leave and lock your
vehicle, if the system detects the residual condensate in the climate control system,
it will turn on the fan automatically and run it at the maximum air volume to keep
the evaporator and air pipe dry, thereby reducing the risk of bacteria breeding in
the humid environment.
You can select one of the two drying levels: Standard (the fan works for about 3
minutes continuously) and Strong (the fan works for about 20 minutes
continuously).
This feature increases energy consumption in certain circumstances, so make sure
that you plan your trip properly or turn the feature off if necessary.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
91/295


Remaining Life of Air Filter
After replacing the filter element, go to the air conditioning comfort adjustment
interface in the control bar at the bottom of the center display, tap 
GUM227134,
and select Air Conditioning Purifier Filter Element Life Timer to reset the filter
element service life timer.
Note
This reminder is the estimated service life, and the actual service life may vary due
to the environment and other factors. Please replace the air filter if necessary.
Intelligent Fragrance System
Your vehicle is equipped with an intelligent fragrance system. You and your family
can choose your favorite fragrance, and enjoy the fresh and comfortable olfactory
pleasure during the journey.
It provides you with a variety of scents. You can choose your favorite fragrance and
install it in the fragrance mechanism above the open storage area of the center
console, and change the fragrance vial according to your preferences.
How to install and change the fragrance vial:
1. Open the cap of the fragrance vial, insert the thin end of the fragrance vial
upward into the hole in the fragrance mechanism above the open storage area
of the center console, and gently press the bottom of the vial upward to
ensure that it is properly installed.
Caution
Do not rotate the fragrance cartridge when inserting it.
GUM190801
2. The fragrance vial will be secured by the magnet in the fragrance mechanism
once it is inserted into the hole.
3. The center display will prompt that the fragrance vial has been installed
successfully and display information about the fragrance inserted into the
corresponding hole.
4. When replacing the fragrance vial, pinch the bottom of the fragrance vial with
your fingers, and slowly remove the fragrance vial from the fragrance
mechanism.
After the fragrance is successfully installed, enter the Air Conditioning Settings
interface from the center display, tap Fragrance, and on this interface, you can
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
92/295


control whether the fragrance system is on/off, adjust the concentration of the
corresponding fragrance, and select fragrances with different scents.
Warning
Keep the fragrance cartridge out of the reach of children to prevent them
from swallowing it accidentally, as this may be detrimental to their health.
Do not allow your child to insert their finger into the fragrance holder. Doing
so may result in injury.
To ensure your safety, do not insert or replace the fragrance cartridge while
driving.
If you or any passenger feels discomfort, disable the fragrance system
immediately.
Caution
Please check the expiration date before inserting the fragrance cartridge. The
fragrance has a shelf life of one year if the bottle remains unopened; after the
bottle is opened, the fragrance can last three months. Stop using the
fragrance and replace it after it expires.
Some fragrances (e.g. Wild) have a stimulating effect. Please use it only when
needed.
When replacing the fragrance cartridge, keep your hands clean to ensure the
fragrance system can function normally after it is replaced.
A magnet is placed in each fragrance holder. Keep your smart phone, tablet
and other electronic devices away from the holder to avoid any interference
between electronic devices and the fragrance system.
Chemical reactions may occur between the fragrance and organic substances.
Keep the ceramic fragrance stuck in the fragrance cartridge and away from all
plastic parts.
Note
The experience with the fragrance system may vary depending to the cabin
temperature, fan speed, and user’s physical condition.
Only purchase genuine ceramic fragrance sticks and avoid damaging the
fragrance cartridge to ensure its quality.
If the fragrance cartridge cannot be identified after it is inserted, please try
again.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
93/295


NOMI Smart Assistant
The vehicle smart assistant, NOMI, is placed above the vehicle center console. You
and your passengers can easily control different features by simply talking to NOMI,
your thoughtful helper during the journey.
GUM190799
GUM190800
After you've entered the car, NOMI will greet you warmly. Whenever you need NOMI,
say the wake-up words "Hi, NOMI" or press the voice button on the right side of
the steering wheel. After NOMI responds, just say what you have to say (see some
examples below ). When the conversation ends or the designated request has been
completed, NOMI will automatically enter standby mode. Whenever necessary, you
can always wake up NOMI again.
Tell NOMI your opinion about the different features of the car by saying "I want to
give feedback." NOMI will record your feedback for up to 60 seconds and send it to
our product expert team, together with the necessary information, including your
vehicle ID, account ID, and time stamp. The recording will be sent after the
countdown.
Please find some examples of NOMI commands here, including but not limited to
the listed function:
Topic
Voice command examples
Climate
"Climate control on"
"Turn off the fan"
"Defrost mode on"
Lights
"Change ambient light to green"
"Turn on the resding lights"
"Turn off all lights"
Comfort
"Fold the mirrors"
"I want seat heating"
"Open my window by 10%"
"Close all windows"
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
94/295


"Pet mode on"
"Turn on parking camera"
Media
"Play music"
"Play favorites"
"Play 'Blinding lights' on Tidal"
"Next song"
"Repeat"
"Pause"
"Play radio"
"Increase volume"
Navigation
"Mute navigation"
"Go to [address]"
"Drive me to a hospital"
"find me a coffee shop"
"End navigation"
"Find a charging station"
"I need a power swap station"
"Mute navigation"
Phone
"Accep the call"
"Decline the call"
"Call [contact name]"
"Call back"
Others
"Mute system"
"Mute yourself"
"Unmute"
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
95/295


"Turn on Bluetooth"
"Take a picture"
"Increase the cenrtal screen brightnes"
Warning
Do not allow NOMI and its base to come into contact with liquids, acidic or
alkaline solutions, dust, fibers, magnetic substances, or other similar materials.
Do not attempt to dismantle or repair NOMI and its base on your own.
Do not apply excessive force to push, pull, or twist NOMI. Refrain from
impeding the movement of NOMI with external pressure.
Do not attempt to remove NOMI and its base by yourself.
To prevent damaging NOMI hardware, do not install hard helmets or caps on
it. In the event of an accident, it will help you avoid personal injury.
Music
You can go to the Media interface from the main interface of the center display to
select the program for listening to music:
Select "Tidal" to discover and listen to your favorite music. You can also use it
to build a library of your preferred songs or albums.
Insert a USB flash disk into the USB port in your vehicle to play the music in
the USB flash disk.
After a mobile device is connected to your vehicle's Bluetooth, you can select
"Bluetooth Music" to play the music in the mobile device.
You can go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the
center display, and tap Sound to set the volume for media music. Select "Sound
Mode" to set the sound field effect in the passenger compartment. If necessary (for
example, when a child is sleeping in the rear row), the rear mute feature can be
turned on.
Dolby Atmos provides a finely tuned, balanced audio experience with an optimal
music listening configuration for the vehicle's interior environment. As a result, the
vehicle becomes an ideal immersive space for enjoying music, which sounds more
layered and richer than ever before. This product is manufactured under the license
of Dolby Laboratories. Dolby, Dolby Atmos and the double-D symbol are registered
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
96/295


trademarks of Dolby Laboratories Licensing Corporation. This is an unpublished
product. © 2012-2021 Dolby Laboratories, Inc. All rights reserved.
Navigation
You can select your navigation route on the navigation interface from the main
page of the center display. If you have previously sent a navigation route through
your mobile app, the selected navigation route will be displayed automatically when
the center display is turned on.
Tap 
 to set navigation options, such as route preference, navigation voice
broadcast, and map display mode.
Photos
Photographing
NOMI can capture your selfies inside the car upon request. The center display's
Photos application is where videos or photos are stored. To transfer them, use a
USB cable.
Photos
You can access Photos in the application center on the center display and see all
the photos in it. You can select the ones to be exported or deleted. There are
various categories of photos: All/Digital Video Recorder (DVR)/Smart
Guardian/Quick Video Recording/Selfie/Screenshot, and more.
Phone
When your mobile phone's Bluetooth is successfully paired with your vehicle's
Bluetooth, the on-board Bluetooth phone feature can be used after your vehicle is
authorized on your mobile phone to synchronize your mobile phone contacts and
recent calls. You can see the Phone interface on the main interface or on the
application center in the center display.
When your contacts and recent calls in your mobile phone are synchronized to your
vehicle, you can choose a specific contact or recent call or enter a phone number
directly to make a call. You can switch between private mode and hands-free mode
during a call.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
97/295


You can browse your recent calls, or switch to other Bluetooth phone devices or
hide your recent calls in the dialing interface.
Connect to Mobile Device
You can connect mobile devices (such as mobile phones, tablets) to the vehicle
through interior Bluetooth or Wireless hotspots, and the center display can
synchronize the entertainment features (such as phone contacts, music) in the
mobile device with your confirmation, which is convenient for you to better
experience the entertainment features inside the vehicle. When you connect the
same mobile device to the vehicle the next time, it can be automatically
synchronized to the center display without reconfirmation.
Tap the Bluetooth/Wireless hotspot icon at the top of the center display to select
the Bluetooth or Wireless hotspot you want to connect to:
1. Turn on the Bluetooth or Wi-Fi feature on your mobile device (mobile phone or
tablet).
2. Turn on the Bluetooth or Wireless hotspot feature on the center display.
3. Select the mobile device you want to connect to on the current interface of
the center display, and manually pair it with the vehicle to connect.
You can also quickly connect to Bluetooth and Wireless hotspot with one tap on the
central control wireless charging board (only for some mobile phone models):
1. Turn on the NFC and Bluetooth/Wi-Fi features on the phone.
2. Place your phone on the wireless charging board of the center console.
GUM190798
3. Open the Bluetooth or Hotspot interface on the center display, and select
"One-tap quick connection through the mobile NFC feature".
Note
Do not remove your phone from the charging pad when it is connected to the
vehicle via Bluetooth or Hotspot.
Tide
Tide is a physical and psychological health app that helps you sleep, meditate,
relax, and stay focused. Inspired by travels, nature and meditation, Tide provides a
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
98/295


wealth of audio resources such as sounds of nature and meditation exercises to
help you escape from the fast-paced world for a quiet space of peace, where you
can meditate for a while to relax your mind and sleep better with less anxiety and
stress while staying focused and calm.
Tide offers three modes, namely Nap, Meditation, and Breathing.
Nap Mode
You and your family can fall asleep to the sounds of nature in the vehicle and wake
up to a soft alarm to embrace a beautiful world.
You or your authorized users can enter the application launcher to open the Tide >
Nap page where sound scenarios and alarm time for the nap can be set and
memorized for the specific account.
Nap by Time: You can set a nap countdown to wake you up at the set time.
You can also choose to continue or end the nap upon the alarm.
Nap by Charge: If the vehicle is in the DC charging process, you can set a
battery level within the charging limit to have a nap until the set level is
reached.
GUM182953 More settings are provided, including volumes and timed
playback of sleep aid sounds, alarm clock sounds and volumes, and seat
position restoration switch upon the end of nap.
GUM182954 Set sleep aid sound scenarios.
After the vehicle enters the Nap Mode, the in-vehicle lighting will be turned off, with
windows and doors closed and locked, the climate control will be automatically set
to the temperature comfortable for a nap, and the air purifier will be automatically
turned on. If you sit in a front seat, the seat will automatically move to the relax
position (if set previously) or the default position. NOMI will enter the Do Not
Disturb Mode to create a relaxing atmosphere for you. After the nap ends, the
vehicle will restore the settings before the nap.
Caution
Before entering the Nap Mode, make sure the vehicle is in PARK and not in
the power swap mode.
Close all the doors and the liftgate before starting the Nap Mode to ensure
safety.
A fault with the climate control system may compromise the comfort during
the nap.
When the front seats are moving backward at the beginning of the nap, pay
attention to the space for occupants on rear seats.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
99/295


If the vehicle is not being charged, make sure that its remaining range is not
less than 60 km. The time alarm will be triggered automatically when the
remaining range is less than 30 km, and the charging alarm will be triggered
automatically when the charging connector is disconnected or the charging
runs into a fault, to remind you to check the battery level.
The vehicle will automatically exit the Nap Mode under certain circumstances,
for example, when the vehicle is not in PARK, the battery has a risk of ignition,
a software update is in progress, the vehicle is in the power swap mode, the
vehicle is locked for sleep, the climate control is faulty, and the account is
switched. In this case, the seats cannot be automatically restored to the
positions before the nap.
Meditation Mode
The Meditation Mode provides an immersive experience to give your brain break, so
that you can feel your inner self and your surroundings and reduce your physical
and mental exhaustion.
You or your authorized users can enter the application launcher to open the Tide >
Meditation page where sound scenarios and sound volumes for the meditation can
be set and memorized for the specific account.
After the vehicle enters the Meditation Mode, the in-vehicle lighting will be turned
off, with windows and doors closed and locked, the climate control will be
automatically set to the temperature comfortable for meditation, and the air purifier
will be automatically turned on. NOMI will enter the Do Not Disturb Mode to create
an immersive and quiet atmosphere for you. After the meditation ends, the vehicle
will restore the settings before the meditation.
Caution
Please verify that the vehicle is in the park gear and not in the power swap
mode.
Please close all doors and the tailgate before starting the mode to ensure
safety.
If the vehicle is not in charging process, it is necessary to ensure that the
vehicle range is not less than 30 kilometers.
The vehicle will automatically exit the current mode in certain situations, such
as if it is in a non-park gear, has a risk of battery fire, has software updates,
has entered power swap mode, is locked and asleep, and is switching
accounts.
Breathing Mode
The Breathing Mode helps you learn how to breathe properly, calm yourself down,
and relieve stress.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
100/295


You or your authorized users can enter the application launcher to open the Tide >
Breathing page where breathing scenarios and background sound scenarios and
volumes can be set and memorized for the specific account.
Caution
Please verify that the vehicle is in the park gear and not in the power swap
mode.
Please close all doors and the tailgate before starting the mode to ensure
safety.
If the vehicle is not in charging process, it is necessary to ensure that the
vehicle range is not less than 30 kilometers.
The vehicle will automatically exit the current mode in certain situations, such
as if it is in a non-park gear, has a risk of battery fire, has software updates,
has entered power swap mode, is locked and asleep, and is switching
accounts.
Smart Action
You can tap Smart Action in the application launcher on the center display to freely
combine apps for customized scenarios, or enter the Square interface to enjoy a
personalized and automated intelligent experience using the recommended Smart
Action templates.
Actions that support custom shortcuts include: time, media, weather, cabin comfort,
driving, charge, doors, windows, seats, lighting, system settings and applications,
and other common settings. You can also share custom scenarios with friends.
Instrument Cluster Indicators
If the following indicators do not light up or go out normally, please contact the NIO
Service Center for assistance immediately.
Symbol on Instrument Cluster Display
Description
GUM168859
Automatic high and low beam control
indicator
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
101/295


GUM168860
High beam indicator
GUM193362
Autohold indicator
GUM193364
Position lights indicator
GUM193365
Low beam indicator
GUM193366
Front fog lights indicator
GUM193367
Vehicle ready indicator
GUM193369
Left turn signal indicator
GUM193370
Right turn signal indicator
GUM193371
Rear fog lights indicator
GUM193372
Ice- and snow-covered road indicator
GUM193373
Acoustic Vehicle Alerting System (AVAS)
off indicator
GUM193374
Brake system fault indicator
GUM193375
Electronic stability control system
on/fault indicator
GUM193377
Low battery indicator of high-voltage
battery
GUM193296
Exceeding speed limit prompt or speed
limit mode malfunction indicator
GUM193392
Trailer connection status indicator
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
102/295


GUM193297
Intelligent headlight malfunction indicator
GUM193300
Electronic stability control system off
indicator
GUM193303
Driver Drowsiness and Attention Warning
(DDAW) system fault/start self-
inspection indicator
GUM193304
Driver Drowsiness and Attention Warning
(DDAW) system indicator for no face
detected
GUM193396
Lane Departure Warning (LDW) and
Assist off indicator
GUM193302
Speed Limit Warning off indicator
GUM193376
Limited power warning light
GUM193379
Anti-lock braking system fault warning
light
GUM193380
Direct Tire Pressure Monitoring System
(dTPMS) warning light
GUM193381
High-voltage battery cut-off warning
light
GUM193309
Autonomatic Emergency Brake
(AEB)/Forward Collision Warning (FCW)
off and fault warning light
GUM193393
Hands-off reminder status indicator
GUM193394
Charging cable connected indicator
GUM193386
Electronic parking brake indicator
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
103/295


GUM193299
Driver Drowsiness and Attention Warning
(DDAW) status indicator
GUM193388
E-Powertrain System fault warning light
GUM193391
EPB fault warning light
GUM193383
Seat belt unfastened reminder warning
light
GUM193384
Airbag fault warning light
GUM193390
Drive motor fault warning light
GUM193385
Low voltage battery charging fault
warning light
GUM193387
High-voltage battery fault warning light
GUM193389
High-voltage battery over-temperature
warning light
GUM193298
Trailer electrical connection fault warning
light
GUM193307
Blind Spot Detection and Lane Change
Alert fault warning light
GUM193308
Front Cross Traffic Alert (FCTA)/Rear
Cross Traffic Alert with Braking (RCTA-
B) fault warning light
GUM193311
Driver Assistance fault warning light
GUM193301
Speed limit feature fault warning light
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
104/295


GUM193310
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with
Fusion fault warning light
GUM193314
Lane Departure Warning (LDW) and
Assist fault warning light
Controls on Center Display
Front Center Display
After you or authorized users log in, the vehicle's center display can help you easily
access rich personal resources such as music, navigation, and radio stations. You
can also customize your favorite content and store it in your personal account. The
personalized content saved in your account can be displayed the next time you
login in to your account. You can switch different accounts freely in your vehicle,
and the customized content for different accounts will be presented to you.
You can select different features (media, navigation, etc.) on the main interface of
the center display. The features are as follows:
1. Prompt Bar
Displays prompt messages, warning messages, warning icons, etc.
2. Tile Feature Menu
Press+hold to switch to different feature tiles, such as music, weather, etc.
3. Main Interface
To return to the main interface, tap this button or five-finger pinch on any
interface of the center display.
4. Vehicle Settings
Configure the settings for common features.
You can also swipe right from the left edge of the center display to enter the
Quick Access interface. On this interface, you can access frequently used
features quickly and customize quick access features.
5. Air Conditioning and Comfort Feature Interface
Quickly set the air conditioning, seats, and comfort features here.
6. Application Center
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
105/295


Select different applications, such as weather and photos.
7. Volume Settings
Quickly set the system and media volume.
Event Data Recorder (EDR)
This vehicle is equipped with an Event Data Recorder(EDR). The main purpose of an
EDR is to record the data of some collisions or the conditions similar to a collision,
such as airbag deployment or collision with obstacles on the road; these data can
help to check the operation status of the vehicle's systems.
The EDR on this vehicle can temporarily or permanently store technical information
such as vehicle status, events and faults. These technical information can usually
record the following status of components, modules, systems and environments:
Status information of the vehicle and its individual components, such as
vehicle speed, acceleration and vehicle identification code.
Feature status of important system components, such as seat belt buckles.
Vehicle reaction under special conditions, such as the triggering of airbags
and the intervention of electronic stability program (ESP).
Data of a period of time before and after a collision accident, such as braking,
acceleration, steering operation, accident occurrence time, deployment
information of occupant protection devices, seat belt status information, etc.
These data help to better check the conditions when a collision or an injury occurs.
In EDR, the recording of vehicle speed comes from the brake control unit.
These data are only of natural attributes, which are used to identify and eliminate
faults and optimize vehicle features, and the motion characteristics of road sections
passed cannot be created based on these data. When carrying out service work
such as repair and maintenance, service personnel and the manufacturer can read
these technical data from the event and fault data memory by using a special
diagnostic device. After the fault is eliminated, the information in the fault memory
can be deleted or overwritten continuously.
When the vehicle is being used, these technical parameters and other information
related to the vehicle, such as accident records, vehicle damage, evidence, etc.
(which may require the intervention of professionals), can be read by using a
diagnostic device in a NIO Service Center.
If the EDR system does not have enough space to record an event, the current
event data will overwrite the previous unlocked event data, but the overwriting
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
106/295


should be in a chronological order. A locked event will not be overwritten by
subsequent events.
Note
NIO will not disclose any information recorded in the system to a third party without
your permission or consent.
System Update
Your vehicle comes with a remote upgrade system. When the vehicle is connected
to the Internet, you can go to the Settings interface from the bottom of the center
display, and tap General > System Update to upgrade the vehicle system software.
and keep your vehicle features up to date. You will be notified by a message when
a software update is available. You can choose to start the upgrade immediately or
schedule a time for upgrade (the vehicle can automatically start upgrading at the
appointed time). During the upgrade, the center display will show the time needed
to complete the process (which depends on the size of the upgrade package).
Caution
The system upgrade function is only available for the vehicle owner's account.
The system upgrade can only be carried out when the vehicle is in the parked
state (in the P gear) and connected to the network.
The system upgrade process will consume a certain amount of power. Before
the system upgrade, please ensure that the battery level of the vehicle is
greater than 20% and your trip has been reasonably planned.
If the system upgrade is performed for the vehicle during the charging
process, the charging process will stop automatically. After the system
upgrade is completed, you can resume the charging process manually.
During the system upgrade process, the vehicle can also be unlocked/locked
with the NFC/mobile Bluetooth key in addition to the smart key. The vehicle
cannot be driven.
System upgrades may result in updates or additions of some features, as well
as changes in the usage habits of certain features. Please read the upgrade
instructions carefully to understand the updated or added features after the
system upgrade is completed. Please use the updated function with caution if
you are unfamiliar with it to avoid personal injury or property damage due to a
misoperation.
If the system upgrade cannot be started or is not completed successfully,
please contact the NIO service center immediately.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
107/295


Do not modify vehicle components or software by yourself to avoid personal
injury or property damage due to a system upgrade failure.
Resetting All Settings
When you need to sell the vehicle, you can erase all content and settings by
entering Settings from the bottom of the center display, and tap General > Reset
All Settings.
The following data and settings will be erased, including vehicle settings (such as
settings for seats, side mirrors, and climate control), driving settings (such as ADAS
and driving mode), NOMI settings, system settings (such as time and date),
navigation settings, media playlists, and photos & videos.
Caution
Reset All Settings is only accessible to the main user and must be performed
while the vehicle is not in motion.
During the reset, the instrument cluster and center display will go dark and
flash. Do not drive the vehicle at this time because it may cause unanticipated
consequences.
After the reset, the vehicle will be returned to inactive status and must be
reactivated before it may be used.
All application data and system settings will be reset following a reset. All
images and videos stored in this vehicle will be deleted. It is recommended
that users back up any necessary files in advance. You can access Photos
from the application center on the center display, choose the files you wish to
save, and then tap Export to USB drive.
Reset All Settings will not delete the user's personal cloud data, such as
driving preferences, frequently visited destinations in Navigation and music
playlists.
Basic Operations
Starting the Vehicle
The vehicle can get ready to drive when the following conditions are met:
1. The driver is seated.
2. Close the driver door or press the brake pedal.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
108/295


The driver can start the vehicle in many ways such as with the Smart Key, NFC
card, and mobile phone NFC.
If the mobile phone NFC or NFC card is used, place the mobile phone with the NFC
key or NFC card on the wireless charging board, keep the mobile phone unlocked
and fit it into the wireless charging board, and then try to engage the gear and start
the vehicle.
Caution
When using NFC for vehicle startup, ensure that your phone or card key is placed
on the wireless charging board.
Caution
When using the NFC key, ensure that your phone is powered on and unlocked.
Unfortunately, due to Apple's restrictions on third-party access to NFC
permissions, the iOS system is currently not supported.
Caution
In case of a collision, the impact force is transmitted to the driver’s lower leg
through the accelerator pedal, causing personal injury. Therefore, the accelerator
pedal has a fracture limiter groove to protect the driver’s legs and personal safety.
In unexpected situations where a great lateral external force is applied to the
vehicle, the accelerator pedal may break due to the limiter groove design.
Gear Shifting
After pressing the brake pedal and toggling the gear shifter into the D or R gear,
the digital instrument cluster displays 
, indicating that power output is ready.
After shifting the gear, the digital instrument cluster will display the real-time gear
position of the vehicle. If the shifting fails, the digital instrument cluster will prompt
you to confirm the current gear.
You can use the P-R-D gear shifter to control gear switching, including:
Drive gear (D gear): used in normal drive mode.
Reverse gear (R gear): can only be engaged in the parking state.
Parking gear (P gear): prevents slipping in the parking state.
Go to Settings from the bottom of the center display, and tap Sound > Gear Shift
Sound to enable or disable the ringer and alerts.
For example, the vehicle can be switched to Neutral (N) gear in specific conditions
such as while pushing the vehicle and automatic washing.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
109/295


Go to Settings from the bottom of the center display）, and tap Driving and
Parking > N (NEUTRAL) to enable or disable Neutral (N) gear.
Caution
Be sure to confirm the gear position on the digital instrument cluster after shifting,
and re-shift the gear if the digital instrument cluster indicates a different gear than
intended.
Caution
The Park (P) gear can only be engaged while the vehicle is stationary and the brake
pedal is depressed.
Warning
Before leaving the vehicle or parking it on a slope, please ensure that the Park (P)
gear is engaged. If no gear position is displayed on the instrument cluster, the
vehicle may move without control.
Electric Parking Brake
When switching to the Park gear, the parking brake will be automatically activated,
and the digital instrument cluster displays 
, indicating that the Electric Parking
Brake has been enabled.
When locked from the outside of the vehicle, the vehicle's power will be
automatically turned off, and the center display and digital instrument cluster will be
shut down at the same time.
You can switch the vehicle to the Park gear in the following ways:
Press the P gear button on the side of the gear selector in the center console.
Go to Settings from the bottom of the center display, and tap Driving and
Parking > EPB to park.
When the digital instrument cluster displays 
, it indicates that the brake system is
faulty. Please drive carefully and contact the NIO Service Center for maintenance.
Feature Settings
Autohold
Autohold is to keep the vehicle stationary for temporary parking when the brake
pedal is released.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
110/295


During the driving process, when you press the brake pedal until the vehicle comes
to a stop, pressing the brake pedal further will activate the Autohold feature.
The 
 icon is displayed on the digital instrument cluster when the Autohold feature
is activated. When it is activated, you can step on the accelerator pedal or the
brake pedal to deactivate Autohold.
Caution
The Autohold mode will not be enabled when the vehicle is in REVERSE (R gear).
You still need to use Full Press Activation to park.
You can also floor the brake pedal to activate Autohold in an emergency.
You can also activate Autohold when parking on an uphill road, where the braking
system will provide sufficient braking force to keep the vehicle stationary in
accordance with the gradient of the slope.
Caution
The gradient of the slope should not exceed 20%.
Emergency Braking
In the event of a brake pedal failure, you can activate Emergency Braking by
pressing the P gear button, which will produce full braking deceleration under
normal circumstances to stop the vehicle.
Press+hold the P gear button to activate Emergency Braking.
Release the P gear button, or step on the accelerator pedal to deactivate
Emergency Braking. To re-activate Emergency Braking, you will need to press
the button again.
Caution
The Emergency Braking feature should only be activated in emergency situations,
such as brake pedal failure or sticking.
Warning
When you drive on large curves, uneven roads, or icy and snowy roads in winter,
activating the emergency braking feature may cause your vehicle to spin or slip.
Please drive with caution.
Hill Start Assist
Hill Start Assist prevents your vehicle from rolling backwards when starting uphill.
When your foot switches from the brake pedal to the accelerator pedal, the
pressure on the brake pedal will be maintained in the brake system for a maximum
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
111/295


of 2 seconds. The temporary braking effect will disappear after 2 seconds or when
you accelerate.
Lead Vehicle Start Alert
After the vehicle stops by following the lead vehicle, if the lead vehicle drives away,
Lead Vehicle Start Alert will send you a reminder.
Go to Settings from the bottom of the center display, and tap Driver Assistance >
Lead Vehicle Start Alert to turn this feature on or off.
With this feature enabled in the manual driving mode, if you do not follow after the
lead vehicle starts, the vehicle will remind you.
Warning
Lead Vehicle Start Alert serves as a reference only and cannot substitute your
visual observation. You must always pay attention to the traffic conditions and road
conditions, and drive at an appropriate and safe speed in compliance with
applcable traffic laws and regulations.
Drive Mode
There are five basic drive modes on the vehicle: Sport+, Sport, Comfort, Eco, and
Custom. You can change the Acceleration, Regenerative Braking, Steering Force,
and Climate control settings using the modes.
Drive modes can be selected to alter the vehicle's driving characteristic, improve
your driving experience, or accommodate your unique driving requirements in
special cases.
Sport+
Sport
Comfort
Eco
Custom
Acceleration 4s
5.9s
7.9s
9.9s
4s, 5.9s,
7.9s, 9.9s,
12.9s
Regenerative
Braking
Low
Low
Low
Standard
Standard,
Low, Very
Low
Steering
Force
Steady
Standard
Comfort
Comfort
Steady,
Standard,
Comfort
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
112/295


Climate
control
Standard
Standard
Standard
Eco
Standard,
Eco
Note: Sport+, Sport, Comfort and Eco modes are customizable except for
acceleration performance.
In Eco mode, the system will prioritize the saving of energy consumption for your
vehicle. Compared with other drive modes, the comfortableness of the air
conditioning is slightly poor. If necessary, you can set a higher or lower temperature
than what is set in other modes manually.
Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Driving and Parking > Drive mode to enter the settings.
Scenario Assist
Snow Mode
Snow mode is appropriate for snow-covered roads, low-traction roads with a
mixture of wet asphalt, snow, and ice, as well as slippery grass.
When the mode is activated, the vehicle retains all-wheel drive, with power
distributed evenly to the front and rear wheels, and the accelerator pedal is
relatively gentle, so as to guarantee a smooth start and to avoid slipping on slippery
surfaces such as ice, which secures the driving through snowy terrain.
Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Driving and Parking > Snow Mode to turn this feature on or off.
Caution
The Snow Mode of your vehicle can improve your driving safety. However, please
still drive with caution, and depress the accelerator and brake pedal slowly to
control your vehicle speed. Pay attention to whether there are foreign objects in the
surrounding environment of your vehicle to avoid damaging your vehicle.
Wet Mode
Wet Mode is appropriate for slick hard asphalt or flooded roads, as well as
congested, slick sand and mud conditions.
Wet Mode increases stability and smoothness of the vehicle when starting, braking,
and cornering. The vehicle retains all-wheel drive, with power distributed evenly to
the front and rear wheels and with extremely low regenerative braking.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
113/295


Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Driving and Parking > Wet Mode to turn this feature on or off.
Caution
The Wet Mode of your vehicle can improve your driving safety. However,
please still drive with caution, and depress the accelerator and brake pedal
slowly to control your vehicle speed. Pay attention to whether there are
foreign objects in the surrounding environment of your vehicle to avoid
damaging your vehicle.
Do not drive your vehicle onto muddy or swampy roads to avoid getting stuck
or trapped.
Sand Mode
Sand Mode is appropriate for congested hard roadbed sandy soil and Gobi road
surfaces.
Sand Mode smooths out the vehicle's starting and braking, allowing for some side-
to-side slippage while preventing bogging and retaining forward ability. To improve
driving enjoyment in sandy conditions, the vehicle retains all-wheel drive with
increased power delivery to the rear axle, more aggressive power delivery, and
vehicle stability control with extremely low regenerative braking.
Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Driving and Parking > Sand Mode to turn this feature on or off.
Caution
The Sand Mode of your vehicle can improve your driving safety. However,
please still drive with caution, and pay attention to whether there are foreign
objects in the surrounding environment of your vehicle to avoid damaging your
vehicle.
Please do not drive your vehicle into soft deserts and seaside beaches to
avoid getting stuck.
Trailer Mode
The vehicle automatically detects trailer connection and adjusts settings such as
suspension height, rearview mirror angle, driver assistance, and safety features to
adapt to the towing scenario.
Before towing, please shift to the P gear, go to the Settings interface from the
control bar at the bottom of the center display, and tap Driving and Parking > Tow
Hitch. This will extend the tow hitch. When a trailer is towed, Trailer Mode must
always be active. When you connect the trailer's electrical harness, the vehicle will
enable Trailer Mode after you confirm. Trailer Mode is deactivated when the trailer's
electrical harness is disconnected. To manually enable or exit Trailer Mode, go to
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
114/295


the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center display and
tap Driving and Parking > Trailer Mode. One of the following indicators is displayed
on the instrument cluster at this time:
Icon
Description
GUM221925
The vehicle has detected the connection
of the trailer lights, but Trailer Mode is
not activated. The vehicle may already
have an accessory connected.
GUM193909
The vehicle has detected an electrical
connection fault with the trailer lights.
Some or all of the trailer lights may be
faulty. To ensure your safety, pull over as
soon as possible and check the wiring or
connection of the trailer lights for faults.
If the problem has been resolved but the
red icon is still on, please try turning off
Trailer Mode and then turning it on again.
Warning
Before towing, be sure to check that the Tow Mode is on.
Under no circumstances should the Tow Mode be exited during the towing
process. Doing so may result in serious injury and/or death.
Do not use the ride height adjustment setting on the center display to properly
match the height of the towing device to the height of the trailer.
Note
Some PILOT features (Steering Assist,Active Lane Change, etc.) as well as
kick sensors, easy entry, and ultrasonic sensors may not be available in the
Trailer Mode.
Please connect your vehicle to a trailer under the normal ride height. If you
enter the Trailer Mode under an abnormal ride height, the ride height will be
automatically adjusted to normal.
ECO+ Mode
The power consumption of the vehicle can be reduced to attain greater range by
disabling features that are not required for driving to meet the driving needs at the
minimum.
In ECO+ Mode, the vehicle's top speed is constrained, driver assistance and other
features are momentarily inaccessible, and comfort features like air conditioning
and ambient lighting are also restricted.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
115/295


Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Driving and Parking > ECO+ Mode to turn this feature on or off.
You can switch to any regular drive mode or exit the ECO+ Mode by tapping the
button again.
Pet Mode
When the vehicle is put in P gear, go to Settings from the bottom of the center
display, and tap Driving and Parking > Pet Mode to turn it on. You can keep your
pets in your vehicle when necessary. After locking the vehicle and leaving, it will
maintain an appropriate temperature inside the vehicle, ensuring the safety of both
your pet and the vehicle. You can manually disable the Pet Mode through the
central control screen or the mobile App whenever needed.
After you set the Pet Mode to ON, when you successfully lock your vehicle, the air
conditioning air volume, the ventilation mode and the internal and external
circulation will enter automatic mode (the temperature in your vehicle is 22 ℃ by
default and can be manually set). The center display will display the cabin
temperature and a prompt stating that pets have been intentionally left in the
vehicle. The brightness of the instrument cluster will be adjusted to the minimum,
and the brightness of the center display will be adjusted to 50%. At this time, the
NOMI voice wake-up feature will be disabled, the window adjustment button will
not be available, and the child locks will be activated for the rear doors and
windows to ensure the safety of your pets and vehicle.
The Pet Mode is disabled by default before each drive, and once enabled, it can
maintain the previous state even if the account is switched.
Caution
Pet Mode is only for the temporary placement of pets. Please do not leave
children alone in your vehicle.
It is not possible to activate Pet Mode simultaneously with Power-Keep Mode
or Camping Mode.
After Pet Mode is activated, Smart Guardian and Real-Time Surround View
are temporarily unavailable. They can be reactivated after Pet Mode is exited
and your vehicle is locked.
After Pet Mode is activated, system update and gear shifting operations
cannot be performed for your vehicle.
Pet Mode can only be activated when your vehicle is in P gear and all four
doors are closed. If your vehicle is in N gear, Pet Mode cannot be activated.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
116/295


After Pet Mode is activated, you will be prompted with a message that your
pets are in your vehicle through your mobile App every two hours. If the
current remainder range of your vehicle is less than 60 kilometers and it is not
being charged, you will be prompted by a message; if the current remainder
range of your vehicle is less than 10 kilometers, Pet Mode will be automatically
exited and the windows will be opened to enter Ajar Mode to protect your
pets.
If the high-voltage system or climate control system of your vehicle is
abnormal, Pet Mode will be automatically exited and the windows will be
opened to enter Ajar Mode to protect your pets.
Power-Keep Mode
Go to Settings from the bottom of the center display, and tap Driving and Parking
> Power-Keep Mode to turn the mode on. When you temporarily need to leave the
vehicle (such as for buying coffee or breakfast), enabling the Power-Keep Mode
can maintain the current comfortable environment inside the vehicle.
You can set the duration for the Power-Keep Mode, and after reaching the set
time, the vehicle will automatically exit this mode.
When the Power-Keep Mode is enabled and you successfully lock the vehicle, it will
retain the current status of the lights, air conditioning, seats, windshield wipers, and
other features. Alternatively, it can also restore the previous state before you left
the vehicle automatically once the mode is exited.
The Power-Keep Mode is disabled by default before each drive, and once enabled,
it can maintain the previous functional settings even if the account is switched.
Caution
Power-Keep Mode is only designed to maintain a comfortable interior climate
during a temporary walk-away. Do not leave children and pets alone in your
vehicle.
It is not possible to activate Power-Keep Mode simultaneously with Pet Mode
or Camping Mode.
After Power-Keep Mode is activated, Smart Guardian and Real-Time
Surround View are temporarily unavailable. They can be reactivated after
Power-Keep Mode is exited and your vehicle is locked.
Power-Keep Mode can only be activated when your vehicle is in P gear. If
your vehicle is in N gear, Power-Keep Mode cannot be activated.
After Power-Keep Mode is activated, system update and gear shifting
operations cannot be performed for your vehicle.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
117/295


If the current remainder range of your vehicle is less than 60 kilometers and it
is not being charged, you will be prompted by a message; if the current
remainder range of your vehicle is less than 10 kilometers, Power-Keep Mode
will be automatically exited.
If the high-voltage system or climate control system of your vehicle is
abnormal, Power-Keep Mode will be automatically exited.
Camping Mode
When the vehicle is put in Park, go to the Settings interface on the left side of the
control bar at the bottom of the center display, and tap Driving and Parking >
Camping Mode to turn on the camping mode. When you need to use the in-car
power supply for a long time (e.g. when camping outdoors), a safe and comfortable
camping experience will be achieved. You can manually turn off the Camping Mode
on the center display or in the mobile App when needed.
When Camping Mode is on, the air conditioning is turned on, with front and rear
row temperature at 25℃ by default, the air circulation is turned on, the air
purification is adjusted to Silent mode, at the same time, all screens inside the car
go off according to the screen off delay time you set, the interior lighting and
doors/windows are adjusted according to the setting options, and the Hands-Free
Liftgate feature is automatically turned off. NOMI enters Do Not Disturb mode at
the same time.
The Camping Mode is disabled by default before each drive, and once enabled, it
can maintain the previous state even if the account is switched.
Caution
It is not possible to activate Camping Mode simultaneously with Pet Mode or
Power-Keep Mode.
Camping Mode can only be activated when your vehicle is in P gear. If your
vehicle is in N gear, Camping Mode cannot be activated.
After Camping Mode is activated, Smart Guardian and Real-Time Surround
View are temporarily unavailable. They can be reactivated after Camping Mode
is exited and your vehicle is locked.
After Camping Mode is activated, system update and gear shifting operations
cannot be performed for your vehicle, and the features of Walk Up Unlock and
Walk Away Lock will be temporarily turned off. They will be resumed after
exiting the Camping Mode. In this mode, it is recommended to turn on the air
conditioning to maintain air circulation.
If the current remainder range of your vehicle is less than 60 kilometers and it
is not being charged, you will be prompted by a message; if the current
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
118/295


remainder range of your vehicle is less than 10 kilometers, Camping Mode will
be automatically exited and the windows will be opened to enter Ajar Mode.
When Camping Mode is on and the car is locked from inside, if someone
opens the door from inside and leaves the car, the center display in the car
will light up, and a message will be displayed to remind anyone left in the car
of the vehicle's unlocked status.
If the high-voltage system or Climate Control system of your vehicle is
abnormal, Camping Mode will be automatically exited and the windows will be
opened to enter Ajar Mode.
When Camping Mode is on, the Hands-Free Liftgate feature will be
automatically turned off.
Digital Video Recorder
The Digital Video Recorder feature includes Rolling Recording, Emergency
Recording and Quick Video Recording.
Caution
The DVR will cease to function when the vehicle is powered off.
Rolling Recording
The recording angle of Digital Video Recorder includes the main view angle and the
front, rear, left, right and surround view angles, supporting simultaneous recording
and real-time previews.
Main view: only records the main view angle of the camera, which supports a
maximum resolution of 3,840x1,696 and has a picture fluency of 30 frames
per second.
Five-view: records all view angles of the camera, with four surround-view
cameras that support a maximum resolution of 1,280×1,000 and have a picture
fluency of 30 frames per second.
The longest continuous rolling recording time for the main view angle of Digital
Video Recorder is about 10 hours, and 5.7 hours for the five-view angle. When the
corresponding time is exceeded, the original video file will be overwritten.
The contents of the Rolling Recording will be stored in the Photos > DVR > Rolling
Recording folder. If you want to save a specific video file, insert a storage device
such as a USB flash drive, select the video file, and transfer it to save it in the
storage device.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
119/295


Go to Settings from the bottom of the center display, and tap Safety > DVR to
enable or disable this feature.
When the feature is enabled, 
 will be displayed at the top of the center
display.
When the feature is disabled, 
 will be displayed at the top of the center
display.
When the Digital Video Recorder feature is enabled, the camera will be turned on
and continue to record rolling videos until the video recording is terminated.
The Digital Video Recorder supports watermarking features, which are disabled by
default and need to be enabled manually.
In the Settings for the recording interface of the Digital Video Recorder , tap
Driving Data Embedding to enable or disable the feature.
Emergency Recording
The Emergency Recording feature can record video images in the vehicle's memory.
If the Autonomous Emergency Brake is triggered or the airbag is deployed, the
emergency video will be recorded and saved.
The emergency videos include clips recorded 30 seconds before the emergency and
60 seconds after the emergency. The contents of the emergency video recording
will be stored in the Photos > DVR > Emergencies folder. If you want to save a
specific video file, insert a storage device such as a USB flash drive, select the file,
and transfer it to save it in the storage device.
Quick Video Recording
You can use the Quick Video Recording feature to promptly record and save the
ongoing events.
Go to the Quick Access interface by swiping right on the home interface of the
center display, tap Quick Video Record to start recording, while 
 is displayed at
the top of the center display.
The Quick Video Recording saves clips recorded 30 seconds before and 60
seconds after it is triggered. The contents of the emergency video recording will be
stored in the Photos > DVR > Emergencies folder. If you want to save a specific
video file, insert a storage device such as a USB flash drive, select the file, and
transfer it to save it in the storage device.
Caution
The storage space for emergency videos will not be cyclically overwritten, and
manual cleaning is required when the storage space is full. Otherwise, the video
recording feature will be affected.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
120/295


Acoustic Vehicle Alerting System (AVAS)
When your vehicle is traveling at low speeds (typically lower than 30 km/h), it emits
a sound to alert other road users in the surrounding area, such as pedestrians and
other vehicles.
GUM192011
Seat Belts
Seat Belt Instructions
Seat belts are the primary passenger safety protection system which can protect
passengers from serious injury in the event of an accident especially when used
with airbags.
There are pretensioning devices for both the front and both outer rear seats of the
vehicle. This kind of device provides a certain pretension force for the seat belt in
the event of a serious collision. They retract part of the seat belt quickly to protect
passengers reliably. At the same time, they prevent excessive restraint force of the
seat belts that could cause injury to passengers.
Warning
If the seat belt is not fastened or correctly fastened, serious injury or death
may occur as a result. Always fasten your seat belt correctly.
Do not unfasten your seat belt while your vehicle is in motion. Otherwise,
serious injury may occur in the event of an accident.
Please keep your seat belt clean, and avoid blocking the socket with foreign
objects. Otherwise, the seat belt will not be able to be buckled reliably.
Before use, please check your seat belt and its fixing mechanism carefully for
damage and aging. If there is any damage, never continue using it, and
replace your seat belt immediately.
Do not repair damaged seat belts by yourself. Do not remove or install seat
belts by yourself under any circumstances.
Do not share one seat belt with another person (such as holding a child), or it
may cause secondary injury to passengers in the event of an accident.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
121/295


A seat belt that is stretched and deformed during an accident has lost its
safety protection feature. Even if its surface is not damaged, it shall be
replaced immediately.
Once the pretension force limiting device of the seat belt is triggered during
an accident, it shall be replaced immediately. In some accidents, even if the
pretension force limiting device is not triggered, it is recommended to go to
the NIO Service Center for inspection and have it replaced if necessary.
Please do not tilt your backrest too far back. Otherwise, the protective
function of your seat belt will be seriously affected.
Seat Belt Unfastened Warning Light
All seats in your vehicle are equipped with seat belts.
When you, as a driver, are seated in the driver's seat (and the driver's door is closed
or the brake pedal is depressed) or your vehicle is driving, if the front passenger
does not fasten his/her seat belt, the Seat Belt Unfastened Warning Light
GUM168551 on the digital instrument cluster will illuminate to remind you and the
front passenger to fasten his/her seat belt immediately.
When a front row seat belt is not fastened:
If your vehicle speed is higher than 22 km/h and his/her seat belt is still not
fastened, the Seat Belt Unfastened Warning Light will flash and the warning
chime will sound. After his/her seat belt is fastened, the warning light and
warning chime will disappear;
If the seat belt remains unfastened, the warning chime will stop after 95
seconds, but the warning light will be steadily on.
When you, as a driver, are seated in the driver's seat (and the driver's door is closed
or the brake pedal is depressed), if a rear row passenger does not fasten his/her
seat belt, the corresponding Seat Belt Unfastened Warning Light 
GUM168551 on
the digital instrument cluster will illuminate to remind the rear row passenger to
fasten his/her seat belt immediately. The warning light will go out after the seat belt
is fastened.
When a rear row seat belt is not fastened:
If your vehicle speed is higher than 22 km/h and a rear row passenger
releases his/her seat belt, the warning chime will sound at the same time
when the Seat Belt Unfastened Warning Light illuminates. This warning light
will go out after all seat belts are fastened.
If the rear row seat belt remains unfastened, the warning chime will stop after
33 seconds, but the warning light will be steadily on.
Warning
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
122/295


If the seat belt reminder malfunctions, do not use the seat and contact NIO
immediately for inspection.
Use of Seat Belts
The correct use of seat belt is as follows:
GUM191140
1. Pull the seat belt tongue across the front of your body. The upper part of the
seat belt shall be across your shoulder, and the lower part of the seat belt
shall be across your hip. Do not put the seat belt across your neck or
abdomen. Insert the tongue into the buckle for the same seat until you hear a
click. Pull the seat belt to confirm that the seat belt is locked.
GUM228632
2. Press and hold the seat belt height adjustment button and move the seat belt
up and down to adjust the seat belt height. After the seat belt reaches a
comfortable height, release the adjustment button. After the height is
adjusted, pull the seat belt shoulder part to confirm that the seat belt is
locked.
To release the seat belt, press the red button at the buckle, and the tongue will pop
out. Now the seat belt can be retracted by hand. The tongue can be rolled back
automatically into the upper fixing device of the seat belt.
Warning
Ensure that the backrest and head restraint are positioned correctly before
wearing a seat belt, so that the seat belt can protect the occupant to the
fullest extent possible.
A seat belt that is either too loose or too tight can cause injury if a collision
occurs.
For a pregnant occupant, the seat belt must rest evenly across the chest and
as low and flat as possible across the hips. Failure to do so can cause severe
injury to both the unborn fetus and the mother if the seat belt tightens in the
event of an accident.
GUM228521
Airbag
Airbag Instructions
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
123/295


Airbags are a supplementary restraint system that works with the seat belts.
Airbags quickly deploy in serious accidents to protect the head and chest of
passengers and reduce the severity of injury. However, they do not prevent limb
injuries or scrapes and bruises. Therefore, the airbags should be used together with
the seat belt to provide maximum protection.
Your vehicle is equipped with collision sensors. In case of a frontal or side collision
that meets the conditions (depending on the type, angle and object of collision) for
the airbag system to deploy, the airbags will deploy from their position. The gas
generator inside the airbag will ignite and release gas at high pressure to blow open
the cover of the airbag. Gas will fill the airbag to form a buffer protection layer that
protects passengers, thereby reducing the risk of injury or death.
The vehicle airbag system includes frontal airbags and side airbags. The word
"AIRBAG" is marked on the places where the airbag is placed to remind you that
there is an airbag herein.
The front airbags include the front row head airbags, which are located in the
trim cover of the steering wheel and at the instrument panel on the front
passenger side respectively;
The side airbags include the front side airbags (located on both sides of the
driver's seat and the outside of the front passenger seat) and the curtain
airbags (located above the doors on both sides, in the ceiling area from the A-
pillar to the C-pillar).
GUM191141
GUM191142
1. Driver front airbag
2. Front passenger's front airbag
3. Front seat side airbag
4. Curtain airbag
5. Front row middle airbag
Warning
Airbags are a supplementary restraint system and cannot replace seat belts.
The airbag can only maximize your safety when used in conjunction with the
seat belt. Thus, all occupants should always correctly wear their seat belt and
sit in the correct position.
The driver should sit at least 25 cm away from the steering wheel, since the
airbag may injure the driver when deployed with great force.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
124/295


Children must not sit in the front passenger seat if the front passenger airbag
is enabled. In the case of an accident, the impact of the airbag when deployed
may cause severe injury to children.
Do not place any objects on the front passenger seat. These objects will enter
the deployment area and be ejected if the airbag deploys in the event of
emergency braking, which may injure occupants.
The airbag system can only provide protection once. If the airbag has been
deployed, you must have it replaced; during certain accidents, the airbag may
not deploy. However, to ensure that the airbag system works properly, please
contact NIO immediately for inspection or replacement if necessary.
If any damage or fractures are found on the airbag cover, do not use the
vehicle and contact NIO immediately.
If the airbag system has never been deployed for a period of ten years from
its production date, please visit NIO to have it replaced. A record of the airbag
system’s replacement needs to be kept and given to the new owner when the
vehicle’s ownership is transferred.
Installing or removing airbag system components, including airbag labels, is
prohibited.
Smoke and fine powder may be produced when the airbag deploys. Even if the
fine powder is nontoxic, it may still make occupants feel uncomfortable.
When using seat covers, avoid the area around the side airbags for the front
seats. Doing so may impair the protective function of the side airbags.
Do not place any objects in the deployment area of the curtain airbags
(including pillars, headliner or handles). Occupants should not lean against the
doors. Doing so may result in injury if a curtain airbag deploys.
Do not place any hard objects (including clothes hangers, fruits, or glass
bottles) on the garment hooks in the vehicle. Doing so may result in injury if a
curtain airbag deploys.
Never place your feet, knees or other body parts on or near the airbag covers.
Do not place or hang any objects on or near the airbag covers. Doing so may
impair the functionality of the airbags and may result in injury if an airbag
deploys.
Never place, hang or install any objects on or near the instrument panel on the
passenger side. Doing so may result in injury if an airbag deploys.
Never modify the headliner of the vehicle. Doing so may impair the
functionality of the curtain airbags, and result in injury if they deploy.
Never place or hang any heavy or sharp-edged objects on the front passenger
sun visor. Doing so may result in injury if the front passenger airbag deploys.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
125/295


The smoke and dust generated during the rapid airbag deployment may cause
skin or eye irritation/scalds/burns, and the airbag fibers may cause skin
scratches or burns.
Airbag Deployment Conditions
The airbag may deploy in the following conditions:
GUM191143
1. High speed frontal impact with a wall or vehicle.
2. Impact with hard roadbed.
3. Falling into a deep ditch.
4. Side impact by a vehicle traveling at a high speed.
5. Leaving the road surface and then impacting it violently.
The airbags may not deploy in some collision situations, including but not limited to
the following situations. Please use seat belts correctly to protect passengers.
GUM194153 
GUM228400
1. Impact with a tree, column or other slender objects;
2. Rear collision from a vehicle behind;
3. Lateral roll;
4. Collision with or getting stuck under the rear of the truck in front;
5. A collision with a vehicle from the side at the nose of the vehicle;
6. A collision with a wall from the side at the nose of the vehicle;
7. Side collision with a post;
8. Side collision at the front of the vehicle at a certain angle;
9. Side collision on the body of the vehicle at a certain angle;
10. Partial side collision;
11. Partial side collision.
Airbag Warning Light
The airbag warning light 
GUM168560 indicating the airbag status is displayed on
the digital instrument cluster. If this warning light is on after the digital instrument
cluster is started, please stop using your vehicle and contact the NIO Service
Center immediately.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
126/295


Deactivating the Front Passenger Airbag
Because the airbag expands rapidly and has a large impact force when it deploys, it
is safer for the front passenger to stay at least 25 cm away from the front airbag.
However, if a child or a passenger with special medical needs must ride in the front
row, go to the Settings interface in the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, tap Security > Front Passenger Airbag, and select the option to turn off
the front passenger airbag. At this time, the icon 
GUM169076 appears at the top
of the center display to remind you that the front passenger airbag has been
disabled to prevent the front passenger airbag from causing serious injury to the
special front passenger.
Safety Measures after Airbag Deployment
When the vehicle has a collision and the airbags deploy, the vehicle will
automatically implement some safety measures to protect the occupants in the
vehicle:
Unlock all doors to ensure that passengers in the vehicle or rescue personnel
can open the doors;
Turn on the hazard warning light to show the vehicle position and warn
vehicles coming from behind;
Cut off the high-voltage power supply to protect occupants;
Open the windows to prevent occupants from being trapped if the vehicle falls
into water;
Turn off the steering wheel and seat memory features to avoid being adjusted
to a position where the driver is trapped;
Turn on the interior reading lights in the vehicle to facilitate rescue at night.
Child Locks
The child locks are deactivated by default. They need to be set up to be activated.
Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display and tap Doors and Windows Lock > Doors to see the settings for the child
locks.
Manually Activate and Deactivate Door/Window Child Locks
Tap Rear Door/Window Child Locks. ON represents that this feature is activated,
and OFF represents that this feature is deactivated.
If the child lock of the corresponding door/window fails to be activated or
deactivated, a pop-up reminder will appear on the center display. Repeat the above
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
127/295


procedure until it is successful.
Caution
When Child Protection Locks are on, please do not leave children unattended
in the vehicle. Doing so may result in injury or death.
After turning on Child Protection Locks, please check their status again.
Child Safety Seat
When a child under 12 years old or with a height less than 1.5 meters rides in your
vehicle, always install a child safety seat or booster cushion. Please have the child
sit in the child safety seat or booster cushion instead of holding him or letting him
sit on an adult's lap to fully protect the child.
Only child safety seats that are approved for children and comply with relevant
regulations or standards are allowed to be used. Check the markings on the child
safety seat when selecting a child safety seat. When installing and using a child
safety seat, follow the relevant laws and regulations, the instructions of the child
safety seat manufacturer and the instructions on the safety of children in this user
manual.
Important Instructions for Using Child Safety Seats
Proper use of child safety seats will greatly reduce the risk of injury to children and
reduce the severity of injury in accidents. Please be aware of the following when
using child safety seats:
We advise not to install a child safety seat in the middle seat of the rear row.
When installing a seat belt type child safety seat in the front passenger seat,
adjust the front passenger seat to its highest position.
Children must use child safety seats, maintain a correct posture and have their
seat belts fastened during their ride.
Never let your child ride without protection.
One child safety seat cannot be shared by more than one child.
Do not ride with a child in your arms.
Hard or sharp objects may injure a child in an accident. Keep them away from
the child safety seat.
If a rearward-facing child safety seat is installed in the rear seat of your
vehicle, it is necessary to adjust the corresponding front seat forward as
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
128/295


appropriate. If a forward-facing child safety seat is installed on the rear seat
of your vehicle, it may be necessary to adjust the height of the seat headrest.
Children need to be supervised by adults when sitting in child safety seats.
Never leave children alone in your vehicle.
Do not let children stand in your vehicle or kneel on the seat during driving. A
standing or kneeling child could be thrown forward during an accident, which
may lead to injury or death to the child or another passenger.
The instructions of the child safety seat manufacturer on the correct use of
the seat belt must be observed. Proper fastening of seat belts can make full
use of the protection afforded by the child safety seat.
In case of collision or emergency braking, a child safety seat that is not
properly installed and fixed in place could move and injure other passengers in
your vehicle. Therefore, even when the child safety seat is not in use, it must
also be properly installed and secured in your vehicle.
When a child is riding in the child safety seat, do not let him lean his head or
body against the door, the side of the seat or the pillar, or below the roof
beam. In case of an accident, side airbags or curtain airbags will deploy in
those areas, increasing the risk of injury to the child.
Child Safety Seat Grouping
Only a child safety seat that is approved and suitable for the child is allowed to be
used. Children taller than 1.5 meters can use the vehicle seat belts as would an
adult. If a child safety seat needs to be used, it must comply with relevant
regulations or standards.
Table 1. CRS Table
Seat position
Driver
1st row passenger
2nd row left
2nd
row
middle
2nd row right
Passenger
Airbag
OFF
Passenger
Airbag ON
Seating position
suitable for
universal belts
(yes/no)
N/A
Yes (*a)
No
Yes
Yes
(*b)
Yes
i-Size seating
position (yes/no)
N/A
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Seating position
suitable for
lateral fixture
(L1/L2)*
N/A
No
No
No
No
No
Largest suitable
rearward-facing
N/A
No
No
R1/R2X/R2/R3
No
R1/R2X/R2/R3
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
129/295


fixture
(R1/R2X/R2/R3)*
Largest suitable
forward-facing
fixture
(F1/F2X/F2/F3)*
N/A
No
No
F2X/F2/F3
No
F2X/F2/F3
Largest suitable
booster cushion
fixture (B2/B3)*
N/A
No
No
B2/B3
No
B2/B3
Suitable for
support leg
N/A
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Note:
*The child seat category is defined according to ECE R16/R44/R129, you can find
the category of child seat on it's specification. The child restraint system must be
appropriate to the age, weight and size of the child.
(a) If it is absolutely necessary for you to install a child seat to the front passenger
seat, be sure to turn passenger airbag off. Adjust front passenger seat to the
highest position before installing universal CRS on it.
(b) It is forbidden to install a child seat with a support base or with a support leg
on the middle seat of the 2 nd row.
Table 2. Recommended Child Restraints by NIO
Group
Manufacturer
Model
Attachment
0 & 0+
Besafe
iZi Combi X4 ISOfix
ISOFIX mounted
with support leg,
rearward-facing
Up to 13 kg
I
9-18 kg
II
Cybex
SolutionZ i-Fix
ISOFIX with seat
belt, forward-facing
15-25 kg
III
Ossan
UP
With seatbelt,
forward-facing
22-36 kg
NIO recommend to put your kids in corresponding CRS on the 2 nd row outer
seating position, and CRS should be mounted to vehicle with ISOFIX, support leg or
seatbelt. In order to have the best protection for your younger kids, kids weight
under 18kg please use recommended rearward-facing CRS.
Q6 recommended CRS: Cybex Solution Z i-Fix
Q10 recommended CRS: Osann Up
Selection of Child Safety Seat
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
130/295


There is a warning label for the front row airbag on the sun visor on the front
passenger side.
GUM220858
To place a child safety seat in the front row seat, you need to disable the front
passenger airbag. Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom
of the center display, tap Security > Front Passenger Airbag, and turn off the front
passenger airbag. After doing so, the icon 
GUM169076 appears at the top of the
center display to remind you that the front passenger airbag is disabled.
Children should use a child safety seat or seat belt in either outer rear seat
according to the age, height and weight of the child:
Reclining child safety seats should be used for infants weighing less than 13
kg. They should be installed rearwards in rear seats whenever possible.
Child safety seats with safety platforms or five-point seat belts should be
used for children with a weight of 9-18 kg. It is recommended to install them
rearwards in rear seats.
Forward-facing child safety seats should be used for children with a weight of
15-25 kg. They should be installed in rear seats in coordination with seat
belts.
Child booster cushions should be used for children with a weight of 22-36 kg
and a height less than 1.5 meters. They should be installed in rear seats in
coordination with seat belts.
Warning
The upper belt must lay flat across the shoulder and chest, and never lay across the
neck; the lower belt must lay flat across the pelvis, and never lay across the
abdomen.
Installation of Child Safety Seat
Before installing a child safety seat, please read the instructions for the child safety
seat carefully to confirm that it can be installed in your vehicle. If the vehicle seat
belt or ISOFIX connection can be used to fix the child safety seat according to the
installation method of the child safety seat, it is recommended to use the ISOFIX
connection preferentially.
Securing with Vehicle Seat Belt
Install the child safety seat in the rear seat, put the vehicle seat belt through
the child safety seat and insert the tongue into the buckle. Make sure that the
seat belt is straight, not twisted. Pull the seat belt to confirm that it cannot be
pulled out.
GUM191150
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
131/295


Securing with ISOFIX Connection
Both outer rear seats in your vehicle are equipped with ISOFIX connections
suitable for installing child safety seats. The ISOFIX connection is hidden
under the cover between the seat back and the seat cushion. After opening
the cover, insert it into the gap between the seat back and the cushion, and
then use the ISOFIX connection to install the child safety seat.
1. Lift the cover between the seat back and the seat cushion, and insert the
lower part of the child safety seat into the hook in the ISOFIX connection
until you hear a click.
GUM228455
2. Pass the upper fixing belt of the child safety seat under the seat
headrest and connect it with the hook in the upper safety device of the
rear seat.
GUM191151
3. Pull the child safety seat hard to check whether it is firmly installed.
Warning
The ISOFIX attachment points are designed solely for child safety seats with
the ISOFIX system. To avoid injury, never secure other objects to ISOFIX.
Always follow the child safety seat manufacturer’s instructions and this
manual when installing and removing a child safety seat. Improper usage can
result in injury to your child or other passengers.
Multi Collision Braking (MCB)
Multi Collision Braking (MCB) comes standard on ET5. In certain types of collisions,
the vehicle's brakes are applied to help prevent or mitigate a secondary collision.
In order to avoid or mitigate a secondary collision, the system applies the brakes
automatically to bring the vehicle to a stop. The brake lights and hazard warning
flashers will be activated and the flashers will remain on after the vehicle has come
to a standstill. The electrical parking brake will then be applied automatically.
In a situation where stopping the vehicle may not be desirable, you can override this
operation by depressing the accelerator pedal.
This feature can only operate when the braking system is sufficiently intact after
the collision.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
132/295


Child Presence Detection
As an auxiliary feature for the safety of children, Child Presence Detection can
effectively remind users when children are left alone in the vehicle, and gives a
high-frequency reminder for a short period of time, reducing the likelihood of
incidents caused by users forgetting their children.
The in-vehicle cameras and other sensors will detect the presence of children after
the user locks the vehicle. If any child is left alone in the vehicle, it will remind the
user by means of flashing hazard warning flasher, audible alerts, messages on
mobile App, etc.
Go to Settings from the bottom of the center display, and tap Safety > Child
Presence Detection to enable or disable this feature. When this feature is enabled,
in the event of a hardware failure (including in-vehicle camera, radar or air
conditioning, etc.), the status icon 
 will be displayed at the top of the center
display, and corresponding prompts will be displayed when the icon is tapped;
Similarly, in the events such as when the camera is fully covered, the status icon 
will be displayed at the top of the center display, and corresponding prompts will be
displayed when the icon is tapped.
Caution
The primary purpose of Child Presence Detection (CPD), an auxiliary safety
feature, is to detect and notify users of children that have been left behind in
the backseat. However, the feature cannot entirely protect children due to the
possibility of omissions and false alerts, and users are not encouraged to
leave children unattended in the vehicle.
Please return as soon as you can to the vehicle to take care of the children
and ensure their safety after receiving the SMS and push notification from the
mobile App.
Alcohol Interlock
The purpose of alcohol interlocks is to enhance traffic safety by preventing anyone
with alcohol concentration exceeding a set limit value from driving a motor vehicle.
Before you install the interlock, the following safety risks should be considered:
With your vehicle in the P gear, turn off the high-voltage power supply (to cut
off the high-voltage circuit, disconnect the emergency high-voltage cutoff
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
133/295


plug located under the hood near the coolant reservoir, and then disconnect
the cable connected to the negative terminal of the 12V battery).
The responsibility for the safe installation will remain on the alcohol interlock
installer.
The alcohol interlock electrical plug is located below the front right seat. The
alcohol interlock is connected as follows:
1. Move the right seat to its foremost top position.
2. Lift the carpet and the alcohol interlock cover, and take out the electrical plug
of the alcohol interlock.
GUM220255
3. Connect the alcohol interlock electrical plug and the alcohol interlock handset.
4. Mount the alcohol interlock handset and the alcohol interlock control unit
under the console box.
Note
After installing the alcohol interlock, no visual or audible indication will be given
from the vehicle, but the alcohol interlock handset will show the operation
instructions.
Warning
Do not remove the alcohol interlock by yourself. If you need to remove the alcohol
interlock, please contact the NIO Service Center.
The alcohol interlock connection schematics are as follows:
Feature
Cable or pin
Position of
connection
1
Battery feed (KL30),
uninterrupted
For nominal 12 V,
the alcohol interlock
requires.
Gray Cable
Pin 1
0.5 mm²
In Instrument
Electrical Center
box under front
passenger foot
pedal.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
134/295


2
Ground
Black Cable
Pin 2
0.5 mm²
Under driver's seat
for Left Driver and
under front
passenger seat for
Right Driver.
3c
Data bus connection
Connection to an
internal data bus of
the vehicle for
information
exchange between
the vehicle and the
alcohol interlock.
White-Red Cable
Pin 4
0.35mm²
Under driver's seat
for Right Driver and
under front
passenger seat for
Left Driver.
Forward Collision Warning
Forward Collision Warning (FCW) will emit visual, audible, and vibration alerts if the
system determines that there is a potential risk of collision between your vehicle
and a vehicle, motorcycle, bicycle, or pedestrian in front.
GUM190818
For the detection of vehicles, pedestrians, or cyclists moving in the same direction,
the Forward Collision Warning system is only operational when the vehicle is
traveling at a minimum speed of 4 km/h.
Warning
The Forward Collision Warning is for reference only and cannot replace your
attention and judgment.
The Forward Collision Warning is only applicable to the prevention of frontal
collisions, and will not work when the vehicle is in reverse gear.
As a driving assist feature, the Forward Collision Warning can neither respond
to all traffic, weather or road conditions, nor detect vehicles in all cases. It
may become ineffective, inappropriate or untimely due to a number of factors.
You must always pay attention to the traffic conditions and road environment.
Do not rely on the judgment of the Forward Collision Warning. Otherwise,
personal injury or vehicle damage may occur.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
135/295


When danger is detected, do not wait for the Forward Collision Warning to
activate before taking action
If the risk of a collision further increases, Autonomous Emergency Braking will
intervene regardless of whether the driver applies the brake or not.
You always bear the ultimate responsibility for safe driving and shall abide by
the current traffic laws and regulations.
Settings
Enter Settings from the center display, and tap Driver Assistance >Forward
Collision Warning to enable or disable this feature.
Enter Settings from the center display, and tap Driver Assistance > Timing to
enable or disable this feature.
Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display displays visual warnings when the
Forward Collision Warning is triggered.
When the Forward Collision Warning system is activated, the vehicle emits an
audible signal to prompt the driver to maintain a safe distance from the vehicle in
front.
GUM192037
Warning
Once the Forward Collision Warning is deactivated, the vehicle will not provide
alerts for potential collisions. It is recommended that you do not deactivate this
feature.
The feature will automatically be reactivated when the vehicle's system restarts.
Precautions and Restrictions
Forward Collision Warning may fail to function as intended due to the camera
detection failures in some situations, including but not limited to:
The positions of the cameras have been modified.
The camera cannot focus or malfunctions.
The cameras are obstructed or stained.
The cameras are obstructed by water, dust, small scratches, grease, dirt,
wipers, frost, or snow on the windshield.
Severe weather conditions such as rain, snow, fog, haze.
Visibility is poor in dim environments, such as at dawn, dusk, night, or in a
tunnel, resulting in impaired recognition.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
136/295


Sudden changes in brightness, such as when entering or exiting a tunnel
The view of the cameras is interfered by large shadows cast by buildings,
landscape features, or large vehicles.
The view of the camera is interfered by direct sunlight or other light sources.
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow, or dust lifted by the vehicle ahead.
The road is wet.
Forward Collision Warning system may not function as intended due to failures in
the LiDAR sensor in certain situations. These situations may include, but are not
limited to:
Severe weather conditions such as rain, snow, fog, and haze.
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead.
Driving on wet or waterlogged roads.
The LiDAR window is obstructed by water, dust, transparent vehicle covers,
color-changing films, micro-scratches, oil sludge, dirt, ice, snow and other
obstacles.
Due to the limitation of LiDAR characteristics, in rare special cases, false
alarms may occur for the traffic signs, high-speed anti-collision barrels in
high-speed or elevated sections.
Overheating of the LiDAR caused by prolonged sun exposure.
The installation position of the LiDAR has been modified.
The Forward Collision Warning feature will only respond to eligible vehicles
travelling in the same direction. Some targets will not trigger a response, including
but not limited to:
Animals
Traffic lights
Wall
Barriers (cone barrels, etc.)
Other non-vehicle objects.
Caution
This feature cannot guarantee the recognition of all special vehicles in all
circumstances, especially during nighttime, extra caution is required. For
example, three-wheeled vehicles, vehicles with damaged taillights or indistinct
rear contours, vehicles with obstructions at the rear, vehicles with irregular
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
137/295


shapes, vehicles with a rear vertical surface below a certain height, and
unloaded commercial vehicles, among others.
The feature may have false negatives for stationary or slow-moving vehicles,
especially during nighttime, so extra caution is necessary.
There is a possibility of false triggering of the feature in special scenarios
where vehicles need to drive close to carrier trucks or recovery vehicles.
Forward Collision Warning system may not function as intended if the target is not
positioned in front of the vehicle in certain situations. These situations include, but
are not limited to, the following:
It will not respond to targets in the blind spots of the sensor, such as targets
in blind spots at corners, sides, and back of the vehicle.
The target may be incorrectly selected or missed when the vehicle is
approaching or navigating a curve.
The target may be lost or the distance to the target may be misjudged when
the vehicle is on a slope.
When a vehicle in an adjacent lane cuts in front of your car with only a portion
of its body (especially when a large vehicle such as a bus or truck cuts in), it
may not be recognized in time.
When your vehicle suddenly maneuvers to the rear of a vehicle in front, or
when other vehicles abruptly change direction or position in front of your
vehicle, the target may not be identified in time.
Forward Collision Warning may fail to function as intended due to special or
complicated road conditions, including but not limited to:
Water, mud, potholes, snow, ice, speed bumps, or obstacles on the road.
Large numbers of pedestrians, bicycles, electric bicycles, or animals.
Complex and changeable traffic conditions, such as busy intersections,
expressway ramps, and congested roads.
Winding roads and sharp turns.
Driving on hills.
Bumpy roads.
Tunnel entrances and exits.
Warning
The following actions may result in the Forward Collision Warning not issuing an
alert, including but not limited to:
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
138/295


When the driver is already applying the brakes, the Forward Collision Warning
may not issue an alert.
When the driver presses the accelerator pedal deeply or suddenly, the Forward
Collision Warning may not issue an alert.
When the driver makes a sudden steering maneuver, the Forward Collision
Warning may not issue an alert.
Warning
It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
The above warnings, precautions, and restrictions do not exhaust all the situations
that may affect the proper operation of Forward Collision Warning. Forward
Collision Warning may be affected by many factors. To avoid safety accidents,
always pay attention to traffic, road, and vehicle conditions and drive with caution.
Autonomous Emergency Braking
When the system determines that a frontal collision with a vehicle in front is
unavoidable, it will apply the brakes to reduce the speed and minimize the impact of
a rear-end collision.
GUM190819
For detection of vehicles，pedestrians or cyclists in front, Autonomous Emergency
Braking operates only when you are driving between about 4 km/h and 150 km/h.
For detection of pedestrians behind, Autonomous Emergency Braking operates only
when you are driving between about 4 km/h and 15 km/h.
When Autonomous Emergency Braking has been triggered, the vehicle speed will be
reduced by up to 60 km/h to mitigate the impact of a possible collision. For
example, if Autonomous Emergency Braking is triggered at a speed of 90 km/h, the
brakes will be released after the vehicle speed is reduced to 30 km/h.
When Autonomous Emergency Braking is triggered, the dynamic environment
simulation will display a visual alert, and the brake light will turn on.
Caution
The recognition of pedestrians behind the vehicle as well as braking is still in the
continuous optimization stage. This feature cannot guarantee the recognition of
pedestrians in all situations.
Warning
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
139/295


As a driver assistance feature, Autonomous Emergency Braking cannot be relied
upon in all situations in all traffic, weather, or road conditions and cannot detect
vehicles in all situations. Several factors can cause an invalid, inappropriate, or
untimely warning.
You must pay attention to the traffic and road conditions at all times.
Never depend on Autonomous Emergency Braking to avoid collisions or reduce the
impact of a collision. Doing so can cause personal injury or vehicle damage.
For safety reasons, never test the use of Autonomous Emergency Braking when
facing the direction of other vehicles, cyclists, or pedestrians.
If you come across a dangerous situation, never wait for Autonomous Emergency
Braking to intervene before taking action. You always bear the ultimate
responsibility for driving safely and complying with applicable traffic laws and
regulations.
Warning
Autonomous Emergency Braking may apply short and sharp braking to reduce the
risk of a potential collision, which may not be in line with your normal driving habit
and may make you feel uncomfortable.
Enter Settings from the bottom of the center display, and tap Driver Assistance >
Autonomous Emergency Braking to enable or disable this feature.
Warning
When Autonomous Emergency Braking is disabled, your vehicle will not
automatically apply the brakes even if a potential frontal collision is detected. It is
not suggested to turn it off.
This feature will be turned on when the vehicle's system restarts.
Precautions and Restrictions
The camera system may fail to recognize obstacles and thus Automous Emergency
Braking may fail to operate as intended in some situations, including but not limited
to:
The positions of the cameras are changed.
The cameras are obstructed or stained.
Visibility is poor in dim environments, such as at dawn, dusk, night, or in a
tunnel, resulting in impaired recognition.
Sudden changes in brightness, such as when entering or exiting a tunnel
The view of the cameras is interfered by large shadows cast by buildings,
landscape features, or large vehicles.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
140/295


The view of the camera is interfered by direct sunlight or other light sources.
In rain, snow, fog, haze, and other bad weather.
When exhaust gas, splashes, snow, or dust is kicked up by vehicles in front of
you.
The cameras are obstructed by water, dust, small scratches, grease, dirt,
wipers, frost, or snow on the windshield.
The road is wet.
The camera cannot focus or malfunctions.
The LiDAR sensor may fail to recognize obstacles and thus Autonomous Emergency
Braking may fail to operate as intended in some situations, including but not limited
to:
The position of the LiDAR sensor is changed.
In rain, snow, fog, haze, and other bad weather.
Exhaust fumes, spray, snow or dust from the vehicle ahead can cause poor
detection.
The vehicle is driving on wet or waterlogged roads.
The window of the LiDAR sensor is obstructed by water, dust, paint protection
film, wrap film, small scratches, grease, dirt, frost, snow, etc.
The LiDAR sensor overheated due to extended exposure of the vehicle to the
sunlight.
Due to the limitations of LiDAR characteristics, in rare special cases, false
alarms may occur for traffic signs and high-speed anti-collision barrels in
high-speed and elevated sections of road
Autonomous Emergency Braking will only respond to road users that satisfy the
feature's operational conditions. Some targets will not trigger a response, including
but not limited to:
Animals.
Traffic lights.
Walls.
Barriers (cones barrels, etc.).
Other non-vehicle objects.
Caution
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
141/295


This feature cannot ensure that all special-shaped vehicles can be identified
in all conditions. You need to pay extra attention, especially at night. Special-
shaped vehicles may include tricycles, vehicles with a damaged taillight,
unclear rear contour, or obstructed rear body, irregular-shaped vehicles,
vehicles with a rear body lower than a certain height, or unloaded transporters
for carrying vehicles.
This feature may miss stationary or slow-moving vehicles, especially at night
when the driver needs to pay extra attention.
This feature may be falsely triggered when the vehicle needs to be driven onto
special places such as a car hauler or a wrecker.
Vehicle targets may prevent the Autonomous Emergency Braking from operating as
expected in the following situations, which include but are not limited to:
The Autonomous Emergency Braking will not respond to targets in blind spots
of the sensor, such as those in blind spots at the corners, sides and back of
the vehicle.
It may wrongly select or miss targets when approaching or crossing a turn in
the road.
When going uphill, it may miss a target or misjudge the distance to the target.
When only part of the body of a vehicle in the adjacent lane cuts in front of
your vehicle (especially when it's a larger vehicle cutting in, like a bus, truck,
etc.), it may not be able to recognize it in time.
When your vehicle abruptly cuts into the rear of the vehicle ahead, or another
vehicle abruptly cuts into or out of the front of your vehicle, it may not be able
to recognize it in time.
When the lead vehicle is positioned at a large angle to this vehicle, it may not
be able to be recognized in time.
When only part of the body of the lead vehicle overlaps with this vehicle, that
vehicle may not be recognized in time.
Situations such as during the short amount of time after the power-on, when
the vehicle is in the Park gear, and when the seat belt is unfastened, etc.
The performance of Autonomous Emergency Braking in reducing the impact of a
collision may be affected due to special or complex road conditions, including but
not limited to:
Waterlogged roads, muddy roads, potholes, ice- and snow-covered roads,
roads with speed bumps, roads with obstacles.
Large numbers of pedestrians, bicycles, electric bicycles, or animals.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
142/295


Complex and changing traffic flows, such as busy intersections, freeway
ramps, and congested roads.
Winding roads and sharp turns.
Uphill and downhill roads.
Bumpy roads.
Tunnel entrances and exits.
Caution
The braking distance increases on slippery roads. If Anti-Lock Braking System,
Traction Control System, and Electronic Stability Program are triggered, the
performance of Autonomous Emergency Braking in reducing the impact of a
collision may be impaired.
Warning
The brake pedal moves downward abruptly during autonomous braking events. Do
not place any objects under the brake pedal. Doing so can impede the ability of the
brake pedal to move freely.
Warning
Autonomous Emergency Braking is not a substitute for maintaining a safe following
distance between you and the vehicle in front. Do not stay too close to vehicles in
front of you and avoid driving aggressively.
Warning
Autonomous Emergency Braking is mainly used to reduce the impact of a frontal
collision.
Warning
Autonomous Emergency Braking may not apply the brakes or may stop applying the
brakes in some situations, including but not limited to:
The driver fully or suddenly presses the accelerator pedal.
The driver turns the steering wheel sharply.
The driver's seat belt is unbuckled.
The driver's door is not closed.
Autonomous Emergency Braking has been triggered and cannot be triggered
again within roughly 30 seconds.
No vehicle is detected in front of the vehicle.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
143/295


Warning
It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
The above warnings, precautions and restrictions do not exhaust all the situations
that may affect the proper operation of Autonomous Emergency Braking.
Autonomous Emergency Braking may be affected by many factors. To avoid safety
accidents, be sure to always pay attention to traffic, road and vehicle conditions
and drive with caution.
Lane Departure Warning
The Lane Departure Warning (LDW) system is designed to reduce the risk of
unintentional lane drifting by providing visual, audible, and steering wheel vibration
alerts when the vehicle shows a non-autonomous tendency to drift towards the
adjacent lane or cross the lane markings.
Warning
The Lane Departure Warning may not detect road edges, so it is important to drive
cautiously and always stay within the lane.
Warning
Lane Departure Warning system is designed to aid drivers and cannot address all
traffic, weather, and road situations. Lane Departure Warning system is for
reference only and cannot replace your visual inspection.
To protect your safety, you must always pay attention to the traffic and road
conditions and decide for yourself whether to activate Lane Departure Warning.
When utilizing the Lane Departure Warning system, you should always be ready to
take control of the vehicle if you discover that the road, the traffic, the state of the
vehicle, or any other risky factor makes it unsafe for you to utilize this feature. You
always bear the ultimate responsibility for keeping your vehicle in its lane and
should abide by the current traffic laws and regulations.
Enabling/Disabling the Lane Departure Warning
Enter the Settings interface at the bottom of the center display, and tap Driver
Assistance > Lane Departure Warning and Assist to enable or disable this feature.
This feature will be turned on when the vehicle's system restarts. When enabled,
you can select the warning type and sensitivity:
Warning types:
Visual: visual warning
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
144/295


Audio: audible warning
Vibration: steering wheel vibration warning
Sensitivity:
Low: gives an alert later than normal sensitivity under the same
conditions.
Medium: normal sensitivity.
High: gives an alert earlier than normal sensitivity under the same
conditions.
Operating Conditions of Lane Departure Warning:
Lane Centering Control feature is not activated.
Your vehicle speed is about 50-130 km/h.
Your vehicle drives normally without suddenly accelerating, decelerating or
steering.
Your vehicle is in the center of its lane and does not drive on the lane marking.
The lane markings on at least one side are clear.
The high-definition cameras work normally and provide clear vision
No components of the Lane Departure Warning system are faulty.
Your vehicle meets all safety conditions, such as:
The driver is seated.
The driver has fastened the seat belt.
All doors are closed.
Your vehicle is in D gear.
Anti-lock brake system, traction control system and vehicle stability
control system are not triggered.
The traction control system and vehicle stability control system are not
manually disabled.
Caution
The Lane Departure Warning will not provide alerts or interventions when the turn
signal is activated and the vehicle intentionally deviates to the corresponding side.
Digital Instrument Cluster Display
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
145/295


GUM175096
① Lane Departure Warning system status icon
② Lane marking display
No status icon: the Lane Departure Warning system is not enabled.
Gray status icon: the Lane Departure Warning system is enabled, in standby
status, and not activated yet.
GUM175065
White status icon and central lane marking: the Lane Keeping Assist system is
active.
GUM175066
Red status icon and one side of the central lane marking: there is a risk of
unintentional lane departure on the corresponding side.
GUM175067
Caution
The digital instrument cluster display is only for illustrative purposes and cannot
fully reflect the actual traffic conditions. Therefore, it is important not to rely solely
on the information displayed on the digital instrument cluster display.
Precautions and Restrictions
The following situations may prevent the Lane Departure Warning system from
operating as expected or cause it to automatically exit, which include but are not
limited to:
The vehicle is navigating sharp curves, such as on expressway ramps.
Lane lines are unclear, worn, missing, overlapping, or obscured by shadows
cast by other vehicles, buildings, or landscape features.
The road section has no lane lines, such as non-standard roads, intersections,
or construction areas.
Passing through road sections with special lane markings, such as speed
reduction markings and channelizing-line markings.
Lane lines are not clearly divided, such as merging or diverging lanes,
expressway ramps, urban intersections, or left-turn waiting areas.
There are edges or other high-contrast lines on the road instead of lane lines,
such as road joints or curbs.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
146/295


Lane lines cannot be or are incorrectly identified due to changes in height,
such as on sloped roads.
Lane markings cannot be recognized or are not recognized correctly due to
light, such as reflection of lane markings caused by strong light, poor visibility
or insufficient light caused by bad weather and or at night.
The distance between lane markings on both sides is too wide or too narrow.
The following situations may prevent the Lane Departure Warning system from
operating as expected or cause it to automatically exit due to a camera failure,
which include but are not limited to:
Changed installation position of camera.
Blocked or dirty camera.
Limited recognition at night.
Dark surroundings, such as at dawn, dusk, night, in tunnels.
Sudden changes in ambient brightness, such as tunnel entrances or exits.
Large shadows cast by buildings, landscapes or large vehicles.
Camera directly exposed to light.
Severe weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead that falls
onto your vehicle.
Water, dust, micro-scratches, oil sludge, dirt, wiper, ice, snow, etc. on the
windshield in front of the camera.
Wet roads.
It is not recommended to use the Lane Departure Warning system in special or
complex road conditions, as that may prevent the Lane Departure Warning system
from operating as expected or cause it to automatically exit, which include but are
not limited to:
Water, mud, potholes, snow, ice, speed bumps, or obstacles on the road.
Large numbers of pedestrians, bicycles, or animals on the road.
Complex and changeable traffic conditions, such as busy intersections,
expressway ramps, congested roads.
Winding roads and sharp turns.
Driving on the hills.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
147/295


Bumpy roads.
Narrow roads.
Tunnel entrances and exits.
Non-standard roads.
Roads without a median.
Lane Keeping Assist
Lane Keeping Assist (LKA) will temporarily assist the driver in bringing the vehicle
back into the correct lane while emitting visual, audible, or steering wheel vibration
alert when the vehicle unintentionally drifts into an adjacent lane or tends to do so.
GUM190820
Lane Keeping Assist includes:
Warning: When the moving vehicle has a non-autonomous tendency to deviate
to the adjacent lane, or is about to cross the lane marking, the Lane Keeping
Assist can provide appropriate visual, audiable and steering wheel vibration
alerts.
Warning & Lane Correction: When the moving vehicle has a non-autonomous
tendency to deviate to the adjacent lane, or is about to cross the lane
marking, the Lane Keeping Assist will apply a slight corrective Steer Assist to
the steering wheel to reduce the possibility of the vehicle deviating from the
lane. Lane Keeping Assist emits visual and audio alerts when your vehicle
deviates too much from the center of the lane.
Warning
Lane Keeping Assist can only provide limited steering assist and cannot control the
vehicle’s speed.
Lane Keeping Assist is unable to constantly control the steering. Therefore, it
cannot always keep the vehicle centered in the lane.
Warning
Lane Keeping Assist has limited steering torque which can only provide a slight
steering assist and cannot fully guarantee the prevention of lane departure. Do not
rely solely on Lane Keeping Assist to steer. You should always be prepared to take
over steering, especially when driving on roads with curves.
Please take over steering immediately when cornering, turning around, or driving on
winding roads or roads with sharp curves.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
148/295


Warning
Lane Keeping Assist, as a Driver Assist feature, cannot handle all traffic, weather
and road conditions.
Lane Keeping Assist is for reference only and cannot replace your visual inspection.
You must always pay attention to traffic conditions and the road environment, and
decide whether to use LKA when it is safe to do so.
When using Lane Keeping Assist, stay prepared to take over your vehicle if you find
surrounding traffic, road conditions or vehicle unsuitable for use, or if there are
other unsafe factors.
You always have the ultimate responsibility to keep your vehicle safe in the lane and
in compliance with applicable road traffic safety laws and regulations.
Warning
The following behaviors are prohibited when driving:
Relying solely on Lane Keeping Assist
Using Lane Keeping Assist in bad weather conditions
Using Lane Keeping Assist on non-standardized roads
Hands off the steering wheel
Eyes off the road
Enabling/Disabling the Lane Keeping Assist System
Enter Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center display,
and tap Driver Assistance > Lane Departure Warning and Assist to enable or
disable this feature.
When enabled, you can select the assist levels, warning type and sensitivity:
Assist level
Warning: only provides an alert feature.
Warning & Lane Correction: provides an alert and a slight Steer Assist.
Warning types
When it is set to "Warning", the available warning types include visual,
audio, and vibration.
When it is set to "Warning & Lane Correction", the warning types cannot
be set and the default setting is visual and audio warnings.
Sensitivity
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
149/295


Low: Gives an alarm later than normal sensitivity under the same
conditions.
Medium: Normal sensitivity.
High: Gives an alarm earlier than normal sensitivity under the same
conditions.
Caution
Set the warning type and sensitivity with caution to ensure that such settings are in
line with your driving habits.
Caution
Enabling Lane Departure Warning and Assist on the center display does not mean
that the feature is activated immediately. Its functionality will only be automatically
activated when the working conditions are met.
When the Lane Departure Warning and Assist feature is disabled, the vehicle will
not provide assistance in maintaining the lane, nor will it provide lane departure
warning alerts.
When the Lane Departure Warning and Assist feature is actively controlling the
steering, the steering wheel will turn accordingly.
You can take control of the vehicle by manually turning the steering wheel. In this
case, the direction of the vehicle will be under your control.
Operating conditions for the Lane Keeping Assist system:
Your vehicle speed is about 50-130 km/h.
Your vehicle drives normally without suddenly accelerating, decelerating or
steering.
Your vehicle is in the center of its lane and does not drive on the lane marking.
The lane markings on at least one side are clear.
The high-definition camera works normally and provides clear vision.
No components of the Lane Keeping Assist system are faulty.
Your vehicle meets all safety conditions, such as:
The driver is seated.
Your vehicle is in gear position D.
Anti-lock brake system, traction control system and vehicle stability
control system are not triggered.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
150/295


The traction control system and vehicle stability control system are not
manually disabled.
Caution
When the turn signal is active, Lane Keeping Assist does not provide any reminders
or take control if your vehicle deviates towards the corresponding side.
Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display
GUM182952
1. Status icon of the Lane Keeping Assist system
No icon: Not enabled.
Gray icon: Standby status.
White lane marking: The lane marking on the corresponding side has
been detected.
Yellow lane marking: Level 1 Lane Departure Warning.
Red lane marking: Level 2 Lane Keeping Assist.
2. Lane Marking Display
The status icon is gray: The Lane Keeping Assist system is enabled, in
standby status, and not activated yet.
GUM182979
The status icon and the central lane marking are white: The Lane Keeping
Assist system is active.
GUM182892
The status icon and one side of the central lane marking is red:
GUM182893
When Warning is selected, it indicates that there is a risk of accidental
departure from the lane on the corresponding side.
When Warning & Lane Correction is selected, it indicates that the
vehicle has deviated from the lane unexpectedly, and the Lane Keeping
Assist is no longer able to prevent the vehicle from deviating from the
lane through a slight Steer Assist to correct lanes.
The status icon and one side of the central lane marking are yellow: Only
occurs whenWarning & Lane Correction is selected. It indicates that the Lane
Keeping Assist is providing a certain Steer Assist to correct lanes at the
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
151/295


corresponding side to reduce the possibility of the vehicle deviating from the
lane.
GUM182894
Caution
The Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display can only be used as a reference
and cannot perfectly reflect the real traffic conditions. Therefore, do not rely on the
dynamic environment simulation display.
Precautions and Restrictions
Lane Keeping Assist may fail to function as intended or be disabled automatically in
some situations, including but not limited to:
The vehicle is navigating sharp curves, such as on expressway ramps.
The lane markings are not clear, worn, missing, interweaving, or shaded by
other vehicles or buildings or landscapes.
Passing through road sections without lane markings, such as non-standard
roads, intersections and construction areas.
Passing through road sections with special lane markings, such as speed
reduction markings and channelizing-line markings.
Passing through areas with unclear lane division, such as areas with merging
or dividing lane markings, high-speed ramp crossings, urban intersection
zones and left turn waiting zones.
There are edges or other high-contrast lines on roads instead of lane
markings, such as pavement joints and curbs.
Lane markings cannot be recognized or are not recognized correctly due to
height change, such as on the uphill and downhill.
Lane markings cannot be recognized or are not recognized correctly due to
light, such as reflection of lane markings caused by strong light, poor visibility
or insufficient light caused by bad weather and or at night.
The distance between lane markings on both sides is too wide or too narrow.
The following situations may prevent the Lane Keeping Assist (LKA) system from
operating as expected or cause it to automatically exit due to a camera failuref,
which include but are not limited to:
Changed installation position of camera.
Blocked or dirty camera.
Limited recognition at night.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
152/295


Dark surroundings, such as at dawn, dusk, night, in tunnels.
Sudden changes in ambient brightness, such as tunnel entrances or exits.
Large shadows cast by buildings, landscapes or large vehicles.
Camera directly exposed to light.
Severe weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead that falls
onto your vehicle.
Water, dust, micro-scratches, oil sludge, dirt, wiper, ice, snow, etc. on the
windshield in front of the camera.
Wet roads.
It is not recommended to use the Lane Keeping Assist system in specific or
complex road conditions, as this may result in the LKA system malfunctioning or
automatically disengaging. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:
Waterlogged roads, muddy roads, potholes, ice- and snow-covered roads,
roads with speed bumps, roads with obstacles.
Traffic conditions with a lot of pedestrians, bicycles or animals.
Complex and changing traffic flows, such as busy intersections, freeway
ramps, and congested roads.
Winding roads and sharp turns.
Driving on uphill and downhill.
Driving on bumpy roads, narrow roads, non-standard roads.
Tunnel entrances and exits.
Roads without center medians.
Warning
It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
Emergency Active Stop
When the system detects that you are not in a normal driving state (e.g., your hands
have not been on the steering wheel for a long time, you have been distracted and
tired of driving for a long time, or you have left your seat, etc.), it will activate the
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
153/295


Emergency Active Stop (EAS) feature if the system meets the conditions for normal
operation.
GUM191896
When Emergency Active Stop is active, your car will sound an auditory reminder,
provide a voice warning, issue a Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display alert,
and turn on the hazard warning lights. The system will alert you to take control of
your car by continuously braking and emitting loud ringer and alerts until the car
stops. After stopping, the doors will be automatically unlocked and emergency
services will be called.
When Emergency Active Stop is active, you can deactivate it and take control of
your car at any time by stepping on the accelerator pedal or brake pedal, or turning
the steering wheel, or turning off the hazard warning lights.
Warning
Once activated, the Emergency Active Stop feature will brake the vehicle until it
stops, during which lane departure or collision may occur. Therefore, do not rely
solely on or take the initiative to activate this feature.
Please stay focused at all times while driving, as you always bear the ultimate
responsibility for driving safely and complying with applicable traffic laws and
regulations.
Precautions and Restrictions
The following situations may lead to a camera failure that affects the performance
of Emergency Active Stop, which include but are not limited to:
Changed installation position of camera.
Blocked or dirty camera.
Reduced recognition capability due to dim surrounding environments, such as
at dawn, dusk, night, or in a tunnel.
Sudden changes in ambient brightness, such as tunnel entrances or exits.
Large shadows cast by buildings, landscapes or large vehicles.
Camera directly exposed to light.
Severe weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze.
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead that falls
onto your vehicle.
Water, dust, micro-scratches, oil sludge, dirt, wiper, ice, snow, etc. on the
windshield in front of the camera.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
154/295


Wet roads.
The following situations may lead to a radar failure that affects the performance of
Emergency Active Stop, which include but are not limited to:
Misplaced or blocked radar, or covered with mud, ice and snow, metal plates,
tapes, labels, leaves, etc.
The radar or the area surrounding it is impacted due to a vehicle collision,
scratch, etc.
Extreme weather such as heavy rain, snow, fog, which may affect radar
performance.
Due to the limitation of radar target recognition characteristics, in rare special
circumstances, false alarms may occur for some metal barriers, green belts,
cement walls, etc.
The following situations may lead to a LiDAR failure that affects the feature of
Emergency Active Stop, or even deactivates the feature. These situations include
but are not limited to:
The position of the LiDAR installation has been changed.
Severe weather conditions such as rain, snow, fog, haze,etc.
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead.
Driving on wet or waterlogged roads.
Water, dust, micro-scratches, oil sludge, dirt, ice, snow, tinted or transparent
film or other obstructions on the LiDAR window
Overheating of the LiDAR caused by prolonged sun exposure
Due to the limitations of LiDAR characteristics, in rare special cases, false
alarms may occur for traffic signs and high-speed anti-collision barrels in
high-speed and elevated sections of road.
The targets below cannot be guaranteed to be identified, and may trigger a
response, which include but are not limited to:
Side-crossing vehicles
Motorcycles, tricycles
The targets below will not trigger a response, which include but are not limited to:
Pedestrians
Bicycles
Animals
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
155/295


Traffic lights
Traffic cones
Walls
Barriers
Side-crossing vehicles
Oncoming vehicles
Other non-vehicle objects
Caution
This feature does not guarantee the recognition of special-shaped targets,
especially at night or a poor lighting environment where the driver needs to
pay extra attention. Such vehicles include vehicles with a covered rear or
irregularly-shaped rear, vehicles with a rear below a certain height, and
unladen carriers.
This feature may miss stationary or slow-moving vehicles, especially at night
when the driver needs to pay extra attention.
The following situations may cause late recognition and response of Emergency
Active Stop (EAS) because the target is not directly ahead, which include but are
not limited to:
Emergency Active Stop will not respond to targets in the sensor blind zone.
For example, it cannot detect the blind spots at the corners of the vehicle and
the blind spots on the sides of the vehicle.
When approaching or turning along the road, some targets may be mis-
selected or missed, resulting in the unexpected acceleration and deceleration
of the vehicle.
When going uphill, it may miss a target or misjudge the distance to the lead
vehicle. When going downhill, it may accelerate the vehicle, causing it to
exceed the cruising speed.
When only part of the body of a vehicle in the adjacent lane cuts in front of
your vehicle (especially when it's a larger vehicle cutting in, like a bus, truck,
etc.), it may not be able to recognize and respond to the target.
When your vehicle abruptly cuts into the rear of the vehicle ahead, or another
vehicle abruptly cuts into or out of the front of your vehicle, it may not be able
to recognize the target in a responsive manner.
Emergency Active Stop does not guarantee reliable target recognition in all
circumstances, as its operation may be affected by special or complicated road
conditions, including but not limited to:
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
156/295


Waterlogged roads, muddy roads, potholes, ice- and snow-covered roads,
roads with speed bumps, roads with obstacles.
Traffic conditions with a lot of pedestrians, bicycles or animals.
Complex and changeable traffic conditions, such as busy intersections,
expressway ramps, congested roads.
Winding and turning roads, rapid turning roads.
Uphill and downhill roads.
Rough roads.
Narrow roads.
Tunnel entrances and exits.
Non-standard roads
Roads without a median
It may not be able to provide sufficient lateral grip in the following situations,
including but not limited to:
The brake feature cannot fully work (such as when brake parts are too cold,
too hot, wet, etc.).
Improper vehicle maintenance (excessive wear of the brake or tires, abnormal
tire pressure, etc.).
The vehicle is driving on special roads (such as uphill and downhill, water,
mud, potholes, ice and snow roads, etc.).
Warning
It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
The above warnings, precautions and restrictions have not fully covered all the
situations that may affect the normal operation of the Emergency Active Stop
system. There are many factors that may interfere with the Emergency Active Stop
system. In order to prevent accidents from occurring, you need to drive attentively
and focus on the traffic, road, and vehicle conditions to ensure safe driving.
Emergency Lane Keeping
Emergency Lane Keeping (ELK) can provide a certain steer assist capability to help
the driver correct the vehicle position urgently to prevent the risk of collision as
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
157/295


much as possible when the vehicle deviates from its lane involuntarily or when there
is a potential side collision risk in its adjacent lane.
When the vehicle speed is about 50-130 km/h, Emergency Lane Keeping may be
triggered in the following four emergency scenarios:
Without having the turn light on, your vehicle deviates involuntarily from its
lane to the road curb.
Without having the turn light on, when the lane marking is a solid line, your
vehicle deviates involuntarily from its lane to the side where the solid line is.
Without having the turn light on, when there is an oncoming vehicle in your left
lane, your vehicle deviates involuntarily from its lane to the left.
When there is a vehicle approaching rapidly from behind in your left lane, your
vehicle deviates from its lane involuntarily or actively changes lane to the left.
Enabling/Disabling Emergency Lane Keeping
Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Driver Assistance > Emergency Lane Keeping to turn this feature
on or off.
It is not recommended to turn off this feature. When this feature is turned off, it will
not be able to assist the driver by taking emergency control of the steering when
there is a potential risk of a side collision.
Warning
Emergency Lane Keeping has limited steering torque which can only provide certain
steering assist and cannot fully guarantee the prevention of lane departure or
avoidance of danger. Therefore, please take over steering in time instead of relying
solely on Emergency Lane Keeping.
Please control the vehicle direction immediately when cornering, turning around, or
driving on winding roads or roads with sharp curves.
Warning
As a driver assist feature, Emergency Lane Keeping cannot handle all situations in
all traffic, weather and road conditions.
You must always pay attention to traffic and road conditions. Never rely solely on
Emergency Lane Keeping to avoid danger. For safety reasons, never test this
feature by deliberately or actively triggering Emergency Lane Keeping. If you come
across a dangerous situation, never wait Emergency Lane Keeping to intervene
before taking action. You always bear the ultimate responsibility for driving safely in
the lane and complying with applicable traffic laws and regulations.
Warning
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
158/295


The following behaviors are prohibited when driving:
Relying solely on Emergency Lane Keeping
Hands off the steering wheel
Eyes off the road
Operating Conditions of Emergency Lane Keeping:
Your vehicle speed is about 50-130 km/h.
Your vehicle drives normally without sudden acceleration, deceleration or
steering.
Your vehicle is in the center of its lane and does not drive on the lane marking.
The high-definition camera features normally and provides clear vision.
No components of the Lane Keeping Assist system are faulty.
Your vehicle meets all safety conditions, such as:
The driver is seated.
Your vehicle is in gear position D.
Anti-lock brake system, traction control system and vehicle stability
control system are not triggered.
Caution
Emergency Lane Keeping is automatically activated when the conditions are met in
an emergency.
Emergency Lane Keeping can only provide limited steering assist and cannot
control the vehicle’s speed.
Emergency Lane Keeping is unable to constantly control the steering. Therefore, it
cannot always keep the vehicle centered in the lane.
When Emergency Lane Keeping controls your steering, the steering wheel will turn
accordingly.
You can take over steering by turning the steering wheel manually.
Emergency Lane Keeping in Case of Deviation to Road Curb
When the operating conditions of Emergency Lane Keeping are met, it can provide
a certain degree of steer assist if your vehicle deviates from its lane involuntarily to
the roda curb without having the turn light on. At this time, the corresponding side
of the central lane marking will be displayed in yellow.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
159/295


Warning
Emergency Lane Keeping may fail to operate as intended or cancel automatically
and the vehicle may deviate to the right in some situations, including but not limited
to:
Curbs are not clear or cannot be or are incorrectly identified due to lighting
conditions, such as strong light which leads to reflective curbs, and poor
visibility or insufficient light due to bad weather or at night;
There are roadside obstacles that Emergency Lane Keeping cannot identify,
such as fences, guard rails, traffic cones and cone rods;
The vehicle is steering around a sharp bend, or driving on a sloped road,
bumpy road, road with water or snow and ice, etc.
Emergency Lane Keeping in Case of Deviation to Solid Lane Marking
GUM225374
When the operating conditions of Emergency Lane Keeping are met, ELK can
provide a certain degree of Steer Assist if your vehicle deviates from its lane
involuntarily to the solid lane marking without having the turn light on. At this time,
the corresponding side of the central lane marking will be displayed in red.
Warning
Emergency Lane Keeping may fail to operate as intended or cancel automatically
and the vehicle may deviate to the solid lane line in some situations, including but
not limited to:
Lane lines are unclear, worn, missing, overlapping, or obscured by shadows
cast by other vehicles, buildings, or landscape features.
The lanes are too wide or too narrow.
Lane lines are special ones.
Lane lines cannot be or are incorrectly identified due to changes in height,
such as on sloped roads.
Lane lines cannot be or are incorrectly identified due to lighting conditions,
such as strong light which leads to reflective lane lines, and poor visibility or
insufficient light due to bad weather or at night.
The vehicle is steering around a sharp bend, or driving on a sloped road,
bumpy road, road with water or snow and ice, etc.
Emergency Lane Keeping with Risk of Left Front Collision
GUM225405
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
160/295


When the operating conditions of Emergency Lane Keeping are met, ELK can
provide a certain degree of steer assist if your vehicle deviates from its lane
involuntarily to the left without having the turn light on when there is an oncoming
vehicle in your left lane and the lane marking is clear. At this time, the left side of
the central lane marking will be displayed in red.
Warning
Emergency Lane Keeping may fail to operate as intended or cancel automatically
and the vehicle may collide with the lead vehicle on the left in some situations,
including but not limited to:
Lane lines are unclear, worn, missing, overlapping, or obscured by shadows
cast by other vehicles, buildings, or landscape features.
The lanes are too wide or too narrow.
Lane lines are special ones.
Lane lines cannot be or are incorrectly identified due to changes in height,
such as on sloped roads.
Lane lines cannot be or are incorrectly identified due to lighting conditions,
such as strong light which leads to reflective lane lines, and poor visibility or
insufficient light due to bad weather or at night.
The vehicle is steering around a sharp bend, or driving on a sloped road,
bumpy road, road with water or snow and ice, etc.
The oncoming vehicle is not a vehicle, such as a motorcycle.
Emergency Lane Keeping with Risk of Left Rear Collision
When the operating conditions of Emergency Lane Keeping are met, ELK can
provide a certain degree of steer assist if your vehicle deviates from its lane
involuntarily or actively changes lane to the left when there is a vehicle approaching
rapidly from behind in your left lane and the lane marking is clear. At this time, the
left side of the central lane marking will be displayed in red.
Warning
Emergency Lane Keeping may fail to operate as intended or cancel automatically
and the vehicle may collide with the vehicle approaching from behind on the left in
some situations, including but not limited to:
Lane lines are unclear, worn, missing, overlapping, or obscured by shadows
cast by other vehicles, buildings, or landscape features.
The lanes are too wide or too narrow.
Lane lines are special ones.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
161/295


Lane lines cannot be or are incorrectly identified due to changes in height,
such as on sloped roads.
Lane lines cannot be or are incorrectly identified due to lighting conditions,
such as strong light which leads to reflective lane lines, and poor visibility or
insufficient light due to bad weather or at night.
The vehicle is steering around a sharp bend, or driving on a sloped road,
bumpy road, road with water or snow and ice, etc.
Precautions and Restrictions
The following situations may cause Emergency Lane Keeping to fail to operate as
expected or exit automatically due to a camera failure. Please steer your vehicle in
a timely manner. These situations include but are not limited to:
Changed installation position of camera.
Blocked or dirty camera.
Reduced recognition capability due to dim surrounding environments, such as
at dawn, dusk, night, or in a tunnel.
Sudden changes in ambient brightness, such as tunnel entrances or exits.
Large shadows cast by buildings, landscapes or large vehicles.
Camera directly exposed to light.
Severe weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze,etc.
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead that falls
onto your vehicle.
Water, dust, micro-scratches, oil sludge, dirt, wiper, ice, snow, etc. on the
windshield in front of the camera.
Wet roads.
The following situations may cause the Emergency Lane Keeping to fail to operate
as expected or exit automatically due to a radar failure. Please steer your vehicle in
a time. These situations include but are not limited to:
Misplaced or blocked radar, or covered with mud, ice and snow, metal plates,
tapes, labels, leaves, etc.
The radar or the area surrounding it is impacted due to a vehicle collision,
scratch, etc.
Extreme weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze, which may affect radar
performance.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
162/295


Due to the limitation of radar target recognition characteristics, in rare special
circumstances, false alarms may occur for some metal barriers, green belts,
cement walls, etc.
The following situations may lead to a LiDAR malfunction, affect Emergency Lane
Keeping feature and even cause the feature to deactivate. These situations include
but are not limited to:
Changed installation position of LiDAR.
Severe weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze.
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead.
Driving on wet or waterlogged roads.
Water, dust, micro-scratches, oil sludge, dirt, ice, snow, tinted or transparent
film or other obstructions on the LiDAR window.
Overheating of the LiDAR caused by prolonged sun exposure.
Due to the limitation of LiDAR characteristics, in rare special cases, false
alarms may occur for the traffic signs/high-speed anti-collision barrels in
high-speed/elevated sections.
Special or complex road conditions may cause the Emergency Lane Keeping
System to fail to operate as intended or may exit automatically. Please steer your
vehicle promptly, including but not limited to the following conditions:
Waterlogged roads, muddy roads, potholes, ice- and snow-covered roads,
roads with speed bumps, roads with obstacles.
Traffic conditions with a lot of pedestrians, bicycles or animals.
Complex and changeable traffic conditions, such as busy intersections,
expressway ramps, congested roads.
Winding and turning roads, rapid turning roads.
Driving on uphill and downhill roads.
Rough roads.
Narrow roads.
Tunnel entrances and exits.
Construction areas.
The above warnings, precautions and restrictions have not fully described all the
situations that may affect the normal operation of the Emergency Lane Keeping
system. There are many factors that may interfere with the Emergency Lane
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
163/295


Keeping system. In order to avoid accidents, you need to drive attentively and focus
on the traffic, road, and vehicle conditions to ensure safe driving.
Blind Spot Detection
Blind Spot Detection (BSD) will emit visual, audible, and vibration alerts when
another vehicle appears or is approaching quickly in your blind spot.
GUM192023
The Blind Spot Detection will only be activated when the speed of your vehicle
exceeds 15 km/h.
Caution
This feature is able to detect the lanes next to the vehicle and more than 70 meters
from the rear.
Enter Settings interface from the bottom of the center display, and tap Driver
Assistance > Blind Spot Detection to enable or disable this feature and select an
appropriate means of reminding you.
When the feature is enabled and activated, the Dynamic Environment Simulation
and Display (ESD) will remind you that there is a vehicle approaching from behind
as shown in the figure.
GUM182950
When a vehicle in the driver's blind spot and a vehicle approaching rapidly from
behind are detected, a marker saying that there is a vehicle on the side will be
displayed on the rearview mirror. If you turn on the turn light on the corresponding
side in this case, it will remind you not to change lanes with the following warnings:
Side mirror marker light flashing.
Audible warning + side mirror marker light flashing.
Steering wheel vibration + side mirror marker light flashing.
Audible warning + steering wheel vibration + side mirror marker light flashing.
Caution
The chime may not be heard if the environmental noise is too loud, such as when
the audio system is played at high volumes or the surrounding environment is too
noisy.
In a bright environment such as daytime, the warning of the red ambient lighting
may not be easily noticeable.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
164/295


Caution
Blind Spot Detection does not work when the vehicle is in REVERSE.
Caution
The Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display can only be used as a reference
and cannot perfectly reflect the real traffic conditions. Therefore, do not rely on the
dynamic environment simulation display.
Caution
When you drive on a road with sharp curves, wide lanes or an uneven surface, Blind
Spot Detection may not be able to warn you about vehicles in adjacent lanes.
Blind Spot Detection may give false warnings in the following situations:
Driving near protective fences.
Driving on or under a bridge, or through a tunnel.
Driving besides bushes, trees, etc.
When there are wire poles, street lights or low concrete walls along the road.
Driving near construction areas such as factory buildings, ports, etc.
Driving on urban roads or multi-lane intersections.
Warning
Radars are mounted on or behind the bumper. Keep the bumper clean and
free of mud, ice, metal plates, stickers, labels, and leaves. Failure to do so
may impact the performance of the radars.
If this feature does not function properly due to a collision, scratches, radar
failure, or malfunction, please contact NIO as soon as possible.
If the radar malfunctions for a long period of time and fails to receive any
fault-related alerts, please contact NIO as soon as possible.
This feature only detects and alerts you to vehicles and large motorcycles or
objects, and may have a delay or omission, or even fail to detect or alert you
to objects such as pedestrians, bicycles, or skateboards.
This feature does not alert you to stationary objects. False warnings may be
generated by certain metal fences, median strips, or concrete walls.
Heavy rain, snow, fog, and other extreme weather conditions may impair radar
performance. Please drive with caution, and pay attention to your
surroundings.
Never use this feature in the Trailer Mode.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
165/295


You always bear the ultimate responsibility for driving safely and complying
with applicable traffic safety laws and regulations.
Warning
Even with Blind Spot Detection, you should still drive with caution and use the
rearview mirror and the side mirrors properly.
Warning
It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
The above warnings, precautions and restrictions have not fully described all the
situations that may affect the normal operation of the Blind Spot Detection. There
are many factors that may interfere with the Blind Spot Detection systems. In order
to prevent accidents from occurring, you need to drive attentively and focus on the
traffic, road, and vehicle conditions to ensure safe driving.
Door Open Warning
When you open the door of your vehicle, if vehicles, cyclists or pedestrians
approaching from behind may affect the safety of opening the door or even cause a
collision.
GUM190825
Enter the Settings interface at the bottom of the center display, and tap Driver
Assistance > Door Open Warning to enable or disable this feature.
When the Door Open Warning feature is enabled, your vehicle will remind you in the
following ways. At this time, you or your passengers should avoid opening the door
and confirm whether it is safe to open the door first:
The ambient lighting turns red.
Icon on the side mirror.
Warning alarm.
Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display displays "Watch out for vehicles
approaching from behind".
Note
Door Open Warning monitors for targets approaching fast from behind.
Caution
This feature is only available when the vehicle is in DRIVE (D) or PARK (P).
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
166/295


Caution
The chime may not be heard if the environmental noise is too loud, such as when
the audio system is played at high volumes or the surrounding environment is too
noisy.
In a bright environment such as daytime, the warning of the red ambient lighting
may not be easily noticeable.
Warning
Door Open Warning cannot accurately alert you in all situations and cannot replace
active observation by you and passengers, as well as the function of the rearview
mirror and side mirrors. Please do not rely excessively on this feature and always be
aware of the environment outside the vehicle when opening doors.
Warning
Radars are mounted on or behind the bumper. Keep the bumper clean and
free of mud, ice, metal plates, stickers, labels, and leaves. Failure to do so
may impact the performance of the radars.
If this feature does not function properly due to a collision, scratches, radar
failure, or malfunction, please contact NIO as soon as possible.
If the radar malfunctions for a long period of time and fails to receive any
fault-related alerts, please contact NIO as soon as possible.
This feature only detects and alerts you to vehicles and large motorcycles or
objects, and may have a delay or omission, or even fail to detect or alert you
to objects such as pedestrians, bicycles, or skateboards.
This feature does not alert you to stationary objects. False warnings may be
generated by certain metal fences, median strips, or concrete walls.
Heavy rain, snow, fog, and other extreme weather conditions may impair radar
performance. Please drive with caution, and pay attention to your
surroundings.
Never use this feature in the Trailer Mode.
You always bear the ultimate responsibility for driving safely and complying
with applicable traffic safety laws and regulations.
Warning
It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
The above warnings and precautions have not fully described all the conditions that
may affect the normal operation of the Door Open Warning system. There are many
factors that may interfere with the Door Open Warning system. In order to prevent
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
167/295


accidents from occurring, you need to drive attentively and focus on the traffic,
road, and vehicle conditions to ensure safe driving.
Front Cross Traffic Alert
When driving at low speeds, if the system detects a potential collision risk with the
front crossing vehicle, the Front Cross Traffic Alert (FCTA) feature can warn the
driver to be careful through visual and auditory alerts.
GUM190826
Warning
Cross Traffic Alert is only a supplement to, and not a substitute for, your visual
observation.
Cross Traffic Alert cannot handle all situations in all traffic, weather and road
conditions.
You must always pay attention to traffic and road conditions, and decide to use
Cross Traffic Alert or not after your safety is ensured.
It is the driver's responsibility to comply with, all current regulations in the region(s)
where your vehicle is driven.
Enabling/Disabling Front Cross Traffic Alert
Enter the Settings interface from the bottom of the center display, and tap Driver
Assistance > Front Cross Traffic Alert to enable or disable this feature.
When the operating conditions are satisfied, if a potential collision risk with the
front crossing vehicle is detected, it will remind you through visual and auditory
alerts on the Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display, 360 Surround View
interface and Parking Assist interface.
Operating conditions for the Front Cross Traffic Alert:
The vehicle speed is lower than 15 km/h and higher than 0 km/h.
The speed of the front crossing vehicle is within a certain range of the normal
vehicle speed.
The front lateral radar operates normally and has a clear field of view.
The driver is seated.
Your vehicle is in gear position D.
Caution
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
168/295


The Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display can only be used as a reference
and cannot perfectly reflect the real traffic conditions. Therefore, do not rely on the
dynamic environment simulation display.
Precautions and Restrictions
The targets below cannot be guaranteed to be identified, and may trigger a
response, which include but are not limited to:
Pedestrians
Animals
Motorcycles, electric bikes,tricycles, or icycles
Other non-vehicle objects
The targets below will not trigger a response, which include but are not limited to:
Oncoming vehicles driving in the same direction.
Stationary objects.
The Front Cross Traffic Alert does not respond to targets in blind spots of the
sensor. The Front Cross Traffic Alert cannot detect lateral vehicles in front of this
vehicle through obstacles or parked vehicles.
For example, the Front Cross Traffic Alert cannot detect the front crossing vehicles
in the following situations, which include but are not limited to:
Parked in the innermost position.
The parking space is at an angle.
The following situations may lead to a radar failure and affect the performance of
the Front Cross Traffic Alert, which include but are not limited to:
Misplaced or blocked radar, or covered with mud, ice and snow, metal plates,
tapes, labels, leaves, etc.
The radar or the area surrounding it is impacted due to a vehicle collision,
scratch, etc.
Extreme weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze, which may affect radar
performance
Due to the limitation of radar target recognition characteristics, in rare special
circumstances, false alarms may occur for some metal barriers, green belts,
cement walls, etc.
Warning
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
169/295


It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
The above warnings, precautions and restrictions have not fully described all the
conditions that may affect the normal operation of the Front Cross Traffic Alert
system. There are many factors that may interfere with the Front Cross Traffic Alert
system. In order to prevent accidents from occurring, you need to drive attentively
and focus on the traffic, road, and vehicle conditions to ensure safe driving.
Rear Cross Traffic Alert
When reversing, if the system detects a potential collision risk with the rear
crossing vehicle, the Rear Cross Traffic Alert (RCTA) feature can warn the driver to
pay attention to safety through visual and auditory alerts and even enhance the
warning effect to the driver by braking briefly if necessary.
GUM190828
Warning
Cross Traffic Alert is only a supplement to, and not a substitute for, your visual
observation.
Cross Traffic Alert cannot handle all situations in all traffic, weather and road
conditions.
You must always pay attention to traffic and road conditions, and decide to use
Cross Traffic Alert or not after your safety is ensured.
It is the driver's responsibility to comply with, all current regulations in the region(s)
where your vehicle is driven.
Warning
Never use this feature in the Trailer Mode.
Warning
Rear Cross Traffic Alert only provides a warning and cannot guarantee to stop your
vehicle. Never depend on it to avoid a collision or reduce the impact of a collision.
Enabling/Disabling Rear Cross Traffic Alert
Enter the Settings interface from the bottom of the center display, and tap Driver
Assistance > Rear Cross Traffic Alert to enable or disable this feature.
GUM182913
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
170/295


When it is enabled, you can select the assist level in the Rear Cross Traffic Alert
Settings:
Warning: When the vehicle speed is lower than about 15km/h and the
operating conditions are satisfied, if a potential collision risk with rear
crossing vehicles from behind is detected, it will remind the vehicle in the rear
through visual and auditory alerts on the digital instrument cluster, 360
Surround View interface and Parking Assist interface.
Warning & Braking: When the vehicle speed is about 1-15km/h and the
operating conditions are satisfied, besides visual and auditory alerts, the
system will warn you by a brief instance of active braking if necessary, but
cannot ensure that the vehicle will come to a complete stop.
Operating conditions for the Rear Cross Traffic Alert:
The speed of the rear crossing vehicle is between about 5 and 60 km/h.
The rear lateral radar operates normally and has a clear field of view.
The driver is seated.
All doors are closed.
Your vehicle is in REVERSE.
Caution
When you select Warning & Braking, if you fully press the brake pedal or
accelerator pedal, the function may not intervene.
Caution
The Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display can only be used as a reference
and cannot perfectly reflect the real traffic conditions. Therefore, do not rely on the
dynamic environment simulation display.
Precautions and Restrictions
The targets below cannot be guaranteed to be identified, and may trigger a
response, which include but are not limited to:
Pedestrians
Animals
Motorcycles, electric bikes, bicycles, or tricycles
Other non-vehicle objects
The targets below will not trigger a response, which include but are not limited to:
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
171/295


Oncoming vehicles driving in the same direction
The Rear Cross Traffic Alert does not respond to targets in blind spots of the
sensor. The Rear Cross Traffic Alert is not designed to detect vehicles behind this
vehicle through obstacles or parked vehicles.
The Rear Cross Traffic Alert is not designed to detect rear crossing vehicles in the
following situations, which include but are not limited to:
Parked in the innermost position.
The parking space is at an angle.
The following situations may lead to a radar failure and affect the performance of
the Rear Cross Traffic Alert, which include but are not limited to:
Misplaced or blocked radar, or covered with mud, ice and snow, metal plates,
tapes, labels, leaves, etc.
The radar or the area surrounding it is impacted due to a vehicle collision,
scratch, etc.
Extreme weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze, which may affect radar
performance.
Due to the limitation of radar target recognition characteristics, in rare special
circumstances, false alarms may occur for some metal barriers, green belts,
cement walls, etc.
Warning
It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
The above warnings, precautions and restrictions have not fully described all the
conditions that may affect the normal operation of the Rear Cross Traffic Alert
system. There are many factors that may interfere with the Rear Cross Traffic Alert
system. In order to prevent accidents from occurring, you need to drive attentively
and focus on the traffic, road, and vehicle conditions to ensure safe driving.
Advanced Driver Monitoring System
The Advanced Driver Monitoring System can monitor the driver's driving status.
GUM190821
When it is enabled and conditions for activating the feature are satisfied, once the
driver is detected to be tired or distracted, NOMI will provide different levels of
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
172/295


warnings through expressions and sounds. The digital instrument cluster will also
remind the driver to focus on driving and protect the driver's safety.
Caution
Advanced Driver Monitoring System cannot operate under all conditions and is only
designed to assist driving. The driver should always bear the ultimate responsibility
for driving safely.
Therefore, it is of great importance that you pay attention when driving and take
regular breaks. When a driver is alerted or feels fatigued, they should adjust their
behavior or pull over safely as soon as possible to take a break.
The Advanced Driver Monitoring System is automatically switched on and remains
active when driving with either Driver Assistance modes Adaptive Cruise Control
(ACC) or Lane Centering Control (LCC/Pilot). Switching off the Advanced Driver
Monitoring System will only deactivate it for manual driving.
After the driver adjusts the steering wheel, the feature requires a brief recalibration,
during which the feature fault light for the Advanced Driver Monitoring System will
appear.
Enabling/Disabling the Drowsiness and Distraction Warning System
The Advanced Driver Monitoring System monitors the driver's drowsiness and
attention state.
Drowsiness Warning
GUM190822
Distraction Warning
GUM190823
Enter Settings interface from the control bar of the center display and tap Driving
Assistance > Drowsiness Warning or Driving Assistance >Distraction Warning to
enable or disable this feature.
After this feature is enabled, when the vehicle speed is 20 km/h or above, the
system will keep monitoring the status and provide sound or voice warnings.
Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display
Level 1 Alarm (take the Distraction Warning feature for example).
GUM232873
Level 2 Alarm (take the Distraction Warning feature for example).
GUM232879
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
173/295


If the driver still does not take control of the vehicle after a Level 2 alarm, the
Emergency Active Stop will be activated when the normal working conditions
of the system are met.
When the following are displayed due to a system fault or malicious occlusion
of the camera, it indicates that the feature is limited. Please promptly contact
the NIO Service Center.
Malicious occlusion
GUM232877
System fault
GUM232878
Caution
The camera will not record or share any images, audio or videos.
Precautions and Restrictions
In some cases, the detection of Distraction Warning and Drosiness Driving
behaviors may be affected or fail, resulting in the system not providing
corresponding warnings, being partially unavailable or providing false alarms, such
as:
At night and in low light.
Sunlight, opposite headlights and other direct light interference.
While adjusting the Seat.
In the event of eye occlusion, including but not limited to the use of dark
glasses with low transmittance, polarizers, sunglasses, and eyeglass frame
occlusion, etc.
Wearing accessories such as hats, scarves and bandanas that may alter the
shape of the head.
Wearing a mask.
Warning
It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
The above warnings, precautions and restrictions have not fully covered all the
conditions that may affect the normal operation of the Advanced Driver Monitoring
System. There are many factors that may interfere with the Advanced Driver
Monitoring System. In order to prevent accidents from occurring, you need to drive
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
174/295


attentively and focus on the traffic, road, and vehicle conditions to ensure safe
driving.
Auto High Beams
Your vehicle will turn off the high beam headlights in a timely manner when it meets
and passes other vehicles, the driving distance between the vehicle behind and
ahead in the same direction is close or the vehicle enters a road section with good
lighting conditions by detecting headlights, taillights of the vehicle ahead, street
lights and other information through the front camera, so as not to dazzle the other
vehicles or pedestrians. Turn on the high beam headlights in time when coming
upon and entering an area with poor lighting or low visibility to ensure that the road
ahead is illuminated.
GUM190922
Turn on the high beam headlights: the outside environment is dark and there
are no other traffic participants ahead
Turn off the high beam headlights: the outside environment is bright and there
are other traffic participants ahead
You can see the following information through the digital instrument cluster:
The Auto High Beams are enabled
The headlights are turned on
The Low Beams are turned on
GUM160432
Note
When Auto High Beams are activated, pull the lever towards you to turn on high
beams immediately. Releasing the lever will switch the headlights back to low
beams and return Auto High Beams to standby status.
Warning
As a driving assist feature, Auto High Beams cannot handle all situations in all
traffic, weather and road conditions.
Please use the high and low beams in compliance with applicable traffic safety
laws and regulations. Do not turn on Auto High Beams unless it will not cause
any violation of applicable laws and regulations.
The driver should always bear the ultimate responsibility for driving safely in
compliance with applicable traffic safety laws and regulations.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
175/295


Enable/Disable the Auto High Beams
GUM221600
1. Enter the Settings page from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Light > Headlights. Select 
GUM155709 to turn on the
Automatic Headlights.
2. Go to the Settings page from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, and tap Light > Auto High Beams to enable or disable this function.
3. When the Auto High Beams (AHB) are enabled:
Push the light control lever forward to activate the Auto High Beams (AHB)
function.
Push the light control lever forward or pull it backward again to enter the
standby status of the function.
4. When the Auto High Beams are disabled:
Push the light control lever forward to turn on the high beam headlights.
Push the light control lever forward or pull it backward again to turn off the
high beam headlights.
Automatic control may not be performed under, but also not be limited to, the
following situations:
Turn on the turn light.
Turn the steering wheel hard.
Pass a sharp turn.
The wiper is set to its maximum speed.
The fog lights are on.
Only targets that satisfy the conditions will be responded to by the Auto High
Beams (AHB). The targets below will not trigger a response, which include but are
not limited to:
Pedestrians.
Cyclists (including but not limited to bicycles, motorcycles, electric bikes,
tricycles, etc.).
Other non-vehicle objects.
Warning
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
176/295


This feature may be impaired in heavy rain, snow, fog and other extreme weather
conditions, or when the camera is blocked. Please drive with caution.
Warning
It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
The above warnings do not cover all conditions that may affect the proper
operation of the Auto High Beams (AHB) system. There are many factors that may
interfere with the Auto High Beams system. In order to prevent accidents from
occurring, you need to drive attentively and focus on the traffic, road, and vehicle
conditions to ensure safe driving.
Active Lane Change
The Active Lane Change (ALC) is a sub-feature of Lane Centering Control and
provides assistance for lane changes. Once enabled in the Settings, the system will
complete the lane change after the driver activates the turn signal lever and when
specific environmental and road conditions are met.
GUM190920
The Active Lane Change is applicable to high speed roads. The current and target
lanes must be well lit, have clear lane markings and space to change lanes.
Warning
As a driving assist feature, Active Lane Change cannot handle all situations in all
traffic, weather, and road conditions.
You must always pay attention to traffic and road conditions and make your own
decision on whether to use Active Lane Change if it is safe. You should always be
ready to take over when you find that the conditions of the traffic, road, or the
vehicle are not suitable for Active Lane Change, or there are other unsafe factors.
You always bear the ultimate responsibility for changing lanes safely and complying
with current traffic laws and regulations.
Enabling/Disabling Active Lane Change
Enter the Settings interface from the center display, and tap Driver Assistance >
Active Lane Change to enable or disable this feature.
Operating conditions for the Active Lane Change:
The driver's hands on the steering wheel.
The Lane Centering Control is enabled and operating normally.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
177/295


The Active Lane Change is enabled and operating normally.
The sensor features properly and the field of view is clear.
Driving speed is at 60-130 km/h.
The current and target lanes meet all the safety conditions to change lanes.
When:
The lane marking on the side of the lane change is a dotted line.
The curvatures of the current and target lanes are small.
The vehicle maintains a safe distance to the vehicles in front of and
behind it in the current and target lanes.
There is no Blind Spot Detection and Lane Change Alert and other
alarms for the target lane.
The lane markings on both sides of the target lane are clear.
None of the components for the Active Lane Change are faulty and the vehicle
meets all safety conditions. For example:
No malfunction with the turn light.
The driver is seated.
The driver has fastened the seat belt.
All doors are closed.
Your vehicle is in gear position D.
The driver does not step on the brake pedal.
Anti-lock brake system, traction control system and vehicle stability
control system are not triggered.
Enabling the Active Lane Change feature in Settings does not mean that the feature
has been activated.
After meeting the operating conditions, you must perform a visual check to confirm
the safety of the lane change environment, and then toggle the turn light lever on
the corresponding side. The system will detect if your hands are on the steering
wheel.
The system will activate the Active Lane Change feature to assist the lane
change if it detects that the conditions to change lanes have been met. At this
time, the Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display will display the light
band on the corresponding side turning blue and disappearing after a
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
178/295


successful lane change. After the lane change is completed, please confirm
that the turn light lever has been toggled back.
The system will not perform the lane change if it detects that the conditions to
change lanes has not been met and the Dynamic Environment Simulation and
Display (ESD) will display the light band on the corresponding side turning red.
Before or during a lane change, toggle the turn light lever in the opposite direction
of the lane change to cancel the lane change. When the following situations occur,
the lane change will be interrupted, and you will be reminded through the digital
instrument cluster and sound alerts of the need to take control of your vehicle:
The Active Lane Change detects an unsafe lane change environment, such as
when the activation alarms for Blind Spot Detection go off.
Steer Assist is exited for reasons such as taking over the steering wheel
control, unclear lane markings, and passing through excessively curved bends.
Adaptive Cruise Control and Steer Assist are exited at the same time for
reasons such as pressing the 
GUM166794 button and depressing the brake
pedal.
Caution
Active Lane Change can only change one lane at a time.
Caution
Active lane Change may fail if the light and visibility are poor at night, or when lane
lines are not clear.
Warning
Active Lane Change may suddenly be canceled due to unexpected circumstances.
Please always pay attention to traffic and road conditions, and be prepared to take
over at any time.
Warning
You must always confirm if it is safe and appropriate before and when changing
lanes. Please note that Active Lane Change cannot respond to pedestrians,
obstacles, oncoming vehicles, etc. Never rely solely on Active Lane Change to
choose a driving path. You always bear the ultimate responsibility for changing
lanes safely.
Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display
Active Lane Change is making a lane change.
GUM182939
Active Lane Change suspends or cannot make a lane change.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
179/295


GUM182940
Active Lane Change completes the lane change.
GUM182941
Caution
The Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display can only be used as a reference
and cannot perfectly reflect the real traffic conditions. Therefore, do not rely on the
dynamic environment simulation display.
Precautions and Restrictions
The following situations may prevent the Active Lane Change from completing the
lane change or operating as expected, requiring the driver to take control of the
steering wheel at any time, which include but are not limited to:
Passing through bends with excessive curvature, such as high-speed ramps
The lane markings of the current lane and target lane are not clear, worn,
missing, crossed, or shaded by other vehicles or buildings or landscapes
Passing through road sections without lane markings, such as non-standard
roads, intersections and construction areas
Passing through areas with unclear lane division, such as areas with merging
or dividing lane markings, high-speed ramp crossings, urban intersection
zones and left turn waiting zones
Passing through road sections with special lane markings, such as speed
reduction markings and channelizing-line markings
There are edges or other high-contrast lines on roads instead of lane
markings, such as pavement joints and curbs
Lane markings cannot be recognized or are not recognized correctly due to
height change, such as on the uphill and downhill
Lane markings cannot be recognized or are not recognized correctly due to
light, such as reflection of lane markings caused by strong light, poor visibility
or insufficient light caused by bad weather and or at night
The distance between the lane markings on both sides of the current lane or
the target lane is too wide or too narrow
The following situations may lead to a camera failure, thus making it impossible to
complete the lane change assistance, which include but are not limited to:
Changed installation position of camera
Blocked or dirty camera
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
180/295


Limited recognition at night
Dark surroundings, such as at dawn, dusk, night, in tunnels
Sudden changes in ambient brightness, such as tunnel entrances or exits
Large shadows cast by buildings, landscapes or large vehicles
Camera directly exposed to light
Severe weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead that falls
onto your vehicle
Water, dust, micro-scratches, oil sludge, dirt, wiper, ice, snow, etc. on the
windshield in front of the camera
Wet roads
The following situations may lead to a radar failure, thus making it impossible to
complete the lane change assistance, which include but are not limited to:
Misplaced or blocked radar, or covered with mud, ice and snow, metal plates,
tapes, labels, leaves, etc.
The radar or the area surrounding it is impacted due to a vehicle collision,
scratch, etc.
Extreme weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze, which may affect radar
performance
Due to the limitation of radar target recognition characteristics, in rare special
circumstances, false alarms may occur for some metal barriers, green belts,
cement walls, etc.
The following situations may lead to a LiDAR failure, affect the feature of lane
change assistance, and even cause the feature to deactivate, which include but are
not limited to:
Changed installation position of LiDAR
Severe weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead
Driving on wet or waterlogged roads
Water, dust, micro-scratches, oil sludge, dirt, ice, snow, tinted or transparent
film or other obstructions on the LiDAR window
Overheating of the LiDAR caused by prolonged sun exposure
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
181/295


Due to the limitation of LiDAR characteristics, in rare special cases, false
alarms may occur for the traffic signs/high-speed anti-collision barrels in
high-speed/elevated sections
The Active Lane Change may omit or misdetect obstacles in the target and current
lanes. You must always confirm whether it is safe and appropriate to change lanes
before and during the lane change. The targets below cannot be guaranteed to be
identified, and may trigger a response, which include but are not limited to:
Side-crossing vehicles
Motorcycles, tricycles
The targets below will not trigger a response, which include but are not limited to:
Pedestrians
Bicycles
Animals
Traffic lights
Walls
Barriers
Oncoming vehicles
Other non-vehicle objects
Caution
Active Lane Change cannot guarantee the recognition of special-shaped
targets. Please pay extra attention, especially at night, to targets. Such
vehicles include vehicles with a covered rear or irregular shape, vehicles with a
rear below a certain height, and unladen carriers.
Active Lane Change may miss stationary or slow-moving vehicles, especially
at night when the driver needs to pay extra attention.
It is not recommended to use Active Lane Change in special or complex road
conditions, which include but are not limited to:
Waterlogged roads, muddy roads, potholes, ice- and snow-covered roads,
roads with speed bumps, roads with obstacles.
Traffic conditions with a lot of pedestrians, bicycles or animals.
Complex and changeable traffic conditions, such as busy intersections,
expressway ramps, congested roads.
Winding and turning roads, rapid turning roads.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
182/295


Driving on uphill and downhill roads.
Rough roads.
Narrow roads.
Tunnel entrances and exits.
Non-standard roads.
Roads without a median.
Warning
It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
The above warnings, precautions and restrictions have not fully covered all the
situations that may affect the normal operation of the Active Lane Change system.
There are many factors that may interfere with the Active Lane Change system. In
order to prevent accidents from occurring, you need to drive attentively and focus
on the traffic, road, and vehicle conditions to ensure safe driving.
Lane Centering Control
Lane Centering Control (LCC) provides Steering Assist that keeps your vehicle in
the current lane alongside speed control and distance maintenance by Adaptive
Cruise Control. Lane Centering Control detects vehicles in front of you with the HD
cameras, millimeter-wave radars and LiDAR sensor, and automatically controls your
speed to maintain a safe distance. Lane Centering Control also identifies lane lines
with the HD cameras and can provide steering assist to keep the vehicle in the
current lane when there are clear lane lines on both sides.
GUM190921
Lane Centering Control , as a driving assist feature, is unable to achieve auto
driving capabilities, so the driver shall keep both hands on the steering wheel and
stay focused, ready to take over the vehicle at any time.
Lane Centering Control is mainly intended for use on motorways, expressways, and
other major roads.
Caution
Lane Centering Control will strive to keep the vehicle in the lane when there are
clear lane lines on both sides. Special road conditions and poor lighting on rainy
days or at nighttime may result in impaired lane recognition, failure to keep the
vehicle in the lane, or scratching. In this case, it is suggested that you temporarily
turn off Lane Centering Control and switch to Adaptive Cruise Control.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
183/295


Warning
As a driving assist feature, Lane Centering Control cannot handle all situations in all
traffic, weather and road conditions.
You must always pay attention to traffic and road conditions, and decide to use
Lane Centering Control or not after your safety is ensured.
You should always be ready to take over when you find that the conditions of the
traffic, road or the vehicle are not suitable for enabling Lane Centering Control, or
there are other unsafe factors.
You always bear the ultimate responsibility for maintaining an appropriate distance
and speed and complying with applicable traffic laws and regulations.
Warning
The following behaviors are prohibited when driving:
Relying solely on the system
Using the feature in bad weather conditions
Using the system in an environment where there are many pedestrians,
bicycles, or animals
Using the system on sharp curves
Using the system when the lane lines are unclear or the lighting is poor
Hands off the steering wheel
Eyes off the road
Warning
As a feature for driving comfort, and not for preventing collision, Lane Centering
Control has a limited maximum deceleration that is less than the maximum
deceleration required by Automatic Emergency Brake and manual driving scenarios.
Therefore, never rely solely on Lane Centering Control to decelerate the vehicle
when avoiding a collision.
Lane Centering Control may fail to stop your vehicle or maintain a safe distance
from the lead vehicle when the relative speed between your vehicle and the lead
vehicle is great. In this case, exit Lane Centering Control immediately. Do not rely
on Lane Centering Control to bring your vehicle to a complete stop regardless of
whether it is following a stationary vehicle or a lead vehicle.
Warning
Lane Centering Control has a limited steering torque that is less than the maximum
steering force required in normal driving scenarios. Therefore, do not rely solely on
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
184/295


Lane Centering Control to steer your vehicle. You should always be prepared to
take over the steering, especially when navigating curves.
Please take over the steering immediately when cornering, turning around, and
driving on winding roads or roads with sharp curves. Do not rely on Lane Centering
Control in these situations due to limited visibility of lanes.
Enabling/Disabling Lane Centering Control
Enter the Settings interface from the bottom of the center display, tap Driver
Assistance and choose Lane Centering Control to turn this feature on or off.
Turning on Lane Centering Control in the Settings does not mean that LCC is
activated.
GUM191172
Middle button: activate or deactivate Lane Centering Control
Up button: increase or resume the cruising speed
Down button: decrease the cruising speed
Left button: decrease the following distance
Right button: increase the following distance
When the operating conditions are met, press the Middle button 
GUM163177 to
activate Lane Centering Control.
If the lane markings on both sides are clear and the vehicle is in the center of
the current lane, activating Steer Assist will activate Adaptive Cruise Control
as well.
If the lane markings on both sides are unclear or the vehicle is not in the
center of the current lane, it will first activate Adaptive Cruise Control and
start searching for lane markings, and then activate Steer Assist when the
conditions are met.
Lane Centering Control is enabled at a vehicle speed of 0-180 km/h.
If the vehicle speed is lower than 10 km/h, 10 km/h will be set as the cruising
speed.
If the vehicle speed is higher than 10 km/h but not higher than 180 km/h, the
current vehicle speed will be set as the cruising speed.
When Lane Centering Control activates Adaptive Cruise Control and starts
searching for lane markings, you can release the accelerator pedal, and the system
will maintain the set cruising speed.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
185/295


If there is a lead vehicle, Lane Centering Control will adjust the speed of your
vehicle according to the speed and distance of the lead vehicle, and the
maximum speed will not exceed the cruising speed.
When there is no vehicle ahead, Lane Centering Control will quickly adjust the
speed of your vehicle to the cruising speed.
When Lane Centering Control activates Steer Assist, it will actively assist with
steering control, however, please keep your hands lightly on the steering wheel. The
pressure of your hands may have a slight effect on the steer assist control, please
pay close attention to the driving situation, and be ready to take control of the
steering wheel at any time to control the direction of the vehicle.
The steering wheel turns when Lane Centering Control is controlling the steering.
When Lane Centering Control is actively accelerating, the accelerator pedal does
not move; when it’s decelerating, the brake pedal may move.
Working Condition for Lane Centering Control:
The speed does not exceed 180 km/h.
High-definition cameras, radar and LiDAR functioning properly with a clear
view
No components of Lane Centering Control are faulty
The feature cannot be activated when the steering angle of the steering wheel
is too large
Your vehicle meets all safety conditions, such as:
The driver's hands on the steering wheel.
The driver is seated.
The driver has fastened the seat belt.
All doors are closed.
Your vehicle is in gear position D.
The driver does not step on the brake pedal.
Anti-lock brake system, traction control system and vehicle stability
control system are not triggered.
Adjusting the speed under Lane Centering Control
When Lane Centering Control is active, you can increase or decrease the cruise
speed by pressing on the Up or Down button on the left side of the steering wheel.
You can customize the cruise speed adjustment from the menu by tapping Driver
Assistance > Cruise Speed Adjustment.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
186/295


The available options are:
Press for 1 km/h, Press and Hold for 5 km/h
Press the Up or Down button on the left side of the steering wheel to
increase/decrease the cruise speed by 1 km/h
Press and hold the Up or Down button on the left side of the steering
wheel to increase/decrease the cruise speed to the closest 5 km/h
increment, that is, if the speed is 82 km/h, press and hold the Up button
on the left side of the steering wheel, and the speed will be increased to
85 km/h
Press and hold for 1 km/h, press for 5 km/h
Press and hold the Up or Down button on the left side of the steering
wheel to increase or decrease the cruise speed by 1 km/h.
Press the Up or Down button on the left side of the steering wheel to
increase or decrease the cruise speed to the closest 5 km/h increment,
if the speed is 82 km/h, press the Up button on the left side of the
steering wheel, and the speed will be increased to 85 km/h
The maximum set speed for Lane Centering Control is 180 km/h.
The minimum set speed for Lane Centering Control is 10 km/h, but it allows the
vehicle to decelerate to 0 km/h when following the vehicle ahead.
Caution
To activate it for the first time, shortly press for 1 km/h, or long press for
5km/h.
The cruise speed cannot be adjusted via NOMI.
Warning
When driving with this feature on, if the system detects that you are not in a normal
driving state (e.g., you are not holding the steering wheel for an extended period of
time, you are distracted and fatigued for an extended period of time, or you are out
of your seat), it will activate Emergency Active Stop when the normal operating
conditions for the system are met.
Adjusting the Time-Distance to the Lead Vehicle
When Lane Centering Control is activated or awaiting activation, the following
time-distance can be set to one of five levels.
Press the left Right button on the steering wheel to increase the following
time-distance by one level.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
187/295


Press the left Left button on the steering wheel to decrease the following
time-distance by one level.
Takeover and Resumption
When driving with Lane Centering Control, you can take over the vehicle by firmly
pressing the accelerator pedal or turning the steering wheel. When you take over by
firmly pressing the accelerator pedal, Lane Centering Control will no longer respond
to the movements of the target lead vehicle.
When you stop firmly pressing the accelerator pedal, Lane Centering Control will
immediately resume Adaptive Cruise Control.
When you take over by turning the steering wheel, Steering Assist will temporarily
switch to standby, but Adaptive Cruise Control will remain on and search for lane
lines. In this case, steering is under your control.
When you stop turning the steering wheel, if the lane lines on both sides are clear
and your vehicle is in the center of the current lane, Steering Assist will
automatically resume.
If Lane Centering Control is deactivated by pressing
GUM163177 or the brake
pedal, it can be reactivated by pressing the left Up button on the steering wheel,
and this will resume the previously set cruise speed.
After following the lead vehicle to a stop, Lane Centering Control can be
reactivated by pressing the left Up button on the steering wheel or the accelerator
pedal and this will resume the previously set cruise speed.
When Lane Centering Control is reactivated, Adaptive Cruise Control will engage
first and start searching for lane lines. If the lane lines on both sides are clear and
your vehicle is in the center of the current lane, Steering Assist will engage.
Caution
When the Steer Assist feature of Lane Centering Control (LCC) is working properly,
if the Active Lane Change (ALC) feature is activated in the Settings, when you
toggle the turn light lever, an automatic lane change will be performed with
the conditions met. Please refer to "Active Lane Change (ALC)" for details.
If the Active Lane Change (ALC) feature is not activated in the Settings, when
you toggle the turn light lever, the Steer Assist feature of Lane Centering
Control (LCC) will be temporarily exited to enter standby state, and you need
to take over the steering wheel to control your vehicle direction in a timely
manner. At this time, the Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) feature is retained
and the lane marking is continuously being searched. The Steer Assist feature
will be automatically restored once the conditions are met.
Caution
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
188/295


When Steering Assist functions properly and Active Lane Change (ALC) is not
enabled in Settings, please take over the steering and exit Steering Assist if you
need to change lanes.
Warning
Steering Assist may fail to operate as intended in certain situations or disengage to
standby while providing sound and text alerts to remind you to take over steering.
During this time, Adaptive Cruise Control will remain on and continue searching for
lane lines. When the required conditions are met, Steering Assist will resume
automatically. including but not limited to:
The vehicle is navigating sharp curves, such as on expressway ramps.
Lane lines are unclear, worn, missing, overlapping, or obscured by shadows
cast by other vehicles, buildings, or landscape features.
The road section has no lane lines, such as non-standard roads, intersections,
or construction areas.
The road section has special lane lines, such as deceleration lines or diversion
lines.
Lane lines are not clearly divided, such as lane lines merging or diverting,
expressway ramps, urban intersections, left-turn waiting areas, etc.
There are edges or other high-contrast lines on the road instead of lane lines,
such as road joints or curbs.
Lane lines cannot be or are incorrectly identified due to changes in height,
such as on sloped roads.
Lane lines cannot be or are incorrectly identified due to lighting conditions,
such as strong light which leads to reflective lane lines, and poor visibility or
insufficient light due to bad weather or at night.
The lanes are too wide or too narrow.
Disabling Lane Centering Control
Lane Centering Control will be deactivated, and will no longer be in active control of
speed and direction, and alert you audibly when:
The steering wheel button 
GUM163177 is pressed.
The brake pedal is pressed.
In addition, when the working conditions are no longer met, Lane Centering Control
will be automatically deactivated, and you should take control of the brake pedal,
accelerator pedal and steering wheel immediately after that to control the speed
and direction of the vehicle.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
189/295


Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display
GUM237510
An intelligent driving status indicator light has been added next to the real-time
vehicle speed on the left side of the digital instrument cluster. The intelligent driving
status indicator light can be used to understand the features of intelligent driving
that can be activated now and that is running now, as well as the cruise speed
status of intelligent driving.
Feature
Active state
To be activated
Loss of lateral
control
Lane Centering
Control
GUM237501
GUM237500
GUM237504
GUM237505
GUM237508
Adaptive Cruise
Control
GUM237502
GUM237503
GUM237506
GUM237507
/
Caution
The Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display can only be used as a reference
and cannot perfectly reflect the real traffic conditions. Therefore, do not rely on the
dynamic environment simulation display.
Caution
When neither lane line is clear, but there is a vehicle in front that meets
requirements, your vehicle can follow the lead vehicle for a short time.
Warning
When lane lines are unclear on both sides and your vehicle is following the lead
vehicle, you may collide with other vehicles in adjacent lanes if the lead vehicle
changes lanes at a slow speed. Therefore, you need to be prepared to take over at
any time to ensure your safety.
Keep your hands on the steering wheel and eyes on the road ahead when driving
with Lane Centering Control active.
When the system detects that your hands have been off the steering wheel
and your eyes have been off the road ahead for a period of time, Dynamic
Environment Simulation and Display will display "Please keep your hands on
the steering wheel" or "Please concentrate on driving", and alert you audibly.
When the system detects that your hands have been still off the steering
wheel and your eyes have been still off the road ahead after a period of time,
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
190/295


Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display will display "LCC is about to be
deactivated, please put your hands on the steering wheel immediately", or
"LCC is about to be deactivated, please take control of the vehicle
immediately", and keep alerting you audibly.
When the system detects that your hands have been always off the steering
wheel and your eyes have been always off the road ahead after a period of
time, Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display will display "Emergency
Active Stop is activated, the vehicle is about to stop" and alert you audibly,
accompanied by a NOMI voice prompt of "The vehicle is stopping" and double
flashing lights.
When the system detects that your hands are on the steering wheel and your eyes
are on the road ahead, the warning will disappear.
Maintaining Safe Distance
GUM237516
When Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display displays a warning, it means
that there is a risk of collision because the maximum deceleration available to Lane
Centering Control can no longer maintain a safe distance, and you need to take
control of the brake pedal and steering wheel immediately to control the speed and
direction of the vehicle.
Warning
If you encounter a dangerous situation, do not wait for a warning before taking
action and take over immediately.
Go Notifier
Lane Centering Control stops the vehicle as the lead vehicle stops:
If the lead vehicle starts, Lane Centering Control will follow it and actively start
the vehicle as well. You need to pay attention to the surrounding environment
at all times to prevent collision accidents from occurring.
When the vehicle stops as the lead vehicle stops for more than about 5
seconds, before it starts again to follow the lead vehicle, it will alert you
audibly.
When the vehicle stops as the lead vehicle stops for more than about 5
seconds, and the system detects obstacles ahead that may affect driving,
Dynamic Environment Simulation will display "The lead vehicle starts moving"
prompt, and you need to re-activate Following Start by pressing the Up button
on the left side of the steering wheel or stepping on the accelerator pedal
after checking the surroundings.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
191/295


After approximately 5 minutes, Lane Centering Control will be deactivated and
Electric Parking will be activated instead.
After Lane Centering Control stops the vehicle as the lead vehicle stops, it will start
the vehicle again only when the distance to the lead vehicle exceeds about 4
meters.
Intelligent Speed Assist
Once activated, when the vehicle detects new speed limit signs, it will ask you to
manually confirm adjusting your cruise speed to the new speed limit.
Enter the Settings interface from the bottom of the center display, tap Driver
Assistance > Intelligent Speed Assist to turn this feature on or off.
Warning
Intelligent Speed Assist is only a supplement to, and does not function as a
substitute for, your visual observation. Never rely solely on the speed limit
information recognized by Traffic Sign Recognition.
When the speed of the vehicle exceeds the speed limit of the road, you will be
visually alerted of overspeed.
Warning
As a driving assist feature, Intelligent Speed Assist is not designed to handle
all situations in all traffic, weather, and road conditions. It is the driver's
responsibility to pay attention to traffic and road conditions and to decide
whether to use Intelligent Speed Assist.
Intelligent Speed Assist does not work in complex road conditions such as
ramps.
You always bear the ultimate responsibility for driving safely and complying
with applicable traffic laws and regulations.
Intelligent Speed Assist combines the speed limit information from the map
and camera to display the speed limit information on the digital instrument
cluster. No speed limit information will be displayed when no speed limit
information source is available.
Caution
The Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display can only be used as a reference
and cannot perfectly reflect the real traffic conditions. Therefore, do not rely on the
dynamic environment simulation display.
Precautions and Restrictions
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
192/295


The following situations may cause the camera to misidentify obstacles, affect the
performance of Lane Centering Control, or even cause deactivation, which include
but are not limited to:
Changed installation position of camera.
Blocked or dirty camera.
Limited recognition at night.
Dark surroundings, such as at dawn, dusk, night, in tunnels.
Sudden changes in ambient brightness, such as tunnel entrances or exits.
Large shadows cast by buildings, landscapes or large vehicles.
Camera directly exposed to light.
Severe weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze.
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead that falls
onto your vehicle.
Water, dust, micro-scratches, oil sludge, dirt, wiper, ice, snow, etc. on the
windshield in front of the camera.
Wet roads.
The following situations may cause the radar to misidentify obstacles, affect the
performance of Lane Centering Control, or even cause deactivation, which include
but are not limited to:
Misplaced or blocked radar, or covered with mud, ice and snow, metal plates,
tapes, labels, leaves, etc.
The radar or the area surrounding it is impacted due to a vehicle collision,
scratch, etc.
Extreme weather such as heavy rain, snow, fog, which may affect radar
performance.
Due to the limitation of radar target recognition characteristics, in rare special
circumstances, false alarms may occur for some metal barriers, green belts,
cement walls, etc.
The following situations may cause the LiDAR to misidentify obstacles, affect the
performance of Lane Centering Control, or even cause deactivation, which include
but are not limited to:
Changed installation position of LiDAR.
Severe weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
193/295


Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead.
Driving on wet or waterlogged roads.
Water, dust, micro-scratches, oil sludge, dirt, ice, snow, tinted or transparent
film or other obstructions on the LiDAR window.
Overheating of the LiDAR caused by prolonged sun exposure.
Due to the limitation of LiDAR characteristics, in rare special cases, false
alarms may occur for the traffic signs/high-speed anti-collision barrels in
high-speed/elevated sections
The vehicle will only respond to Lane Centering Control when the conditions are
met The targets below cannot be guaranteed to be identified, and may trigger a
response, which include but are not limited to:
Transverse vehicles.
Motorcycles, tricycles.
The targets below will not trigger a response, which include but are not limited to:
Pedestrians.
Bicycles.
Traffic cones.
Animals.
Traffic lights.
Walls.
Barriers.
Oncoming vehicles.
Other non-vehicle objects.
The following situations may cause the late recognition and response of Lane
Centering Control because the target is not directly ahead, which include but are
not limited to:
Lane Centering Control will not respond to targets in the sensor blind zone.
For example, it cannot detect the blind spots at the corners of the vehicle and
the blind spots on the sides of the vehicle.
When approaching or turning along the road, some targets may be mis-
selected or missed, resulting in the unexpected acceleration and deceleration
of the vehicle.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
194/295


When going uphill, it may miss a target or misjudge the distance to the lead
vehicle. When going downhill, it may accelerate the vehicle, causing it to
exceed the cruising speed.
When only part of the body of a vehicle in the adjacent lane cuts in front of
your vehicle (especially when it’s a larger vehicle cutting in, like a bus, truck,
etc.), it may not be able to recognize the target in a responsive manner and
you need to take over in time.
When your vehicle abruptly cuts into the rear of the vehicle ahead, or another
vehicle abruptly cuts into or out of the front of your vehicle, it may not be able
to recognize the target in a responsive manner and you need to take over in
time.
Caution
In rare cases, this feature may accelerate your vehicle even when it is not
necessary or intended due to a change in, or loss of, the target (especially
when cornering or changing lanes).
In rare cases, this feature may apply the vehicle's brakes when it is not
necessary or intended, due to the detection of vehicles or objects, or a change
in, or loss of, a stationary target in the adjacent lane (especially when
cornering or changing lanes).
When following the lead vehicle, if your vehicle or the lead vehicle switches
out of the current lane, acceleration may be restricted by this feature for a
certain period of time for safety reasons. The driver can take control by
pressing the accelerator pedal.
Warning
This feature cannot guarantee accurate target recognition in all situations. If you
find that the displayed "lane marking" from the Dynamic Environment Simulation
and Display (ESD) does not match the actual situation, please drive with caution so
as to take control of your vehicle in a timely manner. Which include but are not
limited to:
There is actually a lead vehicle, but the digital instrument cluster does not
display the target vehicle.
There is actually no lead vehicle, but the digital instrument cluster shows a
lead vehicle.
When driving in special or complex road conditions, it is not recommended to
activate Lane Centering Control because it may affect the performance of Adaptive
Cruise Control and Keeping, or even cause deactivation, which include but are not
limited to:
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
195/295


Waterlogged roads, muddy roads, potholes, ice- and snow-covered roads,
roads with speed bumps, roads with obstacles.
Traffic conditions with a lot of pedestrians, bicycles or animals.
Complex and changeable traffic conditions, such as busy intersections,
expressway ramps, congested roads.
Winding and turning roads, rapid turning roads.
Uphill and downhill roads.
Rough roads.
Narrow roads.
Tunnel entrances and exits.
Non-standard roads.
Roads without a median.
In the following ss, if the vehicle is driving at a speed that is too fast in relation to
the lead vehicle, the Lane Centering Control may be subject to limited control,
resulting in an inability to maintain a safe distance responsively. It may be unable to
provide sufficient braking force in the following situations, which include but are not
limited to:
The brake feature cannot fully work (such as when brake parts are too cold,
too hot, wet, etc.)
Improper vehicle maintenance (excessive wear of the brake or tires, abnormal
tire pressure, etc.)
The vehicle is driving on special roads (such as uphill and downhill, water,
mud, potholes, ice and snow roads, etc.)
Warning
It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
The above warnings, precautions and restrictions do not exhaust all the situations
that may affect the proper operation of Lane Centering Control. Lane Centering
Control may be affected by many factors. To avoid safety accidents, be sure to
always pay attention to traffic, road and vehicle conditions and drive with caution.
Adaptive Cruise Control
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
196/295


Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) can be used to sync your vehicle speed
automatically with the speed of the lead vehicle. When there is no target in front of
your vehicle to respond to, the vehicle will drive at the set cruise speed. When there
is a target to respond to, ACC automatically controls the vehicle speed to maintain
the set distance.
Adaptive Cruise Control can only be used to control longitudinal speed and
distance. This system includes the start and stop feature of Adaptive Cruise
Control, which allows your vehicle to follow the lead vehicle till it stops (certain
deceleration conditions need to be met). If the lead vehicle drives away in a short
amount of time, your vehicle can automatically start and follow. If the lead vehicle
remains stationary for a period of time, your vehicle will enter the parking state.
Adaptive Cruise Control is mainly applicable to long-distance driving on dry and
smooth standardized straight roads, such as highways, expressways, and long
straight roads.
GUM190923
Warning
As a driving assist feature, Adaptive Cruise Control cannot handle all situations in
all traffic, weather and road conditions.
Adaptive Cruise Control controls the speed, but not the direction, of your vehicle.
You must always pay attention to traffic and road conditions, and make your own
decision on whether to use Adaptive Cruise Control if it is safe. You should always
be ready to take over if you find that the conditions of the traffic, road or the
vehicle are not suitable for Adaptive Cruise Control, or there are other unsafe
factors. You always bear the ultimate responsibility for maintaining an appropriate
distance and speed and complying with current traffic laws and regulations.
Warning
The following behaviors are prohibited when driving:
Relying solely on the system.
Using the feature in bad weather conditions.
Using the system in an environment where there are many pedestrians,
bicycles or animals.
Using the system on special roads, like construction rounds and restricted
roads.
Hands off the steering wheel.
Eyes off the road.
Warning
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
197/295


As a feature for driving comfort, and not for preventing collision, Adaptive Cruise
Control has a limited maximum deceleration that is less than the maximum
deceleration required by Autonomous Emergency Braking and manual driving
scenarios. Therefore, never rely solely on Adaptive Cruise Control to decelerate the
vehicle when avoiding a collision.
Adaptive Cruise Control may fail to stop your vehicle or maintain a safe distance
from the lead vehicle when the relative speed between your vehicle and the lead
vehicle is great. In this case, press the brake pedal immediately for your safety. Do
not rely on Adaptive Cruise Control to bring your vehicle to a full stop following the
stationary vehicle or the lead vehicle in this situation.
Enabling Adaptive Cruise Control
Enter the Settings interface from the bottom of the center display, tap Driver
Assistance, and chooseAdaptive Cruise Control to enable or disable this feature.
Choosing Adaptive Cruise Control in the Settings does not mean that ACC is
activated.
GUM191172
Middle button 
GUM160418: activate or exit Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC)
Up button: increase or resume the cruising speed
Down button: decrease the cruising speed
Left button: decrease the following distance
Right button: increase the following distance
When the operating conditions of Adaptive Cruise Control are met, press the Middle
button on the left side of the steering wheel 
GUM160183 to activate Adaptive
Cruise Control.
Adaptive Cruise Control can be enabled at the vehicle speed of 0-180 km/h.
If the vehicle speed is lower than 10 km/h, 10 km/h will be set as the cruising
speed.
If the vehicle speed is higher than 10 km/h but not higher than 180 km/h, the
current vehicle speed will be set as the cruising speed.
When Adaptive Cruise Control is activated, you can release the accelerator pedal to
maintain the set cruising speed.
If there is a lead vehicle, Adaptive Cruise Control will adjust the speed of your
vehicle according to the speed and distance of the lead vehicle, and the
maximum speed will not exceed the cruising speed.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
198/295


When there is no vehicle ahead, Adaptive Cruise Control will quickly adjust the
speed of your vehicle to the cruising speed.
When driving with Adaptive Cruise Control, you can press the accelerator pedal
hard at any time to take over your vehicle in a short amount of time. At this time,
Adaptive Cruise Control will no longer respond to the target lead vehicle, and your
vehicle will be completely under your control. When you release the accelerator
pedal, your vehicle will return to the cruising speed.
When Adaptive Cruise Control actively accelerates your vehicle, the accelerator
pedal will not move. When Adaptive Cruise Control decelerates your vehicle, the
brake pedal may move.
After you exit Adaptive Cruise Control by pressing the Middle button 
GUM160183
on the left side of the steering wheel or pressing the brake pedal, you can activate
it again by pressing the Up button on the left side of the steering wheel, and you
can restore the vehicle speed to the previously set cruising speed. If you press the
Up button on the left side of the steering wheel while pressing the accelerator
pedal, the current speed will be set as the cruising speed. The maximum set speed
is 180 km/h (110 mph).
Operating Conditions of Adaptive Cruise Control :
The high-definition camera, LiDAR and radar function normally, and the field
of vision is clear.
No components of Adaptive Cruise Control are faulty.
Your vehicle meets all safety conditions, such as:
The driver is seated.
The driver's hands on the steering wheel.
The driver has fastened the seat belt.
All doors are closed.
Your vehicle is in gear position D.
The driver does not step on the brake pedal.
Anti-lock brake system, traction control system and vehicle stability
control system are not triggered.
The feature cannot be activated when the steering angle of the steering wheel
is too large.
The speed does not exceed 180 km/h.
Warning
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
199/295


When driving with this feature on, if the system detects that you are not in a normal
driving state (e.g., you are not holding the steering wheel for an extended period of
time, you are distracted and fatigued for an extended period of time, or you are out
of your seat), it will activate Emergency Active Stop when the normal operating
conditions for the system are met.
Disabling Adaptive Cruise Control
Adaptive Cruise Control is deactivated when:
The steering wheel button 
GUM160183 is pressed
The brake pedal is pressed.
In addition, when the conditions for Adaptive Cruise Control are not met, it will be
automatically deactivated. You can take control of the vehicle immediately after
Adaptive Cruise Control is deactivated.
After Adaptive Cruise Control is deactivated, the vehicle may slow down due to
regenerative braking, and will not be able to maintain the set distance to the lead
vehicle.
Warning
Aaptive Cruise Control may be canceled suddenly due to unexpected
circumstances. Please always pay attention to traffic and road conditions, and be
prepared to take over at any time.
Adjusting Adaptive Cruise Control Speed
When Adaptive Cruise Control is active, go to the Settings interface from the
control bar of the center display, tap Driver Assistance > Cruise Speed
Adjustment, and select the appropriate way to adjust the cruising speed.
The cruise speed can be adjusted by:
Press for 1 km/h, Press and hold for 5 km/h.
Press the Up or Down button on the left side of the steering wheel to
increase or decrease the cruise speed by 1 km/h.
Press the Up or Down button on the left side of the steering wheel to
increase/decrease the cruise speed to the closest 5 km/h increment,
that is, if the speed is 82 km/h, press+hold the Up button on the left side
of the steering wheel, and the speed will be increased to 85 km/h
Long press for 1 km/h and short press for 5 km/h.
Long press the Up or Down button on the left side of the steering wheel
to increase or decrease the cruise speed by 1 km/h.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
200/295


Press the Up or Down button on the left side of the steering wheel to
increase or decrease the cruise speed to the closest 5 km/h increment,
that is, if the speed is 82 km/h, press the Up button on the left side of
the steering wheel, and the speed will be increased to 85 km/h
The maximum set speed for Adaptive Cruise Control is 180 km/h.
The minimum set speed for Adaptive Cruise Control is 10 km/h, but it allows the
vehicle to decelerate to 0 km/h when following the vehicle ahead.
Caution
To activate it for the first time, shortly press for 1 km/h, or long press for
5km/h.
The cruise speed cannot be adjusted via NOMI.
Adjusting Following Time and Distance with Adaptive Cruise Control
When Adaptive Cruise Control is active or in standby, the following time and
distance can be adjusted in 5 levels.
Press the Right button on the left side of the steering wheel to set the
following time and distance to a farther setting.
Press the Left button on the left side of the steering wheel to set the following
time and distance to a closer setting.
Caution
When the time distance to the lead vehicle is set shorter, Adaptive Cruise Control
will respond more aggressively, which may cause a level of discomfort.
Warning
It is your responsibility to determine and maintain a safe following distance at all
times. Do not rely solely on Intelligent Adaptive Cruise Control to maintain an
accurate or appropriate following distance.
Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display (ESD)
GUM237510
An intelligent driving status indicator light has been incorporated into the digital
instrument cluster, situated to the left of the real-time vehicle speed. This indicator
light enables the user to comprehend the features of intelligent driving that can be
activated at this time and those that are currently operational. Furthermore, the
status of cruise speed in intelligent driving can be discerned.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
201/295


Feature
Active state
To be activated
Loss of lateral
control
Lane Centering
Control
GUM237501
GUM237500
GUM237504
GUM237505
GUM237508
Adaptive Cruise
Control
GUM237502
GUM237503
GUM237506
GUM237507
/
GUM192030
When Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display displays a warning to drive
cautiously, it means that there is a risk of collision because the maximum
deceleration available to Adaptive Cruise Control can no longer maintain a safe
distance, and you need to take control of the brake pedal and steering wheel
immediately to control the speed and direction of the vehicle.
Caution
The Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display can only be used as a reference
and cannot perfectly reflect the real traffic conditions. Therefore, do not rely on the
dynamic environment simulation display.
Warning
If you encounter a dangerous situation, do not wait for a warning before taking
action and take over immediately.
Go Notifier
When the vehicle is stopped when following the lead vehicle under Adaptive Cruise
Control：
If the lead vehicle starts, Adaptive Cruise Control will follow it and actively
start the vehicle as well. You need to pay attention to the surrounding
environment at all times to prevent collision accidents from occurring.
When the vehicle is stopped for no more than about 5 minutes when following
the lead vehicle, starting while following is available under Adaptive Cruise
Control.
After the vehicle is stopped for about 5 minutes when following the lead
vehicle, Electric Parking Brake will be activated and Adaptive Cruise Control
will be deactivated.
If the system detects obstacles ahead that may affect driving, making it
impossible to follow the lead vehicle, you may, after checking the
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
202/295


surroundings, reactivate Adaptive Cruise Control by stepping on the
accelerator pedal.
Warning
Adaptive Cruise Control cannot detect other traffic participants in all situations, as
this feature may fail, work improperly, or work with delay under the impact of
multiple factors.
You must always pay attention to the traffic and road conditions. Never rely on
Adaptive Cruise Control to automatically start the vehicle to follow,, otherwise it
may cause personal injury or vehicle damage.
Intelligent Speed Assist
Once activated, when the vehicle detects new speed limit signs, it will ask you to
manually confirm adjusting your cruise speed to the new speed limit.
Enter the Settings interface from the bottom of the center display, and tap Driver
Assistance > Intelligent Speed Assist to turn this feature on or off.
GUM192033
Warning
Intelligent Speed Assist is only a supplement to, and does not function as a
substitute for, your visual observation. Never rely solely on the speed limit
information recognized by Traffic Sign Recognition.
When the speed of the vehicle exceeds the speed limit of the road, you will be
visually alerted of overspeed.
Warning
As a driving assist feature, Intelligent Speed Assist is not designed to handle
all situations in all traffic, weather, and road conditions. It is the driver's
responsibility to pay attention to traffic and road conditions and to decide
whether to use Intelligent Speed Assist.
Intelligent Speed Assist does not work in complex road conditions such as
ramps.
You always bear the ultimate responsibility for driving safely and complying
with applicable traffic laws and regulations.
Intelligent Speed Assist combines the speed limit information from the map
and camera to display the speed limit information on the digital instrument
cluster. No speed limit information will be displayed when no speed limit
information source is available.
Caution
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
203/295


The Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display can only be used as a reference
and cannot perfectly reflect the real traffic conditions. Therefore, do not rely on the
dynamic environment simulation display.
Precautions and Restrictions
The following situations may lead to a camera failure, affect the performance of
Adaptive Cruise Control , or even cause deactivation, which include but are not
limited to:
Changed installation position of camera.
Blocked or dirty camera.
Reduced recognition capability due to dim surrounding environments, such as
at dawn, dusk, night, or in a tunnel.
Sudden changes in ambient brightness, such as tunnel entrances or exits.
Large shadows cast by buildings, landscapes or large vehicles.
Camera directly exposed to light.
Severe weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze.
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead that falls
onto your vehicle.
Water, dust, micro-scratches, oil sludge, dirt, wiper, ice, snow, etc. on the
windshield in front of the camera.
Wet roads.
The following situations may lead to a LiDAR failure, affect the performance of
Adaptive Cruise Control, or even cause deactivation, which include but are not
limited to:
Changed installation position of LiDAR.
Severe weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze.
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead.
Driving on wet or waterlogged roads.
Water, dust, transparent vehicle coverings, color-changing film, micro-
scratches, oil sludge, dirt, ice, snowfall and other obstructions on the LiDAR
window.
Overheating of the LiDAR caused by prolonged sun exposure.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
204/295


Due to the limitation of LiDAR characteristics, in rare special cases, false
alarms may occur for the traffic signs/high-speed anti-collision barrels in
high-speed/elevated sections
The following situations may lead to a radar failure, affect the performance of
Adaptive Cruise Control, or even cause deactivation, which include but are not
limited to:
Misplaced or blocked radar, or covered with mud, ice and snow, metal plates,
tapes, labels, leaves, etc.
The radar or the area surrounding it is impacted due to a vehicle collision,
scratch, etc.
Extreme weather such as heavy rain, snow, fog, which may affect radar
performance.
Due to the limitation of radar target recognition characteristics, in rare special
circumstances, false alarms may occur for some metal barriers, green belts,
cement walls, etc.
Only the vehicles that meet the conditions will trigger a response by Adaptive
Cruise Control. The targets below cannot be guaranteed to be identified, and may
trigger a response, which include but are not limited to:
Transverse vehicles.
Motorcycles, tricycles.
The targets below will not trigger a response, which include but are not limited to:
Pedestrians.
Animals.
Traffic lights.
Walls.
Barriers.
Oncoming vehicles.
Bicycles.
Other non-vehicle objects.
Caution
This feature does not guarantee the recognition of special-shaped targets,
especially at night or a poor lighting environment where the driver needs to
pay extra attention. Such vehicles include vehicles with a covered rear or
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
205/295


irregularly-shaped rear, vehicles with a rear below a certain height, and
unladen carriers.
This feature may miss stationary or slow-moving vehicles, especially at night
when the driver needs to pay extra attention.
The following situations may cause late recognition and response in Adaptive
Cruise Control because the target is not directly ahead, which include but are not
limited to:
Adaptive Cruise Control will not respond to targets in the sensor blind zone.
For example, Adaptive Cruise Control cannot detect the blind spots at the
corners of the vehicle and the blind spots on the sides of the vehicle
When approaching or turning along a road, some targets may be mis-selected
or missed, resulting in unexpected acceleration and deceleration of the vehicle
When going uphill, it may miss a target or misjudge the distance to the lead
vehicle. When going downhill, it may accelerate the vehicle, causing it to
exceed the cruising speed
When only part of the body of a vehicle in the adjacent lane cuts in front of
your vehicle (especially when it’s a larger vehicle cutting in, like a bus, truck,
etc.), it may not be able to recognize the target in a responsive manner and
you need to take over in time
When your vehicle abruptly cuts into the rear of the vehicle ahead, or another
vehicle abruptly cuts into or out of the front of your vehicle, it may not be able
to recognize the target in a responsive manner and you need to take over in
time
Caution
In rare cases, this feature may accelerate your vehicle even when it is not
necessary or intended due to a change in, or loss of, the target (especially
when cornering or changing lanes).
In rare cases, this feature may apply the vehicle's brakes when it is not
necessary or intended, due to the detection of vehicles or objects, or a change
in, or loss of, a stationary target in the adjacent lane (especially when
cornering or changing lanes).
When following the lead vehicle, if your vehicle or the lead vehicle switches
out of the current lane, acceleration may be restricted by this feature for a
certain period of time for safety reasons. The driver can take control by
pressing the accelerator pedal.
Warning
This feature cannot guarantee accurate recognition of the target in all situations. If
you find that the display of "target lead vehicle" on the digital instrument cluster
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
206/295


does not match the actual situation, please take control of your vehicle in a timely
manner. Which include but are not limited to:
There is actually a lead vehicle, but the digital instrument cluster does not
display the target vehicle.
There is actually no lead vehicle, but the digital instrument cluster shows a
lead vehicle.
When driving in special or complex road conditions, it is not recommended to
activate Adaptive Cruise Control because it may affect the performance of Adaptive
Cruise Control, or even cause deactivation, which include but are not limited to:
Waterlogged roads, muddy roads, potholes, ice- and snow-covered roads,
roads with speed bumps, roads with obstacles.
Traffic conditions with a lot of pedestrians, bicycles or animals.
Complex and changeable traffic conditions, such as busy intersections,
expressway ramps, congested roads.
Winding and turning roads, rapid turning roads.
Uphill and downhill roads.
Rough roads.
Narrow roads.
Tunnel entrances and exits.
Non-standard roads.
Roads without a median.
In the following situations, if the vehicle speed is too high relative to the lead
vehicle, Adaptive Cruise Control may be subject to limited control, which will result
in an inability to maintain the safe distance in a responsive manner, which include
but are not limited to:
Sudden maneuvers of the vehicle ahead (such as sudden turns, acceleration,
deceleration, etc.).
Another vehicle abruptly cutting in or out of the front of your vehicle.
Your vehicle abruptly cutting in behind the vehicle ahead.
Your vehicle driving towards a stationary or slow-moving target at a high
speed.
It may not be able to provide sufficient braking force in the following situations,
which include but are not limited to:
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
207/295


The brake feature cannot fully work (such as when brake parts are too cold,
too hot, wet, etc.).
Improper vehicle maintenance (excessive wear of the brake or tires, abnormal
tire pressure, etc.).
The vehicle is driving on special roads (such as uphill and downhill, water,
mud, potholes, ice and snow roads, etc.).
Warning
It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
The above warnings, precautions and restrictions have not fully covered all the
situations that may affect the normal operation of the Adaptive Cruise Control
system. There are many factors that may interfere with the Adaptive Cruise Control
system. In order to prevent accidents from occurring, you need to drive attentively
and focus on the traffic, road, and vehicle conditions to ensure safe driving.
Predictive Speed Control
Predictive Speed Control (PSC) is an auxiliary feature that assists the driver by
reducing the driving speed through curves when Driver Assistance is activated in
either Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) or Lane Centering Control (LCC/Pilot) mode.
When the Predictive Speed Control is enabled in the settings and the environment
and road conditions meet certain requirements, the system will assist the vehicle to
decelerate before entering the curve and limit the driving speed throughout the
curve. After the curve, the cruise speed defined by the user will be resumed.
Enabling/disabling Predictive Speed Control
Enter Settings from the bottom of the center display, and tap Driver Assistance >
Predictive Speed Control to enable or disable the feature.
If the system detects that the environment and conditions are met, and the Set
Speed for Adaptive Cruise Control or Lane Centering Control is higher than
recommended to safely and comfortably drive through the upcoming curve,
Predictive Speed Control will intervene by gradually reducing the driving speed.
When the PSC is enabled and activated, the Dynamic Environment Simulation and
Display will prompt you as illustrated in the figure.
Dynamic Environment Simulation Display
GUM236108
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
208/295


The dynamic Environment Simulation Display is only for illustration and cannot fully
reflect the real traffic situation. Therefore, do not rely on the content displayed in
the dynamic Environment Simulation Display, e.g. In case of no lane markings are
detected.
Predictive Speed Control is a driving assistance feature like Adaptive Cruise Control
or Lane Centering Control. Therefore, the feature is mainly intended for the
following scenarios:
Motorways, expressways and other major roads.
Using and following in-vehicle navigation.
The driver is always responsible for safe speed at any time.
Caution
The driver always bears the responsibility to choose a safe driving speed and
comply with current traffic laws and regulations.
PSC may provide limited or no assistance in the following scenarios, including but
not limited to:
Curves with excessive curvature, such as highway ramps.
If the vehicle position cannot be determined by the navigation system.
The sensors are blocked or dirty.
In extreme weather conditions, including but not limited to rain, snow, fog,
haze.
Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display
Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display (ESD) can display the external
environment monitored by the vehicle in real-time through a digital instrument
cluster, including other traffic elements such as lane markings.
The digital instrument cluster displays indicators for the status of Driver Assistance
Features as follows:
Displayed icon on instrument cluster Description
GUM232205
ACC available but not activated
GUM232206
ACC activated
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
209/295


GUM232207
ACC failed to activate
GUM232208
LCC/Pilot available but not activated
GUM232209
LCC/Pilot activated
GUM232210
LCC/Pilot failed to activate
Warning
The Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display (ESD) is for reference only
and cannot replace your visual inspection. Do not rely solely on the Dynamic
Environment Simulation and Display (ESD) for driving.
Since the detection range of the cameras and sensors associated with the
Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display (ESD) is limited, and road and
weather conditions may have adverse effects on detection, always drive with
caution.
Caution
The Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display (ESD) is only for illustrative
purposes and cannot fully reflect the actual traffic conditions. Therefore, do
not rely on the content displayed from the Dynamic Environment Simulation
and Display (ESD).
As a driving assist feature, the Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display
(ESD) can neither respond to all traffic, weather or road conditions, nor detect
vehicles in all cases. It may become ineffective, inappropriate or untimely due
to a number of factors.
You always bear the ultimate responsibility for safe driving and shall abide by
the current traffic laws and regulations.
Dynamic Environment Simulation and Display may not always be able to detect
various objects, vehicles, riders, or pedestrians, nor accurately display all the
conditions of the surrounding environment, and there is a possibility of display
errors. The following circumstances could cause the Dynamic Environment
Simulation and Display to malfunction or have limitations, including but not limited
to:
Changed installation position of camera.
Blocked or dirty camera.
Reduced recognition capability due to dim surrounding environments, such as
at dawn, dusk, night, or in a tunnel, etc.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
210/295


Sudden changes in ambient brightness, such as tunnel entrances or exits.
Large shadows cast by buildings, landscapes or large vehicles
When the camera is slanted by the sun or exposed to direct sunlight.
Severe weather such as rain, snow, fog, haze.
Exhaust gas, water spray, snow or dust lifted up by the vehicle ahead that falls
onto your vehicle.
Water, dust, micro-scratches, oil sludge, dirt, wiper, ice, snow, etc. on the
windshield in front of the camera.
Wet roads.
The camera is out of focus or faulty.
Vehicle traveling on roads with sharp turns or in poor condition.
Misrepresentation of one kind of object as another kind of object.
Displaying an object in the incorrect direction or at the incorrect distance.
The above warnings, precautions and restrictions have not fully covered all the
conditions that may affect the normal operation of the Dynamic Environment
Simulation and Display. There are many factors that may interfere with the Dynamic
Environment Simulation and Display. In order to prevent accidents from occurring,
you need to drive attentively and focus on the traffic, road, and vehicle conditions
to ensure safe driving.
Parking Camera and Parking Assist
Parking Assist monitors the surrounding conditions of vehicles at low speeds
through ultrasonic sensors to help you drive safely.
During parking, your vehicle will warn you with warning sounds and images
according to the distance between obstacles and the front or rear of the vehicle.
Distance
Frequency of the warning
sounds
Color
1.2-1.5 m
None
White
0.9-1.2 m
0, 1, 2 times per second
White
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
211/295


0.6-0.9 m
0, 2, 3 times per second
Orange
0.3-0.6 m
3, 4, 5 times per second
Orange
Less than 0.3 m
High-frequency beeps
Red
Caution
The warning zones in front of and behind the vehicle are limited to a distance of 1.5
meters.
Warning
Parking Assist Alert is provided for reference only and cannot replace your
visual observation.
Parking Assist Alert is a driving assist feature and cannot address all traffic,
weather, and road situations. To protect your safety, you must always pay
attention to the traffic and road conditions and decide for yourself whether to
activate Parking Assist Alert.
You always bear the ultimate responsibility for safe driving and compliance
with current traffic laws and regulations.
Enabling and Disabling Parking Camera
You can enable the parking camera in the following ways:
Swipe right from the home interface of the center display to enter the Quick
Access interface, and tap Surround View icon to open the 360° surround view.
Enter the application center from the center display and tap Parking to open
the memory view (360° surround view or dual-view).
Engage the vehicle in R gear and open the memory view (360° surround view
or dual-view).
After setting the custom feature of the Middle button on the right side of the
steering wheel to Surround View, to press+hold it will activate the 360°
surround view.
Wake up NOMI, enable Parking with your voice, and enable the 360° surround
view.
You can tap on the Settings icon in the upper right side of the Parking Camera
interface and select to turn off the warning sound. You should take full
responsibility for any risks that may arise from disabling the warning sound.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
212/295


Caution
It is recommended to only disable the parking assist warning sound when the
surrounding environment clearly does not require it. When you manually
disable the parking assist warning sound, you assume all risks associated with
it.
The parking camera will automatically exit when the vehicle is shifted into the
P gear or when the vehicle speed exceeds 16 kilometers per hour.
If the vehicle is not in the R gear, you can also manually exit the parking
camera by using your fingers to swipe the center display or by tapping the
OFF button on the interactive interface.
Warning
The ultrasound sensors may be restricted under the following conditions, resulting
in messages such as "Front parking radar fault," "Rear parking radar fault," or
"Parking radar fault." These conditions include, but are not limited to:
One or more ultrasonic sensors are damaged, misplaced, or obscured (such as
by mud or ice).
Adverse weather conditions such as rain, snow, fog, or haze affecting the
sensors.
Interference from electrical devices or equipment that can generate
disturbances affecting the sensors.
Caution
Due to the characteristics of ultrasonic sensors, they may produce false alarms in
certain situations. These false alarms will end on their own as the road conditions
change and will not affect driving, which include but are not limited to:
Rough asphalt, concrete, cobblestone roads, waterlogged roads, and other
uneven surfaces.
Induction loops and similar devices buried under roads.
Interference caused by large vehicles, construction machinery, and other
equipment nearby.
Warning
The ultrasonic sensors may have limitations in detecting obstacles with low heights,
obstacles coming from above or the sides of the vehicle, narrow objects, and other
items, including but not limited to the following. It is crucial for you to always pay
attention to the surrounding environment. Failure to do so may result in property
damage or personal injury:
Pedestrians, children, animals.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
213/295


The activated ground lock, low stone pillars, cylindrical objects, thin poles,
sharp objects, and uneven ground surfaces.
Height-restricted gates, poles, or overhead structures.
Obstacles on the sides of the vehicle that may cause collisions or scratches.
Bicycles, wall corners, edges of parking lot barriers, etc.
Parking Camera Interface
The parking camera consists of two interfaces: 360° surround view and dual-view.
Tap the button on the 360° surround view to switch the interfaces.
Button
Feature
GUM185194
Switch to the dual-view.
GUM185193
Switch to the 360° surround view.
GUM229461
Quick Access.
GUM229462
Switch to the hub view.
Parking Camera View
After opening the Dual-View interface, you can switch to the front view and rear
view by switching between the Drive (D) gear and the Reverse (R) gear, or tap the
3D view, front view, rear view, left and right hub view, front hub view and rear hub
view in the lower left area of the center display to switch between different views.
When using the 3D view, you can adjust the viewing angle by swiping with one
finger, adjust the viewing distance by zooming in with two fingers and adjust the
viewing height by swiping up and down with two fingers.
Caution
When the center display shows the left/right wheel view, front wheel view, or rear
wheel view, the parking view will not change when you shift gears.
Adjusting the Brightness of the Parking Camera
Auto Adjustment
Tap Quick Access in the Parking Camera interface to find Brightness Adjustment,
then select Auto. The brightness of the center display can be automatically adjusted
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
214/295


along with the brightness of the environment.
Manual Adjustment
Tap Quick Access in the Parking Camera interface to find Brightness, then slide the
brightness adjustment slider to manually adjust the brightness of the central
display.
Dynamic Steering View
After the feature is activated, the viewing angle of the front and rear reversing
images will be adjusted according to the rotation angle of the steering wheel,
helping users expand their reversing view and improving parking safety.
Enter the application center from the bottom of the center display, tap Parking, and
turn on Dynamic Steering View in the Parking settings.
Dynamic Transparent Chassis
Dynamic transparent chassis refers to a transparent effect that can be presented,
via technical processing, on the road images collected by the camera in advance
when the vehicle is moving, and transmitted to the center display of the vehicle so
that the road conditions can be seen in the vehicle.
You can enable this feature on the Settings interface of the parking camera. After
the dynamic transparent chassis is enabled, the transparency of the model during
driving can be customized, which includes four options: Opaque, Low, Medium and
High.
Caution
The Dynamic Transparent Chassis cannot detect possible environmental changes
under the chassis when the vehicle is stationary. Please drive with caution and
always pay attention to your surroundings to avoid damage to the vehicle.
Dynamic Blind Spot
Due to the relative positioning of the cameras and the body, there is a dynamic
blind spot range covering 20 centimeters around the model of your vehicle in the
360° Surround View. Please pay attention to the actual situation around your vehicle
when parking.
Caution
The blind spot indication shown in the surround view image serves as a reference
only, and cannot substitute your visual observation.
You must always pay attention to traffic and road conditions, and park the vehicle
only after your safety is ensured.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
215/295


Due to the existence of blind spots, some low objects close to the vehicle may not
be fully displayed. Please pay attention and drive carefully.
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion (S-APA with Fusion) uses surround-
view cameras and ultrasonic sensors to detect ground markings or parking spaces
between two vehicles, so as to provide reverse parking assistance.
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion supports perpendicular parking,
parallel parking, and limited angled parking, but does not support parking in three-
dimensional parking spaces.
GUM190926
Caution
To ensure the normal and safe operation of this feature, please make sure to fasten
your seat belt during the use of this feature.
Warning
Do not use Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion on roads which are
sloped or uneven.
Do not use Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion while the vehicle is being
charged.
Warning
The performance of Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion depends on the
capabilities of the surround view camera and ultrasonic sensors to detect and
identify the environment.
Do not use Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion if any one of the two side
mirrors, the surround view camera, and the ultrasonic sensors is damaged or in an
abnormal position.
Warning
You should pay special attention to pedestrians, children, and animals near your
vehicle, and other fine, pointed, low or suspended obstacles undetected by the
ultrasonic sensors, such as parking locks, low stone blocks, traffic cones, low
cylinders, thin rods, pointed objects, corners of walls, and square columns in
parking lots.
Warning
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
216/295


As a driving assist feature, Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion cannot
handle all situations in all traffic, weather, road, and light conditions.
You must always pay attention to traffic and road conditions, and decide to use
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion or not after your safety is ensured.
You should always be ready to take over if you find that the conditions of the
traffic, road or vehicle are not suitable for enabling Shiftless Advanced Parking
Assist with Fusion, or there are other safety risks. You always bear the ultimate
responsibility for parking safely and complying with applicable traffic laws and
regulations.
Enabling Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion parks the vehicle as follows:
1. Parking space search:
Manual parking space search: Enter the Dual-view Image interface and
open Parking Space Search. Drive forward slowly at a speed of lower
than 16 km/h, and stop after the instrument cluster or center diaplay
show that a parking space has been found. Keep the brake on, check
and choose a safe and suitable parking space.
Auto parking space search: When the road conditions and system
conditions are met, drive forward slowly at a speed of lower than 16
km/h. When a parking space is found in the background, the Parking
Assist button 
GUM217856 will appear on the Map interface. Touch the
button and stop the vehicle according to the text prompts on the
interface. Keep the brake on, check and choose a safe and appropriate
parking space.
2. Parking:
Select a safe and suitable parking space, and follow the instructions in
the center display to allow the vehicle to perform the parking maneuvers.
Keep checking the surroundings to ensure that the vehicle is parked
safely.
3. Parking completed：
When Parking is completed, the Dual-view Image interface will prompt P
inthe instrument cluster.
Details are as follows:
1. Parking Space Search
Before searching for a parking space, the vehicle must meet the following
conditions:
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
217/295


The vehicle speed is lower than 16 km/h.
The vehicle is in the D or R gear position.
All doors are closed.
The driver is seated.
ACC or LCC is not enabled.
Ultrasonic sensors and surround-view cameras function properly with a
clear view.
No system error.
Anti-lock brake system, traction control system and vehicle stability
control system are not triggered.
Traction control system, vehicle stability control system are not disabled.
Not available in ECO+ Mode.
When the above conditions are met, you can initiate Parking Space Search in
any of the following ways:
Where the parking camera is off, say a command like "I want to park"or
"Park the vehicle" to wake up NOMI, which will open the Dual-view
Image interface directly and enter Parking Space Search.
Swipe right on the center display to enter the Quick Access interface,
tap Parking Assist, enter the Dual-view Image interface and open
Parking Space Search.
Put your vehicle in Reverse, and tap the 
GUM165565 button in the
upper left corner to open Parking Space Search.
Tap the parking camera to enter the 360° image interface, tap the
GUM165565 button in the upper left corner to open Parking Space
Search.
After turning on Parking Space Search feature, keep the vehicle at a distance
of 0.5 to 1.5 meters from the target parking space, while driving at a speed of
less than 16 km/h to search for a parking space.
During the search for a parking space, when a white "P" appears on the center
display, it means that the system has found a parking space on the
corresponding side. If a "P" appears on both sides, it means that the system
has found parking spaces on both sides.
Stop the vehicle at this time, keep the brake on, and check whether the
parking space is safe and suitable. If multiple parking spaces are found, you
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
218/295


can manually select the appropriate parking space on the Dual-view Image
interface.
GUM237585
Note
After the vehicle starts searching a parking space, if you shift into REVERSE
and reverse the vehicle, it will continue searching.
Caution
If the vehicle speed is above 16 km/h, the parking space search will stop.
Caution
When searching for parking spaces, parking may not be successful if the
vehicle’s direction has significantly deviated from the direction of the road.
Caution
Parking spaces on narrow roads or spaces that are too narrow may not be
selected due to a lack of space.
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion does not support parking space
search and lateral shift in a parking space.
Caution
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion can be used to identify the
barrier-free parking space sign in the parking space. After successful
identification, the barrier-free parking space will display the corresponding
icon on the lower-left corner of the parking space interface. Currently, the
identification of barrier-free signs that are not located within parking spaces,
such as standing metal plates and text signs, is not supported. Additionally,
this type of parking space may be misidentified. Please select a parking space
according to the actual situation.
Warning
You must always check and confirm if the detected parking space is safe
and suitable for parking. Do not rely solely on Shiftless Advanced Parking
Assist with Fusion to search for suitable parking spaces.
This feature is not available on high-speed roads and urban
expressways.
Never use this feature in the Trailer Mode.
The system may misidentify parking spaces on roads, at entrances, in
bushes, etc. You need to determine if the parking space is suitable.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
219/295


Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion cannot determine if the
detected parking space is legitimate. You need to confirm the legitimacy
before starting the parking procedure.
2. Parking
Select a safe and suitable parking space, release the steering wheel and brake
pedal according to instructions displayed on the interface, and then initiate
the S-APA with Fusion feature. During the parking process, the interface will
display the current gear and the remaining length of the route in this gear as a
reference. Keep checking the surroundings to ensure the safety of the parking
process.
After selecting a parking space, you can de-select it by tapping the space
again before releasing the brake pedal.
When the vehicle is parked, the "P" on the left or right side of the vehicle in
the digital instrument cluster will turn green.
Caution
Please only release the brake pedal when you receive the prompt “Release the
brake pedal and the steering wheel” on the center display. Otherwise, Shiftless
Automatic Parking Assist will cancel and the vehicle will move backwards.
Warning
Before releasing the brake pedal, make sure that your hands and arms do not
interfere with the steering wheel to avoid any injuries caused by its rapid
movement. When parking, always be prepared to apply the brakes to pause
the process or take over.
Warning
Initiating Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion in a narrow parking
space may affect the performance of the sensors, which can increase the risk
of damaging the vehicle or surrounding objects.
Warning
You are responsible for driving safely. Always pay attention to your
surroundings when parking, ensure that the parking process is safe, and be
prepared to take over at any time. In particular, you should pay special
attention to pedestrians, children, or animals near your vehicle, and other fine,
pointed, low, or suspended obstacles the ultrasonic sensors may not be able
to detect.
Any retrofits or modifications made to the steering wheel, including but not
limited to steering wheel cover, steering wheel modification, and
counterweight ring, will increase the parking risk caused by failed or affected
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
220/295


The center display only shows available parking spaces that Shiftless
Automatic Parking Assist is capable of parking in, which are subject to both
the size of the parking space and its surroundings. If you spot any obstacles
that suddenly appear around the car while parking, take over immediately as
the system may not apply the brakes in time.
3. Parking Completed
GUM237555
The vehicle is properly parked when the Dual-view Image interface prompts a
"P" on the left or right side of the vehicle in the digital instrument cluster turns
green.
After parking, you may need to make further adjustments to the vehicle in
order to ensure that the vehicle is in the best parking position.
Before leaving, make sure that the electric parking brake is activated and the
vehicle is in Park gear.
Caution
Parking may be finished in advance due to the surroundings. In this case, you
may need to adjust the vehicle’s position manually.
Pausing Parking
During the process of parking under Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion,
you can lightly step on the brake pedal to slow the vehicle down without
disengaging the feature; only when you keep stepping on the brake pedal until the
speed is reduced to 0 km/h, will the feature be suspended. In addition, stepping on
the accelerator pedal during parking will also suspend the parking.
If you actively intervene with the steering wheel, the parking feature will be
suspended.
Intervention includes, but is not limited to, the process of perpendicularly backing
into a parking space with Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion active, if
the system detects that there may be a safety risk or the parking result cannot be
guaranteed, the system will pause parking and ask you whether to continue parking.
After parking is paused, check the surroundings to ensure that it is safe to continue
parking, then release the brake pedal, and tap the “Resume Parking” button on the
center display to re-activate Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion.
Caution
Parking may be impaired if you pause too many times during the parking process.
Disabling Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
221/295


You can deactivate the parking operation process manually in the following ways.
Take over control of the speed and direction of your vehicle after actively
disengaging Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion:
Step on the brake pedal and shift gears
When Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion is suspended, tap the
"Stop Parking" button on the Dual-view Image interface.
Actively exit the Dual-view Image interface
In addition, when Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion is active, the
following situations will cause the ongoing parking to stop, requiring you to take
over the vehicle in time:
Too close to an obstacle.
Front trunk, liftgate or any door is open.
Electric parking brake is activated.
Anti-lock brake system, traction control system and vehicle stability control
system triggered.
Driver leaves seat.
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion has been suspended for more
than about 30 seconds.
Too many front and rear adjustments.
The overall parking process has timed out.
System fault.
GUM237552
When Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion is deactivated abnormally, the
"P" in the instrument cluster will turn red.
Precautions and Restrictions
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion may not be able to function as
expected when the vehicle is driving under the following road conditions, which
include but are not limited to:
Do not activate Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion when the road
surface is slanted or sloped. Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion is
only designed for use on road surfaces with no gradients.
Do not activate Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion if the road
surface is uneven or there are steps on the road. Shiftless Advanced Parking
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
222/295


Assist with Fusion is designed for use on flat roads only.
Do not activate Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion if there is
water, mud, potholes, ice and snow, speed bumps, and obstacles on the road.
The curb material is special or cannot be detected. If parked improperly, the
tires and wheel rims of the vehicle are at risk of being damaged by the curb,
and you need to promptly take over the vehicle.
When the road surface is slanted or the slope is beyond the supported range,
the success rate of Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion cannot be
guaranteed.
If the angle of the slanted parking space exceeds the supported range, the
parking space will not be released, and the success rate for parking cannot be
guaranteed.
Ultrasonic sensors may have limited detection of the following obstacles, requiring
you to be ready to take over the vehicle at any time, so as to prevent property
damage or personal injury, which include but are not limited to:
Pedestrians, children, animals, etc.
Thin, pointed, short, and suspended obstacles, such as ground locks, low
stone piers, low cylinders, thin rods, sharp objects, etc.
Wall corners, parking lot columns, etc.
Ultrasonic sensors may have limited detection in the following situations, resulting
in Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion being unable to function or not
functioning as expected, which includes but is not limited to:
One or more ultrasonic sensors are damaged, misplaced, or obscured (such as
by mud or ice)
Severe weather like rain, snow, fog, and haze affect the performance of
ultrasonic sensors
Sensors are affected by other electrical equipment or installations that can
cause interference
The surround-view camera may have limited detection in the following situations,
resulting in Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion being unable to function
or not functioning as expected, which includes but is not limited to:
The left and right side mirrors or the front and rear of the vehicle are
damaged, resulting in an abnormal position of the surround-view camera
The surround-view camera is soiled (such as by mud or ice) or obscured
Under strong sunlight or dappled tree shade
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
223/295


Reflective ground or water on the ground
Poor lighting conditions (dark), strong reflection from the ground, or poor
visibility (heavy rain, heavy snow, dense fog)
A parking space of an unconventional size (too narrow or too wide), or a tile-
paved parking space
Worn, unclear, covered, or overlapping parking space lines
Cylindrical, square and other shaped pillars near the parking space
Parking space at a corner
The system may not be able to judge and exclude parking spaces with no-
parking markings, cones, restricted-stop signs, ground locks, or other special
parking spaces
The system may not be able to exclude parking spaces with obstacles, such
as pedestrians, bicycles, tricycles, low debris, bricks, etc.
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion may not be able to function as
expected when the vehicle is driving in the following situations, which include but
are not limited to:
Any addition or modification of the steering wheel, which will increase the risk
of parking and may cause the Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion
to not work, or not function as expected, which includes but is not limited to:
installing a leather steering wheel cover, or modifying the steering wheel or
weight ring, etc.
Do not activate Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion if a trailer is
attached to the rear of the vehicle.
Do not activate Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion if the vehicle is
fitted with snow chains or a spare wheel.
Do not activate Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion if a loaded
object protrudes into the area surrounding the vehicle.
Non-original tires or low tire pressure will affect the driving trajectory of
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion. When Shiftless Advanced
Parking Assist with Fusion is active, make sure the tires are original and
properly inflated.
After changing the tire size and specifications, you need to update the
relevant parameters at the After-sales Services. Currently only the tire models
specified by us are supported; any modification of the vehicle's tire size and
specifications may affect parking performance.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
224/295


Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion may not be able to function as
expected due to the following target parking space conditions, which include but
are not limited to:
The target parking space is adjacent to the roadside fence, high walls, street
lights, trees, bushes, pillars, suspended obstacles such as railings, distribution
boxes, chargers, etc., which will affect the final parking effect and may even
cause vehicle damage.
The target parking space is on a curve, which will affect the final parking
effect.
Do not activate Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion when the target
parking space is at an angle.
Do not activate Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion when there are
obstacles such as unlocked ground locks, cones, shopping carts, and
lampposts in the target parking space.
Do not activate Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion when the following
conditions may lead to poor vision of the observed environment while driving, which
include but are not limited to:
Any one of the left and right side mirrors is blurred, damaged or in an
abnormal position.
The surround-view camera is blurry, damaged, or in an unusual position.
Inclement weather (rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.) results in poor visibility.
Poor vision at night or due to insufficient light.
Do not activate Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion repeatedly in the
following situations, which include but are not limited to:
After vigorous driving or repeated parking operations, which may trigger
overheating protection of the steering system. Do not activate Shiftless
Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion for prolonged periods of time or
repeatedly.
The above warnings, precautions and restrictions have not fully covered all the
situations that may affect the normal operation of the Shiftless Advanced Parking
Assist with Fusion system. There are many factors that may interfere with the
Shiftless Advanced Parking Assist with Fusion system. In order to prevent accidents
from occurring, you need to drive attentively and focus on the traffic, road, and
vehicle conditions to ensure safe driving.
Power Swap with Assisted Parking
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
225/295


The Power Swap with Assisted Parking (PSAP) can help drivers park their vehicles
in the Power Swap Station without any steering wheel input, braking, acceleration,
or gear shift operations.
GUM191807
Search for the Power Swap Station on the map, or open the power-up assistant to
screen the Power Swap Station:
If you are within the order placing range of the Power Swap Station, directly
tap to place an order;
If you are not in the order placing range, navigate to the Power Swap Station
and place an order when you arrive nearby.
Caution
The locations of your vehicle and the NIO App are checked during order
placement. An order cannot be placed successfully unless your vehicle is
within 200m of the power swap station.
In the event of an order placement failure due to unavailable vehicle network,
please try again after the network resumes or consult the field specialist.
Please read the Agreement and Disclaimer before placing an order.
When the order is placed successfully, a power swapping serial number will be
generated to enter the queuing sequence. You can check the battery's charging
status, the number of people in the current queue, the estimated waiting time and
other information on the order interface of the mobile App and the vehicle.
After the lead vehicle finishes the power swap and leaves the Power Swap Station,
the Power Swap Station will send a number calling command after checking to
notify you to enter the station for the power swap. Tap the "Activate Power Swap
Process" button on the center display to start the parking process.
Caution
Please await your turn in the vicinity of the Power Swap Station and monitor
the queue status on your center display or NIO App. Should you fail to take
your turn, please contact the field specialist in a timely manner.
If you have to leave the Power Swap Station for some reason, please pay
attention to the queuing status on the NIO App or cancel the order in time.
Please avoid the lane in front of the station when waiting for Power Swap.
The Power Swap with Assisted Parking feature may not operate as expected in the
following situations:
The material that the curb is made out of is not stone or the curb is
undetectable. If parked improperly, the tires and wheel rims of the vehicle are
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
226/295


at risk of being damaged by the curb, and you need to promptly take over the
vehicle.
Any modification or alteration of the steering wheel, which may increase the
risk of parking and may result in the Power Swap with Assisted Parking
becoming inoperable or malfunctioning, including but not limited to the
installation of a leather steering wheel cover, the modification of the steering
wheel or weight ring, etc.
One or more ultrasonic sensors are contaminated or obstructed (e.g. sludge or
ice and snow).
Weather conditions (heavy rain, snow, fog, extreme heat or cold, etc.) interfere
with the operation of the sensor.
Reflective ground or water on the ground.
Sensors are affected by other electrical equipment or installations that can
cause interference.
The road surfaces are uneven, have grass planting bricks, grooves, etc.
It is equipped with snow chains or spare wheels.
The loaded objects protrude around the vehicle.
Any one of the left and right side mirrors is damaged or in an abnormal
position.
Caution
After the tire size is changed, you need to go to the service center to update
the relevant parameters. Currently, only the official tire models are supported.
Any modification related to the vehicle tire size and performance may affect
the parking performance.
Parking may be impaired if you pause too many times during the parking
process.
High-speed driving or multiple parking operations may trigger overheat
protection for the steering system. Do not use this feature repeatedly for an
extended period.
When the target parking space is close to roadside fences, high walls, street
lights, trees, bushes, pillars, or overhanging obstacles such as railings, power
distribution boxes and charging connectors, these obstacles may affect the
parking result and even cause vehicle damage.
Parking into the Power Swap Station
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
227/295


After tapping the "Activate Power Swap Process" button, please enter the starting
area for the power swap in the specified direction at a speed lower than 18 km/h
according to the vehicle's instructions.
Caution
A high speed may cause positioning detection failure. Please keep the speed
below 18 km/h.
Please drive as instructed by the arrows on the ground and avoid vehicles and
pedestrians around.
If positioning detection fails, please contact the field specialist to take over
your vehicle and manually reverse for power swap.
After entering the starting area for the power swap, when the Dynamic Environment
Simulation and Display (ESD) displays and NOMI plays a voice prompt saying that
the vehicle has been successfully located, please press the brake pedal to keep the
vehicle stationary and wait for positioning detection.
Make sure your seat belt is fastened and the door is closed while you wait in the
starting area.
Tap the "Assist in Parking Into the Power Swap Station" button. When you see
"Please release the brake and steering wheel", follow the instructions to start
parking in the Power Swap Station.
Parking will be suspended if obstacles are detected during the process.
If parking is suspended due to systemic reasons or active intervention during
the process, please confirm that there are no obstacles in the surrounding
area and manually resume the parking.
If you are unable to continue parking, you can select "Terminate Parking", and the
on-site specialist will manually swap power for the vehicle after you quit. If the
Power Swap Station is unattended, users can choose to park automatically or
manually again, or contact the specialist.
After parking is completed, swap power for the vehicle as instructed on the
interface.
Caution
Before or during parking into the power swap station, please always pay attention
to your surroundings to confirm that there are no passing vehicles, pedestrians,
children, etc. and ensure parking safety.
Please do not take over the accelerator pedal, unbuckle the seat belt, leave the
driver’s seat, or open the door during parking into the power swap station.
Starting/Ending the Power Swap
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
228/295


After parking successfully in place, it will automatically enter the one-button Power
Swap process. Please read the instructions on the vehicle's screen carefully and tap
to start the power swap.
The vehicle will automatically adjust to the power swap status, and switch off the
screen to start the power swap.
Warning
If your vehicle is not parked in place or failed to be automatically adjusted, please
adjust your vehicle as instructed by the field specialist.
The windows or air conditioning cannot be adjusted during the power swap. Please
adjust them to proper positions in advance.
During the power swap, it is normal that the vehicle jerks slightly with some noise
and some warning lights are on temporarily.
During the process, do not try to open any door, shift gears, press the brake pedal,
or perform other actions, which may cancel the power swap abnormally.
After the power swap is completed, the vehicle's screen will light up to indicate that
the power swap has been completed. At this time, it can drive away from the Power
Swap Station without any problems.
Caution
Please pay attention to any vehicles or pedestrians in front for safety before exiting
the power swap station.
The above warnings and precautions have not fully covered all the conditions that
may affect the normal operation of the Power Swap with Assisted Parking system.
There are many factors that may interfere with the Power Swap with Assisted
Parking system. In order to prevent accidents from occurring, you need to drive
attentively and focus on the traffic, road, and vehicle conditions to ensure safe
driving.
Side Distance Indication System
The Side Distance Indication System monitors the front of the vehicle when it is
driving at a low speed with ultrasonic sensors. When approaching obstacles, it
automatically activates the Parking Camera interface to assist in assessing parking
space or navigating through narrow passages, such as restricted-width roads.
GUM190816
Warning
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
229/295


The Side Distance Indication System is for reference only and cannot replace your
visual inspection.
The Side Distance Indication System is a driving assist feature and cannot address
all traffic, weather, and road situations. In extreme and adverse weather conditions,
including but not limited to rain, snow, fog, and haze, it is not recommended to
activate this feature.
To protect your safety, you must always pay attention to the traffic and road
conditions and decide for yourself whether to activate the Side Distance Indication
System.
You always bear the ultimate responsibility for safe driving and compliance with
current traffic laws and regulations.
Enabling and Disabling Side Distance Indication System
The Side Distance Indication System can be enabled or disabled by the Settings
button on the Parking Camera interface. When the Side Distance Indication System
feature is enabled, different layout styles can be selected, such as Dual-View, Full-
Screen, and Picture-in-Picture.
The Parking Camera interface will be automatically activated when the following
conditions are met simultaneously:
Vehicle in D gear.
The speed does not exceed 16 km/h.
There are obstacles in any of the areas ahead and they are close to the
vehicle.
Detection Areas and Distances of Side Distance Indication System
GUM190817
Area
Distance
1
Distance within 50 cm
2
Distance within 80 cm
3
Distance within 80 cm
You can tap the upper right of the Parking Camera interface to turn off the warning
sound. You should take full responsibility for any risks that may arise from disabling
the warning sound.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
230/295


Automatic Exit of the Parking Camera Interface:
The Parking Camera interface will be automatically closed after 4.5 seconds
since you have passed the obstacle.
When the Side Distance Indication System is turned off by tapping the blank
area of the parking camera or grabbing the screen with fingers, it can be
temporarily disabled for 3 minutes, and normal use can be resumed 3 minutes
later.
When the vehicle speed exceeds 16 km/h.
When the working conditions for the Side Distance Indication System are met
again, the Parking Camera interface will be automatically activated.
Warning
It is not recommended to use this feature in the event of extremely severe weather
conditions (such as rain, snow, fog, haze, etc.).
The above warnings do not exhaust all the situations that may affect the proper
operation of Side Distance Indication System. Side Distance Indication System may
be affected by many factors. To avoid safety accidents, be sure to always pay
attention to traffic, road and vehicle conditions and drive with caution.
Vehicle Health Status
Please keep an eye on the health status of the vehicle to keep your vehicle in the
best condition. You can tap My ET5 on the main screen of the center display to
enter the Vehicle Health Status interface. When you are on this interface, the
vehicle can perform a self-check, and show you the current health status of the
vehicle once it is finished.
You can also check the power consumption of the current trip on the My ET5
interface, and reset the trip by tapping Reset Accumulated Mileage.
Maintenance Instructions
To ensure that the vehicle can operate normally and bring a good driving and riding
experience, you need to conduct regular vehicle maintenance.
In light of the complexity of vehicle systems and the after-sales service
requirements of electric vehicles by national laws and regulations, we recommend
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
231/295


you to have your vehicle maintained regularly at NIO’s service center. If you have
any inquiries about the vehicle inspection, please contact NIO at any time.
Routine Maintenance
Routine maintenance is very important for ensuring your vehicle performance,
reducing your costs of vehicle usage, and extending your vehicle service life. It is
recommended to go to the NIO Service Center to have maintenance conducted
according to the following requirements.
Daily Maintenance
Daily maintenance is a very important measure to ensure driving safety and reduce
vehicle malfunctions. The following items shall be checked on a daily basis. If any
abnormalities are found, please contact the NIO Service Center in a timely manner
for relevant inspections.
Check that all exterior lights, horns, turn signals, and hazard warning lights
work properly.
Check that the wipers and windshield washers work properly.
Check that the brakes work properly.
Check that the seat belts work properly.
Check if there are abnormally lit indicator lights or text warning messages on
the instrument cluster and center display.
Check the tire pressure and check the tires for damage and abnormal wear.
Check if there is any abnormal accumulation of fluids under your vehicle body
(water accumulation caused by dehumidification in the air conditioning system
is normal).
When driving, pay attention to whether there are abnormal sounds such as
bumps or impacts from the bottom of your vehicle body.
Check your vehicle body for any dirt (such as bird droppings, resin, asphalt
spots, insects, and industrial dust) that may damage the paint. If there is any
dirt, please clean your vehicle body according to the instructions. Refer to
"Exterior Cleaning and Maintenance".
Check for any dirt in the roof LiDAR area, high-definition camera area, and
360 surround-view camera area. If there is any dirt, please clean those areas
according to the instructions. Refer to Exterior Cleaning and Maintenance.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
232/295


Replace the smart key battery according to the prompts on the center display
of your vehicle.
Regular Maintenance
When driving in normal driving conditions, please go to the NIO Service Center for
vehicle maintenance according to the following maintenance items and intervals:
Gearbox oil: Replace every 200,000 kilometers.
Brake fluid: Replace every 3 years.
Coolant: Check the coolant at the latest in the 5th year or at 100,000
kilometers (whichever comes first), and replace it if necessary.
If the coolant is not replaced, check the coolant every 2 years or 40,000
kilometers (whichever comes first) and replace it if necessary. If the coolant is
replaced, check the new coolant in the 5th year or at 100,000 kilometers
(whichever comes first), and replace it if necessary.
When your vehicle is used in extremely cold (below -30 ° C) climates, check
the coolant and replace it if necessary.
Brake pads: At the latest in the 5th year or at 100,000 kilometers (whichever
comes first), check your brake pads for wear and replace them if necessary.
If the brake pads are not replaced, check the brake pads every 2 years or
40,000 kilometers (whichever comes first) and replace them if necessary. If
the brake pads are replaced, check the new brake pads for wear in the 5th
year or at 100,000 kilometers (whichever comes first), and replace them if
necessary.
Brake discs: At the latest, check your brake discs for wear and replace them if
necessary in the 10th year or at 200,000 kilometers (whichever comes first).
If the brake discs are not replaced, check the brake discs every 2 years or
40,000 kilometers (whichever comes first) and replace them if necessary. If
the brake discs are replaced, check the new brake discs for wear in the 10th
year or at 200,000 kilometers (whichever comes first), and replace them if
necessary.
Note
The above "when necessary" refers to when test results do not meet the
requirements of NIO technical standards.
Irregular Maintenance
It is recommended to go to the NIO Service Center for the following maintenance
when needed based on the conditions of your vehicle and the prompts on the
center display:
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
233/295


Check the wiper strips for aging and scraping, and replace them if necessary.
Check the air filter according to the prompts on the center display of your
vehicle and replace it if necessary.
Replace the 12V battery according to the prompts on the center display of
your vehicle.
In cold regions, it is recommended to clean and lubricate the calipers annually or
every 20,000 kilometers.
Note
The above "when necessary" refers to when test results do not meet the
requirements of NIO technical standards.
It is recommended to go to NIO Service Center for a comprehensive vehicle health
check when needed based on the usage environment and condition of your vehicle.
Special Maintenance
If your vehicle is frequently driven in the following harsh environments, additional
maintenance items or shorter maintenance intervals may be required. For specifics,
please contact the NIO Service Center.
Driving in a dusty environment.
Driving in harsh cold (below -20 ℃) or high temperature (above 40 ℃)
environments.
Driving in humid environments or frequently wading in water.
Driving on roads with high salt content or corrosive materials.
Frequent braking or driving in mountainous areas.
Often used for special purposes such as high loads.
Retrofitted or modified for special purposes.
Front Wiper Blade Replacement
The front wipers remove rainwater and stains on the windshield (used together with
windshield washer fluid). If your vision through the windshield is blurred or if there
are multiple obvious water marks after the wiping, which affect the driver's vision
and do not disappear, it's time to replace the wiper blades.
How to replace the front wiper blades:
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
234/295


1. Enter the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center
display, tap Doors and Windows Lock > Wipers > Front Wiper Service
Position, and then the front wipers will move to a position that is convenient
for replacement.
2. After the front wipers move to the service position, they can be lifted upwards:
press and hold the front wiper blade tab and slide the wiper blade down
perpendicular to the wiper arm to remove the wiper blade.
GUM228728
3. Insert the new wiper blade until you hear a "click", which indicates that the
wiper blade has been properly secured.
Windshield Washer Fluid Refill
Warning
To add windshield washer fluid, open the hood. If necessary, please contact
the NIO Service Center for assistance, so as to avoid injuries resulting from
accidental contact with high-voltage components.
Windshield washer fluid is flammable and irritating. When using it, please
avoid open flames or in contact with body parts.
Windshield washer fluid may damage your vehicle light cover. Please prevent
the windshield washer fluid from coming into contact with the light cover.
Do not add coolant to the windshield washer fluid. Otherwise, it may damage
the windshield washer system and paint.
Windshield washer fluid helps maintain good visibility in the front windshield. How
to add windshield washer fluid:
1. Pull the hood handle cover plate in the passenger compartment twice to
release the hood.
GUM185928
2. Lift the hood.
GUM185929
3. Open the windshield washer fluid cap and add an appropriate amount of
washer fluid.
GUM190803
Caution
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
235/295


When topping up the windshield washer fluid, please fill the reservoir carefully
to avoid spilling and wipe up any spills immediately.
4. Close the lid of the washer fluid pot tightly after adding the washer fluid.
5. When closing the hood, hold the hood with your hands to lower it a little bit
first, and then push the hood down until it is completely closed.
Caution
Do not close the hood forcefully or allow it to fall freely.
Please add appropriate windshield washer fluid according to the outdoor
temperature. In cold weather, please use washer fluid containing antifreeze to
avoid reducing the visibility through the windshield.
When using concentrated windshield washer fluid, please follow the
manufacturer's instructions to dilute it with water.
Do not add water to the ready-to-use windshield washer fluid, or it may cause
the washer fluid to freeze and damage the washer fluid reservoir and other
components of the washer system.
When the weather is very cold, it is recommended to add washer fluid to
three-quarters of the reservoir to prevent the washer fluid from freezing and
expanding, which can damage the washer fluid reservoir.
Do not add formulated windshield washer fluid containing waterproofing agent
or insect-stain removal washer fluid, or it may cause streaks, stains, squeaks,
or other noises during wiping.
Coolant Refill
Warning
To avoid the risk of high voltage electric shock when opening the hood, please
contact NIO to top up the vehicle’s coolant.
Coolant helps the vehicle E-Powertrain System to run at a suitable temperature
range. How to refill coolant:
1. Pull the hood handle cover plate in the passenger compartment twice to
release the hood.
GUM185928
2. Lift the hood.
GUM185929
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
236/295


3. Open the coolant cap and refill an appropriate amount of coolant (between the
MIN level and the MAX level).
GUM190804
4. Close the coolant cap tightly.
5. When closing the hood, hold the hood with your hands to lower it a little bit
first, and then push the hood down until it is completely closed.
Caution
Do not slam or drop the hood.
Brake Fluid Refill
Warning
To avoid the risk of high voltage electric shock when opening the hood, please
contact NIO to top up the vehicle’s brake fluid.
Brake fluid is the medium that transmits brake pressure in the hydraulic brake
system. How to add brake fluid:
1. Pull the hood handle cover plate in the passenger compartment twice to
release the hood.
GUM185928
2. Lift the hood.
GUM185929
3. Open the brake fluid cap and add an appropriate amount of brake fluid
(between the MIN level and the MAX level).
GUM190805
4. Close the brake fluid cap tightly.
5. When closing the hood, hold the hood with your hands to lower it a little bit
first, and then push the hood down until it is completely closed.
Caution
Do not slam or drop the hood.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
237/295


Tire Inspection and Maintenance
Do not drive on damaged, over-worn, or incorrectly inflated tires. For driving safety,
please check the tires on a regular basis:
Inspect the tires frequently for damage (punctures, cuts, tears, and bulges),
and remove foreign matter embedded in the tire tread.
A puncture will cause the tire to lose pressure, so it's important to check the
tire pressure frequently. Repair or replace punctured or damaged tires as soon
as possible. If you feel sudden shaking or bumps while driving, or suspect that
the tires are damaged, slow down immediately while avoiding heavy braking or
sudden steering. Stop after confirming that it is safe, and then contact the
NIO Service Center for assistance immediately.
If the tire valve dust cap is lost, please replace it as soon as possible.
Keep the tires away from oil, grease or fuel.
Always store wheels in a cool, dry and dark place. Separate tires that are not
on wheels should be stored upright.
Do not store summer tires or park a vehicle with summer tires in ambient
temperatures below -15 °C.
Check the tread pattern for wear marks on a regular basis, especially before and
after long drives. If the tire is worn down to 1.6mm or less, a wear mark will appear,
by then the ground grip of the tire will be greatly reduced, and the tire will need to
be replaced immediately to prevent the risk of an accident occurring.
GUM190806
For safety reasons, tires must be replaced if they show the following damage:
Damage such as cuts, splits, and cracks down to the carcass, and bulges that
indicate inner ply damage.
Frequently leaks, or irreparable damage due to the size or location of the cut
or other damaged locations.
Punctures, bulges and damage to tire sidewalls.
Deformation or corrosion of tires caused by long-term parking.
If you are not sure, please consult the NIO Service Center.
Caution
If tire wear is uneven, we recommend that you contact NIO to have the tires
checked for dynamic balancing.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
238/295


In order to reduce tire wear and prolong the service life of the tires, the tires should
be cared for according to your driving habits and road conditions:
New tires are in the run-in period during the first 500 kilometers. Running in
at a moderate speed and with a careful driving style will prolong the service
life of the tires.
When passing a curb or similar sections of road, keep the wheels
perpendicular to the curb as much as possible, and drive slowly.
Hard impacts of the tires against curbs or objects with sharp edges, such as
rocks, or impacts against sharp edges can cause imperceptible tire damage
that will add up in the future. Depending on the severity of the impact, it may
damage the rim flange.
Turning too fast, over acceleration and hard braking will increase tire wear.
New tires, after they are replaced, must undergo a dynamic balance check.
If the vehicle cannot remain straight or keeps deviating while driving, please
go to the NIO Service Center to check the wheel alignment parameters and
make adjustments if necessary.
If the rear tires have less wear than the front tires, then swap the front and
rear tires as needed. It is recommended to swap the front and rear tires every
10,000 km.
GUM190807
Caution
When passing through large pits, speed bumps, obstacles or damaged roads,
please pay attention to safety and slow down to reduce the likelihood that the low-
profile tires bulge or burst.
Brake Pad and Disc Inspection and Maintenance
Please depress the brake pedal occasionally when driving on rainy days or on ice-
and snow-covered roads so that the heat generated by friction can make the brake
pads warm and dry. The same shall be done when you drive in extremely wet or
cold weather.
After having your vehicle cleaned, dry the brake for a short time to avoid impacting
the braking effect and prevent the brake disc from rusting.
Because the wear condition of brake pads and brake discs depends largely on your
driving style and service conditions, it is impossible to determine the wear condition
in terms of actual driving mileage.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
239/295


This high performance braking system is used to achieve comprehensive and
excellent braking effects at various vehicle speeds and temperatures. Therefore, in
certain vehicle speed, braking force and environment conditions (such as
temperature and humidity), the brake may make a sharp noise.
New and replaced brake pads and brake discs can provide the best braking effect
after a "running-in" period of at least 500 kilometers. During the running-in period,
you need to depress the brake pedal harder to compensate for the reduced braking
effect.
Air Filter Inspection and Maintenance
After replacing the air filter, go to the Comfort settings interface from the bottom
of the center display, and tap Air Filter Life Timer to reset the filter element service
life timer. This estimated service life is for reference only because the actual
service life depends on the environment and other factors. Replace it when needed.
Make sure to keep the grille shutter of the air conditioner clear of any obstructions
(such as leaves and snow) before driving.
12V Battery Care
The 12V battery supplies 12V power for vehicle starting equipment and electrical
equipment, and is located in the front trunk. Keeping the 12V battery fully charged
will prolong its service life.
GUM186523
Warning
If the 12V battery is leaking or swelling, please contact NIO immediately. If the
electrolyte comes in contact with eyes or skin, please rinse the eyes or skin with
running water and seek medical attention immediately.
Caution
If the 12V battery is severely drained (e.g. having been left unused for a long
time), please contact NIO for assistance and do not replace it yourself.
Before leaving the vehicle, please ensure that all electric systems, such as
lights and the media center, are turned off, and park the vehicle in a cool and
dry place.
Caution
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
240/295


After the 12V battery is disconnected and reconnected, the automatic lifting and
anti-pinch features of the window will be temporarily unavailable.
High-voltage Battery Maintenance and Recycling
High-voltage Battery Maintenance
The high-voltage battery is an important driving part of the vehicle. Please pay
attention to the following precautions when using it:
Parking the vehicle in an environment with excessively high or low temperature
will directly affect the service life of the high-voltage battery. Do not park the
vehicle in such an environment for an extended period of time (more than 8
hours).
Do not park the vehicle in a place with high temperature or a heat source to
avoid accidental fire.
The vehicle should be parked in a dry place. Try to avoid parking in damp or
watery parking spaces.
It is recommended not to stay in deep water for a long time (preferably not
exceeding the battery base plate) when the vehicle is wading, as it may cause
damage to the high-voltage components of the vehicle.
Avoid frequent use of high-power DC fast charging to charge the vehicle, as it
will affect the service life of the high-voltage battery.
If the vehicle will not be used for a long time, ensure that the battery level of
high-voltage battery is above 50% (displayed on the digital instrument cluster)
and park the vehicle in a cool and dry place to avoid affecting the service life
of the high-voltage battery. It is recommended to check the battery level every
week and use the vehicle once a month.
Please follow the instructions and use a charging device that complies with
the charging specifications to properly charge the vehicle.
When driving on a road with bumps, gravel, or protruding obstacles, please
drive slowly or try to avoid the obstacles to prevent harm to the vehicle
chassis or high-voltage battery pack. If the vehicle body bottom is bumped or
a bumping sound is heard, please contact a NIO Service Center immediately
for safety inspection of chassis and high-voltage battery pack.
Warning
The high voltage battery operates at a high voltage. Do not touch, move, or
disassemble the high voltage battery or its circuit without authorization. Doing
so may result in injury.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
241/295


Please be sure to charge the vehicle within 24 hours when the remaining
driving range is at zero. During this time, the charging speed will be limited
until the battery level reaches 50%. Failure to charge the vehicle within 72
hours may cause irreversible damage to the high voltage battery.
Recycling of High-voltage Battery
Waste high-voltage batteries need to be properly recycled. In the process of vehicle
maintenance, the high-voltage batteries that meet the following conditions are
deemed to require recycling:
1. During the maintenance of high-voltage battery in a NIO Service Center,
battery capacity and state are inspected. For batteries that shall be recycled
according to the provisions of relevant laws and regulations, NIO shall assume
the entity responsibility and recycle them according to the market conditions
at that time.
2. In other circumstances, if it is determined that a battery can no longer be
utilized but it is in good condition, it will be recycled and put to degraded use
after minimal repair.
3. If a battery has a major flaw or damage, and cannot be put into degraded use,
it will enter the recycling process.
Caution
Do not casually dispose of the high voltage battery, as it can cause severe
environmental damage.
Vehicles, vehicle parts and batteries must be disposed of using authorized recycling
companies. They must not be disposed of in general household waste or sent to
landfill as this can cause severe environmental damage. Please see the NIO website
for details.
GUM190599
This symbol on the battery means that this product must not be treated as
household waste.
The recycling process of high-voltage battery is as follows: NIO or a third-party
recycling agency designated by NIO will perform recycling and subsequent
treatment.
Fuse Box under the Hood
Caution
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
242/295


Do not use fuses with a nominal current higher than the rated current. Only replace
the blown fuse with a fuse of the same nominal current and size.
GUM190808
S/N
Specifications
Description
UR01
MINI
Cooling fan relay
UR02
—
—
UR03
280 MICRO
High-voltage battery
electronic water pump
relay
UR04
ISO MINI
Main relay
UR05
—
—
UR06
—
Front windshield heating
relay
UR07
280 MICRO
Front motor electronic
water pump relay
UR08
—
—
UR09
MINI
Front fan relay
UF01
60A
UR01 relay switch-end
power supply
UF02
—
—
UF03
25A
Front body controller (front
wiper motor) KL30 power
supply
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
243/295


UF04
—
—
UF05
10A
High-voltage DC converter
integrated component
UF06
10A
Front inverter (KL30 power
supply)
UF07
—
—
UF08
—
—
UF09
50A
UR09 relay switch-end
power supply
UF10
—
—
UF11
20A
UR03 relay switch-end
power supply
UF12
10A
Electronic shift module
(KL87 power supply)
UF13
10A
Climate control
system/PM2.5
sensor/compressor
assembly/heat exchanger
electronic expansion
valve/heat pump electronic
expansion valve (KL87
power supply)
UF14
20A
UR07 relay switch-end
power supply
UF15
—
—
UF16
—
—
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
244/295


UF17
10A
Rear HV power distribution
unit (KL87 power supply)
UF18
15A
Vehicle controller (KL87
power supply)
UF19
—
—
UF20
10A
UR01/UR03 relay coil-end
power supply
UF21
10A
Five-way cooling water
valve (KL87 power supply)
UF22
10A
Brake switch (KL87 power
supply)
UF23
10A
Front bumper movable
grille (KL87 power supply)
UF24
—
—
UF25
—
—
UF26
15A
Front windshield heating
UF27
—
—
UF28
10A
UR07 relay coil-end power
supply
Instrument Panel Fuse Box
Caution
Do not use fuses with a nominal current higher than the rated current. Only replace
the blown fuse with a fuse of the same nominal current and size.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
245/295


GUM194017
S/N
Specifications
Description
IR01
MINI
Power socket relay
IR02
MINI
Seat/flexible chassis
control relay
IR03
ISO MINI
KL15 relay
IF01
50A
IR01 relay switch-end
power supply
IF02
—
—
IF03
20A
Brake pressure regulator
power supply
IF04
40A
Brake pressure regulator
motor power supply 1
IF05
40A
Brake pressure regulator
motor power supply 2
IF06
40A
IR03 relay switch-end
power supply
IF07
50A
IR02 relay switch-end
power supply
IF08
10A
Driver's seat lumbar
support/fan power supply
IF09
10A
Passenger seat lumbar
support/fan power supply
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
246/295


IF10
10A
Flexible chassis controller
power supply 1
IF11
—
—
IF12
10A
Flexible chassis controller
power supply 2
IF13
20A
Trailer control module
power supply
IF14
10A
Body gateway controller
IF15
10A
Wireless charging module
and body controller (safe
box) power supply
IF16
10A
Center display power
supply
IF17
30A
ADAS main controller
power supply 1
IF18
10A
Smart antennas power
supply
IF19
10A
Digital key Bluetooth
antenna module power
supply
IF20
10A
Steering column module
power supply
IF21
10A
Air conditioning control
unit power supply
IF22
10A
Outer door handle, driver's
door switch power supply
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
247/295


IF23
25A
Body controller power
supply (rear seats and
backlighting)
IF24
10A
ETC/alcohol interlock
power supply
IF25
10A
LiDAR sensor power supply
IF26
15A
Body controller power
supply (washer fluid pump)
IF27
10A
NOMI power supply
IF28
10A
Digital instrument cluster
display power supply
IF29
10A
Diagnostic port power
supply
IF30
10A
Fragrance module and rain
light sensor power supply
IF31
20A
Body controller power
supply 1
IF32
20A
Body controller power
supply 2
IF33
—
ADAS main controller
power supply 2
IF34
10A
Rear child
monitoring/radar
sensor/parking radar
controller power supply
IF35
10A
IR03 relay coil-end power
supply
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
248/295


IF36
10A
Battery management
system power supply
IF37
15A
Pyrotechnic cutout switch
power supply
IF38
10A
Electronic shift module
power supply
IF39
10A
Brake light switch power
supply
IF40
10A
Vehicle controller power
supply 1
IF41
20A
Multimedia system host
power supply 1
IF42
25A
Front 12V power socket
power supply
IF43
—
—
IF44
10A
Front USB port power
supply
IF45
10A
Rear control panel USB
port power supply
IF46
10A
Body gateway controller
(power socket relay
feedback)
IF47
25A
Rear 12V power socket
power supply
IF48
15A
Body controller power
supply (horn)
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
249/295


IF49
30A
Driver's seat control
module power supply
IF50
30A
Passenger seat control
module power supply
IF51
30A
Front left door control
module power supply 1
IF52
20A
Front left door control
module power supply 2
IF53
30A
Front right door control
module power supply 1
IF54
20A
Front right door control
module power supply 2
IF55
30A
Rear left door control
module power supply 1
IF56
20A
Rear left door control
module power supply 2
IF57
30A
Rear right door control
module power supply 1
IF58
20A
Rear right door control
module power supply 2
IF59
10A
Electric power steering
power supply 1
IF60
10A
Electric power steering
power supply 2
IF61
10A
Airbag controller power
supply
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
250/295


IF62
10A
Body gateway
controller/body controller
feedback
IF63
10A
Air conditioning control
unit/ETC/rearview mirror
power supply
IF64
20A
Left headlight power
supply
IF65
20A
Right headlight power
supply
IF66
10A
Liftgate middle taillight
power supply
IF67
10A
Liftgate left and right
taillight power supply
IF68
10A
Vehicle controller power
supply
IF69
10A
Interior lighting
IF70
10A
Four-door speaker ambient
lighting power supply
Rear Trunk Fuse Box
Caution
Do not use fuses with a nominal current higher than the rated current. Only replace
the blown fuse with a fuse of the same nominal current and size.
GUM190811
S/N
Specifications
Description
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
251/295


TR01
—
—
TR02
ISO MINI
Rear defog relay
TR03
ISO MINI
KL15 power supply relay
(redundant)
TR04
—
—
TR05
—
—
TR06
—
—
TF01
—
—
TF02
40A
TR02 relay switch-end
power supply
TF03
40A
TR03 relay switch-end
power supply
TF04
20A
Trailer control module
power supply 1
TF05
30A
Liftgate control module
power supply
TF06
30A
Power amplifier control unit
power supply 1
TF07
—
—
TF08
10A
Rear inverter power supply
TF09
10A
Vehicle controller power
supply 2
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
252/295


TF10
10A
Battery management unit
power supply 1
TF11
20A
Multimedia system host
power supply 2
TF12
10A
Body gateway controller
power supply 2
TF13
30A
ADAS main controller
power supply 2
TF14
30A
ADAS main controller
power supply 4
TF15
30A
Body controller KL30
power supply (exterior
lighting 2)
TF16
10A
Liftgate kick sensor power
supply
TF17
10A
Charging indicator power
supply
TF18
30A
Body controller KL30
power supply (exterior
lighting 1)
TF19
—
—
TF20
20A
Trailer control module
power supply 2
TF21
10A
TR02 relay coil-end power
supply
TF22
10A
Onboard charging module
power supply (charging
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
253/295


communication)
TF23
10A
Onboard charging module
power supply
TF24
40A
Front row left retractor
assembly power supply
TF25
—
—
TF26
—
—
TF27
30A
Flexible chassis controller
power supply 2
TF28
30A
Flexible chassis controller
power supply 1
TF29
30A
Power amplifier control unit
power supply 2
TF30
10A
Charge port ground reverse
protection A-
TF31
10A
Charging confirmation
signal A+
TF32
—
—
TF33
—
—
TF34
—
—
TF35
—
—
Pre-fuse Box
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
254/295


Caution
Do not use fuses with a nominal current higher than the rated current. Only replace
the blown fuse with a fuse of the same nominal current and size.
GUM191064
S/N
Specifications
Description
PF01 450A
DC/DC converter
PF02 200A
Front trunk fuse box
PF03 200A
Instrument panel fuse box
PF04 200A
Rear trunk fuse box
PF05 125A
Electric power steering gear power
supply 2
PF06 125A
Electric power steering gear power
supply 1
Exterior Cleaning and Maintenance
Regular cleaning and waxing of your vehicle can protect it from damage caused by
the external environment. The interval to wash and wax your vehicle depends on the
frequency of use, parking conditions of your vehicle (in garage, under trees, or in
direct sunlight, etc.), and weather conditions.
The deposition of bird droppings, insect residues, resins, industrial dust, tar lumps,
coal cinders, and other deposits on the body paintwork and roof will cause damage
to the surface of your vehicle's paint, headlights, and taillights. If your vehicle is
exposed to high temperature and strong light, the corrosion of the paintwork of
your vehicle will be exacerbated. Therefore, it may be necessary to wash your
vehicle once a week. When washing, please soak the dirt with enough water first
and then remove it.
Warning
Do not wash the vehicle when it is charging.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
255/295


Caution
When washing and waxing the vehicle, use special-purpose cleaning and
maintenance products. Check that the products are not expired and be sure to
store them out of reach of children after use.
Manual Wash
When manually washing your vehicle, first use enough water to moisten the exterior
surface of your vehicle and rinse off as much dirt as possible. Then, clean your
vehicle carefully from the top down using a soft sponge, cloth, or soft brush. If
there is dirt that is difficult to remove, a cleaning agent can be used. If there is a lot
of dirt on the sponge or cloth, replacing it with a new cleaning sponge is
recommended. After cleaning your vehicle, rinse it thoroughly with water and wipe it
clean with a towel. After the winter salt spraying period ends, the bottom of your
vehicle needs to be thoroughly washed.
To protect the environment, please wash your vehicle on a dedicated washing
platform. If this equipment is not available, you need to choose a suitable place to
wash your vehicle.
To facilitate your vehicle washing operation, you can go to the Settings interface
from the control bar at the bottom of the center display and tap Driving and
Parking > Wash Mode, where you can choose the opening and closing of the
doors, windows, rear trunk, and charge port, and unlock the settings, wipers, and
door handles to reduce damage to your vehicle components while the vehicle is
washed.
Note
Do not wash the vehicle in direct sunlight as this may damage the surface of
the paint, headlights, and taillights.
When washing the vehicle with a hose in winter, do not aim directly at the
outer door handles, charge port, and the seams around doors and the sunroof.
Otherwise, these parts may be frozen in place.
Do not use coarse sponges or corrosive cleaning agents to wash the vehicle
to avoid damaging the surface of the paint.
Do not wash the vehicle with water above 60 °C.
Do not use a dry cloth or sponge to clean the headlights. Use only water or
soapy water.
Automatic Wash
Your vehicle can be washed in automatic vehicle washing equipment. However, the
structure and filter of the vehicle washing equipment and the type of cleaning agent
and maintenance agent can have an impact on the body paintwork. If the paintwork
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
256/295


of your vehicle is dull or even scratched after washing, please notify the operator of
the vehicle washing equipment immediately. If necessary, the vehicle washing
equipment shall be replaced.
Before the automatic vehicle wash of your vehicle is performed, all the doors and
windows shall be closed, the automatic wipers shall be turned off, and the side
mirrors shall be folded. At the same time, the operator of the vehicle washing
equipment shall be informed in advance that your vehicle is equipped with a roof
rack, a radio antenna, etc.
You can go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the
center display and tap Driving and Parking > Wash Mode, where you can choose
the opening and closing of the doors, windows, rear trunk, and charge port, and
unlock the settings, wipers, and door handles to reduce damage to your vehicle
components while the vehicle is washed.
Caution
Before your vehicle undergoes an automatic vehicle wash, please switch to Neutral
gear (N gear). Go to the Settings interface from the control bar at the bottom of the
center display and tap Driving and Parking > N (NEUTRAL).
High Pressure Wash
When using a high pressure washing machine to wash your vehicle, always follow
the operating instructions, and, in particular, maintain a sufficient distance between
the spraying nozzle and the paintwork or soft materials (such as rubber hoses or
sound insulation materials). It is recommended that the distance is more than 500
mm, the pressure is below 100 bar, and the maximum temperature is 60 ℃. When
rinsing, try to make the jet perpendicular to the surface of your vehicle as much as
possible. If these requirements are not satisfied, your vehicle components may be
damaged or water droplets may flow into your vehicle.
Never use a circular or rotating nozzle, especially when washing tires. Even if the
spraying distance is large and the rinsing time is short, the tires may be damaged.
Never use a high pressure washing machine to rinse your vehicle nameplate and the
gaps at the edges and corners of the door glass.
Polishing and Waxing
A high quality wax layer can effectively protect your vehicle's paintwork from
environmental influences and even prevent minor scratches. When water droplets no
longer roll off smoothly on the cleaned body paintwork, a layer of high quality hard
wax curing agent shall be applied immediately. If cleaning and curing agents are
applied regularly, applying hard wax at least twice a year is recommended to
protect the body paintwork.
Polishing is only necessary when the body paintwork has lost its gloss and the
waxing cannot restore its glossy appearance. Do not polish components coated
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
257/295


with matte paint or plastic parts.
Wiper Blades
Wash in warm soapy water. Do not use cleaning agents derived from alcohol or
petroleum products.
Windows and Side Mirrors
Clean the inner and outer surfaces of all the windows regularly with glass cleaning
agents.
Clean the inner surface of the rear windshield with a soft cloth and wipe it
horizontally. Do not scratch the glass or use abrasive cleaning agents to avoid
damaging the heating element.
Wash the side mirrors with soapy water. Do not use abrasive cleaners to avoid
damaging the lens.
Plastic Parts
Plastic parts shall be cleaned through conventional cleaning methods. If the stains
cannot be removed, only solvent-free special cleaning agents for plastic parts can
be used. Otherwise, the plastic parts may be corroded.
Chromium-plated Parts
Chromium-plated parts can be cleaned with a damp cloth and then polished with a
soft dry cloth. If the effect is not good enough, chromium care agents can be used.
When using chromium care agents, make sure to cover the entire surface evenly
and completely. Do not clean and polish chrome-plated surfaces in dusty and sandy
environments.
Wheels
To maintain the glossy appearance of the aluminum alloy wheel rims for a long
time, you need to perform regular maintenance on the wheels. It is recommended to
clean them every two weeks to prevent fine abrasive particles, dirt, or salt particles
that fall after the vehicle brakes from adhering to them. Otherwise, the aluminum
alloy may be corroded. After cleaning the wheels, apply an acid- and alkali-free
cleaning agent designed specifically for aluminum alloy wheels. Apply hard wax to
the wheels every three months. If the protective paint layer is damaged due to being
struck by a stone or other reasons, it must be repaired immediately and no body
paintwork polish or other polishing materials shall be used.
Severe dirt layers on the wheels can also lead to a wheel imbalance. This will be
reflected through wheel vibrations, which will be transmitted to the steering wheel.
In some cases, this may cause premature wear of the steering gear. Therefore,
wheels covered in dirt shall be cleaned regularly.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
258/295


Bottom Plate Protection
The bottom of your vehicle has been treated to prevent chemical and mechanical
damage. However, damage to the protective layer is inevitable during driving. It is
recommended to inspect the protective layer on the bottom and chassis of your
vehicle at regular intervals, preferably before winter and in spring, and perform
repairs if necessary.
External Area of Radar
The external area of the radar can be cleaned manually with a flannelet soaked with
a proper amount of water or neutral cleaning solution.
In case of snow or ice, it is necessary to first clean the external area of the radar
from ice and snow, and then wipe it with a flannelet or air dry it.
When using a high pressure washing machine to wash your vehicle, do not rinse the
external area of the radar directly to prevent damage.
Please be careful not to pollute or damage the sensors on the front/rear bumper
when maintaining your vehicle.
Do not apply film, wax, or coat in the external area of the LiDAR. Otherwise, the
sensing performance of the LiDAR will be affected.
Interior Cleaning and Maintenance
Regularly clean the interior with cleaners or conditioners to maintain the interior
appearance. Before using any cleaners, vacuum the interior first.
Note
Some dyes (such as from dark-washed jeans or sheepskin clothing) may stain
the interior materials. When this happens, clean the stained surface as soon
as possible.
Do not use strong solvents such as cleaning fluids, petrol or petroleum
solvents which may damage the interior materials.
Do not spray cleaners directly on electronic buttons, switches or parts. Wipe
stains with a soft cloth dampened with cleaning fluid.
Sharp objects may damage the fabric interior.
Fabric Interior
Only use specialized cleaners, dry foam, and a soft brush to clean the fabric
materials on the doors, rear trunk, roof, and other areas.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
259/295


Leather Interior
You can use a slightly wet cotton or woolen cloth, or a cleaning cloth to clean
common dirt on the leather interior. You can use a cloth dipped in mild car
shampoo to clean stubborn oil stains. Make sure that the leather material is not
fully wet and prevent water from seeping through the stitching. Any remaining water
on the leather surface should be quickly wiped off with a soft dry cloth. Stains from
ballpoint pens, ink, lipsticks, shoe polish, and other substances on leather surfaces
should be removed as soon as possible. We recommend you use a 100% pure
polyurethane foam sponge for cleaning Nappa leather.
We recommend limiting the use of leather care products as much as possible, no
more than twice a year for light-colored leather and no more than once a year for
dark-colored leather.
Note
Do not use cleaning solvents to clean the instrument panel, air bag covers, or
leather interior.
To avoid leather fading, do not leave the vehicle under strong sunlight for long
periods of time. If you need to park the vehicle under strong sunlight, please
cover all leather material.
Sharp objects on clothes such as zips, rivets, and sharp buckles may leave
marks or dents on the leather.
Avoid drinking coffee or using sunscreen in vehicles with a Nappa leather
interior. Remove coffee or sunscreen stains on Nappa leather with mild soapy
water as soon as possible.
Do not spray formaldehyde cleaners on leather. Doing so may leave white
spots on genuine leather which are difficult to remove.
Seat Belts
Only use mild car shampoo to clean the seat belts. Do not remove the seat belts
from the vehicle. Allow the belts to dry fully while extended.
Protective Films
Sunroof Heat Insulation Film/TPU Film
The vehicle comes with a panoramic glass sunroof that can block most of the heat
and ultraviolet rays. In addition, high-precision positioning units are installed under
the sunroof. Any additional products such as a heat insulation film, TPU film, or roof
luggage box installed on the sunroof may interfere with the signals of the units,
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
260/295


thus preventing relevant advanced driver assistance system features from working
properly.
If you want to install a heat insulation film or TPU film to the sunroof, make sure to
avoid the blue areas shown below. Otherwise, signal reception will be affected. If
you have any questions, please contact the NIO Service Center.
Color-Changing Film/Transparent Film
When installing a color-changing or transparent film, make sure to avoid areas
around the surround-view cameras, HD cameras, ultrasonic radars, and LiDAR
radars to prevent interference with the advanced driver assistance system features.
Side Window Film
Do not install the side window film too close to the edge of the window. Leave a
small gap to prevent the curling caused by the lifting and lowering of the window.
Front Windshield Film
The original front windshield of NIO electric vehicles has good thermal insulation
and ultraviolet blocking performance. We do not recommend to install a film on it.
If you still want to install a film, you should prevent installation liquid from seeping
into the area below the instrument panel. This will cause failure of electrical
components inside the instrument panel.
Rear Windshield Film
The original rear windshield of NIO electric vehicles has good thermal insulation and
ultraviolet blocking performance. We do not recommend to install a film on it.
If you still want to install a film on the rear windshield, be sure to:
Thoroughly remove water when applying the film to avoid causing excessive
glare on the windshield at night.
Prevent excessive installation liquid from seeping into the rear cover, which
will cause short circuit in the audio system.
Caution
Avoid the signal emission and reception areas when installing the film in order
not to affect the normal operation of some systems.
After the installation of the sunroof insulation protection film, avoid exposure
to sunlight within 3 hours, do not wash your vehicle within 24 hours, and do
not exceed 80 km/h while driving.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
261/295


Do not raise or lower the window or wipe the inside of the glass with force
within 7-10 days after the installation of the side shield film.
Do not activate the rear windshield defogging feature within 30 days after the
installation of the rear windshield film.
The rear windshield film may have an impact on the auto-dimming feature of
the rearview mirror.
Avoid scratching the film area with hard objects during daily use and when
washing the vehicle.
Application of Antibacterial Product
Haptex
Haptex synthetic leather with antibacterial properties by means of a functional layer
is based on Biomaster AT300 (active ingredient silver chloride CAS-No. 7783-90-
6) for use in automotive interior parts (eg. seats, IP, CNSL, pillars) cladding:
Antimicrobial product protection against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria
(eg. Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli according to GB/T 31402 or ISO
22196). No addition precautions need to be taken when the driver and passengers
use the vehicle normally.
Fabric
Fabric with antibacterial properties is based on SILVADUR™ 960 Flex Antimicrobial,
a polymeric system incorporating a silver ion antimicrobial agent (active ingredient
CAS-No. 7761-88-8) for use in automotive interior parts: Antimicrobial product
protection against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria (eg. Staphylococcus
aureus and Escherichia coli according to GB/T 20944). No additional precautions
need to be taken when the driver and passengers use the vehicle normally.
Steering Wheel Leather
Artificial leather with antibacterial properties by means of a functional layer is
based on Biomaster AT300 (active ingredient silver chloride CAS-No. 7783-90-6)
for use in the steering wheel surface cover: Antimicrobial product protection
against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria (eg. Staphylococcus aureus and
Escherichia coli according to GB/T 31402 or ISO 22196). No additional precautions
need to be taken when the driver and passengers use the vehicle normally.
Paint
1. Novaron AG1100 coatings with antibacterial properties are based on silver
sodium hydrogen zirconium phosphate (active ingredient CAS-No. 265647-11-
8) for use in the automotive interior paint parts (eg. driver airbag cover):
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
262/295


Antimicrobial product protection against gram-positive and gram-negative
bacteria (eg. Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli according to GB/T
21866). No additional precautions need to be taken when the driver and
passenger use the vehicle normally.
2. PETER coatings with antibacterial properties are based on silver phosphate
glass (active ingredient CAS-No. 308069-39-8) for use in automotive interior
paint parts (eg. ICS holder paint): Antimicrobial product protection against
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria (eg. Staphylococcus aureus and
Escherichia coli according to ISO 22196). No additional precautions need to be
taken when the driver and passenger use the vehicle normally.
Filter
Filter with antibacterial properties by means of a functional layer is based on
dimethyltetradecyl[3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl]ammonium chloride (N-46279) (active
ingredient CAS-No. 41591-87-1) for use in air handling/ air conditioning systems:
Bacteriostatic and fungistatic properties against a multitude of gram-positive and
gram-negative bacteria, yeast and fungi according to ISO 846 and JIS L 1902. No
additional precautions need to be taken when placing the filter on the market.
Evaporator core & Inner condenser coating
Hydrophilic composite coating with antimicrobial properties by means of a
functional layer based on active substances CAS-No.7631-86-9, 26530-20-1 and
4299-07-4 was attached to the surface of the evaporator and inner condenser.
The coating shows great antimildew properties for Aspergillus Niger, Penicillium sp.
and antibacterial properties for Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus
according to GB 21551.2. No additional precautions need to be taken when placing
the evaporator and inner condenser on the market.
Vehicle Information
OEM
NIO
NIO Hotline
Refer to the contact table
NIO website
Refer to the contact table
The vehicle nameplate is located under the B-pillar on the right side.
GUM185862
The vehicle brand logo can be found in the following places:
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
263/295


GUM185863
Instrumentation and Controls
GUM185864
GUM185865
1. Electronic switch for inner door handle 8. Emergency call and reading lights
2. Window control panel
9. NOMI Smart Assistant
3. Switches on the left side of the
steering wheel
10. Touchscreen display
4. Turn signal and headlights stalk
11. Gears and central control panel
5. Digital instrument cluster display
12. Central control wireless charging
board
6. Switches on the right side of the
steering wheel
13. Accelerator pedal
7. Wiper and washer stalk
14. Brake pedal
Warning Sign Information
No.
Name
Warning Sign
Description
1
High voltage
electricity
warning sign
GUM168852
Danger! Do not touch
high voltage
components.
2
High voltage
component
warning sign 1
GUM180215
High voltage
components. Danger! Do
not touch high voltage
components without
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
264/295


wearing protective
equipment to avoid
electric shock.
3
High voltage
component
warning sign 2
GUM180216
High voltage
components. Danger! Do
not touch high voltage
components without
wearing protective
equipment to avoid
electric shock and
burns.
4
High voltage
battery pack
warning sign
GUM181499
Cautions for using the
high voltage battery
pack
5
High voltage
cable warning
sign
GUM168856
High voltage
components are
connected with orange
high voltage harnesses.
Do not touch high
voltage components
without wearing
protective equipment.
6
Mutual
compatibility
identifiers used
for charging the
car
GUM171956
GUM171957
GUM171958
Mutual compatibility
identifiers to guide you
charging the car are
found in the car’s
charging port. When
selecting the charging
gun, you must make
sure the identifier on the
charging gun equals one
of the identifiers found
in the car’s charging
port, either C, K or
L.Voltage ranges related
to those identifiers are
as follows:
C: AC ≤ 480V
K: DC 50V to 500V
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
265/295


L: DC 200V to
920V
Vehicle Identification Number (VIN)
The vehicle identification number (VIN) is embossed on the floorboard under the
front passenger seat.
GUM185866
The vehicle identification number (VIN) can be found in the following places:
GUM185867
1. Inner side of the hood
2. On top of the front drive motor
3. On the left side of the instrument panel crossbeam
4. Bottom left corner of the front windshield
5. Under the B-pillar on the right side of the body
6. Under the right rear door frame
7. Above the end of the rear drive motor
8. Above the rear floorboard
9. On the right side of the liftgate
You can also read the vehicle identification number (VIN) with a diagnostic tool (NIO
Diagnostic System Generation II (BD2)) that is compatible with the vehicle:
1. Connect the diagnostic tool to the vehicle diagnostic port, and turn on the
diagnostic tool.
GUM185868
2. Start the diagnostic tool and log in to the main interface of the diagnostic
tool.
3. The diagnostic tool will automatically read the vehicle identification number
and display it on the current interface of the diagnostic tool.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
266/295


Drive motor identification mark
The front drive motor identification mark is located under the motor.
GUM185892
The rear drive motor identification mark is located on the lower left side of the
motor.
GUM185893
Recommended Fluids and Capacities
Item
Specifications
Capacity
Brake fluid
DOT4
0.9L
Coolant
-40 °C OAT (glycol
aqueous solution with
inhibitor)
12.9L (100kWh - Jiangsu
Contemporary Amperex
Technology Limited)
12.81L (100kWh - CALB
Co., Ltd.)
13.15L (75kWh)
Refrigerant
R1234yf
1,000g
Windshield washer fluid
Freezing point < -30 °C
4L
Gear box oil
Castrol BOT350M3
0.8L (front) 1L (rear)
E-Powertrain System Information
GUM185873
1. High-voltage DC converter integrated component
2. Emergency HV cut-off plug
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
267/295


3. Airbag
4. Curtain airbag gas cylinder
5. Structural reinforcement
6. Curtain airbag
7. Charge port
8. Drive Motor
9. Air conditioning HV electric heater
10. High-voltage battery
11. Rear HV power distribution unit
12. 12V battery
13. Airbag control unit
14. Air conditioning compressor
15. Seat belt pre-tensioner
High-voltage battery
The vehicle is equipped with a lithium-ion high-voltage battery. Be sure not to
damage the high-voltage battery when lifting the vehicle. Take extra care not to
break the battery's bottom plate when using rescue tools.
Warning
Before repairing, disassembling, and installing high-voltage components, it is
necessary to disconnect the power supply and confirm that the emergency
power cut-off switch and 12V power supplies are disconnected. After
disconnecting the power, let your vehicle stand still for more than 5 minutes.
Personnel without corresponding qualifications are prohibited from operating
high-voltage components. Operators must wear insulated protective
equipment such as insulated gloves that meet the requirements. They are not
allowed to carry or wear any metal items.
Drive Motor
The electric drive system is responsible for the power output of the vehicle, which
can convert the DC energy of the high-voltage battery pack into mechanical torque
in a controllable way, and transmit it to the wheels to drive the vehicle. In addition,
in the braking state, the electric drive system can also regenerate braking energy to
charge the high-voltage battery pack. The vehicle is equipped with two electric
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
268/295


drive systems, of which the front electric drive system is installed on the front sub-
frame, and the rear electric drive system is installed on the rear sub-frame.
12V battery
The 12V battery powers the SRS, windows, locks, touchscreens, vehicle lighting, etc.
Airbag
The vehicle airbag system includes frontal airbags and side airbags. The frontal
airbags include front row head airbags, of which the driver airbag is located inside
the trim cover of the steering wheel, and the front passenger airbag is located
inside the instrument panel; the side airbags include front side airbags (located on
the outer side of the front seats, and the inner side of the driver seat), and curtain
airbags (located above the doors on both sides, in the ceiling area from the A-pillar
to the C-pillar, where there are curtain airbag gas cylinders inside). The word
"AIRBAG" is marked on the places where the airbag is placed to remind you that
there is an airbag herein.
Vehicle Dimension
GUM185876
Item
Numerical value
Length A (mm)
4,790
4,913 (with tow hitch extended)
Width B (mm) (without side mirrors) 1,960
Height C (mm)
1,499
Wheelbase D (mm)
2,888
Front track E (mm)
1,685
Rear track F (mm)
1,685
Front suspension G (mm)
897
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
269/295


Rear suspension H (mm)
1,005
1128 (with tow hitch extended)
Ground clearance (mm)
135
Approach angle
13°
Departure angle
14°
Number of seats
5
Mass Parameters
Item
75 kWh
100 kWh
Unladen mass (kg)
2,140
2,160
Mass of vehicle with bodywork in running
order (including coolant, oil, fuel, tools,
spare wheel and driver) (kg)
2,215
2,235
Distribution of this
mass among the
axles (kg)
Front Axle:
1,121
1,135
Rear Axle:
1,094
1,100
Technically permissible maximum laden
mass stated by the manufacturer (kg)
2,690
2,690
Distribution of this
mass among the
axles and, in the
case of a semi-
trailer or center-
axle trailer, load on
the coupling point
(kg)
Front Axle:
1,237
1,237
Rear Axle:
1,453
1,453
Technically
permissible
maximum mass on
each axle (kg)
Front Axle:
1,264
1,264
Rear Axle:
1,480
1,480
Caution
When a trailer is installed, it's still necessary to ensure that:
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
270/295


Technically permissible maximum laden mass no more than 2690 kg;
Technically permissible maximum mass on Front Axle no more than 1264 kg,
and on Rear Axle no more than 1480 kg.
Wheel and Tire Specifications
Item
Numerical value
Specifications
245/45R19 102V XL
245/40R20 99W XL
Tire pressure (bar)
2.6 (no load)
Camber angle
-0.37±0.5°
Total front camber angle
0±0.5°
Front toe-in angle (per wheel)
0.21±0.1°
Total front toe-in angle
0±0.05°
Front kingpin caster angle
4.17±0.5°
Total front kingpin caster angle 0±0.5°
Rear camber angle
-0.96±0.35°
Total rear camber angle
0±0.5°
Rear toe-in angle (per wheel)
0.08±0.05°
Thrust angle
0±0.15°
Steering wheel angle
0±1.5°
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
271/295


Wheel bolt torque (N·m)
140
Note: The tire specifications are subject to the actual configuration of the vehicle.
Caution
To ensure driving safety, it is recommended to replace the wheel nuts or bolts after
removing and installing them 20 times.
Tire Markings
All tire signs and features are marked on the sidewall of the tire.
GUM187377
1. Product Name
2. Rated load mark
3. Tire Size
A tire marked 245/40R20 means that the tire width is 245 mm, the aspect
ratio is 40, and R means that the tire has a radial structure and the wheel
diameter is 20 inches.
4. Tire load index and rated speed
The tire load represents the corresponding load weight of the tire, and the
rated speed is the maximum speed that the tire can be used for a long time.
Tire
Load
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
Load
Weight
750
kg
775
kg
800
kg
825
kg
850
kg
875
kg
900
kg
925
kg
950
kg
975
kg
1000
kg
1030
kg
1060
kg
Q
R
S
T
U
H
V
W
Y
Rated
Speed
160
km/h
170
km/h
180
km/h
190
km/h
200
km/h
210
km/h
240
km/h
270
km/h
300
km/h
5. Maximum tire load and maximum inflation pressure allowed (not for normal
driving)
6. DOT tire identification number
Starts with the letters DOT, followed by numbers/letters, where the first 2
digits represent the code of the tire manufacturing plant, the second 2 digits
represent the tire size, the next 4 digits represent the tire type code, and the
last 4 digits represent the year and week of manufacturing. For example, 1721
means the 17th week of 2021. In the event of a recall of defective tires, this
information may be used to contact consumers.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
272/295


Motor Parameters
Item
Numerical value
Front
Rear
Drive motor type
Three-phase asynchronous
motor
Three-phase permanent
magnet synchronous motor
Drive motor model
YS150S001
TZ210S001
Drive motor rated
power/torque (kW/N·m)
30/60
70/150
Drive motor peak
power/torque (kW/N·m)
150/280
210/420
Brake and Suspension Specs
Item
Numerical value
Thickness of brake pad
(mm)
Front
Rear
2.5~8.7
2~8
Brake disc (mm)
Front
Rear
32~30
20～18
High-voltage Battery Parameters
Item
100 kWh (Jiangsu
Contemporary
100 kWh (CALB
Co., Ltd.)
75 kwh
70 kWh
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
273/295


Amperex
Technology
Limited)
High-
voltage
battery
cell
Type
Ternary lithium
ion battery
Ternary lithium
ion battery
Ternary lithium
ion/lithium iron
phosphate battery
Ternary lithium
ion battery
Rated
voltage
(V)
3.73
3.74
3.73/3.22
3.65
Rated
capacity
(Ah)
276
137
237/192
100
High-
voltage
battery
pack
system
Rated
voltage
(V)
358
358
386
350
Rated
capacity
(Ah)
280
280
195
200
L x W x
H (mm) 2,062x1,539x185.6 2,062x1,539x183.1 2,062x1,539x185.6 2,062x1,539x136
Number
of cells
in
battery
pack
96
192
118
192
Weight
of
battery
pack
(kg)
555
555
535
525
Tire Inflation
Warning
Using underinflated or overinflated tires will increase the risk of accident and injury.
To ensure driving safety, please check the tire pressure on a regular basis. When
checking the tire pressure, make sure it is the cold tire pressure (the tire
temperature should be the same as the ambient temperature, or the tire should be
cooled off for 3 hours after driving). The recommended cold tire pressure is marked
on the door frame of the driver side. If hot tire is measured, the tire pressure is
generally about 0.3 bar higher than that of cold tires.
GUM185894
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
274/295


Over-inflated tires may compromise the comfort of the vehicle, and are easily
damaged on uneven road surfaces. In severe cases, there is even a risk of a tire
blowout occurring, threatening the safety of the vehicle. Under-inflated tires may
cause uneven tire wear, affecting the maneuverability of the vehicle and draining
the battery.
Caution
If the tires used on the vehicle are self-repairing tires, the vehicle can still
continue to run within a certain speed range (below 120 km/h) when the
puncture width is less than 5 mm and the center display shows that the tire
pressure is normal. However, self-repairing tires cannot be used as permanent
tire repair measures. If any tire is found to have a nail in it or is seriously
damaged, please contact the NIO Service Center in a timely manner for tire
inspection or replacement.
When repairing, please try to orient the tire so that the punctured spot is at
the top of the tire.
Tire sealant can only be used to repair the tread area.
To inflate the tires using the air pump in the emergency kit:
1. Park the vehicle on a safe road, put on your reflective vest and place a
warning triangle.
2. Open the vehicle tool cover in the rear trunk, and take out the air pump.
3. Take out the air pump hose on the side of the air pump and connect it to the
tire valve.
4. Take out the power plug of the air pump and connect it to the 12V power
supply of the vehicle.
5. Make sure that the vehicle is powered on, turn on the power switch of the air
pump, and start to inflate the tires. When the tire pressure reaches 2.6 bar,
manually turn off the power of the air pump and disconnect it from the
vehicle's power supply.
6. After inflation is complete, disconnect the air pump hose from the tire valve,
and put everything away.
Direct Tire Pressure Monitoring System (dTPMS)
The vehicle is equipped with a direct tire pressure monitoring system (dTPMS). If
the pressure or temperature of one or more tires is abnormal, the tire pressure
warning indicator
GUM168905 will light up on the digital instrument cluster display
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
275/295


along with the location of the faulty tire, alerting you to stop as soon as possible
and check the tires, and to inflate/deflate the tires to the correct air pressure.
In the event of abnormal tire pressure or rapid air leakage, the tire pressure warning
indicator 
GUM168906 will light up along with a "Beep" tone, alerting you to check
the tires; if the Direct Tire Pressure Monitoring System (dTPMS) fails or the tire
temperature exceeds the safe value, the tire pressure warning indicator
GUM168907 will flash for 75 seconds and then stay on, along with a "Beep" tone.
In this case, please stop the vehicle as soon as possible and contact the NIO
Service Center immediately.
You can tap My ET5 on the main screen of the center display to check the current
tire pressure detected by the direct tire pressure monitoring system. If it shows that
the current tire pressure is "--", it means that no valid tire pressure value has been
obtained. In such a case, drive at a speed of above 25 km/h for 10 minutes and
check again. If the tire pressure is too low, the tire is overheated or the direct tire
pressure monitoring system has failed, the corresponding tire will be highlighted
along with the specific fault information.
The Direct Tire Pressure Monitoring System (dTPMS) is based on tire temperature
and atmospheric temperature. At high altitudes or in cold regions, you may need to
inflate the tires to a slightly higher pressure to clear the low tire pressure warning
message.
If radio transmitting devices (e.g., wireless headsets, walkie-talkies) are used in or
near the vehicle, the operation of the Direct Tire Pressure Monitoring System
(dTPMS) may be subject to interference.
Anti-skid Chain
The vehicle is not equipped with anti-skid chains, which can be purchased
separately if necessary. Precautions for using anti-skid chains:
Unsuitable anti-skid chains will damage the tires, wheels and braking system
of the vehicle. Please carefully check the specifications of the original tires
and the relevant instructions of the anti-skid chain manufacturer. For original
tires, only rear tires are equipped with half-pack anti-skid chains, and the rest
of the tires are not suitable for anti-skid chains.
When installing the anti-skid chains, do not drive faster than 50 km/h or the
limit speed specified by the anti-skid manufacturer, whichever is lower.
Drive with caution to avoid road bumps, holes, sharp turns, or locked wheels
which may affect the vehicle in an adverse manner.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
276/295


To prevent tire damage and excessive wear of the anti-skid chains, be sure to
remove the e.g., anti-skid chains when driving on snow-free roads.
AutoSock
Vehicle does not come with AutoSock, but you can purchase them separately.
Please pay attention to the following points when using AutoSock:
Improper AutoSock can damage the tires, wheels, and brake system of the
vehicle. Please carefully check the specifications of the original equipment
(OE) tires and the relevant instructions provided by the AutoSock
manufacturer. AutoSock can be used on all the four wheels of the vehicle.
AutoSock is only used on ice and snow. When driving onto dry roads (asphalt
roads, cement roads, dirt roads, etc.), remove it immediately. AutoSock should
be removed when the vehicle is parked.
When the vehicle starts, ice and snow particles on the ground may be thrown
up due to the increased grip of AutoSock. Avoid standing at the rear of the
vehicle.
No need to turn off the vehicle's electronic stability system when AutoSock is
in use.
The speed of the vehicle must not exceed 50 km/h with AutoSock installed.
Please also avoid sharp acceleration, braking, turning, and other aggressive
operations, otherwise, there is a high risk of damage to AutoSock.
If any abnormal noise is heard during driving with AutoSock installed, stop the
vehicle in a safe position and, while ensuring personal safety, check whether
AutoSock is installed correctly.
When the black fabric in the bottom layer below the white road contact fabric
is exposed, stop using AutoSock, and replace it with new ones.
AutoSock should not be used as direct substitutes for winter tires.
After use, dry AutoSock, place it in their original packaging, and store it in a
dry place. Due to the ease of use of the material, AutoSock can be washed at
room temperature to keep the road contact fabric clean but should not be
ironed.
Winter Tires
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
277/295


The vehicle is configured with summer tires. In cold environments, tire performance
is reduced, grip is reduced and susceptibility to impact damage is increased. High
performance tires may temporarily stiffen in cold weather, and a rolling noise may
be heard for the first few kilometers before the tires warm up. To have your vehicle
perform optimally, using winter tires in winter is recommended. Please choose the
applicable winter tires or stud tires according to the national laws in your country.
It is recommended to install winter tires for the vehicle when the ambient
temperature is below about 7 °C. The driving performance of summer tires will be
reduced at low temperatures, and the comfort will also be reduced. For example,
there may be rattling noises caused by the tires when maneuvering on dry and
slippery surfaces, or when accelerating out of corners.
Extremely cold temperatures below -15 °C may cause permanent damage to
summer tires.
Use winter tires of the same brand and tread pattern on all wheels to ensure safe
maneuvering characteristics.
Tire Size
Load Index
245/45R19 102
245/40R20 99
Caution
The tires will be damaged if the vehicle speed is above the maximum speed
rating. As a result, the tires are likely to burst. Please do not drive over the
speed limit allowed by the tires.
Winter tires with a tread pattern depth of less than 4 millimeters must be
replaced immediately. These tires are no longer suitable for winter because
they cannot provide sufficient grip. As a result, you may lose control of the
vehicle and potentially cause an accident.
Tire Repair
Warning
Do not drive with a punctured tire, as it may lead to a tire blowout and
endanger your safety.
Tire sealant can irritate the eyes and skin. Keep out of reach of children. When
using tire sealant, ignition, open flames, and smoking are prohibited.
If the tire sealant gets on the skin or in the eyes, rinse the affected part of the
body off i immediately and thoroughly with plenty of water. Change soiled
clothing immediately. Get medical attention immediately in the event of an
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
278/295


allergic reaction. If sealant was swallowed, thoroughly rinse out the mouth
without delay and drink plenty of water. Do not induce vomiting.
Caution
Before using tire sealant, please check the expiry date marked on the tire
sealant tank to ensure that it is used before its expiry date.
When the puncture width of a 19-inch tire is less than 6 mm, it is
recommended to take out the puncturing object and repair the tire. If the
puncture width is greater than 6 mm or the tire is even more seriously
damaged, please do not continue to drive, and contact the NIO Service Center
in a timely manner to replace the tire.
If the tire is repaired while the puncturing object is not taken out, the tire can
make abnormal noises while driving after the repair, and air leakage may occur
during long-distance driving.
If self-repairing tires or silent cotton tires are used, it is not recommended to
repair tires with tire sealant. Please contact the NIO Service Center.
Caution
If the tires used on the vehicle are self-repairing tires, the vehicle can still
continue to run within a certain speed range (below 120 km/h) when the
puncture width is less than 5 mm and the center display shows that the tire
pressure is normal. However, self-repairing tires cannot be used as permanent
tire repair measures. If any tire is found to have a nail in it or is seriously
damaged, please contact the NIO Service Center in a timely manner for tire
inspection or replacement.
When repairing, please try to orient the tire so that the punctured spot is at
the top of the tire.
Tire sealant can only be used to repair the tread area.
Park the vehicle on a flat and solid road and put it in Park, stay away from busy and
congested roads, then put on your reflective vest and place the warning triangle,
turn on the hazard warning lights, and use the tire sealant and air pump in the
vehicle tools to repair the tire:
1. Park the vehicle on a safe road, and place the warning triangle.
2. Open the vehicle tool cover in the rear trunk, and take out the tire sealant tank
and air pump.
3. Stick the speed limit sign on the tire sealant canister onto the steering wheel
to remind yourself not to exceed 80 km/h when driving.
4. Connect the tire sealant canister to the wheel, remove the tire valve dust cap,
and connect the fill tube on the tire sealant canister to the tire valve.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
279/295


5. Take out the power plug of the air pump and connect it to the 12 V power
supply of the vehicle.
6. Make sure the vehicle is powered on, turn on the tire inflator and start to
inject tire sealant into the tire. Observe the pressure gauge, and turn it off
when the pointer reaches ≥2.2 bar (which will take around five to 10 minutes).
Turn off the tire inflator and disconnect the power plug from the 12V power
socket.
Note
When the tire inflater begins operating, the pressure gauge will initially display
a high pressure up to six bar, after which the pressure will drop to a normal
range.
7. Disconnect the inflation tube from the tire valve, and put everything away.
8. Drive for 3-10 kilometers (about 5-10 minutes) at a speed not higher than 80
km/h, so that the tire sealant can be evenly spread inside the tire and block
the puncture hole.
9. Park the vehicle on a safe road, set up the warning triangle, and check the tire
pressure readings on the center display. Continue driving if the tire pressure is
≥2.2 bar. Inflate the tire to ≥2.2 bar if the tire is under-inflated and drive the
vehicle at a speed no higher than 80 km/h for 3 to 10 km (or around 5 to ten
minutes). Check the tire pressure again. If the tire pressure is still below 2.2
bar which means the tire is severely damaged or the tire sealant cannot seal
the tire, park the vehicle in a safe place and contact NIO immediately.
Caution
If the tire pressure cannot reach the designated range within 12 minutes
during the tire repair process, this indicates severe damage. Please park your
vehicle safely and call for assistance.
Repairing with tire sealant is only for temporary emergency processing. After
repairing the tire, you can continue driving for up to 200 kilometers or 3 days.
Please go to the nearest workshop as soon as possible to have the tire
repaired and the tire sealant wiped dry.
After repairing the tire by using tire sealant, please contact the NIO Service
Center for replacement of the inflation pump hose assembly.
Tire Replacement
When the vehicle is subject to a severe air leakage that it cannot be driven
anymore, park the vehicle on a flat and solid road and put it in Park, stay away from
busy and congested roads, then put on your reflective vest and place the warning
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
280/295


triangle, turn on the hazard warning lights, then contact NIO Service Center for a
tire replacement.
Warning
When replacing a tire, the new tire must comply with the specifications of the
original one. Using a tire with different specifications may affect the vehicle’s
handling and result in a loss of vehicle control.
Never get underneath the vehicle when it is lifted on a jack as this may cause
severe injury or even death.
Do not lift the vehicle when people are inside.
The vehicle can only be lifted at specified lift points on the vehicle's underside.
Do not place any object above or underneath the jack when it is lifting the
vehicle.
Never use a jack to lift the vehicle on an uphill or downhill slope or on a
roadway that slopes to one side.
Jacks should only be used to raise vehicles when changing tires.
How to replace the tire:
1. Have a jack and a spare tire of the right specification ready for the tire
replacement.
2. Place a block in front of the tire diagonally to the flat tire to prevent the
vehicle from sliding.
3. Use the bolt cover remover in the emergency kit to remove the bolt covers,
and loosen the bolts counterclockwise with the wheel wrench.
GUM185914
Caution
There is a special protective coating on the exterior of the rim. During the
disassembly and assembly of bolts, tires or rims, the operating area of the rim
shall be properly protected to prevent the surface of the rim from being
accidentally scratched by hard objects.
4. Place the jack below the correct jacking spot on the vehicle.
GUM185916
Warning
Make sure the jack is positioned correctly under the jack point. Failure to do
so may damage the vehicle, or the vehicle may slip off the jack and cause
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
281/295


injury.
5. Jack the vehicle up to a tire changing height. As the jack touches the vehicle
and jacks it up, double check to make sure that the jack is in the correct
position.
GUM185918
6. Remove the wheel bolts and replace the tire. When installing the wheel, make
sure the bolts are aligned with the mounting holes, and that the metal side of
the wheel is in proper contact with the mounting surface.
7. After installing the wheel bolts, lower the vehicle completely to the ground
(using the jack), then use a wrench to tighten all the bolts clockwise, and then
use a torque wrench to tighten the vehicle bolts to the specified torque value.
8. Check the tire pressure after the tire is replaced, inflate to the specified tire
pressure if necessary, then install the tire valve cap.
9. Put the tools, jack, and the flat tires away in a secure manner.
Set Up Warning Signs
In the event of an emergency, drive the vehicle to a safe area while ensuring safety,
then step on the brake pedal to stop the vehicle; put the vehicle in Park, and turn on
the hazard warning lights on the center console to alert other drivers and
passersby.
GUM185920
1. Park gear switch
2. Hazard warning lights
Open the cover at the bottom of the rear trunk's storage space, and inside you will
see the emergency kit, take out the warning triangle and reflective vest, put on the
reflective vest and place the warning triangle within 50 meters to 100 meters behind
the vehicle (when it's on an expressway, place it 150 meters behind the vehicle;
when it's at night, place it 100 meters further than the normal distance; in the event
of rain and fog, place it 200 meters behind the vehicle).
GUM185921
How to assemble the warning triangle:
GUM181055
1. Unfold the bracket under the triangle.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
282/295


2. Unfold the sides of the triangle.
3. Fasten the snap button on the top of the triangle.
Call for Road Assistance
In case of accidents such as a vehicle collision, water soaking, battery pack fire,
etc., after setting up the warning signs, please leave the vehicle as soon as possible
while ensuring the safety of the surrounding environment and maintain a safe
distance (over 15 meters), then call the NIO Hotline for road assistance, and the
Road Assistance team will come to help you as soon as possible.
Warning
In the event of a battery fire risk, the vehicle will automatically cut off power and
the instrument cluster and center display will display a warning message. Make sure
the surrounding area is safe and promptly leave the vehicle to call for help.
If the vehicle is connected to the network, you can press the SOS button on
the roof to call for road assistance (press+hold once, or press twice), and you
can cancel the call on the center display within 8 seconds after making the
call. The backlight of the SOS button indicates the status of the SOS feature:
a steady green light means that the SOS feature is available; a flashing green
light means that road assistance is being called; a steady red light or a
flashing red light means that the SOS feature is unavailable, in such a
situation you need to contact NIO Service Center immediately.
GUM185922
Note
When your vehicle is connected to the network, if an accident occurs and the
airbag is deployed or the seat belt pretensioner is triggered, your vehicle will call for
rescue automatically to protect your life.
The 112-based E-Call In-vehicle System
The 112-based eCall in-vehicle system is mandatory for new vehicle models in all
EU countries. In the event of a severe accident, the eCall system can connect you
to an appropriate PSAP (Public Safety Answering Point) via an audio link
automatically if the vehicle safety system is triggered, or manually if you press the
SOS button on the roof console.
The 112-based eCall in-vehicle system is activated by default. It is activated
automatically when the activation level for seat belt tensioners or airbags is reached
in the event of a severe accident. The 112-based eCall in-vehicle system can also
be activated manually, if needed. To activate the eCall manually, press the SOS
button on the roof console for over 500 milliseconds and release the button within
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
283/295


10 seconds. The manual trigger is designed in such a way as to avoid mis-
operation. To terminate the calling, press and release the SOS button again within
five seconds after it is pressed the first time.
In the event of a critical system malfunction, the 112-based eCall in-vehicle system
may be impaired. The backlight of the SOS button indicates the status of the
emergency call. Solid green indicates the eCall system functions normally; flashing
green indicates an emergency call is in progress; flashing red indicates the eCall
system has a minor fault but can still be activated; solid red indicates the eCall
system has a major fault and cannot be activated. In this case, you can find the
fault notification on the center display, and contact NIO if needed.
The processing of personal data through the 112-based eCall in-vehicle system is
in line with the personal data protection rules stipulated in Directives 95/46/EC (1)
and 2002/58/EC (2) of the European Parliament and of the Council, and in
particular, is based on the necessity to protect the vital interests of the individuals
in accordance with Article 7(d) of Directive 95/46/EC (3). The processing of such
data is strictly limited to the purpose of handling the emergency call made to the
single European emergency number 112 in emergency situations within the meaning
of Article 5(2) of Regulation (EU) 2015/758.
The 112-based E-Call in-vehicle system may collect and process only the following
data:
Vehicle Identification Number
Vehicle type (passenger vehicle)
Vehicle propulsion storage type (gasoline/diesel/CNG/LPG/electric/hydrogen)
Vehicle last three locations and direction of travel. The recent vehicle locations
are selected by random so as to ensure that the IVS is not traceable and not
subject to any constant tracking.
Estimated number of occupants onboard
Log file of E-Call activation of the system and its timestamp
Recipients of data processed by the 112-based eCall in-vehicle system are the
relevant public safety answering points of the area where the vehicle is located. The
data may be shared with other parties such as police stations, fire stations,
hospitals limited for emergency aid purposes.
The 112-based eCall in-vehicle system is designed in such a way as to ensure that:
Data stored in the system is not available outside the system before an eCall
is triggered.
The system is not traceable and not subject to any constant tracking in its
normal operation status.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
284/295


Data stored in the system is automatically and continuously removed.
The vehicle location data is constantly overwritten in the internal memory of
the system so as to keep the last three up-to-date locations of the vehicle
necessary for the normal functioning of the system.
The log of activity data in the system is kept for no longer than necessary for
attaining the purpose of handling the emergency call and in any case no
longer than 13 hours after an emergency call is triggered.
With regard to the arrangements for exercising data subjects' rights as well as the
contact service responsible for handling access requests, please kindly contact NIO
for support. For contact details, please refer to our Connected Vehicle Privacy
Notice or contact details in this manual. NIO GmbH
Data Protection
Montgelasstrasse 14
81679 Munich
Germany
privacy.eu@nio.io
00 8000 999 6699 (EU) / 800 24 789 (Norway)
TPS eCall
TPS ecall is a third party supported eCall service regard to 112-based eCall in EU.
ARC Europe SA will be acting as the TPS agency for NIO TPS eCall, operating the
NIO TPS eCall with 24-hours, 7-days availability.
TPS eCall agent will deliver users with services in the corresponding language
according to the language set in the user's vehicle. TPS eCall agent evaluates if it is
a fake or real emergency before addressing the relevant PSAPs, then cancel the
mis-call to help avoid legal risk of mis-connecting to PSAP. When the incidents
occur, the TPS agent can help the user redirect RSA (Road Side Assist service) or
advise the user to contact insurance companies providing RSA; if the incident is
evaluated to be a crash or an emergency, TPS agent transfers the MSD to the local
Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP) and track the rescue progress in time. During
the rescue process, TPS agents can act as a language translation function between
the user and the local rescue staff to avoid language barriers in emergency
situations.
TPS eCall can be set by main user on Setting - General section in the setting
interface of the ICS of the vehicle replacing the statutory eCall. The default option
will be TPS eCall. Once the customer makes a choice, the choice will be recorded
within the user profile.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
285/295


NIO TPS eCall can only be ended by the TPS agent. Please inform the agent if the
call is connected by mistake and the agent will end the call for you.
The necessary vehicle data will be collected from the vehicle and sent to NIO TPS,
then forwarded to the TPS provider to handle the emergency when TPS eCall is
triggered by user's active triggering, collision triggering and EDA triggering.
Uploaded TPS eCall data will be stored for 6 months to allow NIO to perform
accident responding and handling.
After contacting the driver and passengers, TPS provider will pass the necessary
data to the local PSAP in local language for rescue purposes.
The TPS provider may collect and process only the following data, then send it to
the local PSAP when it is needed:
Driving service information
Crash type (front, side, rear, etc.) and delta Velocity (Vx and Vy). (Note:
Delta Velocity is the collection of change of velocity every 10 ms at X-
axis and Y-axis during 250 ms after crash incident.)
Current vehicle location and direction
Vehicle speed
Vehicle propulsion storage type
Airbag triggered (How many airbags are triggered after crash)
Language set up on the center display
Number of passengers
Contact information
User's name (Optional, if the user is registered)
User's email address (Optional, if the user is registered)
User's mobile number (Optional, if the user is registered)
Vehicle basic information
Make/Model/Color/Model year
VIN number
Jump Start
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
286/295


If the vehicle cannot be started normally due to a depleted 12V battery, you can
start the vehicle by connecting it to the 12V battery of another vehicle through a
jumper cable.
Caution
When starting the vehicle with jumper cables, it is crucial to avoid contact
between two vehicles. If the 12V battery-positive terminals of the two vehicles
are connected, the current may run right away, causing damage to the
vehicles.
When connecting the jumper cables to the vehicles, be sure to connect the
positive terminals first, followed by the negative terminals.
When using jumper cables to initiate an external power source, voltage
requirements apply. Please contact NIO Service Center when the battery is
depleted to prevent damage to the battery.
How to jump start a vehicle:
1. Put the vehicle in Park, make sure that the 12V battery is powered off and
connected to the electrical system of the vehicle correctly, open the hood, and
locate the 12V battery of the depleted vehicle A.
GUM185923
2. Connect one end of the red cable to the positive (+) terminal of the 12V
battery of the depleted vehicle A.
GUM185924
3. Connect the other end of the red cable to the positive (+) terminal of the 12V
battery of the supplying vehicle B.
4. Connect one end of the black cable to the negative (-) terminal of the 12V
battery of the supplying vehicle B.
5. Connect the other end of the black cable to the good ground point on the 12V
battery of the depleted vehicle A.
6. Start the supplying vehicle, wait a few minutes and then start the depleted
vehicle. See if the depleted vehicle A can be started normally.
7. Disconnect jumper cables in the reverse order of how they were connected,
and put them away.
Emergency Unlocking from the Outside
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
287/295


When the vehicle cannot be unlocked by conventional methods (such as a smart key
fob, keyless entry, NIO app, or NFC), you can use the emergency key to unlock the
driver's door.
Caution
Do not leave the emergency key in your vehicle. Please keep it safe in case of
emergency.
To use the emergency key:
1. Pull out the metal key portion of the emergency key while toggling the switch
on the emergency key.
2. Push the front end of the exterior handle on the driver's door.
3. Pull the door handle, and insert the emergency key into the lock. Rotate the
key counterclockwise to unlock the driver's door.
4. To lock the driver's door, rotate the key counterclockwise first for unlocking,
and then turn it clockwise.
Caution
After unlocking the driver door using the physical emergency key, if you need to
lock the doors using the Smart Key, you must first toggle the driver door once to
reset the door lock cylinder. This will prevent the driver door from remaining in an
unlocked state and ensure the security of the vehicle.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
288/295


Open the Door from the Inside in an Emergency
When the whole vehicle is locked, if you need to open the door in an emergency
(such as when the door handle electronic switch fails, or the vehicle is soaked in
water), pull the mechanical switch of the inner door handle once to open the
corresponding side door.
GUM185927
Caution
When the 12V battery of the vehicle is low on power, the physical emergency
key can only be used to unlock the door on the driver side. At such moments it
cannot be used to unlock the whole vehicle. The other doors can only be
unlocked and opened by pulling the mechanical switch for the inner door
handle.
The windows cannot be lowered when the door is opened using the
mechanical switch for the inner door handle because doing so would risk
damaging the window trim panel.
Neither rear door can be opened from inside when the child safety lock
function is enabled. They can only be opened from outside once the whole
vehicle is unlocked.
In the event of an accident that is of sufficient gravity to trigger airbag
deployment, the child safety lock on the rear door will unlock automatically.
Emergency Opening of Liftgate
GUM186598
Open the square block above the latch from the inside of the rear trunk, and then
use your fingers to toggle the button in the hole to open the liftgate.
Emergency Evacuation
In case of danger or emergency situations with the vehicle, please evacuate the
vehicle as soon as possible and call for assistance while ensuring personal safety.
Collision Accidents
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
289/295


If your vehicle is involved in a severe collision accident and you can safely exit the
vehicle, please leave the vehicle promptly and move to a safe area to avoid further
harm.
Vehicle Fire or Abnormal Temperature
If your vehicle is smoking, on fire or experiencing any other emergency situation,
quickly evacuate the vehicle and move to a safe area to ensure your personal
safety.
If your vehicle's center display shows warnings about abnormal vehicle or battery
pack malfunctions, please ensure your safety while parking the vehicle. Quickly exit
the vehicle and evacuate to a safe area to ensure your personal safety.
Vehicle Submerged in Water
If your vehicle gets trapped in a heavily flooded area, such as an underpass or a
low-lying road, promptly evacuate the vehicle and move to a safe area to ensure
your personal safety.
Severe Vehicle Breakdown
If your vehicle experiences a severe breakdown during driving or if the center
display indicates a serious vehicle malfunction, please ensure your safety while
parking the vehicle. Then, quickly exit the vehicle and call for assistance.
Miscellaneous
Other scenarios where it is necessary to evacuate the vehicle promptly.
First Aid Kit
If your vehicle is equipped with a first aid kit, the first aid kit will be located in the
side net pocket of the rear trunk. The first aid kit contains rescue items required for
emergencies. See the instructions in the first aid kit for specific directions.
The first aid kit is valid for 5 years . After expiration, please contact NIO to
purchase.
GUM194715
Protective Equipment for Rescue Operations
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
290/295


The vehicle E-powertrain system is driven by the high-voltage battery. In the event
of a serious collision, leakage of high-voltage electricity or battery fluid may occur;
therefore, the rescue operation on the vehicle should be undertaken by professional
rescuers who wear corresponding protective equipment to secure personal safety.
Warning
Remove all metal objects (such necklaces and watches) before carrying out any
operation. Failure to do so may increase the risk of electric shock.
Electrical Protection
Please wear the following protective equipment to avoid injury from high-voltage
electric shock:
Insulated rubber gloves (be able to insulate against voltage above 500V)
Goggles
Insulated rubber boots
Tools with insulated protective covers
Chemical Protection
In the event of a battery leakage or potential risk of battery leakage, please wear
the following protective equipment to prevent injury to your skin and face:
Protective face shield
Solvent resistant gloves
Cut off the High-voltage Circuit
To cut off the high-voltage circuit, first disconnect the emergency HV cut-off plug
(located in the left area of the front trunk), and then disconnect the 12V battery
negative terminal (located in the front trunk near the front windshield).
How to cut off the high-voltage circuit:
1. Pull the hood handle cover plate in the passenger compartment twice to
release the hood.
GUM185928
2. Lift the hood.
GUM185929
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
291/295


3. Disconnect the emergency high-voltage cut-off plug, then cut off the high-
voltage supply circuit, remove the plug and keep it in a safe place.
GUM185930
4. Disconnect the cable from the 12V battery negative terminal, and wrap it with
a protective layer after disconnection to prevent conduction due to accidental
contact from occurring.
GUM185931
Towing a Vehicle that Had an Accident
Caution
This vehicle is not suitable for traction with wheels on the ground. Do not use
a traction chain to tow the vehicle directly.
When the vehicle is on snow, mud, or sand, or when the wheels are locked and
unable to rotate freely, do not use a towing hook to tow the vehicle. Please
contact the NIO service center.
GUM185945
If you need the vehicle to be towed, please call a flatbed trailer to transport the
vehicle. How to tow a vehicle:
1. Take out the tow hitch from the emergency kit in the rear trunk.
GUM188369
2. Press the lower end of the front towing flap of the vehicle to open it (1 in the
picture), insert the tow hitch into the hole and rotate until the tow hitch is
firmly seated (2 in the picture). The rear tow hitch (if present) is installed in
the same way as the front tow hitch.
GUM185947
3. Press the brake pedal while the vehicle is in the Park gear, go to the Settings
interface from the control bar at the bottom of the center display, tap Driving
and Parking > Neutral Mode, then the vehicle will be released from the
parking brake and can be towed.
4. Power the vehicle off before towing, turn on the hazard warning lights, and
make sure that there is no one in the vehicle and lock the entire vehicle.
5. Install the tow chain on the tow hitch and slowly tow the vehicle onto the
flatbed.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
292/295


6. After the vehicle is towed to the designated location on the flatbed, use brake
stops and wheel straps to fix the tires.
7. Before having the vehicle transported on a flatbed, exit the Neutral Mode on
the center display to prevent the vehicle from being damaged due to bumps
during transportation.
Caution
Only when there is no safety risk to the vehicle can it be towed away from the
site. If the vehicle battery pack is deformed, leaking liquid, or emitting smoke,
safety risks shall be eliminated first.
If you are unable to enter the Neutral Mode normally, you can try restarting the
12V battery. If the parking brake cannot be released, the vehicle can be
transported in as short a distance as possible by using tire slides or wheeled
trailers.
Do not depress the brake pedal or accelerator pedal hard while exiting the
Neutral Mode on the center display.
When the parking brake is released and the vehicle can be towed, there is a
risk that the vehicle may slide down on a slope. If necessary, please use brake
wedges in conjunction.
Rescuing the Vehicle in Water
Caution
It is recommended not to stay in deep water for a long time (preferably not
exceeding the battery base plate) when the vehicle is wading, as it may cause
damage to the high-voltage components of the vehicle.
On the premise that the vehicle body and chassis are not damaged, there will be no
greater risk of electric shock caused by its short-time immersion in water.
However, when dealing with the submerged vehicle, the professional rescuers shall
wear appropriate rescue protective equipment. Under the condition of ensuring
insulation protection, pull the vehicle out of the water, open the door, power off the
vehicle, and then clean the water stains inside the vehicle. After checking for
electricity leakage, cut off the high-voltage circuit normally.
Warning
When dealing with submerged vehicles, failure to wear proper rescue protective
equipment by the rescuers can result in serious injury or even death.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
293/295


Rescuing the Vehicle on Fire
Warning
In the case of a vehicle fire, do not directly touch any part of the vehicle. All
rescue operations should be performed by professionals who must wear
appropriate personal protective equipment.
The gas stored in the side curtain airbag cylinder and the high pressure air
suspension tank may expand and explode under high temperatures. Please act
with caution to avoid injury.
If the vehicle fire doesn’t involve the high voltage battery, you can use the fire
extinguisher to put out the fire.
If the vehicle fire is caused by the high voltage battery or the high voltage battery is
overheated, deformed, cracked, or damaged in the fire, use a large amount of water
or foam extinguishing agent mixed with water (F-500 EA is recommended) to cool
down the high voltage battery. After the battery is completely cooled down (which
may take up to 24 hours), monitor it for one more hour to ensure the battery does
not heat up again. Then, drive the vehicle to an open and flat area and set up a 15-
meter safety zone to keep people away from the vehicle.
Warning
Be aware that a high voltage battery may re-ignite even after it is cooled down.
Particular attention should be paid when transporting the battery.
Rescuing the Vehicle with Battery Leakage
Warning
If leakage from a high voltage battery is caused due to an impact, the rescue
should be performed by professionals who must wear protective face shields and
chemical-resistant gloves. Never make direct contact with the fluids.
When the high-voltage battery leaks, it may generate heat or even cause a fire.
Please cool down the high-voltage battery first and then clean up the fluids:
If the leak is not severe, use a liquid absorbing pad to clean up the fluids and
then place the used pad in a closed container or use incineration to dispose of
the pad.
If the leak is severe, dispose of the fluids following the disposal guidelines for
hazardous chemical waste. Pour calcium gluconate solution over the leaked
fluids.
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
294/295


Caution
If any fluids accidentally get on the skin, remove the contaminated clothes, and
rinse the skin with soap under running water for 15 minutes until all chemical
residues are removed. Seek medical attention immediately if the irritation or
discomfort doesn’t improve.
Vehicle Cutting Area
Warning
When professional rescuers perform cutting operations, they must use appropriate
tools such as a hydraulic cutter and wear appropriate personal protective
equipment to avoid serious injury.
When cutting is necessary during rescue, appropriate tools shall be used. The high-
voltage and high-pressure areas of the vehicle must not be cut, such as airbag-
related components and high-voltage components, as shown by the key areas in
the figure below.
GUM185948
2024/9/26 13:44
ET5 User Manual
https://www.nio.com/cdn-static/www/user-instructions/en_EU/ET5/index.html
295/295