The Lawyer as Friend: The Moral
Foundations of the Lawyer-Client Relation'
Charles Friedt
Advocatus sed non ladro,
Res miranda 
populo ....
Medieval anthem
honoring St. Ives
Can a good lawyer be a good person? The question troubles lawyers
and law students alike. They are troubled by the demands of 
loyalty to
one's client and by the fact that one can win approval as a good, maybe
even great, lawyer even though that loyalty is engrossed by over-
privileged or positively distasteful clients. How, they ask, is such
loyalty compatible with that devotion to the common good character-
istic of high moral principles? And whatever their views of the com-
mon good, they are troubled because the willingness of lawyers to help
their clients use the law to the prejudice of the weak or the innocent
seems morally corrupt. The lawyer is conventionally seen as a pro-
fessional devoted to his client's interests and as authorized, if not in
fact required, to do some things (though not anything) for that client
which he would not do for himself.1 In this essay I consider the com-
* Copyright @ 1976 by Charles Fried. This essay is part of a larger work on right and
wrong, supported by the National Science Foundation under grant number SOC75-
13506. Research assistance and suggestions were provided by Dan Polster and Jerrold
Tannenbaum, students at the Harvard Law School. I am grateful for the comments of
Gary Bellow, Sissela Bok, Alan Dershowitz, Philip Heymann, Andrew Kaufman, Robert
Keeton, Thomas Nagel, Charles Nesson, Albert Sacks, and David Shapiro. I am especially
grateful to the editors of the Yale Law Journal for their understanding, help, and
encouragement. I wonder if any of them agree with what I say here. The National
Science Foundation, of course, underwrites only the effort, not the conclusion.
t Professor of Law, Harvard University.
1. See, e.g., J. AUERBACH, UNEQUAL JUsTIcE (1976); M. GREEN, THE OTHER GOVERNIENT
(1975).
Lord Brougham stated the traditional view of the lawyer's role during his defense of
Queen Caroline:
[Ain advocate, in the discharge of his duty, knows but one person in all the world,
and that person is his client. To save that client by all means and expedients, and at
all hazards and costs to other persons, and, among them, to himself, is his first and
only duty; and in performing this duty he must not regard the alarm, the torments,
the destruction which he may bring upon others. Separating the duty of a patriot
from that of an advocate, he must go on reckless of consequences, though it should
be his unhappy fate to involve his country in confusion.
2 TRIAL OF QUEEN CAROLINE 8 (J. 
Nightingale ed. 1821). A sharply contrasting view was
held by law professors at the University of Havana who said that "the first job of a
1060


The Lawyer as Friend
patibility between this traditional conception of the lawyer's role and
the ideal of moral purity-the ideal that one's life should be lived in
fulfillment of the most demanding moral principles, and not just
barely within the law. So I shall not be particularly concerned with
the precise limits imposed on the lawyer's conduct by positive rules of
law and by the American Bar Association's Code of Professional
Responsibility2 except as these provide a background. I assume that
the lawyer observes these scrupulously. My inquiry is one of morals:
Does the lawyer whose conduct and choices are governed only by the
traditional conception of the lawyer's role, which these positive rules
reflect, lead a professional life worthy of moral approbation, worthy of
respect-ours and his own?
I. The Challenge to the Traditional Conception
A. The Two Criticisms
Two frequent criticisms of the traditional conception of the lawyer's
role attack both its ends and its means. First, it is said that the ideal of
professional loyalty to one's client permits, even demands, an alloca-
tion of the lawyer's time, passion, and resources in ways that are not
always maximally conducive to the greatest good of the greatest num-
ber.3 Interestingly, this criticism is leveled increasingly against doctors4
as well as lawyers. Both professions affirm the principle that the pro-
fessional's primary loyalty is to his client,
3 his patient. A "good" law-
yer will lavish energy and resources on his existing client, even if it
can be shown that others could derive greater benefit from them. The
professional ideal authorizes a care for the client and the patient which
revolutionary lawyer is not to argue that his client is innocent, but rather to determine
if his client is guilty and, if so, to seek the sanction which will best rehabilitate him."
Berman, The Cuban Popular Tribunals, 69 COLUM. 
L. REv. 1317, 1341 (1969). And a
Bulgarian attorney has been quoted as saying, " 
'In 
a Socialist state there is no division
of duty between the judge, prosecutor and defense counsel . . . the defense must assist
the prosecution to find the objective truth in a case.' " J. KAPLAN, CRIMINAL JusTICE:
INTRODUCTORY CASES AND MATERIALS 264-65 (1973).
2. The American Bar Association approved a revised Code of Professional Responsi-
bility in 1969. In part that revision was a response to the criticism that the legal pro-
fession, by failing to make legal services more widely available, had not met its public
responsibilities. J. AUERBACH, supra note 1, 
at 285-86. See also Preface, ABA CODE OF
PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY.
3. 
See M. GREEN, supra note 1, 
at 268-69, 285-89.
4. See V. FUCHS, WHo 
SHALL Lrv.? 60 (1974); Havighurst & Blumstein, Coping With
Quality/Cost Trade-Offs in Medical Care: The Role of PSROs, 70 NV. U. L. REV. 6,
25-28 (1975). But see Fried, Equality and Rights in Medical Care, 6 HASTINGS 
CENTER
RErP. 29, 33-34 (1976).
5. 
See ABA CODE OF PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY CANON 7.
1061


The Yale Law Journal
exceeds what the efficient distribution of a scarce social resource (the
professional's time) would dictate.
That same professional ideal has little or nothing to say about the
initial choice of clients or patients. Certainly it is laudable if the
doctor and lawyer choose their clients among the poorest or sickest or
most dramatically threatened, but the professional ideal does not re-
quire this kind of choice in any systematic way-the choice of client
remains largely a matter of fortuity or arbitrary choice. But once the
client has been chosen, the professional ideal requires primary loyalty
to the client whatever his need or situation. Critics contend that it is
wasteful and immoral that some of the finest talent in the legal pro-
fession is devoted to the intricacies of, say, corporate finance or elab-
orate estate plans, while important public and private needs for legaI
services go unmet. The immorality of this waste is seen to be com-
pounded when the clients who are the beneficiaries of this lavish at-
tention use it to avoid their obligations in justice (if not in law) to
society and to perpetuate their (legal) domination of the very groups
whose greater needs these lawyers should be meeting.
The second criticism applies particularly to the lawyer. It addresses
not the misallocation of scarce resources, which the lawyer's exclusive
concern with his client's interests permits, but the means which this
loyalty appears to authorize, tactics which procure advantages for the
client at the direct expense of some identified opposing party. Ex-
amples are discrediting a nervous but probably truthful complaining
witness7 or taking advantage of the need or ignorance of an adversary
in a negotiation. This second criticism is, of course, related to the
first, but there is a difference. The first criticism focuses on a social
harm: the waste of scarce resources implicit in a doctor caring for the
hearts of the sedentary managerial classes or a lawyer tending to the
estates and marital difficulties of the rich. The professional is accused
of failing to confer benefits wisely and efficiently. By the second
criticism the lawyer is accused not of failing to benefit the appro-
priate, though usually unidentified, persons, but of harming his
identified adversary.8
6. For a description of the growth of such criticisms, see J. AUERBACH, supra note 1,
at 275-88.
7. 
For a defense of an attorney's use of such tactics, see M. FREEDMAN, 
LAWYERS'
ETHICS IN AN ADVERSARY SYSTEMi 43-49 (1975). See also Curtis, The Ethics of Advocacy, 4
STAN. L. REV. 3 (1951).
8. The point really carries further than the distinction between benefit and harm.
In the former case, though some particular person may have benefited had the distribu-
tion been efficient, it does not seem correct to say that for that reason this person had a
right to the benefit which he was denied, or that this person was wronged by not
receiving the benefit. Individuals do not acquire rights under policies which are dictated
1062
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
B. Examples
Consider a number of cases which illustrate the first criticism: A
doctor is said to owe a duty of loyalty to his patient, but how is he to
react if doing his very best for his patient would deplete the resources
of the patient's family, as in the case of a severely deformed baby who
can only be kept alive through extraordinarily expensive means?
Should a doctor prescribe every test of distinct but marginal utility
for every patient on public assistance, even if he knows that in the
aggregate such a policy will put the medical care system under in-
tolerable burdens?9 Should he subject his patients to prudent testing
of new remedies because he knows that only in this way can medicine
make the strides that it has in the past?1
0
These problems are analogous to problems which are faced by the
lawyer. The lawyer who advises a client how to avoid the effects of a
tax or a form of regulation, though it is a fair tax or a regulation in
the public interest, is facing the same dilemma and resolving it in
favor of his client. So does the public defender who accedes to his
client's demands and takes a "losing" case to trial, thereby wasting
court time and depleting the limited resources of his organization. We
purely by considerations of efficiency. See generally Dworkin, Hard Cases, 88 HARV. L.
REV. 1057, 1058-78 (1975).
Professor Anscombe makes the following suggestive argument: If saving the life of one
patient requires a massive dose of a drug that could be divided up and used to save five
other people, not one of those five can claim that he has been wronged, that the smaller
dose of the drug was owed to him.
Yet all can reproach me if I gave it to none. It was there, ready to supply human
need, and human need was not supplied. So any one of them can say: you ought
to have used it to help us who needed it; and so all are wronged. But if it was used
for someone, as much as he needed it to keep him alive, no one has any ground for
accusing me of haiing wronged himself.-Why, just because he was one of five who
could hate been saved, is he wronged in not being saved, if someone is supplied
with it who needed it? What is his claim, except the claim that what was needed
go to him rather than be wasted? But it was not wasted. So he was not wronged. So
who was wronged? And if no one was wronged, what injury did I do?
I o 
not mean that 'because they are more' isn't a good reason for helping these
and not that one, or these rather than those. It is a perfectly intelligible reason, But
it doesn't follow from that that a man acts badly if lie doesn't make it his reason.
He acts badly if human need for what is in his power to give doesn't work in him
as a reason. He acts badly if lie chooses to rescue rich people rather than poor
ones, haing ill regard for the poor ones because they are poor. But lie doesn't act
badly if lie uses his resources to save X, or X, Y and Z, for no bad reason, and is
not affected by the consideration that he could save a larger number of people.
For, once more: who can say he is wronged? And if no one is wronged, how does
the rescuer commit any wrong?
Anscombe, Who is Wronged?, 5 OxFoRD REV. 16, 16-17 (1967) (emphasis in original).
9. See generally V. FUcHs, supra note 4, at 94-95; Fried, Rights and Health Care-
Beyond Equity and Efficiency, 293 NEw ENGLAND J. MEDICINE 241, 244 (1975).
10. For discussions of this dilemma, see A. COCHRANE, EFFECTIVENESS AND EFFICIENCY
(1972); C. FRIED, MEDICAL EXPERIMENTATION: PERSONAL INTEGRITY AND SOCIAL POLICY (1974).
1063


The Yale Law Journal
tolerate and indeed may applaud the decision of a lawyer who vigor-
ously defends a criminal whom he believes to be guilty and danger-
ous." And I for one think that a lawyer who arranges the estate of a
disagreeable dowager or represents one of the parties in a bitter mat-
rimonial dispute must be as assiduous and single-minded in fulfilling
his obligation to that client as the lawyer who is defending the civil
liberties case of the century.
Illustrative of the second criticism (doing things which are offensive
to a particular person) are familiar situations such as the following: In
a negotiation it becomes clear to the lawyer for the seller that the
buyer and his lawyer mistakenly believe that somebody else has already
offered a handsome price for the property. The buyer asks the seller
if this is true, and the seller's lawyer hears his client give an ambiguous
but clearly encouraging response. 12 Another classic case is the inter-
position of a technical defense such as the running of the statute of
limitations to defeat a debt that the client admits he owes.1 3
There is another class of cases which does not so unambiguously in-
volve the lawyer's furthering his client's interests at the direct expense
of some equally identified, concrete individual, but where furthering
those interests does require the lawyer to do things which are person-
ally offensive to him. The conventional paradigms in the casuistic
literature deal with criminal defense lawyers who are asked improper
questions by the trial judge ("Your client doesn't have a criminal
record, does he?" or "Your client hasn't offered to plead guilty to a
lesser offense, has he?"), a truthful answer to which would be damn-
ingly prejudicial to the client, but which the lawyer cannot even
refuse to answer without running the risk of creating the same prej-
udice. There are those who say the lawyer must lie in defense of his
client's interests even though lying is personally and professionally of-
fensive to him.14 The defense lawyer who cross-examines a complaining
II. 
See M. FREDMAN, supra note 7, at 43-49.
12. 
DR 7-102(A)(5) of the Code of Professional Responsibility states that a lawyer
shall not knowingly make a false statement of law or fact in his representation of a client.
The issue is how to apply this admonition in the context of negotiation, where decep-
tion is commonplace. See M. MELTSNER & P. SCHPAG, PUBLIC INTEREST ADVOCACY: 
lA.TERIALS
FOR CLINICAL LEGAL EDUCATION 231-39 (1974).
13. 
For a striking example, see Zabella v. Pakel, 242 F.2d 452 (7th Cir. 1957), where
the debtor asserting the technical defenses was a savings and loan association president,
and the creditor was a man who had worked for him as a carpenter and had lent him
money in earlier, less fortunate days.
14. Although Charles Curtis explicitly denounces lying to the court, his observation
that the propriety of lying might depend on whether the question is asked "by someone
who has a right to ask it" at least implies a possible qualification in the case of improper
questioning by the court. Curtis, supra note 7. at 7-9. Monroe Freedman does not
specifically address this problem, but his argument that an attorney's duty to safeguard
1064
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
rape victim (whom he knows to be telling the truth) about her
chastity or lack thereof in order to discredit her accusing testimony
faces a similar moral difficulty. In some respects these cases might be
taken to illustrate both principal criticisms of the traditional concep-
tion. On the one hand, there is harm to society in making the choice
to favor the client's interests: a dangerous criminal may escape punish-
ment or an appropriately heavy sentence. On the other hand, this
social harm is accomplished by means of acting towards another human
being-the judge, the complaining witness-in ways that seem demean-
ing and dishonorable.
II. The Lawyer as Friend
A. 
The Thesis
In this essay I will consider the moral status of the traditional con-
ception of the professional. The two criticisms of this traditional con-
ception, if left unanswered, will not put the lawyer in jail, but they
will leave him without a moral basis for his acts. The real question is
whether, in the face of these two criticisms, a decent and morally
sensitive person can conduct himself according to the traditional con-
ception of professional loyalty and still believe that what he is doing is
morally worthwhile.
It might be said that anyone whose conscience is so tender that he
cannot fulfill the prescribed obligations of a professional should not
undertake those obligations. He should not allow his moral scruples
to operate as a trap for those who are told by the law that they may
expect something more. But of course this suggestion merely pushes
the inquiry back a step. We must ask then not how a decent lawyer
may behave, but whether a decent, ethical person can ever be a lawyer.
Are the assurances implicit in assuming the role of lawyer such that
an honorable person would not give them and thus would not enter
the profession? And, indeed, this is a general point about an argument
from obligation: 1
' It may be that the internal logic of a particular
obligation demands certain forms of conduct (e.g., honor among
tile attorney-client privilege requires the attorney to introduce his client's perjurious
testimony would seem to extend to this situation. M. FREEDMAN, supra note 7, at 27-41.
Cf. ABA Costt. ON PROFESSIONAL ETHICS, OPINIONS No. 287 (1967) (if attorney for de-
fendant learns of previous criminal record through his communications with his client,
lie has no duty to correct misapprehension on part of court that client has no record).
15. 
That one assumes obligations to persons which cannot always be overridden by
the benefits which would accrue from aiding some third person is a standard objection
to utilitarianism. See, e.g., IV. Ross, THE RIGIIT AND THE GOOD 17-19 (1930).
1065


The Yale Law Journal
thieves), but the question remains whether it is just and moral to
contract such obligations.
I will argue in this essay that it is not only legally but also morally
right that a lawyer adopt as his dominant purpose the furthering of
his client's interests-that it is right that a professional put the interests
of his client above some idea, however valid, of the collective interest.
I maintain that the traditional conception of the professional role
expresses a morally valid conception of human conduct and human
relationships, that one who acts according to that conception is to
that extent a good person. Indeed, it is my view that, far from being
a mere creature of positive law, the traditional conception is so far
mandated by moral right that any advanced legal system which did
not sanction this conception would be unjust.
The general problem raised by the two criticisms is this: How can
it be that it is not only permissible, but indeed morally right, to favor
the interests of a particular person in a way which we can be fairly
sure is either harmful to another particular individual or not max-
imally conducive to the welfare of society as a whole? 6
The resolution of this problem is aided, I think, if set in a larger per-
spective. Charles Curtis made the perspicacious remark that a lawyer
may be privileged to lie for his client in a way that one might lie to
save one's friends or close relatives."7 I do not want to underwrite the
notion that it is justifiable to lie even in those situations, but there is a
great deal to the point that in those relations-friendship, kinship-we
recognize an authorization to take the interests of particular concrete
persons more seriously and to give them priority over the interests of
the wider collectivity. One who provides an expensive education for
his own children surely cannot be blamed because he does not use
these resources to alleviate famine or to save lives in some distant land.
Nor does he blame himself. Indeed, our intuition that an individual
is authorized to prefer identified persons standing close to him over the
abstract interests of humanity finds its sharpest expression in our sense
that an individual is entitled to act with something less than impar-
tiality to that person who stands closest to him-the person that he is.
There is such a thing as selfishness to be sure, yet no reasonable
16. 
I have discussed this problem elsewhere. C. FRIED, AN ANATOMY OF VALUES 207-36
(1970); C. FRIED, supra note 10, at 132-37. Cf. Schelling, The Life You Save May Be Your
Own, in PROBLEMS IN PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ANALYSIS 127, 129-30 (S. Chase ed. 1968) (also
discussing our greater concern for known, as opposed to unknown, individuals).
17. 
Curtis, supra note 7, at 8. Analogizing the lawyer to a friend raises a range of
problems upon which I shall not touch. These have to do with the lawyer's benevolent
and sometimes not so benevolent tyranny over and imposition on his client, seemingly
authorized by the claim to be acting in the client's interests. Domineering paternalism is
not a normal characteristic of friendship. This point is due to Jay Katz.
1066
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
morality asks us to look upon ourselves as merely plausible candidates
for the distribution of the attention and resources which we command,
plausible candidates whose entitlement to our own concern is no
greater in principle than that of any other human being. Such a doc-
trine may seem edifying, but on reflection it strikes us as merely fanat-
ical.
This suggests an interesting way to look at the situation of the
lawyer. As a professional person one has a special care for the interests
of those accepted as clients, just as his friends, his family, and he him-
self have a very general claim to his special concern. But I concede
this does no more than widen the problem. It merely shows that in
claiming this authorization to have a special care for my clients I am
doing something which I do in other contexts as well.
B. The Utilitarian 
Explanation
I consider first an argument to account for fidelity to role, for
obligation, made most elaborately by the classical utilitarians, Mill' s
and Sidgwick.' 9 They argued that our propensity to prefer the interests
of those who are close to us is in fact perfectly reasonable because we
are more likely to be able to benefit those people. Thus, if everyone
is mainly concerned with those closest to him, the distribution of social
energies will be most efficient and the greatest good of the greatest
number will be achieved. The idea is that the efforts I expend for my
friend or my relative are more likely to be effective because I am more
likely to know what needs to be done. I am more likely to be sure that
the good I intend is in fact accomplished. One might say that there is
less overhead, fewer administrative costs, in benefiting those nearest
to us. I would not want to ridicule this argument, but it does not
seem to me to go far enough. Because if that were the sole basis for
the preference, then it would be my duty to determine whether my
efforts might not be more efficiently spent on the collectivity, on the
distant, anonymous beneficiary. But it is just my point that this is an
inquiry we are not required, indeed sometimes not even authorized,
to make. When we decide to care for our children, to assure our own
comforts, to fulfill our obligations to our clients or patients, we do
not do so as a result of a cost-benefit inquiry which takes into account
the ease of producing a good result for our friends and relations.
Might it not be said, however, that the best means of favoring the
18. Mill, Utilitarianism, in THE PHILOSOPHY OF JOHN STUART MILL 321, 342-44 (M.
Cohen ed. 1961).
19. H. SIDGIVIcK, THE METHODS OF ETHicS 252 (7th ed. 1907).
1067


The Yale Law Journal
abstract collectivity is in certain cases not to try to favor it directly but
to concentrate on those to whom one has a special relation? This does
not involve tricking oneself, but only recognizing the limitations of
what an individual can do and know. But that, it seems to me, is just
Mill's and Sidgwick's argument all over again. There is no trickery
involved, but this is still a kind of deliberate limitation of our moral
horizon which leaves us uncomfortable. Do I know in a particular case
whether sticking to the narrow definition of my role will in that case
further the good of all? If I know that it will not further the general
good, then why am I acting as the role demands? Is it to avoid setting
a bad example? But for whom? I need not tell others-whether I tell or
not could enter into my calculation. For myself then? But that begs
the question, since if short-circuiting the role-definition of my obliga-
tion and going straight for the general good is the best thing 'to do in
that case, then the example I set myself is not a bad example, but a
good example. In short, I do not see how one can at the same time
admit that the general good is one's only moral standard, while
steadfastly hewing to obligations to friends, family, and clients. What
we must look for is an argument which shows that giving some degree
of special consideration to myself, my friends, my clients is not merely
instrumentally justified (as the utilitarians would argue) but to some
degree intrinsically so. 2 0
I think such an argument can be made. Instead of speaking the
language of maximization of value over all of humanity, it will speak
the language of rights. The stubborn ethical datum affirming such a
preference grows out of the profoundest springs of morality: the con-
cepts of personality, identity, and liberty.
C. 
Self, Friendship, 
and Justice
Consider for a moment the picture of the human person that would
emerge if the utilitarian claim were in fact correct. It would mean
that in all my choices I must consider the well-being of all humanity-
actual and potential-as the range of my concern. Moreover, every
actual or potential human being is absolutely equal in his claims upon
me. Indeed, I myself am to myself only as one of this innumerable
multitude. And that is the clue to what is wrong with the utilitarian
vision. Before there is morality there must be the person. We must
attain and maintain in our morality a concept of personality such that
20. 
See generally D. LYONS, FORMS AND LIMITS OF UTILITARIANISM (1965); J. SMART &
B. WILLIAMS, UTILITARIANISM: 
FOR AND AGAINST (1973); Harrod, Utilitarianism Revised,
45 MIND 137 (1936); Mabbott, Punishment, 48 MIND 152 (1939).
1068
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
it makes sense to posit choosing, valuing entities-free, moral beings.
But the picture of the moral universe in which my own interests dis-
appear and are merged into the interests of the totality of humanity is
incompatible with that,21 because one wishes to develop a conception
of a responsible, valuable, and valuing agent, and such an agent must
first of all be dear to himself. It is from the kernel of individuality
that the other things we value radiate. The Gospel says we must
love our neighbor as ourselves, and this implies that any concern for
others which is a human concern must presuppose a concern for our-
selves.22 The human concern which we then show others is a concern
which first of all recognizes the concrete individuality of that other
person just as we recognize our own.
It might be objected that the picture I sketch does not show that
each individual, in order to maintain the integral sense of himself as
an individual, is justified in attributing a greater value to his most
essential interests than he ascribes to the most essential interests of all
other persons. Should not the individual generalize and attribute in
equal degree to all persons the value which he naturally attributes to
himself? I agree with those who hold that it is the essence of morality
for reason to push us beyond inclination to the fair conclusion of our
21. See generally C. FRIED, AN ANATOMY OF VALUES, 203-06; Rawls, The Independence
of Moral Theory, 48 AM. 
PHIL. Ass'N 17-20 (1975) (Kantian theory, as compared to
utilitarianism, takes seriously basic moral fact of primacy of notion of individual
personality).
22. 
. . . It is written (Lev. xix. 18, Matth. xxii. 39); Thou shalt love thy neighbor
(Lev. loc. cit.,-friend) as thyself. Whence it seems to follow that man's love for
himself is the model of his love for another. But the model exceeds the copy.
Therefore, out of charity, a man ought to love himself more than his neighbor.
W1,e must, therefore, say that, even as regards the affection we ought to love one
neighbor more than another. The reason is that, since the principle of love is God,
and the person who loves, it must needs be that the affection of love increases in
proportion to the nearness to one or the other of those principles.
As stated above . . . we ought out of charity to love those who are more
closely united to us more, both because our love for them is more intense, and be-
cause there are more reasons for loving them 
...
Accordingly we must say that friendship among blood relations is based upon
their connection by natural origin, the friendship of fellow-citizens on their civic
fellowship, and the friendship of those who are fighting side by side on the com-
radeship of battle. Wherefore in matters pertaining to nature we should love our
kindred most, in matters concerning relations between citizens, we should prefer
our fellow-citizens, and on the battlefield our fellow-soldiers 
...
If however we compare union with union, it is evident that the union arising from
natural origin is prior to, and more stable than, all others, because it is something
affecting the very substance, whereas other unions supervene and may cease al-
together.
II Tno.%ts 
AQvINAS, SUMMA THEOLOGICA 1297-1301 (Fathers of the English Dominican
Province trans. 1947).
1069


The Yale Law Journal
premises.2 3 It is a fair conclusion that as my experience as a judging,
valuing, choosing entity is crucial to me, I must also conclude that for
other persons their own lives and desires are the center of their
universes. If morality is transcendent, it must somehow transcend
particularity to take account of this general fact. I do not wish to deny
this. On the contrary, my claim is that the kind of preference which an
individual gives himself and concrete others is a preference which he
would in exactly this universalizing spirit allow others to exhibit as
well. It is not that I callously overlook the claim of the abstract in-
dividual, but indeed I would understand and approve were I myself to
be prejudiced because some person to whom I stood in a similar situa-
tion of abstraction preferred his own concrete dimensions.
Finally, the concreteness which is the starting point of my own
moral sensibility, the sense of myself, is not just a historical, bio-
graphical fact. It continues to enter into and condition my moral
judgments because the effects which I can produce upon people who
are close to me are qualitatively different from those produced upon
abstract, unknown persons. My own concreteness is important not
only because it establishes a basis for understanding what I and what
all other human beings might be, but because in engaging that aspect
of myself with the concrete aspects of others, I realize special values
for both of us. Quite simply, the individualized relations of love and
friendship (and perhaps also their opposites, hatred and enmity)
have a different, more intense aspect than do the cooler, more abstract
relations of love and service to humanity in general. The impulse I
describe, therefore, is not in any sense a selfish impulse. But it does
begin with the sense of self as a concrete entity. Those who object
to my thesis by saying that we must generalize it are not wholly
wrong; they merely exaggerate. Truly I must be ready to generalize
outward all the way. That is what justice consists of. But justice is
not all of morality; there remains a circle of intensity which through
its emphasis on the particular and the concrete continues to reflect
what I have identified as the source of all sense of value-our sense of
self.
Therefore, it is not only consonant with, but also required by, an
ethics for human beings that one be entitled first of all to reserve an
area of concern for oneself and then to move out freely from that area
if one wishes to lavish that concern on others to whom one stands in
concrete, personal relations. Similarly, a person is entitled to enjoy
23. 
See G. WARNOCK, TiE OBJECT OF MORALITY 79-80 (1971); Nagel, Book Review, 85
YALE L.J. 136, 140 (1975).
1070
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
this extra measure of care from those who choose to bestow it upon
him without having to justify this grace as either just or efficient. We
may choose the individuals to whom we will stand in this special rela-
tion, or they may be thrust upon us, as in family ties. Perhaps we
recognize family ties because, after all, there often has been an element
of choice, but also because-by some kind of atavism or superstition-
we identify with those who share a part of our biological natures.
In explicating the lawyer's relation to his client, my analogy shall be
to friendship, where the freedom to choose and to be chosen expresses
our freedom to hold something of ourselves in reserve, in reserve even
from the universalizing claims of morality. These personal ties and
the claims they engender may be all-consuming, as with a close friend
or family member, or they may be limited, special-purpose claims, as
in the case of the client or patient.24 The special-purpose claim is one
in which the beneficiary, the client, is entitled to all the special con-
sideration within the limits of the relationship which we accord to a
friend or a loved one. It is not that the claims of the client are less
intense or demanding; they are only more limited in their scope. After
all, the ordinary concept of friendship provides only an analogy, and
it is to the development of that analogy that I turn.
D. 
Special-Purpose 
Friends
How does a professional fit into the concept of personal relations at
all? He is, I have suggested, a limited-purpose friend. A lawyer is a
friend in regard to the legal system. He is someone who enters into a
personal relation with you-not an abstract relation as under the
concept of justice. That means that like a friend he acts in your in-
terests, not his own; or rather he adopts your interests as his own. I
would call that the classic definition of friendship. To be sure, the
lawyer's range of concern is sharply limited. But within that limited
24. This argument is, of course, just a fragment which must be fitted into a larger
theory. This larger theory would have to explain, among other things, what the precise
contents of the various personal roles might be and how conflicts between personal roles
are to be resolved. My later discussion of permissible and impermissible tactics in legal
representation deals with this conflict in one context. A complete theory would also
have to spell out the relation between personal roles and duties to the larger collectivity.
These latter duties to man in the abstract as opposed to concrete persons are the subject
of principles of justice. I have no doubt that such abstract duties exist and that they
can be very demanding. Roughly, I would adopt something like the principles put forward
in J. RtWLs, A THEORY OF JusTicE 54-117 (1971). I would require, however, that these
principles of justice leave sufficient scope for the free definition and inviolability of
personal relations-to a greater extent perhaps than Rawls allows. These systematic
concerns are the subject of a larger work from which the present essay is drawn. The
relation of principles of justice to other aspects of right and wrong is a principal
concern of that larger work.
1071


The Yale Law Journal
domain the intensity of identification with the client's interests is the
same. It is not the specialized focus of the relationship which may make
the metaphor inapposite, but the way in which the relation of legal
friendship comes about and the one-sided nature of the ensuing
"friendship." But I do insist upon the analogy, for in overcoming the
arguments that the analogy is false, I think the true moral foundations
of the lawyer's special role are illuminated and the utilitarian objec-
tions to the traditional conception of that role overthrown.
1. The Professional 
Role as Socially Defined:
The Content of the Relation
The claims that are made on the doctor or lawyer are made within
a social context and are defined, at least in part, by social expecta-
tions. Most strikingly, in talking about friendship the focus of the
inquiry is quite naturally upon the free gift of the donor; yet in pro-
fessional relationships it is the recipient's need for medical or legal
aid which defines the relationship. So the source of the relationship
seems to be located at the other end, that of the recipient. To put this
disquiet another way, we might ask how recognizing the special claims
of friendship in any way compels society to allow the doctor or the
lawyer to define his role on the analogy of those claims. Why are these
people not like other social actors designated to purvey certain, per-
haps necessary, goods? Would we say that one's grocer, tailor, or land-
lord should be viewed as a limited-purpose friend? Special considera-
tions must be brought forward for doctors and lawyers.2
A special argument is at hand in both cases. The doctor does not
minister just to any need, but to health. He helps maintain the very
physical integrity which is the concrete substrate of individuality. To
be sure, so does a grocer or landlord. But illness wears a special
guise: it appears as a critical assault on one's person. The needs to
which the doctor ministers usually are implicated in crises going to
one's concreteness and individuality, and therefore what one looks for
is a kind of ministration which is particularly concrete, personal, in-
dividualized. Thus, it is not difficult to see why I claim that a doctor
is a friend, though a special purpose friend, the purpose being defined
by the special needs of illness and crisis to which he tends.
25. This question might be more troubling in a socialist system in which the profit
motive is theoretically subordinated to the service of the general good. But my argument
is that the needs for whith lawyers and doctors provide are significantly different in kind
from those met by other economic agents. Therefore, my argument about doctors and
lawyers should be general enough to apply in either a free enterprise or a socialist
system.
1072
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
But what, then, of the lawyer? Friendship and kinship are natural
relations existing within, but not defined by, complex social institu-
tions. Illness too is more a natural than social phenomenon. The
response here requires an additional step. True, the special situations
-legal relations or disputes-in which the lawyer acts as a limited-
purpose friend are themselves a product of social institutions. But it
does not follow that the role of the lawyer, which is created to help us
deal with those social institutions, is defined by and is wholly at the
mercy of the social good. We need only concede that at the very least
the law must leave us a measure of autonomy, whether or not it is in
the social interest to do so. Individuals have rights over and against
the collectivity.26 The moral capital arising out of individuals' con-
crete situations is one way of expressing that structure of rights, or at
least part of it. It is because the law must respect the rights of in-
dividuals that the law must also create and support the specific role of
legal friend. For the social nexus-the web of perhaps entirely just
institutions-has become so complex that without the assistance of an
expert adviser an ordinary layman cannot exercise that autonomy
which the system must allow him. Without such an adviser, the law
would impose constraints on the lay citizen (unequally at that) which
it is not entitled to impose explicitly. Thus, the need which the
lawyer serves in his special-purpose friendship may not be, as in the
case of the doctor, natural, pre-social. Yet it is a need which has a
moral grounding analogous to the need which the physician serves: the
need to maintain one's integrity as a person. When I say the lawyer
is his client's legal friend, I mean the lawyer makes his client's in-
terests his own insofar as this is necessary to preserve and foster the
client's autonomy within the law. This argument does not require us
to assume that the law is hostile to the client's rights. All we need to
assume is that even a system of law which is perfectly sensitive to
personal rights would not work fairly unless the client could claim a
professional's assistance in realizing that autonomy which the law
recognizes.
2. 
The Asymmetry of Motive and Duty:
The Form of the Relation
The institutional origin of the lawyer-client relationship is not its
only characteristic which suggests that the analogy to natural friendship
26. 
For a recent forceful statement of this conception of rights, see Dworkin, Taking
Rights Seriously, in Is LAw DEAD? 168 (E. Rostow ed. 1971). See generally Dworkin, The
Original 
Position, 40 U. CH. L. REV. 500, 522-28 (1973).
1073


The Yale Law Journal
is vulnerable. In natural friendship the ideal relation is reciprocal; in
legal friendship it is not. The lawyer is said to be the client's friend
insofar as he is devoted to his client's interests, but it is no part of the
ideal that the client should have any reciprocal devotion to the in-
terests of his lawyer. Furthermore, I have argued that our right to be
a friend to whomever we choose is a product of our individual au-
tonomy. But in legal friendship the emphasis has been on the au-
tonomy of the client, and it is the client who chooses the lawyer;2 7 yet
it is the lawyer who acts as a friend in the relation. And as a final
contrast to natural friendship, the usual motive for agreeing or re-
fusing to provide legal services is money. Indeed, when we speak of
the lawyer's right to represent whomever he wishes, we are usually
defending his moral title to represent whoever pays.
But recall that the concept of legal friendship was introduced to
answer the argument that the lawyer is morally reprehensible to the
extent that he lavishes undue concern on some particular person. The
concept of friendship explains how it can be that a particular person
may rightfully receive more than his share of care from another: he
can receive that care if he receives it as an act of friendship. Although
in natural friendship I emphasized the freedom to bestow, surely that
freedom must imply a freedom to receive that extra measure of care.
And it is the right of the client to receive such an extra measure of
care (without regard, that is, to considerations of efficiency or fair-
ness) as much as the lawyer's right to give it, that I have been trying
to explicate. Thus, the fact that the care in legal friendship system-
atically runs all one way does not impair the argument.
Yet the unease persists. Is it that while I have shown that the lawyer
has a right to help the "unworthy" client, I have not shown that when-
ever the lawyer exercises this right he does something which is morally
worthy, entitling him to self-respect? I may have shown that the law is
obliged to allow the "unworthy" client to seek legal help and the
lawyer to give it. But have I also shown that every lawyer who avails
himself of this legal right (his and the client's legal right) performs a
morally worthy function? Can a good lawyer be a good person?
The lawyer acts morally because he helps to preserve and express the
autonomy of his client vis-h-vis the legal system. It is not just that the
lawyer helps his client accomplish a particular lawful purpose. Pornog-
raphy may be legal, but it hardly follows that I perform a morally
27. The lawyer is generally free to decline to serve for any or no reason. But evcn
that freedom is qualified; there will be times when there may be a duty to serve, as
when a court appoints the lawyer to serve or when his declining may leave a person
unrepresented. See pp. 1078-79, 1086-87 infra.
1074
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
worthy function if I lend money or artistic talent to help the pornog-
rapher flourish in the exercise of this right. What is special about legal
counsel is that whatever else may stop the pornographer's enterprise,
he should not be stopped because he mistakenly believes there is a
legal impediment. There is no wrong if a venture fails for lack of
talent or lack of money-no one's rights have been violated. But rights
are violated if, through ignorance or misinformation about the law,
an individual refrains from pursuing a wholly lawful purpose. There-
fore, to assist others in understanding and realizing their legal rights
is always morally, worthy. Moreover, the legal system, by instituting
the role of the legal friend, not only assures what it in justice
must-the due liberty of each citizen before the law-but does it by
creating an institution which exemplifies, at least in a unilateral
sense, the ideal of personal relations of trust and personal care which
(as in natural friendship) are good in themselves.
Perhaps the unease has another source. The lawyer does work for
pay. Is there not something odd about analogizing the lawyer's role
to friendship when in fact his so-called friendship must usually be
bought? If the lawyer is a public purveyor of goods, is not the lawyer-
client relationship like that underlying any commercial transaction?
My answer is "No." The lawyer and doctor have obligations to the
client or patient beyond those of other economic agents. A grocer may
refuse to give food to a customer when it becomes apparent that the
customer does not have the money to pay for it. But the lawyer and
doctor may not refuse to give additional care to an individual who can-
not pay for it if withdrawal of their services would prejudice that in-
dividual.
2 s Their duty to the client or patient to whom they have made
an initial commitment transcends the conventional quid pro quo of the
marketplace. It is undeniable that money is usually what cements the
lawyer-client relationship. But the content of the relation is determined
by the client's needs, just as friendship is a response to another's needs.
It is not determined, as are simple economic relationships, by the mere
coincidence of a willingness to sell and a willingness to buy. So the
fact that the lawyer works for pay does not seriously undermine the
friendship analogy.
3. 
Institutional 
Clients
Another possible objection to my analysis concerns the lawyer in
government or the lawyer for a corporation. My model posits a duty
28. See ABA CoMm. ON PROFESSIONAL ETHICS, OPINIONS 56 (1967) (Informal Opinion
No. 334); ABA CODE OF PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY EC 2-31, 2-32. Compare id. DR 2-110
(C)(l)(f) with id. DR 2-110(A)(2).
1075


The Yale Law Journal
of exclusive concern (within the law) for the interests of the client.
This might be said to be inappropriate in the corporate area because
larger economic power entails larger social obligations, and because
the idea of friendship, even legal friendship, seems peculiarly far-
fetched in such an impersonal context. After all, corporations and other
institutions, unlike persons, are creatures of the state. Thus, the pur-
suit of their interests would seem to be especially subject to the claims
of the public good. But corporations and other institutions are only
formal arrangements of real persons pursuing their real interests. If
the law allows real persons to pursue their interests in these complex
forms, then why are they not entitled to loyal legal assistance, "legal
friendship," in this exercise of their autonomy just as much as if they
pursued their interests in simple arrangements and associations?
The real problem in these cases is that the definition of the client is
complicated and elusive. The fundamental concepts remain the same,
but we must answer a question which so far we could treat as straight-
forward: Who is the client? It is the corporation. But because the
corporation is an institutional entity, institutional considerations enter
into both the definition of the entity to whom the loyalty is owed and
the substance of that loyalty. This is dramatically so in the case of a
government lawyer, since his client might be thought to be the
government of the United States, or the people of the United States,
mediated by an intricate political and institutional framework. So it
is said that a United States attorney is interested (unlike an ordinary
lawyer) not only in winning his case but also in seeing that "justice is
done," because his client's interests are served only if justice is done.
Since more and more lawyers have only institutional clients, the
introduction of institutional concerns into the definition of the repre-
sentational obligation is virtually pervasive. From this some would
conclude that my argument is inappropriate or at least anachronistic.
I insist that my analogy is the correct one, that it is applicable to the
institutional client, but that it must be combined in a complicated
though wholly coherent way with other arguments about who one's
client is and how that client's interests are to be identified.
III. The Two Criticisms and the Friendship Analogy
A. 
The Choice of Clients: The Question of Distribution
It is time to apply the concept of legal friendship to the first of the
two criticisms with which this essay began: that the lawyer's ethic of
loyalty to his client and his willingness to pick clients for any and
every reason (usually, however, for money) result in a maldistribution
1076
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
of a scarce resource, the aid of counsel. It is this criticism which the
lawyer shares with the doctor. The preceding sections demonstrated at
least this much: that legal counsel-like medical care-must be con-
sidered a good, and that he who provides it does a useful thing. But
this first criticism in no way questions that conclusion. On the con-
trary, precisely because medical care and legal counsel are benefits to
those who receive them, the critic blames the individual doctor or
lawyer for not bestowing his skills in the way which best meets the
social need. The notion of legal friendship helps us respond to this
criticism.
The lawyer-client relation is a personal relation, and legal counsel
is a personal service. This explains directly why, once the relation has
been contracted, considerations of efficiency or fair distribution can-
not be allowed to weaken it. The relation itself is not a creature of
social expediency (though social circumstances provide the occasion
for it); it is the creature of moral right, and therefore expediency may
not compromise the nature of the relation. This is true in medicine
because the human need creates a relation of dependence which it
would be a betrayal to compromise. In the lawyer-client relation, the
argument is more complex but supports the same conclusion. The
relation must exist in order to realize the client's rights against society,
to preserve that measure of autonomy which social regulation must
allow the individual. But to allow social considerations-even social
regulations-to limit and compromise what by hypothesis is an entail-
ment of the original grant of right to the individual is to take away
with the left hand what was given with the right. Once the relation
has been taken up, it is the client's needs which hold the reins-
legally and morally.
If I have a client with legal needs, then neither another person with
greater needs nor a court should be able to compel or morally oblige
me to compromise my care for those needs. To hold differently would
apply the concept of battlefield emergency care (triage) to the area of
regular legal service. But doctors do not operate that way and neither
should lawyers. For it is just the point about emergencies and wars
that they create special, brutal, and depersonalized relations which
civilization, by its very essence, must keep from becoming the general
rule of social life.2-
So much for the integrity of the relation once it has taken hold. But
what of the initial choice of client? Must we not give some thought to
efficiency and relative need at least at the outset, and does this not
29. 
Fried, supra note 9, at 245.
1077


The Yale Law Journal
run counter to the picture of purely discretionary choice implicit in
the notion of friendship? The question is difficult, but before con-
sidering its difficulties we should note that the preceding argumenta-
tion has surely limited its impact. We can now affirm that whatever
the answer to this question, the individual lawyer does a morally
worthy thing whomever he serves and, moreover, is bound to follow
through once he has begun to serve. In this he is like the doctor. So
if there is fault here it is a limited fault. What would be required for
a lawyer to immunize himself more fully from criticism that he is un-
just in his allocati6n of care? Each lawyer would have to consider at
the outset of his career and during that career where the greatest
need for his particular legal talents lies. He would then have to
allocate himself to that area of greatest need. Surely there is nothing
wrong in doing this (so long as loyalty to relations already undertaken
is not compromised); but is a lawyer morally at fault if he does not
lead his life in this way? It is at this point too that the metaphor of
friendship and the concept of self as developed above suggest the
response. But this time they will be viewed from another perspective-
the lawyer's as opposed to the client's rights and liberties.
Must the lawyer expend his efforts where they will do the most good,
rather than where they will draw the largest fee, provide the most
excitement, prove most flattering to his vanity, whatever? Why must
he? If the answer is that he must because it will produce the most good,
then we are saying to the lawyer that he is merely a scarce resource.
But a person is not a resource. He is not bound to lead his life as if he
were managing a business on behalf of an impersonal body of stock-
holders called human society. It is this monstrous conception against
which I argued earlier. Justice is not all; we are entitled to reserve a
portion of our concern and bestow it where we will. We may bestow it
entirely at our discretion as in the case of friendship, or we may bestow
it at what I would call "constrained discretion" in the choice and
exercise of a profession. That every.exercise of the profession is morally
worthwhile is already a great deal to the lawyer's credit. Just as the
principle of liberty leaves one morally free to choose a profession
according to inclination, so within the profession it leaves one free
to organize his life according to inclination. The lawyer's liberty-
moral liberty-to take up what kind of practice he chooses and to
take up or decline what clients he will is an aspect of the moral
liberty of self to enter into personal relations freely.
I would not carry this idea through to the bitter end. It has always
been accepted, for instance, that a court may appoint an available
lawyer to represent a criminal defendant who cannot otherwise find
1078
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
counsel. Indeed, I would be happy to acknowledge the existence of
some moral duty to represent any client whose needs fit one's par-
ticular capacities and who cannot otherwise find counsel. This is
not a large qualification to the general liberty I proclaim. The obliga-
tion is, and must remain, exceptional; it cannot become a kind of
general conscription of the particular lawyer involved. And the
obligation cannot compromise duties to existing clients. Furthermore,
I would argue that this kind of representation should always be com-
pensated-the duty to the client who cannot afford representation is
initially a duty of society, not of the individual lawyer. I go this far for
a number of reasons. If the representation is properly compensated,
then the very need to appoint a lawyer will be exceptional, an anomaly
arising in one of two ways: a fortuitous perturbation in the law of
supply and demand or a general, if not concerted, professional boycott
of this particular client. If the first is the reason, then the lifetime
imposition on any one lawyer will be slight indeed. If it is the second,
then the assertion of a duty, oddly enough, serves to express and
strengthen the principle of the lawyer's independence. For the moral
position of the lawyer rests on the claim that he takes up his client's
interests irrespective of their merits.3 0 By accepting from time to time
the duty to represent the undesirable, he affirms this independence.
But surely I must admit that the need for legal representation far
exceeds what such an unstructured, largely individualistic system could
supply. Are there not vast numbers of needy people with a variety of
legal problems who will never seek us out, but must be sought out?
And what of the general responsibility that just laws be passed and
justly administered? These are the obligations which the traditional
conception of the lawyer, with his overriding loyalty to the paying
client, is thought to leave unmet. At this point I yield no further. If
the lawyer is really to be impressed to serve these admitted social
needs, then his independence and discretion disappear, and he does
indeed become a public resource cut up and disposed of by the public's
needs. There would be no justice to such a conception. If there are
really not enough lawyers to care for the needs of the poor, then it is
grossly unfair to conscript the legal profession to fill those needs. If the
30. Carried further, this argument would hold that, as to clients who are within his
area of competence, are able to pay his fee, and create no conflict with existing clients,
a doctor or lawyer is perfectly justified in taking whoever happens to be next in the
queue in his waiting room. Places in the queue may be determined by luck, the price
system, or even some bureaucratic method of assignment. The doctor or lawyer does no
wrong if he chooses not to concern himself with how the queue was formed. For a more
detailed discussion of the moral significance of queuing, see C. FRIED, supra note 10, at
132-37.
1079


The Yale Law Journal
obligation is one of justice, it is an obligation of society as a whole. It
is cheap and hypocritical for society to be unwilling to pay the neces-
sary lawyers from the tax revenues of all, and then to claim that in-
dividual lawyers are morally at fault for not choosing to work for free.
In fact, as provision of legal services has come to be seen as necessary
to ensure justice, society has indeed hired lawyers in an effort to meet
that need.
Finally, I agree that the lawyer has a moral obligation to work for
the establishment of just institutions generally, but entirely the wrong
kind of conclusions have been drawn from this. Some of the more
ecstatic critics have put forward the lawyer as some kind of anointed
priest of justice-a high priest whose cleaving to the traditional con-
ception of the lawyer's role opens him to the charge of apostasy.3' But
this is wrong. In a democratic society, justice has no anointed priests.
Every citizen has the same duty to work for the establishment of just
institutions,32 and the lawyer has no special moral responsibilities in
that regard. To be sure, the lawyer like any citizen must use all his
knowledge and talent to fulfill that general duty of citizenship, and
this may mean that there are special perspectives and opportunities for
him.33
B. The Choice of Means
More difficult problems are posed by the conflict between the in-
terests of the client and the interests of some other concrete and
specified person to whom the client stands in opposition. How does my
friendship analogy help to resolve the conflict which a lawyer must
feel if his client asks him to lie, to oppress, or to conceal-to do some-
thing which is either illegal or felt by the lawyer to be immoral?
1. Staying Within the Law
I have defined the lawyer as a client's legal friend, as the person
whose role it is to insure the client's autonomy within the law. Al-
though I have indicated that the exercise of that autonomy is not
always consonant with the public interest, it does not at all follow that
the exercise of that autonomy, therefore, must also violate the law.
If the legal system is itself sensitive to moral claims, sensitive to the
rights of individuals, it must at times allow that autonomy to be
exercised in ways that do not further the public interest. Thus, the
31. 
See, e.g., M. GREEN, supra note 1, at 268-72.
32. 
See J. RAwis, supra 
note 24, at 333-91.
33. 
See ABA CODE OF PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY Canon 8.
1080
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
principle that the lawyer must scrupulously contain his assistance and
advocacy within the dictates of the law seems to me perfectly consistent
with my view of the lawyer as the client's friend, who maintains the
client's interests even against the interests of society.
To be sure, there may have been and may still be situations where
the law grossly violates what morality defines as individual rights; and
there have been lawyers who have stood ready to defy such laws in
order to further their client's rights-the rights which the law should,
but did not, recognize. Whatever might be said about those cases, the
lawyer's conduct in them travels outside the bounds of legal friendship
and becomes political friendship, political agitation, or friendship
tout court. But that is not the case I am examining. The moral claims
which a client has on his lawyer can be fully exhausted though that
lawyer contains his advocacy strictly within the limits of the law.
A critic who fails to see the importance of the lawyer's moral status
in assisting the autonomy of his client, may also be inclined to com-
plain that the constraints of the law restrain his advocacy of truly just
causes too much. Such a critic has things wrong at both ends. Just
as it is false to argue that the lawyer is morally reprehensible if he
furthers the interests of some clients and not others or some purposes
and not others, so it is false to assume that the lawyer fails to have the
proper zeal if he does for his client only what the law allows. The
distinction between the role of the lawyer as a personal adviser and that
of the lawyer as a citizen and member of the community should be
quite clear. It is by controlling what the law is and by varying the inter-
ests that clients may lawfully pursue that social policy should be ef-
fectuated; it is not by deforming the role of the lawyer as the client's
legal friend and asking him to curb his advocacy in that relationship.
This explains why in a reasonably just system which properly com-
mands the lawyer's loyalty, he must confine his advocacy to what the
rules of advocacy permit. He may not counsel his client to commit a
crime, nor to destroy evidence, nor to perjure himself on the witness
stand. Of course, here as elsewhere there will be borderline problems.
It may not be a crime to lie to the judge who has asked the improper
and prejudicial question of the defense attorney, but the implicit or
quasi-official rules defining the limits of the lawyer's advocacy may
nonetheless forbid this. Nothing in my model should discourage the
lawyer from observing such limits scrupulously.
A very difficult question would arise if the law imposed upon the
lawyer an obligation first to seek and then to betray his client's trust,
an obligation to do that which seems outrageous and unjust. I do not
mean to say that the resolution of this question would be easy, but my
1081


The Yale Law Journal
analysis at least clearly locates the area in which a resolution should
be sought. For such laws, if they are to be opposed, ought to be op-
posed as are other unjust laws, and not because the lawyer is in gen-
eral entitled to travel outside the constraints of the law in protecting
his client's interests. Maybe in such a dilemma a conscientious lawyer
would keep his client's confidence as would a priest or a natural
friend; but if conscientiousness requires this, it requires it as an act of
disobedience and resistance to an unjust law, rather than as a necessary
entailment of some extreme view of the lawyer's general role.
2. 
Immoral Means
I come to what seems to me one of the most difficult dilemmas of the
lawyer's role. It is illustrated by the lawyer who is asked to press the
unfair claim, to humiliate a witness, to participate in a distasteful or
dishonorable scheme. I am assuming that in none of these situations
does the lawyer do anything which is illegal or which violates the
ethical canons of his profession; the dilemma arises if he acts in a way
which seems to him personally dishonorable, but there are no sanc-
tions-legal or professional-which he need fear.
This set of issues is difficult because it calls on the same principles
which provide the justification for the lawyer's or the friend's exertions
on behalf of the person with whom he maintains a personal relation.
Only now the personal relation is one not of benefit but of harm. In
meeting the first criticism, I was able to insist on the right of the
lawyer as friend to give this extra weight to the interests of his client
when the only competing claims were the general claims of the abstract
collectivity. But here we have a specific victim as well as a specific
beneficiary. The relation to the person whom we deceive or abuse is
just as concrete and human, just as personal, as to the friend whom
we help.
It is not open to us to justify this kind of harm by claiming that
personal relations must be chosen, not thrust upon us. Personal rela-
tions are indeed typically chosen. If mere proximity could place on us
the obligations of friendship, then there would soon be nothing left
of our freedom to bestow an extra measure of care over and above what
humanity can justly claim. But there is a personal relation when we
inflict intentional harm; the fact that it is intentional reaches out and
particularizes the victim. "Who is my neighbor?" is a legitimate
question when affirmative aid is in question; it is quite out of order
in respect to the injunction "Do not harm your neighbor." Lying,
stealing, degrading, inflicting pain and injury are personal relations
too. They are not like failing to benefit, and for that reason they are
1082
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
laid under a correspondingly stricter regime than abstract harms to
the collectivity. 34 If I claim respect for my own concrete particularity,
I must accord that respect to others. Therefore, what pinches here is
the fact that the lawyer's personal engagement with the client is urging
him to do that to his adversary which the very principles of personal
engagement urge that he not do to anyone.
It is not wrong but somewhat lame to argue that the lawyer like
the client has autonomy. From this argument it follows that the
lawyer who is asked to do something personally distasteful or immoral
(though perfectly legal) should be free either to decline to enter into
the relationship of "legal friendship" or to terminate it.35 And if the
client can find a lawyer to do the morally nasty but legally permissible
thing for him, then all is well-the complexities of the law have not
succeeded in thwarting an exercise of autonomy which the law was
not entitled to thwart. So long as the first lawyer is reasonably con-
vinced that another lawyer can be found, I cannot see why he is less
free to decline the morally repugnant case than he is the boring or
poorly paid case. True, but lame, for one wants to know not whether
one may refuse to do the dirty deed, but whether one is morally
bound to refuse-bound to refuse even if he is the last lawyer in town
and no one else will bail him out of his moral conundrum.
If personal integrity lies at the foundation of the lawyer's right to
treat his client as a friend, then surely consideration for personal in-
tegrity-his own and others'-must limit what he can do in friendship.
Consideration for personal integrity forbids me to lie, cheat, or
humiliate, whether in my own interests or those of a friend, so surely
they prohibit such conduct on behalf of a client, one's legal friend.
This is the general truth, but it must be made more particular if it
is to do service here. For there is an opposing consideration. Remember,
the lawyer's special kind of friendship is occasioned by the right of
34. This point is discussed in detail in Fricd, Right and Wrong-Preliminary Con-
siderations, 
5 J. LEGAL STUD. (June, 1976; forthcoming). The notion that abstention from
harming particular persons is a special kind of duty is expressed in Ross's concept of
nonmaleficence. See W. Ross, supra note 15, at 21-22.
35. DR 2-110(B)(I) of the Code of Professional Responsibility makes withdrawal
mandatory if the attorney "knows or it is obvious that his client is bringing the legal
action, conducting the defense, or asserting a position in the litigation, or is otherwise
having steps taken for him, merely for the purpose of harassing or maliciously injuring
any person." DR 2-10(C)(1)(c) and (1)(d) permit a lawyer to seek withdrawal if the
client either "[i]nsists that the lawyer pursue a course of conduct that is illegal or that is
prohibited under the Disciplinary Rules" or "[b]y other conduct renders it unreasonably
difficult for the lawyer to carry out his employment effectively." For an argument that
an attorney should make his own moral judgments about whether and how to represent
clients, see M. GREEN, supra note I, at 268-89. See also J. AUERBACH, supra note 1, 
at
279-82.
1083


The Yale Law Journal
the client to exercise his full measure of autonomy within the law.
This suggests that one must not transfer uncritically the whole range
of personal moral scruples into the arena of legal friendship. After all,
not only would I not lie or steal for myself or my friends, I probably
also would not pursue socially noxious schemes, foreclose on widows
or orphans, or assist in the avoidance of just punishment. So we must
be careful lest the whole argument unravel on us at this point.
Balance and structure are restored if we distinguish between kinds
of moral scruples. Think of the soldier. If he is a citizen of a just
state, where foreign policy decisions are made in a democratic way,
he may well believe that it is not up to him to question whether
the war he fights -is a just war. But he is personally bound not to fire
dum-dum bullets, not to inflict intentional injury on civilians, and
not to abuse prisoners. These are personal wrongs, wrongs done by his
person to the person of the victim. 3
0 So also, the lawyer must dis-
tinguish between wrongs that a reasonably just legal system permits
to be worked by its rules and wrongs which the lawyer personally
commits. Now I do not offer this as a rule which is tight enough to
resolve all borderline questions of judgment. We must recognize that
the border is precisely the place of friction between competing moral
principles. Indeed, it is unreasonable to expect moral arguments to
dispense wholly with the need for prudence and judgment.
Consider the difference between humiliating a witness or lying to
the judge on one hand, and, on the other hand, asserting the statute
of limitations or the lack of a written memorandum to defeat what
you know to be a just claim against your client. In the latter case, if
an injustice is worked, it is worked because the legal system not only
permits it, but also defines the terms and modes of operation. Legal in-
stitutions have created the occasion for your act. What you do is not
personal; it is a formal, legally-defined act. But the moral quality of
lying or abuse obtains both without and within the context of the
law. Therefore, my general notion is that a lawyer is morally entitled
to act in this formal, representative way even if the result is an injus-
tice, because the legal system which authorizes both the injustice (e.g.,
the result following the plea of the statute of limitations) and the
formal gesture for working it insulates him from personal moral
responsibility. I would distinguish between the lawyer's own wrong
and the wrong of the system used to advantage by the client.
The clearest case is a lawyer who calls to the attention of the court
a controlling legal precedent or statute which establishes his client's
36. 
See Nagel, War and Massacre, I PHILOSOPHY & Pun. AFF. 123, 133-34, 136 (1972);
Fried, supra note 34.
1084
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
position even though that position is an unjust one. (I assume through-
out, however, that this unjust law is part of a generally just and decent
system. I am not considering at all the moral dilemmas of a lawyer in
Nazi Germany or Soviet Russia.) Why are we inclined to absolve him
of personal moral responsibility for the result he accomplishes? I
assert it is because the wrong is wholly institutional; it is a wrong
which does not exist and has no meaning outside the legal framework.
The only thing preventing the client from doing this for himself is
his lack of knowledge of the law or his lack of authority to operate the
levers of the law in official proceedings. It is to supply that lack of
knowledge or of formal capacity that the lawyer is in general authorized
to act; and the levers he pulls are all legal levers.
Now contrast this to the lawyer who lies to an opposing party in a
negotiation. I assume that (except in extreme cases akin to self-defense)
an important lie with harmful consequences is an offense to the
victim's integrity as a rational moral being, and thus the liar affirms a
principle which denigrates his own moral status.37 Every speech act
invites belief, and so every lie is a betrayal. However, may a lawyer
lie in his representative capacity? It is precisely my point that a man
cannot lie just in his representative capacity; it is like stabbing some-
one in the back "just" in a representative capacity. The injury and
betrayal are not worked by the legal process, but by an act which is
generally harmful quite apart from the legal context in which it
occurs.
There is an important class of cases which might be termed "lying
in a representative capacity." An example is the lawyer presenting to
the court a statement by another that he knows to be a lie, as when he
puts a perjurious client-defendant on the stand. There is dispute as to
whether and when the positive law of professional responsibility per-
mits this, 3
8 but clearly in such instances it is not the lawyer who is
lying. He is like a letter carrier who delivers the falsehood. Whether
he is free to do that is more a matter of legal than personal ethics.
A test that might make the distinction I offer more palpable is this:
How would it be if it were known in advance that lawyers would balk
at the practice under consideration? Would it not be intolerable if it
were known that lawyers would not plead the defense of the Statute
of Frauds or of the statute of limitations? And would it not be quite
37. 
Here I follow Augustine, Lying, in TREATISES ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS (R. Deferrari
ed. 1952), and I. KANT, THE METAPHYSICAL PRINCIPLES OF VIRTUE 90-93 (J. Ellington
trans. 1964).
38. Compare M. FREEDMAN, supra note 7, at 27-41 with Noonan, The Purposes of
Advocacy and the Limits of Confidentiality, 64 MICH. L. REv. 1485 (1966).
1085


The Yale Law Journal
all right if it were known in advance that you cannot get a lawyer
to lie for you, though he may perhaps put you on the stand to lie in
your own defense?
A more difficult case to locate in the moral landscape is abusive and
demeaning cross-examination of a complaining witness. Presumably,
positive law and the canons of ethics restrict this type of conduct, but
enforcement may be lax or interpretation by a trial judge permissive.
So the question arises: What is the lawyer morally free to do? Here
again I urge the distinction between exposing a witness to the skep-
ticism and scrutiny envisaged by the law and engaging in a personal
attack on the witness. The latter is a harm which the lawyer happens
to inflict in court, but it is a harm quite apart from the institutional
legal context. It is perhaps just a matter of style or tone, but the
crucial point is that the probing must not imply that the lawyer be-
lieves the witness is unworthy of respect.
The lawyer is not morally entitled, therefore, to engage his own
person in doing personal harm to another, though he may exploit the
system for his client even if the system consequently works injustice.
He may, but must he? This is the final issue to confront. Since he
may, he also need not if there is anyone else who will do it. Only if
there is no one else does the agony become acute. If there is an
obligation in that case, it is an institutional obligation that has
devolved upon him to take up a case, to make arguments when it is
morally permissible but personally repugnant to him to do so. Once
again, the inquiry is moral, for if the law enjoins an obligation against
conscience, a lawyer, like any conscientious person, must refuse and
pay the price.
The obligation of an available lawyer to accept appointment to
defend an accused is clear. Any moral scruples about the proposition
that no man should be accused and punished without counsel are not
morally well-founded. The proposition is intended to enhance the
autonomy of individuals within the law. But if you are the last lawyer
in town, is there a moral obligation to help the finance company
foreclose on the widow's refrigerator? If the client pursues the fore-
closure in order to establish a legal right of some significance, I do
not flinch from the conclusion that the lawyer is bound to urge this
right. So also if the finance company cannot foreclose because of an
ideological boycott by the local bar. But if all the other lawyers happen
to be on vacation and the case means no more to the finance company
than the resale value of one more used refrigerator, common sense
says the lawyer can say no. One should be able to distinguish between
establishing a legal right and being a cog in a routine, repetitive
1086
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
business operation, part of which just happens to play itself out in
court.
Conclusion
I do not imagine that what I have said provides an algorithm for
resolving some of these perennial difficulties. Rather, what I am pro-
posing is a general way of looking at the problem, a way of under-
standing not so much the difficult borderline cases as the central and
clear ones, in the hope that the principles we can there discern will
illuminate our necessarily approximate and prudential quest for
resolution on the borderline. The notion of the lawyer as the client's
legal friend, whatever its limitations and difficulties, does account for
a kind of callousness toward society and exclusivity in the service of
the client which otherwise seem quite mysterious. It justifies a kind of
scheming which we would deplore on the part of a lay person dealing
with another lay person-even if he were acting on behalf of a friend.
But these special indulgences apply only as a lawyer assists his client
in his legal business. I do not owe my client my political assistance. I
do not have to espouse his cause when I act as a citizen. Indeed, it is
one of the most repellent features of the American legal profession-
one against which the barrister-solicitor split has to some extent
guarded the English profession-that many lawyers really feel that they
are totally bought by their clients, that they must identify with their
clients' interests far beyond the special purpose of advising them and
operating the legal system for them. The defendants' antitrust lawyer
or defendants' food and drug lawyer who writes articles, gives speeches,
and pontificates generally about the evils of regulation may believe
these things, but too often he does so because it is good for business or
because he thinks that such conduct is what good representation re-
quires.39 In general, I think it deplorable that lawyers have specialized
39. 
The implications of this idea are particularly important for the so-called Wash-
ington lawyer (wherever he might be) who is hired to represent his client before agencies
and legislatures contemplating new law. This may put us on one of the borderlines I
do not pretend to resolve definitively, yet I think we can get an idea of how to think
about these cases too. To the extent that such representation involves participation in
a formal proceeding in which laws or regulations are drafted and technical competence
is required, the task is closer to the traditional task of the lawyer as I have sketched it,
and the legal friend concept is more appropriate. To the extent that the representation
involves (wholly lawful) deployment of political pressures, inducements, and considera-
tions, it is closer to being political action, and thus to requiring the kind of overriding
concern for the common good that should motivate all political actors. Certainly it is
absurd that a man should seek to be insulated from moral judgment of his accomplish-
ments as a political string-puller or publicist by the defense that he was only doing it
for money.
1087


The Yale Law Journal
not only in terms of subject matter-that may or may not be a good
thing-but in terms of plaintiffs or defendants, in terms of the position
that they represent. 4
0
There is a related point which cuts very much in the opposite
direction. It is no part of my thesis that the client is not morally
bound to avoid lying to the court, to pay a just debt even though it is
barred by the statute of limitations, to treat an opposite party in a
negotiation with humanity and consideration for his needs and vulner-
ability, or to help the effectuation of policies aimed at the common
good. Further, it is no part of my argument to hold that a lawyer must
assume that the client is not a decent, moral person, has no desire to
fulfill his moral obligations, and is asking only what is the minimum
that he must do to stay within the law. On the contrary, to assume
this about anyone is itself a form of immorality because it is a form
of disrespect between persons. Thus in very many situations a lawyer
will be advising a client who wants to effectuate his purposes within
the law, to be sure, but who also wants to behave as a decent, moral
person. It would be absurd to contend that the lawyer must abstain
from giving advice that takes account of the client's moral duties
and his presumed desire to fulfill them. Indeed, in these situations
the lawyer experiences the very special satisfaction of assisting the
client not only to realize his autonomy within the law, but also to
realize his status as a moral being. I want to make very clear that my
conception of the lawyer's role in no way disentitles the lawyer from
experiencing this satisfaction. Rather, it has been my purpose to
explicate the less obvious point that there is a vocation and a satisfac-
tion even in helping Shylock obtain his pound of flesh or in bringing
about the acquittal of a guilty man. 41
Finally, I would like to return to the charge that the morality of
role and personal relationship I offer here is almost certain to lead to
the diversion of legal services from areas of greatest need. It is just
my point, of course, that when we fulfill the office of friend-legal,
medical, or friend tout court-we do right, and thus it would be a
great wrong to place us under a general regime of always doing what
will "do the most good." What I affirm, therefore, is the moral liberty
of a lawyer to make his life out of what personal scraps and shards of
40. In England barristers are regularly hired by the government in all manner of
litigation, thereby accomplishing the many-sidedness I call for here. See Q. JOHNS ONE
& D. HOPSON, LAWYERS AND THEIR WORK 374-75 (1967). Why should this not be done
in the United States? Perhaps there is fear that this might simply become the occasion
for a suspect form of patronage.
41. 
This point is due to Albert Sacks and Richard Stewart.
1088
Vol. 85: 1060, 1976


The Lawyer as Friend
motivation his inclination and character suggest: idealism, greed,
curiosity, love of luxury, love of travel, a need for adventure or
repose; only so long as these lead him to give wise and faithful counsel.
It is the task of the social system as a whole, and of all its citizens, to
work for the conditions under which everyone will benefit in fair
measure from the performance of doctors, lawyers, teachers, and
musicians. But I would not see the integrity of these roles undermined
in order that the millennium might come sooner. After all, it may
never come, and then what would we be left with?
1089