Millions of online book co-purchases reveal 
partisan differences in the consumption of science
Passionate disagreements about climate change, stem cell 
research and evolution raise concerns that science has become 
a new battlefield in the culture wars. We used data derived 
from millions of online co-purchases as a behavioural indica-
tor for whether shared interest in science bridges political dif-
ferences or selective attention reinforces existing divisions. 
Findings reveal partisan preferences both within and across 
scientific disciplines. Across fields, customers for liberal or 
‘blue’ political books prefer basic science (for example, phys-
ics, astronomy and zoology), whereas conservative or ‘red’ 
 
customers prefer applied and commercial science (for example, 
 
criminology, medicine and geophysics). Within disciplines, 
‘red’ books tend to be co-purchased with a narrower subset of 
science books on the periphery of the discipline. We conclude 
that the political left and right share an interest in science in 
general, but not science in particular. This underscores the 
need for research into remedies that can attenuate selective 
exposure to ‘convenient truth’, renew the capacity for science 
to inform political debate and temper partisan passions.
In its quest for an objective understanding of the world1, mod-
ern science has practised two distinct forms of political neutrality: 
as an apolitical ‘separate sphere’ detached from ideological debates, 
and as a ‘public sphere’ relevant to political issues but with balanced 
political engagement that aids reasoned deliberation and deference 
to evidence2–5. Recent surveys support the view that science con-
tributes not only to human knowledge but also to social integration, 
both as a voice of reason and also as a shared value. Joint surveys 
conducted by the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science (AAAS) and the Pew Research Center in 2009 and 2014 
found that science remains near the top in public rankings of pro-
fessions, well above that of clergy, despite the prevalence of liber-
als among scientists6–8. Although nearly two-thirds of respondents 
question evolution, even those who see conflict with issues of per-
sonal faith overwhelmingly support scientific contributions to pub-
lic well-being (67%). In a highly polarized electorate, these responses 
invite reassurance that science continues to command political 
deference as a voice of reason and bridges the partisan divide. We 
may disagree on emotionally charged social issues, but at least we 
 
can agree on science.
Political and cultural polarization within the United States, 
however, raises questions about the validity of this interpretation9. 
A less comforting possibility is that verbal survey responses may 
simply echo an Enlightenment commitment to value-free scientific 
inquiry that masks underlying scepticism about science. In recent 
years, conservative politicians and pundits have challenged sci-
entific positions on evolution, cosmology, climate change and the 
perceived liberal bias in policies advocated by social scientists. For 
example, the conservative-funded scientific counter-movement in 
climate change research suggests the possibility of politically driven 
scientific polarization10,11. When science becomes politicized, par-
tisans tend to cast doubt on scientific consensus through question-
ing its inherent uncertainty12–14.This process is manifest not only in 
conservative resistance to climate change, but in historically liberal 
resistance to consensus over the positive benefits of genetically 
modified organisms, vaccination, nuclear power and the safe stor-
age of nuclear waste15.
Survey data show little overall change in public confidence in sci-
ence since 1970, but beneath the surface there is a marked shift: con-
servatives in the Vietnam era were more confident in science than 
liberals, but today that pattern has reversed16 (Supplementary Fig. 1). 
Does public exposure to science play an integrative role by encour-
aging and informing empirical validation? Or has selective atten-
tion instead reinforced the ‘Big Sort’ of American politics17–19 — the 
 
tendency to cluster in like-minded communities?
Much previous research has used surveys to investigate political 
alignments of the producers of science (with a few exceptions20,21). 
We focus instead on the consumers of science, using online 
 
co-purchases of books on science and politics as a behavioural indi-
cation of preferences held by customers who ‘vote with their pocket­
book’
, in contrast to survey responses that are costless. Surveys 
measure what researchers think is important, not what respondents 
care about, whereas online consumers can register their prefer-
ences by purchasing books on any topic they choose. Retrospective 
self-reports are vulnerable to lapses of memory, whereas online 
sellers track every purchase. Survey responses are difficult to align 
across instruments that ask different questions and ask questions 
differently, whereas books from different stores can be classified 
using consistent typologies (for example the Library of Congress). 
Surveys are vulnerable to response bias from participants reluctant 
to reveal views regarded as politically incorrect; books purchased 
online arrive cloaked in cardboard. Finally, although surveys can 
use stratified random samples to generalize results to the underly-
ing population, which is not possible with data from a convenience 
sample, rates of non-response are rising in landline-administered 
surveys, which raises concerns about their external validity22.
We addressed concerns about generalizability in two ways — by 
replicating our analysis using two independent samples of purchas-
ing behaviour from two online merchants (Amazon and Barnes & 
Noble), and also by the size of these samples, collectively comprising 
hundreds of millions of online customers, including members of hid-
den populations (such as those without landlines) who may be under-
counted in surveys based on at most a few thousand respondents.
1Computation Institute, University of Chicago, 5735 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. 2Yale Institute for Network Science, Yale University, 
17 Hillhouse Avenue, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA. 3Department of Sociology, Cornell University, 323 Uris Hall, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. 
4Department of Sociology, University of Chicago, 1126 East 59th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. †These authors contributed equally to this work. 
*e-mail: jevans@uchicago.edu; mwm14@cornell.edu


2
nature HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0079 (2017) | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Letters
Nature Human Behaviour
Our approach also differs from survey methods in the unit of 
analysis. Individuals are the units in surveys, but online retailers do 
not provide access to individual customer behaviour. Instead, we use 
individual books as the unit of analysis in constructing a co-purchase 
 
network. Bipartite network analysis has been widely used in research 
on co-citation and co-author networks23–27 where individual infor-
mation is aggregated to provide connections between scientific 
papers. What is lost in the absence of individual-level responses for 
a small sample is compensated for with massive numbers of obser-
vations we can use to detect population-level patterns generated by 
individual behaviour. Here we extend bipartite network analysis 
 
to the study of online co-purchase behaviour among a diverse 
population of tens of millions of consumers. These data provide an 
unprecedented opportunity to study the entire popular audience for 
science in ways that are not possible using traditional methods.
These data do not speak to the partisan alignment of scientists, 
the policy relevance of scientific research or the political polariza-
tion of science as an institution. Nor do we address the political 
preferences of science’s consumers. Rather, our attention is focused 
exclusively on the science preferences of those who purchase liberal 
and conservative political books, a group whose science preferences 
could differ from those who do not shop for books online or who 
shop for science books but not for politics. Within that constraint 
of available data, we ask to what extent purchasers of political books 
are also interested in science, and in what parts of science they are 
most interested. A shared interest in science might provide a bridge 
across partisan divisions, whereas selective attention to ‘convenient 
truths’ risks reinforcement of existing political identities.
To find out, we constructed two undirected co-purchase net-
works of books from the American domain of the world’s two 
largest online book stores, following an approach pioneered by 
Valdis Krebs28–30. Up to 100 unranked books are listed on each 
book page under the heading “Customers Who Bought This Item 
Also Bought”
. According to previous work31, these recommenda-
tions are based on a disproportionate number of customers who 
bought both books and are designed exclusively to identify those 
books (up to 100) that a customer is most likely to be interested in 
also purchasing. We compared results derived from two different 
bookstores — Amazon, and Barnes & Noble — each with its own 
co-purchasing algorithm. No important differences were found 
 
(see Supplementary Information).
Differences in the relative popularity of two books A and B could 
cause B to be included in the top 100 list for A while A does not make 
it into the list for B. Co-purchase behaviour is inherently undirected 
at the level of an individual customer’s multiple purchases, however, 
as the purchase of book A cannot be said to cause an individual 
to purchase B any more than the converse. We therefore ignore 
direction and reciprocation and define an undirected co-purchase 
link between two books as the level of bi-directed co-purchasing 
required to trigger a co-purchase listing in either direction.
Beginning with several seed books, we collected data recursively 
by tracing co-purchase links, iterating the search until no new titles 
could be identified. In total, we collected 26,467,385 co-purchase 
links among 1,303,504 books from amazon.com after consolidating 
multiple editions. (For details, see Methods. These counts refer to 
the number of titles, not purchases; we use ‘books’ to refer to titles 
and never to the physical objects.) From this collection, we identi-
fied three groups: political books, science books, and non-science 
books. From 3,530 politically relevant titles, two independent cod-
ers (with a third as tie-breaker) identified 673 conservative (‘red’) 
books, 583 liberal (‘blue’) books, and discarded 2,274 indeterminate 
books. The ‘indeterminate’ books include some that are centrist, 
and these could be used to investigate different interests in science 
held by moderates and those with more extreme views (whether red 
or blue). That possibility falls outside the scope of the present study, 
which is limited to comparisons of red and blue co-purchases.
a
b
Figure 1 | Visualization of the co-purchase network among liberal, conservative and scientific books. a, Links between 583 liberal (blue) and 673 
conservative (red) books. b, Links between these books and science (grey) books. As shown in a, 97.2% of red books linked to other reds and 93.7% of blue 
books linked to other blues. A small number of books were more likely to be co-purchased with books of a different colour. We subjected these blinded books 
to additional judges and found that the original codings were nearly all correct. A number of red ‘orphans’ were written by moderate Republicans critical of 
the religious right while blue ‘orphans’ were written by progressive community organizers such as Saul Alinsky (Rules for Radicals40), later rediscovered by  
the Tea Party who reference their effective ethnic blue-collar organizing tactics. In b, the broader distribution of blue-linked science books indicates that 
readers of blue books have broader disciplinary interest and co-purchased books more centrally located in the network of co-purchased science books.


nature HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0079 (2017) | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav	
3
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Letters
Nature Human Behaviour
As an additional validation, we imputed red and blue codings 
 
based on the relative number of links to other red and blue books 
and compared these with the hand codings. Over 96% were in 
agreement. The network among blue and red books is visualized 
in Fig.  1a. The monochromatic clustering reveals the political 
 
‘echo chambers’ in a highly polarized population. (See Methods for 
methodological details, red/blue book comparisons that show simi-
larity in publication year and sales rank, and information about the 
handful of ‘misfits’ in each cluster.)
The political and science books identified in amazon.com were 
also collected from barnesandnoble.com, to test the consistency 
of co-purchasing patterns between the two bookstores. These co-
purchase networks, composed of millions of distinct purchases, are 
different in important ways: only 9% of Amazon co-purchase links 
are found in the Barnes & Noble network, and only 21% of Barnes 
& Noble links are found in Amazon. Nevertheless, the number of 
political links with each book in Amazon and Barnes & Noble is 
highly correlated (0.60). The consistency of our findings in these 
two environments suggests robust patterns of co-purchase behav-
iour, in which the political preferences of science book consumers 
are very similar even though the expression of those preferences in 
the purchase of particular books differs across the two websites.
We identified 428,433 titles that appeared under science catego-
ries in the Library of Congress and Dewey Decimal classifications. 
We grouped these into 27 exclusive high-level topics, correspond-
ing to broadly defined scientific disciplines (such as physics, 
chemistry, medicine or economics). These 27 disciplines fall under 
four main scientific ‘schools’ (humanities, physical sciences, life 
sciences and social sciences). An additional 494,278 non-science 
titles were grouped in four main topics — arts, sports, literature 
(fiction and poetry), and religion — as a baseline for assessing 
co-purchase links between science and politics (see Methods for 
detailed categories).
We used co-purchase links to measure the political relevance, 
alignment and polarization among online customers. Political rel-
evance of a topic is measured by the fraction of links from political 
books (whether red or blue) among all co-purchase links to books 
in the topic. Given the measure’s uncertainty with small samples, 
we used a Bayesian probabilistic framework with a prior distribu-
tion induced by the configuration model32. Links between science, 
non-science and political books are randomly generated, given the 
network degree of each book. The higher the political relevance, the 
greater the likelihood that purchasers of political books will pur-
chase books in the topic.
Political alignment of a topic is measured by the fraction of links 
from red books among co-purchase links from political books (red 
or blue). As with relevance, we account for statistical uncertainty 
by estimating this measure as the probability that books, in a par-
ticular topic will link with red books, conditioned on their links 
from political books. Alignment captures partisan interest in each 
scientific discipline on the red–blue spectrum, where purple (align-
ment =​
 0.5) could indicate the balanced political interest required 
for a public sphere of reasoned discourse. 
Alternatively, a ‘purple’ discipline could also be internally polar-
ized, with equal interest from left and right but in separate subsets 
of books. Political polarization is a function of the number of books 
within a discipline linked with both red and blue books, compared 
with a null model in which red and blue links are randomly assigned 
to books in the topic. Polarization equals 0 when disciplinary books 
are co-purchased with red and blue books uniformly at random, but 
increases as the sets of red- and blue-linked books diverge, indi-
cating red and blue preferences for distinct books. (Note that we 
use the term ‘polarization’ to refer to the political segregation of 
the population into opposing groups of like-minded members who 
influence one another to adopt similar positions on other issues on 
which they did not initially agree33. Our usage should not be con-
fused with an alternative definition of polarization that indicates 
the tendency of people who agree on a given issue to influence one 
another to adopt more extreme opinions on that same issue.)
In addition to these three metrics, we also measured character-
istics of scientific books and fields to account for diverging red and 
blue scientific interests. We scored fields as basic or applied science 
based on the ratio of patent to article citations in each field. We also 
considered whether books are ‘academic’ or ‘popular science’
, based 
on publication by an academic or popular press. Finally, we mea-
sured the relative scientific breadth of liberals versus conservatives 
as the difference between the average number of disciplinary titles 
linked with a blue book and those with a red book, and the net-
work location of books with ties to red and blue relative to the core 
 
or periphery of the co-purchase network within the disciplines. 
 
(See Methods for detailed discussion of these measures.)
Our analysis proceeds in three steps. We first assess political 
 
relevance, alignment and polarization as measures of political 
 
interest in science compared with political interest in books and 
0.271
0.453
0.461
0.464
0.477
0.498
0.505
0.519
0.524
0.537
0
1
Relevance
Arts
Sports
Literature
Religion
Physical sciences
Life sciences
Social sciences
Humanities
0.014
0.012
0.010
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Polarization
Science
Non-science
Figure 2 | Comparisons of political relevance, polarization and alignment between science and non-science books. Colour indicates alignment from 
liberal (blue) to conservative (red), corresponding to the relative interest in the topic by liberals versus conservatives. The widths of the bars (x axis)  
in the left panel indicate political relevance of topics of science and non-science books, and those in the right panel indicate their political polarization. 
Science books attract equal interest from liberals and conservatives but are more politically relevant and polarized than non-science books, largely owing 
to the social sciences and humanities, while the physical and life sciences are similar to non-science overall. Books on the performing arts are most aligned 
with liberals and, along with sports, have low political relevance and polarization compared with literature, religion and science.


4
nature HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0079 (2017) | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Letters
Nature Human Behaviour
topics outside science; second, we report differences in these mea-
sures across scientific disciplines, broken down by the continuum of 
applied and basic science; third, we report the scientific breadth and 
location of red and blue books within disciplines.
First, compared with the number of co-purchase links expected 
by chance, people who buy liberal and conservative books are more 
likely to buy books on science than on important topics outside 
science, but this interest in science does not appear to be insulated 
from the ‘Big Sort’ of American politics. Figure  2 reports politi-
cal relevance and polarization of science, religion, sports, arts and 
literature, with alignment indicated by colour. Results for politi-
cal relevance show that political readers have greater interest in 
science relative to non-science topics, largely owing to books on 
social science. The physical and life sciences do not attract mark-
edly greater interest among political readers compared with topics 
outside science, but this political interest in science is significantly 
more polarized than for arts and sports, indicating that liberals and 
conservatives are less likely to read the same science book.
Second, we found a significant positive correlation (r  =​
  0.43, 
p =​
 0.002) between political alignment and the normalized num-
ber of citations by patents, our indicator of applied, commercial sci-
ence (Fig. 3b). For example, organic chemistry is the most applied 
sub-discipline, as measured by patent versus article citations, and 
it aligns closely with red books (0.75 on an alignment scale from 
 
0 to 1). This contrasts with a sub-discipline such as zoology, which is 
largely driven by curiosity and basic scientific concerns, and appeals 
more to those on the left (0.1). This pattern can also be observed 
in Fig.  3a, which reports co-purchase alignment within the four 
‘schools’
. Applied disciplines such as medicine and law attract read-
ers at the red end compared with other disciplines in their respec-
tive schools, whereas anthropology and astronomy attract readers 
 
at the blue end. This mirrors the ideological differences among 
 
scientists employed in academia versus industry, as reported in 
AAAS/Pew surveys6,7 from 2009 and 2014. A possible interpretation 
 
is that scientific puzzles appeal more to the left, while problem- 
solving appeals more to the right.
Science
Physical
sciences
(0.48)
Humanities
(0.54)
(0.52)
Social
sciences
(0.52)
Life sciences
(0.50)
a
Applied index
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
10–2
10–1
100
101
102
Political alignment
Geology, hydrology,
metereology
Microorganisms,
fungi, algae
Metallurgy
Zoology
Botany
Applied physics
Analysis
Probability and applied mathematics
 
Modern physics
Food technology
Birds
Algebra and
number theory
Data processing and
computer science
Explosives and
fuel technology
Ecology
Physiology
Biochemistry
Organic chemistry
Inorganic chemistry
Special computer methods
Surgery and related
medical specialties
b
Medicine (0.56)
Law (0.54)
Political science (0.54)
Economics (0.51)
Sociology (0.48)
Psychology (0.47)
Archaeology (0.42)
Education (0.33)
Anthropology (0.32)
Veterinary medicine (0.45)
Plant science (0.38)
Biology (0.38)
Zoology (0.21)
History (0.55)
Architecture (0.39)
Philosophy (0.36)
Climatology (0.73)
Environmental science (0.48)
Chemistry (0.48)
Computer science (0.47)
Palaeontology  (0.45)
Geology (0.43)
Mathematics (0.37)
Physics (0.37)
Oceanography (0.36)
Astronomy (0.26)
Engineering (0.25)
Figure 3 | Comparisons of political alignment across scientific disciplines and sub-disciplines. a, Colours and values in the disciplinary tree indicate 
political alignment. Differences in alignment emerge more clearly the more disaggregated the categories. Books in applied disciplines such as medicine, 
law and climatology are more likely to be co-purchased with conservative books, whereas those in basic science disciplines such as zoology, anthropology 
and philosophy are more likely to be co-purchased with liberal books. b, This association becomes clearer at the sub-discipline level, revealed in the  
scatter plot. Conservative alignment tends to increase with the applied index (r =​
 0.43, p =​
 0.002), which is defined as the ratio of patent to article 
citations, here shown on disaggregated Dewey Decimal subfield data along with a 90% confidence interval.


nature HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0079 (2017) | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav	
5
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Letters
Nature Human Behaviour
Education
Engineering
Computer science
Oceanography
Plant science
Law
Mathematics
Political polarization
Zoology
Biology
History
Philosophy
Economics
Political science
Climatology
Environmental science
Medicine
Diference in scientiﬁc breadth
(blue – red)
2
1
0
–1
100
101
102
3
Figure 4 | Location of red and blue political books within the network of disciplinary books to which they are linked. Network visualizations show the 
locations of red and blue political books in the co-purchase networks of science books (grey nodes) in seven disciplines: zoology, biology, environmental 
science, climatology, economics, political science and philosophy. All disciplines show high polarization in partisan co-purchasing, with red books linked 
to fewer disciplinary books and to disciplinary books closer to the periphery (Supplementary Fig. 4). The peripheral location means that these red books 
are co-purchased with disciplinary books that are less likely to be co-purchased with other books in the discipline. The monochromatic clustering is 
due entirely to links among red-linked science books and likewise for blue-linked science books; the links between political books are not considered in 
constructing the networks. The scatter plot shows that the more polarized the political co-purchases, the higher the relative scientific breadth of blue 
versus red, as measured by the difference between the average number of disciplinary titles linked with a blue book and the number linked with a red book 
(r =​
 0.8, p <​
 0.001). The line represents the estimated relationship, along with the 90% confidence interval.


6
nature HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0079 (2017) | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Letters
Nature Human Behaviour
A few disciplines, notably palaeontology, bridge political divi-
sions and are politically purple because books in these disciplines 
attract equal interest from both left and right. However, most purple 
disciplines (with equal likelihood to have red and blue book links) 
do not bridge political divisions. Figure  4 illustrates the internal 
network structure of seven natural and social science disciplines. 
Monochromatic clusters, located in different regions of the net-
work, indicate that red and blue political books are linked to dif-
ferent interconnected clusters of disciplinary books. Simply put, 
 
even when left and right are equally likely to read books in a 
 
discipline, they are rarely the same books or even from the same 
topical cluster.
We drilled down further to examine the location of science 
books linked with red and blue books within co-purchase networks 
at the disciplinary level. The scatter plot in Fig. 4 presents the rela-
tive scientific breadth of blue versus red (y axis). Note that higher 
values in the y axis indicate greater difference between the breadths 
of blue and red books. The figure reveals that blue books link to a 
larger number of scientific titles than red within most disciplines, 
and the difference increases for more polarized disciplines.
The disciplinary networks show the location of red and blue 
political books linked to disciplinary books within a field (coloured 
grey). All books are positioned such that pairwise proximities corre-
spond only to co-purchase links with disciplinary books. The visu-
alizations show that red books tend to cluster on the periphery of 
the co-purchase networks for climatology, environmental science, 
 
political science and biology, which indicates that conservatives 
 
tend to purchase books likely to be co-purchased with each 
 
other but not with other books in the discipline (Supplementary 
Fig. 4). In contrast, blue books are less clustered and linked to books 
closer to the core, which indicates that liberals tend to purchase 
 
a more diverse set of science books, including books frequently 
co-purchased with other books in the discipline. The greater cen-
trality of blue-linked books does not appear to be a consequence 
of academic liberalism. When books by academic publishers are 
removed, the pattern remains, as do all the other patterns that we 
report (see Supplementary Fig. 5).
These results need to be qualified by inherent limitations in 
the use of co-purchase links to measure partisan interest in sci-
ence. First, although half of the US population purchases books 
 
online, this is not a random sample, which limits the ability to gen-
eralize our results to the other half. We cannot be certain that those 
who purchase books online are similar to those who do not, or 
 
that those who purchase red and blue books have the same inter-
ests in science as liberals and conservatives who do not purchase 
 
political books.
Second, we do not have individual-level co-purchase data and 
therefore cannot pursue analytical strategies for which such data would 
be required, such as multivariate causal modelling. Co-purchasing 
patterns reveal the population-level distribution of political interests 
in science but not the underlying individual-level causes.
Third, co-purchase links can influence purchases that then rein-
force new co-purchase links, thereby magnifying estimates of the 
underlying consumer interest in politics and science. We believe 
that this reinforcing dynamic does not invalidate the patterns that 
we find. Rather, this provides a possible explanation of the findings 
— an ‘echo chamber’ constructed not only by consumer preferences 
but also by the ‘filter bubble’ constructed by collaborative filter-
ing technology that reinforces those preferences34. Future research 
using randomized trials is needed to test whether recommender 
systems can induce users to make choices orthogonal to or counter 
to their existing preferences.
These three sets of concerns are mitigated, however, by similar-
ity in the results derived from distinct bookstores, with different 
purchase patterns and company-specific algorithms. We replicated 
the Amazon-based analyses using the Barnes & Noble network and 
found consistent results across datasets, with political polarization 
(r =​
 0.97, p <​
 0.001) and alignment (r =​
 0.76, p <​
 0.001) highly 
 
correlated across the two websites (Supplementary Fig. 6).
Keeping the limitations of these data in mind, online co- 
purchases reveal a similar level of interest in science among 
 
liberal and conservative readers, but not in the same topics. We 
found little support for the view that science is either an apolitical 
separate sphere, largely ignored by partisans, or a public sphere in 
which left and right share common scientific interests. Books on 
science are more likely than novels or books on religion, sports or 
the arts to be co-purchased with political books, but left and right 
rarely purchase the same books. Scientific preferences are polar-
ized at the aggregate level, with liberals attracted to basic science, 
 
and conservatives attracted to applied, commercial science. Books 
in a few ‘purple’ disciplines such as palaeontology are co-pur-
chased by both the left and right, but these ‘bridging’ disciplines 
also tend to be those with the lowest relevance to political readers. 
 
Disciplines with high political relevance, such as social science, law, 
history and biology, tend to attract politically aligned readers, and 
even when they attract readers from both left and right, it is not to 
the same books. Although our analysis cannot uncover the cog-
nitive and social processes underlying these partisan differences 
in the consumption of science, it is consistent with research on 
ideologically motivated reasoning35, in which political differences 
 
seed different predilections toward politically consequential sci-
entific positions or amplify path-dependent routes of political and 
cultural sorting19.
Our finding that red books tend to link to a narrow cluster of 
relatively peripheral books in the more polarized disciplines is 
consistent with recent research documenting growing scepticism 
among conservatives of the cultural authority held by professional 
scientists16. This may also reflect efforts by conservative political 
movements to offer politicized alternatives to consensus scientific 
positions. Such efforts have been observed in previous research on 
climate change10 and a range of other areas36. Science may not be on 
the front lines of the culture wars, but it is not above the battle, nor 
is it immune to the ‘echo chambers’ that have been widely observed 
in political discourse.
This conclusion underscores the need for research into pos-
sible remedies. Scholars have begun to explore counter-measures of 
scientific communication that include helping scientists to estab-
lish shared interests with audiences to enhance credibility37, add-
ing public deliberation alongside scientific analysis to separately 
identify fact and value38,39, and communicating consensus when 
it exists to help the public set aside protective motivations14. It is 
hoped that these will counter selective exposure to ‘convenient 
truth’ and renew the promise of science to inform and elevate 
 
political debate.
Methods
Data collection. We collected metadata for 1,449,525 books from the largest  
online book retailer, Amazon.com, in spring 2013. Starting from two seed books, 
one liberal (Barack Obama’s Dreams from My Father) and one conservative  
(Mitt Romney’s No Apology), we collected all information accessible from the 
webpage of each book, including descriptive information, reviews, and the list  
of up to 100 books under “Customers Who Bought This Item Also Bought”
.  
We then collected identical data for each book on the recommended list, iterating 
that process until no new books could be identified. The resulting ‘snowball sample’ 
contained virtually all books in the largest strongly connected component in 
Amazon’s directed co-purchase network.
Because every title may have multiple editions or formats, for example 
paperback and hardcover, each of which is associated with a distinct ISBN 
(International Standard Book Number), we consolidated different editions and 
formats based on the unique ASIN (Amazon Standard Identification Number) 
provided in the source code of each book page. After consolidation we ended up 
with 1,303,504 unique titles in the dataset. In the main text and below, we use 
‘books’ to refer to the distinct titles and never to the physical objects.
The political and science books identified in amazon.com were also collected 
from barnesandnoble.com, together with books from the Barnes & Noble  


nature HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0079 (2017) | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav	
7
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Letters
Nature Human Behaviour
across topics while still taking this uncertainty into consideration. We needed to 
normalize the scores across topics. For these two reasons, we developed a Bayesian 
estimate for the probability θ. The procedure is as follows. First, we assume a null  
model in which all the co-purchase links between topics are randomly shuffled 
while preserving the number of links attached to each topic (compare with the 
configuration model32). This ‘best guess’ of the co-purchase network (without 
knowing the identities of the topics) represents a prior distribution on θ, θ ∼​
 beta 
(dkpolitical/m, d(1 – kpolitical/m), where kpolitical is the total number of links attached 
to political books and m is the total number of links between topics (including 
political books). kpolitical/m is the probability of linking to political books in our 
random null model, and d controls the strength of our prior. The values of θ will 
depend on d, but we are interested in the relative size of θ across topics,  
and thus our results are insensitive to the choice of d. We use the average number 
of links to political books over all disciplines as d. After observing the number  
of links between the topic and political books, we can update our estimate  
of θ using Bayes rule:
θ
θ
θ
|
=
|
P
X
P X
P
P X
(
)
(
) ( )
( )
We can then derive a Bayesian estimate for the probability θ:
θ ∼
−
dk
m d
k
m
beta(
/
, (1
/
)
political
political
θ
θ
| ∼
X
K
binomial( , )
θ|
∼
+
−
+
−
X
X
dk
m K
X
d
k
m
beta(
/
,
(1
/
)
political
political
where the posterior distribution θ|X combines our initial guess of θ (based on the 
randomized network) with the actual data X and weights the actual data by the 
number of co-purchase links attached to the topic.
Finally, the political relevance of the topic is defined as the mean of the 
posterior distribution of θ:
θ|
=
+
+
E
X
X
dk
m
K
d
[
]
/
political
This model further reflects how the actual observations (X/K) are  
combined with prior beliefs (kpolitical/m) to incorporate uncertainty resulting  
from too few observations on the point estimator of θ. If the number K of 
co-purchase links attached to a topic is small, we do not have enough evidence  
to estimate its political relevance, and this will be close to the level in the random 
null model; if a topic has many co-purchase links, we have greater trust in  
the estimate.
Political alignment. Political alignment locates each discipline on the blue–red 
spectrum based on the interest among conservative readers relative to liberal. 
Analogous to political relevance, alignment is defined as the probability that a 
co-purchase link attached to a book in a given topic is to a red book, conditioned 
on the link being to a political book (red or blue). Note that we restrict our focus 
to links with political books rather than to all topics. Hence, it can be viewed as 
a measure of how relevant the topic is to readers of red books as opposed to blue 
books. For ease of notation, we also denote this probability θ. One way to estimate 
this probability θ is to divide the number of links (Xred) between the topic and red 
books by the total number of links (Kp) between this topic and political books, 
Xred/Kp. Similar issues arise as for political relevance, however, and hence we 
developed an analogous Bayesian model to estimate θ.
First, we assume a null model in which co-purchase links between a given topic 
and political books are randomly shuffled while preserving the number of links 
attached to each (compare with the configuration model32). Let kred and kblue be 
the total numbers of links attached to red and blue books, respectively. Then the 
probability of linking to red books in the random null model is kred/(kred +​
 kblue), 
which suggests a prior distribution on θ,
θ∼
+
+
dk
k
k
dk
k
k
beta(
/ (
),
/ (
))
red
red
blue
blue
red
blue
where d controls the strength of our prior assumption. After observing the  
number of links (Xred) between the topic and red books, and the number of  
links (Xblue) between the topic and blue books, we update our knowledge on θ  
and obtain the posterior distribution of θ. In summary, the Bayesian model  
for estimating θ is as follows:
θ∼
+
+
dk
k
k
dk
k
k
beta(
/ (
),
/ (
))
red
red
blue
blue
red
blue
θ
θ
| ∼
X
K
binomial(
,
)
red
p
θ|
∼
+
+
−
+
+
X
X
dk
k
k
K
X
dk
k
k
beta(
/ (
),
/ (
))
red
red
red
red
blue
p
red
blue
red
blue
co-purchase recommendation lists for those books. See below for how science  
and political books are identified. A brief summary of the two datasets  
is given in Supplementary Table 1.
Political books. Our 3,714 candidate political books were chosen from three 
sources: 1,667 books listed in Amazon’s ‘Liberalism & Conservatism’ category; 
1,812 additional books listed in 20 Amazon categories that share the most  
books with ‘Liberalism & Conservatism’; and 320 books written by prominent  
US political leaders, including members of the US Congress since 1993 and  
major party presidential candidates since 1992.
Each candidate political book was examined by at least two independent 
coders, with another independent coder as a tiebreaker. The coders classified  
each book as liberal, conservative or ideologically indeterminate, based on  
the information available on the book’s Amazon webpage. For a book to be  
coded as liberal or conservative, it had to meet two basic requirements.  
First, the book must have political content. That is, the book must express an 
ideological position on a partisan political or social issue, even if that issue  
is not necessarily the main topic of the book. For example, autobiographies are 
nominally about a person, but autobiographies of political figures often express 
ideological positions on contested political issues, in which case the book  
meets the requirement to have political content. Second, the ideology that  
the book espouses must be consistently liberal or conservative. If the book 
expressed contradictory ideological positions, or centrist positions that are  
shared by both liberals and conservatives or by neither, the book was coded  
as indeterminate.
Two independent coders reached agreement on 83.5% of the candidate  
books listed in Amazon’s ‘Liberalism & Conservatism’ category. Another two  
independent coders reached agreement on 70% of the books in the 20 categories 
that overlap with ‘Liberalism & Conservatism’
. The lower agreement reflects  
the greater diversity among books that were not listed by Amazon under  
‘Liberalism & Conservatism’
. Conflicts were resolved by other independent coders 
and, in rare cases, by the authors. In total, we identified 677 conservative (‘red’) 
books, 587 liberal (‘blue’) books, and 2,545 indeterminate books. Details of the 
conservative and liberal books are given in Supplementary Tables 3 and 4.
We tested for possible bias introduced by the exclusion of political books 
that did not meet both our criteria for red–blue classification, by including 315 
‘indeterminate’ books written by US Congressmen coded red or blue based  
on the authors’ party memberships. We found that adding these ‘author-coded’ 
books to the ‘content-coded’ books did not weaken the reported results  
(see Supplementary Fig. 8).
Distributions of sales ranks for liberal and conservative books are shown in 
Supplementary Fig. 2, along with distributions of publication years for the two sets 
of books. The average logarithmic sales ranks for liberal and conservative books 
are 13.5 and 13.1, respectively, and the medians are 13.7 and 13.4. The average 
publication years of both sets of books are 1999, and the median publication  
year is 2007 for liberal books and 2009 for conservative books. A summary  
is provided in Supplementary Table 2.
Science books and categories. We consolidated the science-related categories in 
the Library of Congress and Dewey Decimal classification systems and reorganized 
these categories into 27 exclusive high-level topics, corresponding to broadly 
defined scientific disciplines (such as physics, chemistry, medicine or economics). 
These 27 disciplines fall under four main scientific ‘schools’ (humanities, physical 
sciences, life sciences and social sciences). We then used the Library of Congress 
and Dewey Decimal codes of the books to sort them into disciplines.
An additional 494,278 non-science titles were grouped in four main  
topics — arts, sports, literature (fiction and poetry) and religion — as a baseline for 
assessing co-purchase links between science and politics. (Detailed organization  
of the Library of Congress and Dewey Decimal categories can be found  
in Supplementary Tables 5 and 6.)
Political relevance. Political relevance measures how likely it is that books from a 
given topic will be co-purchased with political books. It is a number between 0 and 1,  
defined as the probability θ that a co-purchase link from books in a given topic 
will link that topic with political books (red or blue). More formally, we assume 
that the number of undirected co-purchase links X between the topic (for example 
climatology) and political books has a binomial distribution, X ∼​
 binomial(K,θ), 
where K is the total number of links attached to the topic and ∼​
 indicates 
‘distributed as’
.
A straightforward estimator of this probability θ is the number of co-purchase 
links between the topic and political books divided by the total number of 
co-purchase links between the topic and all other topics, X/K. However, this 
estimator is not appropriate in this application for two reasons. First, a topic might 
have few links to other topics, which renders this measure of relevance unreliable. 
For example, if a topic has only one link to other topics and it links to political 
books, then we have θ =​
 X/K =​
 1, implying that the topic is extremely relevant, 
which is dubious because there is only one co-purchase link in total. Second, 
although the uncertainty of this estimator resulting from too few observations 
could be captured by a confidence interval, we needed to compare relevance 


8
nature HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0079 (2017) | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Letters
Nature Human Behaviour
Accordingly, political alignment is calculated as the mean of the  
posterior distribution:
θ|
=
+
+
+
E
X
X
dk
k
k
K
d
[
]
/ (
)
red
red
red
red
blue
p
We note one extra step in presenting the alignment score. Naively, one  
might expect a topic to be right-leaning if the topic has a larger probability of 
linking with red books than blue books (that is, θ >​
 0.5), but this is not a fair 
comparison. Because red books have more total co-purchase links than blue  
books, red books would also possess more co-purchase links in the random null 
network. Therefore, the fair comparison is to compare θ with kred/(kred +​
 kblue), 
which is the probability of linking to red books in the random null model.  
To make the presentation of results more accessible and intuitive, we scaled θ 
linearly so that when θ =​
 kred/(kred +​
 kblue) the rescaled θ would be 0.5.  
In the main text and in the Supplementary Information, θ is always rescaled 
and 0.5 is the ‘neutral’ point, which accords with intuition. The rescaling is 
straightforward: θ is rescaled to 0.5θ/[kred/(kred +​
 kblue)] when θ <​
 (kred +​
 kblue),  
and to 0.5[θ −​
 kred/(kred +​
 kblue)]/[1 −​
 kred/(kred +​
 kblue)] +​
 0.5 otherwise.
Lastly, we checked the consistency of our measurements of political alignment 
by measuring the alignment of all political books and comparing the results with 
the ‘ground truth’ red and blue hand-codings. Specifically, for every political book 
that had been hand-coded as blue or red, we ignored the ‘ground truth’ and instead 
imputed the book’s alignment using the same procedure for measuring alignment 
of scientific topics introduced above. We then classified a book with alignment 
θ >​
 0.5 as red and otherwise blue. The imputed ideology agreed with human 
codings for over 96% of the political books. Inspection of the handful of anomalies 
revealed red books that appeal to liberals (for example conservative criticisms  
of religious political influence) and blue books that appeal to the Tea Party  
(for example Alinsky-inspired community organizing).
Political polarization. Political polarization measures the extent to which interests 
from conservatives and liberals in a given topic diverge. In other words, even if 
conservatives and liberals are equally likely to buy books of a given topic, they 
might buy distinct, ideology-relevant books. Polarization identifies this possibility. 
For a given topic, we computed the number of books within the topic linked to 
both red and blue books, divided by the number of books linked to either (we call 
this quantity ‘overlap’
, denoted by o). We then compared observed overlap with 
the expected value in a null model in which links from red and blue books are 
randomly assigned to books in the topic.
Specifically, for each link between books in a given topic and political books, 
we shuffle the book in the topic to a randomly chosen topical book, also linked to 
political books. This results in all politically relevant books from the topic being 
linked to political books uniformly at random. After all political links have been 
randomized, the fraction of books linked to both red and blue among books 
linked to either is calculated in the randomized network. We carry out 100 such 
random simulations to obtain a distribution of the overlap between blue and red 
(the fraction of books linked to both blue and red) in the random model. Finally, 
polarization is measured as the difference between the expected overlap in the 
random null model, E[O], and the observed overlap:
−
E O
o
O
[ ]
var[ ]
If the observed overlap is smaller than what would be expected at random, 
polarization is positive and increases with the difference between expected and 
observed overlaps. Polarization of a topic equals zero when red and blue books are 
co-purchased with books within the topic uniformly at random, but increases  
as the sets of red- and blue-linked books diverge, indicating red and blue 
preferences for distinct books.
Applied index. To quantify the extent to which the political alignment of scientific 
fields is correlated with their application, we developed an index measuring the 
extent to which a field is commercially applied.
Among many possible measures of commercial application, a reasonable and 
tractable one is the degree to which patents build upon knowledge produced by the 
field. To that end, we use the US patent database from Google, 1976–2014, which is 
the most digitally complete. For each journal, we tabulate the number of times that 
journal was cited by all patents in the patent database. We aggregated these within 
the Dewey Decimal and Library of Congress categories in which Amazon books 
are categorized, such that the number of citations received by a field is computed as 
the sum of citations received by all the journals in that field.
Citations from patents meaningfully reflect gross contributions of commercial 
relevance to the real world, but they do not fully capture the degree to which  
a field is applied, because the number of citations is strongly influenced by field  
size and activity. Imagine a small, focused field that is commercially applied, 
compared with a large, broad field. Perhaps the smaller, more focused field  
receives fewer citations from patents only because it produces fewer total patents, 
but it is actually more application-oriented because all knowledge in the field is 
transferred to technology. Therefore, we build a field-level citation network to 
capture how active or impactful a field is in the scientific space.
We find that the number of citations that a sub-discipline (as defined by our 
classification of science categories) receives from patents is strongly correlated 
(r =​
 0.8, p <​
 0.001) with the number of citations that it receives from other  
sub-disciplines (Supplementary Fig. 3). This correlation reveals that most  
sub-disciplines are proportionally active in both patent and academic domains,  
and either of the two types of citations alone is not sufficient to estimate how 
applied the field might be. Accordingly, we constructed a commercial applied  
index that combines both kinds of citations and measures how much each sub-
discipline is cited by patents relative to articles. Specifically, for each sub-discipline 
i, we denote the number of citations from patents by yi and the number of  
citations from articles in other sub-disciplines by xi. The expected number E[Y] of 
citations from patents given the number X of citations from other sub-disciplines 
is modelled E[Y] =​
 exp(aX +​
 b), which explains the correlation illustrated in 
Supplementary Fig. 3. Finally, the commercial application index A of a  
sub-discipline is calculated as the number of citations from patents normalized  
by its expected number of patent citations given the number of citations from  
other sub-disciplines: Ai =​
 yi/exp(axi +​
 b).
Scientific breadth. Scientific breadth measures the breadth of interests in science 
from conservatives and liberals. For example, if red books link to a narrow subset 
of books within a discipline, while an equal number of blue books connect to a 
large and diverse subset of disciplinary books, those purchasing blue books have 
exposure to a wider range of science books — and probably a wider range of 
scientific perspectives — than those purchasing red books.
With respect to each discipline, the scientific breadth of conservatives  
(or liberals) is defined by the number of distinct titles within the discipline linked 
to red (or blue) books divided by the number of red (or blue) books linked  
to the discipline.
Centrality. The network location of each book with links to red and blue relative 
to the core or periphery of a disciplinary book network was quantified by assessing 
the closeness centrality41 of each book with respect to the given disciplinary 
network. Centralities of blue-linked books were then compared with those of red-
linked books within each discipline to assess core location of blue and red with 
respect to the discipline. Books at the centre of a disciplinary book network can 
be interpreted as having greater disciplinary relevance, given their co-presence in 
personal libraries with many other books in the discipline. In contrast, books at the 
periphery are rarely purchased with other books in the discipline.
To compare the difference between centralities of blue- and red-linked books 
across disciplines, we calculated the widely used t-score
−
+
E X
E Y
S
n
n
[ ]
[ ]
(1/
1/
)
x
y
2
for each discipline, where X corresponds to centralities of blue-linked books,  
Y to centralities of red-linked books, nx to the number of blue-linked books  
and ny to the number of red-linked books; S2 is the pooled sample variance  
of blue- and red-linked books.
The standardized difference (t-score) between centralities of blue- and  
red-linked books is shown in Supplementary Fig. 4. The mean centrality  
of blue-linked books is larger than that of red-linked books for most disciplines, 
and as polarization increases, blue-linked books are more central than red-linked 
books. Exceptions to this pattern include history and economics.
Data availability. All data that support the findings of this study are publicly 
available at http://www.knowledgelab.org/research_grants/research/amazon/
Code availability. Python code for data processing, analysis and visualization 
is publicly available at http://www.knowledgelab.org/research_grants/research/
amazon/
received 1 September 2016; accepted 21 February 2017;  
published 3 April 2017
References
1.	 Daston, L. & Galison, P. Objectivity (Zone Books, 2007).
2.	 Habermas, J. The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry 
into a Category of Bourgeois Society (MIT Press, 1991).
3.	 Shapin, S. A Social History of Truth: Civility and Science in Seventeenth-
Century England (Univ. Chicago Press, 1994).
4.	 Shapiro, B. J. A Culture of Fact: England, 1550–1720 (Cornell Univ. Press, 2003).
5.	 Sutton, G. V. Science for a Polite Society: Gender, Culture, and the 
Demonstration Of Enlightenment (Westview, 1997).
6.	 Kohut, A., Keeter, S., Doherty, C., Dimock, M. & Leshner, A. I. A Survey 
Conducted in Collaboration with the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science (Pew Research Center for the People & the Press, 
AAAS, 2009).


nature HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0079 (2017) | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav	
9
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Letters
Nature Human Behaviour
7.	 Funk, C. et al. Public and Scientists’ Views on Science and Society  
(Pew Research Center for the People & the Press, AAAS, 2015).
8.	 Public Praises Science; Scientists Fault Public, Media (Pew Research Center for 
the People & the Press, AAAS, 2009).
9.	 Fiorina, M. P. & Abrams, S. J. Political polarization in the American public. 
Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 11, 563–588 (2008).
10.	Farrell, J. Corporate funding and ideological polarization about climate 
change. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 92–97 (2015).
11.	Suhay, E. & Druckman, J. N. The politics of science political values and the 
production, communication, and reception of scientific knowledge.  
Ann. Am. Acad. Pol. Soc. Sci. 658, 6–15 (2015).
12.	Oreskes, N. & Conway, E. M. Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists 
Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming 
(Bloomsbury USA, 2011).
13.	Jasanoff, S. Technologies of humility. Nature 450, 33 (2007).
14.	Bolsen, T. & Druckman, J. N. Counteracting the politicization of science.  
J. Commun. 65, 745–769 (2015).
15.	Berezow, A. B & Campbell, H. Science Left Behind: Feel-Good Fallacies and 
the Rise of the Anti-Scientific Left (PublicAffairs, 2012).
16.	Gauchat, G. Politicization of science in the public sphere: a study  
of public trust in the United States, 1974 to 2010. Am. Sociol. Rev. 77, 
167–187 (2012).
17.	Bishop, B. The Big Sort: Why the Clustering of Like-Minded America is  
Tearing Us Apart (Mariner, 2009).
18.	Bakshy, E., Messing, S. & Adamic, L. Exposure to ideologically diverse news 
and opinion on Facebook. Science 384, 1130–1132 (2015).
19.	DellaPosta, D., Shi, Y. & Macy, M. Why do liberals drink lattes? Am. J. Sociol. 
120, 1473–1511 (2015).
20.	Yeo, S. K., Xenos, M. A., Brossard, D. & Scheufele, D. A. Selecting our own 
science: how communication contexts and individual traits shape information 
seeking. Ann. Am. Acad. Pol. Soc. Sci. 658, 172–191 (2015).
21.	Jelveh, Z., Kogut, B. & Naidu, S. Political language in economics. Preprint at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2535453 (2014)
22.	Massey, D. S. & Tourangeau, R. Where do we go from here? Nonresponse 
and social measurement. Ann. Am. Acad. Pol. Soc. Sci. 645, 222–236 (2013).
23.	Vanraan, A. F. J. Fractal dimension of co-citations. Nature 347,  
626–626 (1990).
24.	Jenssen, T.-K., Lægreid, A., Komorowski, J. & Hovig, E. A literature network 
of human genes for high-throughput analysis of gene expression. Nat. Genet. 
28, 21–28 (2001).
25.	Chen, C. Searching for intellectual turning points: progressive knowledge 
domain visualization. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 5303–5310 (2004).
26.	Uzzi, B., Mukherjee, S., Stringer, M. & Jones, B. Atypical combinations and 
scientific impact. Science 342, 468–472 (2013).
27.	Sinatra, R., Deville, P., Szell, M., Wang, D. & Barabási, A.-L. A century of 
physics. Nat. Phys. 11, 791–796 (2015).
28.	Eakin, E. Study finds a nation of polarized readers. The New York Times  
(13 March 2004).
29.	Krebs, V. The Social Life of Books: Visualizing Communities of Interest via 
Purchase Patterns on the WWW (OrgNet, 1999); http://www.orgnet.com/
booknet.html
30.	Krebs, V. Divided We Stand? (OrgNet, 2003); http://www.orgnet.com/ 
leftright.html
31.	Linden, G., Smith, B. & York, J. Amazon.com recommendations: item-to-item 
collaborative filtering. IEEE Internet Comput. 7, 76–80 (2003).
32.	Molloy, M. & Reed, B. A critical point for random graphs with a given degree 
sequence. Random Struct. Algorithms 6, 161–180 (1995).
33.	Sunstein, C. R. Republic.com 2.0 (Princeton Univ. Press, 2009).
34.	Pariser, E. The Filter Bubble: How the New Personalized Web Is Changing 
What We Read and How We Think (Penguin, 2011).
35.	Kahan, D. M. Ideology, motivated reasoning, and cognitive reflection: an 
experimental study. Judgm. Decis. Mak. 8, 407–24 (2012).
36.	Jacques, P. J., Dunlap, R. E. & Freeman, M. The organisation of denial: 
conservative think tanks and environmental scepticism. Environ. Polit. 17, 
349–385 (2008).
37.	Lupia, A. Communicating science in politicized environments.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 14048–14054 (2013).
38.	Dietz, T. Bringing values and deliberation to science communication.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 14081–14087 (2013).
39.	Maibach, E. W. & van der Linden, S. L. The importance of assessing and 
communicating scientific consensus. Environ. Res. Lett. 11, 091003 (2016).
40.	Alinsky, S. Rules for Radicals (Knopf Doubleday, 2010).
41.	Sabidussi, G. The centrality index of a graph. Psychometrika 31,  
581–603 (1966).
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for comments from participants in seminars at Microsoft Research–New 
England, MSR-NY, GESIS-Koln, University of Michigan School of Information,  
Duke University DNAC, the first International Conference on Computational Social 
Science, and the Computational Social Science Summit at Northwestern.  
We acknowledge funding from the John Templeton Foundation to the Metaknowledge 
Network, NSF SES 1303533, SES 1226483, SES 1158803, National Research Foundation 
of Korea NRF-2013S1A3A2055285 and Air Force Office of Scientific Research  
FA9550-15-1-0162, and computation support from the Open Science Data Cloud.  
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to  
publish or preparation of the manuscript.
Author contributions
All authors designed the research and drafted the paper. F.S., Y.S. and F.A.D. gathered 
and analysed the data.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.A.E and M.W.M.
How to cite this article: Shi, F., Shi, Y., Dokshin, F. A., Evans, J. A. & Macy, M. W. 
Millions of online book co-purchases reveal partisan differences in the consumption  
of science. Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 0079 (2017).
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.


In the format provided by the authors and unedited.
 
 
1 
 
Supplementary Information for 
 
Millions of online book co-purchases reveal partisan differences in the con-
sumption of science 
Feng Shi1†, Yongren Shi2† , Fedor A. Dokshin3, James A. Evans1,4*, Michael W. Macy3*  
Affiliations: 
1Computation Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. 
2Yale Institute for Network Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA. 
3Department of Sociology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 
4Department of Sociology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. 
*Correspondence to: jevans@uchicago.edu (J. A. E.), mwm14@cornell.edu (M. W. M.). 
†Both authors contributed equally to this work. 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
VOLUME: 1 | ARTICLE NUMBER: 0079
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 
1


 
 
2 
 
Supplementary Figures 
 
Supplementary Figure 1. Confidence in science among liberals & moderates (blue curve) 
and conservatives (red curve) since 1970.  
Data are from the General Social Survey cumulative file (N=33154). The figure reports decade-
specific averages of the responses in each of the 27 years between 1972 and 2010 that the item 
was surveyed. Prior to the 1990s, conservatives reported higher confidence, although the differ-
ences are not statistically significant. After 1990, conservatives report significantly lower confi-
dence in science.  
 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 2. Distributions of sales rank and publication year by liberal and 
conservative books.  
Left: Distributions of logarithmic sales ranks for liberal books and conservative books. Rank 1 
corresponds to highest sales. Books with missing sales rank are not considered in the plot. The 
mean logarithmic sales rank is 13.5 for liberal books and 13.1 for conservative books, and medi-
an logarithmic sales rank is 13.7 for liberal and 13.4 for conservative. Right: Distributions of 
publication years for liberal books and conservative books. Mean publication years of both are 
1999. Median publication year is 2007 for liberal books and 2009 for conservative books.   
 
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav	
2
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION


 
 
3 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 3. Positive correlation between the number of citations a sub-
discipline receives from patents (Y) and from other sub-disciplines (X).  
A linear regression model log(Y) = aX + b is fitted to data with estimate a = 0.0279 (p-value < 
0.001). 
 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 4. Standardized difference between centralities of blue- and red-
linked books, by polarization for each discipline.  
For each discipline, the plot shows the centrality difference 
 
E[X]−E[Y]
S2(1/nx +1/ny)
 against polariza-
tion, where X corresponds to centralities of blue-linked books, Y to centralities of red-linked 
books,  nx to the number of blue-linked books, and  ny  to the number of red-linked books.  S2 is 
the pooled sample variance of blue- and red-linked books. A robust linear regression line is 
shown in the plot with slope 1.2278 (p-value<0.001). 
 
 
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav	
3
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION


 
 
4 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 5. Reproduction of major findings in the main text after academic 
books are removed.  
(A) Political relevance and polarization of science topics compared to topics outside of science. 
(B) Correlation between political alignment and applied index of sub-disciplines (r=0.39, 
p=0.005). (C) Difference between the average numbers of science books linked to a blue and 
those to a red book (scientific breadth), by polarization for each discipline. The difference in sci-
entific breadth and log(polarization) are highly correlated with r=0.75 and p<0.001. (D) Differ-
ence between centralities of blue- and red-linked books for each discipline. A robust regression 
line is shown as a guide to the eye. A simple linear regression gives slope 1 and p-value 0.003 
with two outliers economic and history removed.  
 
 
History
Economics
A
B
C
D
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav	
4
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION


 
 
5 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 6. Results from the Barnes & Nobel dataset.  
(A) Political polarization scores of scientific disciplines calculated from the Barnes & Nobel co-
purchase network (Y) and those from the Amazon network (X). The scores from the two dataset 
are nearly identical (r=0.97, p<0.001). (B) Political alignment of disciplines calculated from the 
two datasets. The alignment scores are highly correlated across the two networks (r=0.76, 
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav	
5
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION


 
 
6 
 
p<0.001). (C) Political alignment of disciplines, organized as a tree of science topics. (D) Polari-
zation by the difference between the average numbers of science books linked to a blue book and 
those to a red book, for each discipline. The difference in scientific breadth is significantly corre-
lated with polarization (r=0.54, p=0.005). (E) Difference between mean closeness centralities of 
blue- and red-linked books for each discipline. Except for biology, mean centrality of blue-linked 
books is no less, and for half of the disciplines, significantly larger than that of red-linked books.  
 
 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 7. Results using Erdos-Reyni random graph as null model.  
(Top) Assessments of political relevance, alignment and polarization using the Erdos-Reyni null 
model. These charts and graphs reveal the same pattern of book purchases as reported in the 
main text: Science books are more politically relevant and polarized than non-science, due large-
ly to the social sciences and humanities, while the physical and life sciences are similar to non-
science overall. Books on the performing arts and sports have low political relevance and polari-
zation compared to literature, religion or science. (Bottom) Detailed comparisons of the political 
assessments using the two null models (E-R and configuration). The two models yield nearly 
identical relevance scores, and highly correlated alignments scores. Even though alignment 
scores from the two models are not the same, their respective orderings among topics are nearly 
identical. 
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav	
6
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION


 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 8. Results with Indeterminate books included. 
Reproduction of major results in the main text when 315 formerly “indeterminate” works are in-
cluded in the set of political red and blue books. These books are written by Congresspeople, 
which nevertheless signal weak conservative or liberal leanings, but are coded based on the polit-
ical commitments of the author (e.g., Republican vs. Democrat). We find that when we incorpo-
rate the new “moderate” political books into our analysis, it exhibits negligible change on our 
original results. 
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav	
7
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION


 
 
8 
 
Supplementary Results 
Academic Books 
To test the effect of academic books on our findings that liberals have a wider interest in science 
books within most disciplines, we identified a large set of academic books from our dataset and 
re-performed our analysis after removing the academic books. 
Academic books were identified according to their publishers. First, we compiled a list of 
academic publishers from the website (services.exeter.ac.uk/bfa/az.htm), to which we added all 
publishers with “university” or “academic” in their names and manually filtered out publishers 
that are clearly not academic (e.g., Trump University Press). Finally we classified each book as 
academic or not by using its publisher as a proxy. In total 136,672 academic books (about 10% 
of all books) were identified in the dataset.  
We performed all the analyses after academic books were removed, and present the results 
in Supplementary Figure 5. The results, after removing academic books, remain consistent with 
the results we report in the main text. Supplementary Figure 5A shows that science is neither an 
apolitical sphere nor a public sphere. Science is more relevant and polarized than topics outside 
of science, and is polarized both within and across scientific disciplines. Across fields, there is a 
significant positive correlation (r=0.39, p=0.005) between political alignment and the commer-
cial applied index of sub-disciplines (Supplementary Figure 5B), implying that customers for 
liberal books prefer basic science while conservative customers prefer commercially applied sci-
ence. Within disciplines, Supplementary Figure 5C plots political polarization by the difference 
between the average number of disciplinary books linked to a blue book and the average number 
linked to a red book, for each discipline; and Supplementary Figure 5D reports the difference 
between closeness centralities of blue-linked and red-linked books for each discipline (cf. Sup-
plementary Figure 4). Supplementary Figure 5 C and D together reveal that red books are more 
likely to cluster on the periphery of the disciplinary networks, with blue books linked to a wider 
variety of science books and blue-linked science books closer to the disciplinary core. Given that 
academic books are removed, this wider liberal interest in science books does not appear to be a 
simple consequence of academic liberalism. 
Results from Barnes & Noble Dataset 
Books in the Barnes & Noble dataset constitute a subset of Amazon political and science books, 
but the two co-purchase networks are quite different. For example, only 9% of Amazon co-
purchase links in the science and politics subgraph are found in the Barnes & Noble network, 
and only 21% of Barnes & Noble links are found in Amazon. See Supplementary Table 1 for a 
brief summary. Nevertheless, the number of political links with each book in Amazon and 
Barnes & Noble is highly correlated (r=0.60, p<0.001). 
We replicated the Amazon-based analyses using the Barnes & Noble network and found 
consistent results across datasets. First, we calculated political polarization and alignment of sci-
ence topics in Barnes & Noble. These measures are compared with those of corresponding topics 
in Amazon (Supplementary Figure 6, A and B). The polarization scores of disciplines given by 
the two networks are nearly identical (r=0.97, p<0.001); the alignment scores of disciplines are 
also highly correlated across the two networks (r=0.76, p<0.001).  
Alignment of disciplines within the four “schools” in Barnes & Nobel is reported in Sup-
plementary Figure 6C. There are not enough books in the sub-disciplines from the Barnes & No-
bel dataset to statistically test the correlation between alignment and applied index. However, the 
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav	
8
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION


 
 
9 
 
general pattern still holds: Applied disciplines like veterinary medicine and economics are at the 
red end of their respective schools, while anthropology and mathematics are most blue. 
Finally, across disciplines, blue books link to a larger number of disciplinary books com-
pared to red (Supplementary Figure 6D), consistent with results obtained with Amazon data. And 
for most disciplines, science books linked to blue are more central in their respective disciplines 
in terms of closeness centrality than books linked to red (Supplementary Figure 6E).  
Effect of Null Model 
In the assessment of political relevance and alignment, the configuration model is used as a null 
model for our co-purchase network to generate prior distributions for measurement in our Bayes-
ian framework.  In this way we avoid relying on the “absolute difference” between observations 
and the null model, which could be affected by the choice of null model, but rather compare the 
null model and observations within a statistical framework. The more often we see certain pat-
terns in the data, the weaker the effect of the null model. We picked the configuration model not 
only because it is a standard choice, but also because the book network is highly heterogeneous. 
It is not hard to imagine a book co-purchased with many other books (e.g., the Harry Potter se-
ries) and one that is only co-purchased with other books from the same author (e.g., Dickens’ 
least popular novel, Pickwick Papers). Therefore, it is important to control for the degree of each 
book with our null model of the co-purchase network. The configuration model is ideal for that 
purpose.  
To demonstrate the robustness of our findings, we carried out similar calculations using the 
Erdos-Renyi random graph as a null model. In this model, each co-purchase link appears inde-
pendently with equal probability. Assessments of relevance and alignment from the Erdos-Renyi 
null model are shown in Supplementary Figure 7. They are highly correlated with results from 
the configuration null model and reveal similar patterns of purchase behavior. 
Indeterminate Books 
When coding the political books in our sample, we took a conservative approach and included 
only books that clearly and consistently fit into a “blue” or “red” camp. These sets of books give 
us the most interpretable signal of partisan consumers. Unfortunately, “indeterminate” books in-
clude not only books that could be seen as “moderate” but also ones that lie on dimensions or-
thogonal to the left-right divide, and so they remain outside the scope conditions for testing 
whether political polarization extends beyond politics to other cultural domains such as science.  
To test for potential biases due to our sampling of political books, we reran the analysis in-
cluding a sample of formerly “indeterminate” works (written by U.S. Congresspersons), which 
exhibited weak signals of conservative or liberal leaning. We coded these based only on the po-
litical commitments of the author (e.g., Republican vs. Democratic Congressperson). This yields 
an increase of 315 liberal or conservative books. We find that when we incorporate the new 
“moderate” political books into our analysis, it exerts negligible change on our original results 
(Supplementary Figure 8).  
Finally, among the science books that are co-purchased with red and blue books, we found 
that 80% are also co-purchased with the “indeterminate” political books. In other words, even 
though we did not use the “indeterminate” books to infer people’s political ideology, those who 
buy books that are moderate or nonpolitical remain in our consideration. 
 
 
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-017-0079 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav	
9
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION


 
 
10 
 
Supplementary Tables 
Supplementary Table 1. Number of books and co-purchase links in Amazon and Barnes & 
Noble datasets.  
The last row reports the number of books and links present in both datasets. The last column re-
ports the number of co-purchase links in the subgraph of science and political books. Books in 
Barnes & Noble are a subset of Amazon books, but the two co-purchase networks are quite dif-
ferent when considering the co-purchase links.  
 
 
Number of books 
 
Number of co-purchase links 
Total 
Science 
Politics 
 
Total 
Science - Politics 
Amazon 
1,303,504 
428,433 
1,256 
 
26,467,385 
6,288,423 
B & N 
439,603 
285,942 
1,078 
 
3,375,406 
2,582,715 
Common 
439,603 
285,942 
1,078 
 
664,149 
542,578 
 
Supplementary Table 2. Sales rank and publication year for political books.   
 
 
Number of books 
 
Logarithmic sales rank 
 
Publication year 
 
Mean  
Median 
 
Mean 
Median 
Conservative  
677 
 
13.1 
13.4 
 
1999 
2009 
Liberal 
587 
 
13.5 
13.7 
 
1999 
2007 
 
Supplementary Table 3 (Supplementary_Table_3.tsv) 
ISBN number, title and publisher for the human-coded conservative books. The text file is tab 
delimited. 
 
Supplementary Table 4 (Supplementary_Table_4.tsv) 
ISBN number, title and publisher for the human-coded conservative books. The text file is tab 
delimited. 
Supplementary Table 5 (Supplementary_Table_5.xlsx) 
Organization of the LC and DD categories into a hierarchy of science topics including 4 major 
scientific “schools” (humanities, physical, life, and social sciences) and 27 exclusive high-level 
topics, corresponding to broadly defined scientific disciplines (e.g. Physics, Chemistry, Medi-
cine, Economics, etc.) that fall under these 4 major schools. The file is a Microsoft Excel spread-
sheet. 
Supplementary Table 6 (Supplementary_Table_6.xlsx) 
Organization of the LC and DD categories into four major topics outside of science – Arts, 
Sports, Literature (fiction and poetry), and Religion. The file is a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet.