2023


2 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Table of 
Contents
	
INTRODUCTION
	
4	
UNLOCKING THE POTENTIAL TO SUCCEED
	
6	
Legal productivity is higher than ever before
	
7	
The power of leverage
 
8 
The advent of generative artificial intelligence
	
9	
New this year
	 10	
Data sources
	
PART 1
	 11	
THE THRIVING BUSINESS OF LEGAL
 13 
Lawyers have matched rates with inflation, but non-lawyers  
are way behind
	 17	
A new era of legal productivity
 18 
Small efficiency gains compound into massive revenue growth
 24 
The lawyer’s funnel shows narrowing earning potential 
	 26	
A need to measure performance over time...
	
PART 2
	 27	
LOCKUP—A NEW INDICATOR OF CASH FLOW
	 28	
Introducing “lockup”—a crucial measure for healthy businesses
	 30	
Prolonged lockup periods ruin businesses
	 32	
Reducing lockup puts more cash in hand
	 38	
Clio users enjoy shorter total lockup periods
	 38	
Levers for reducing lockup
	
PART 3
	 44	
GETTING PAID FASTER
 46 
Foonberg’s Gratitude Curve and the key to getting paid 
	 48	
A known problem between lawyers and their clients


3 | Legal Trends Report 2023
	 50	
The challenge to get paid
 52 
Many law firms are still committed to “snail mail”
 54 
Online payments get firms paid faster
 56 
Encouraging clients to pay electronically pays off
	 57	
Clients actually want to pay by credit card
	
PART 4
	 60	
BUSINESS LEVERS TO IMPROVE FIRM PERFORMANCE
	 62	
Business levers for improving realization rates 
	 65	
Top business levers for improving collection rates
 71 
Leverage points that firms struggle with most
	 72	
More levers for improving business performance
	
PART 5
	 73	
THE PROMISE OF AI
	 78	
Legal professionals are interested yet cautious of AI
	 80	
AI poses both risks and rewards 
	 84	
The unseen potential of AI in the justice system
	 88	
How AI can be used by legal professionals
 93 
Many clients see the benefit of hiring a lawyer who uses AI
 97 
Use of AI in legal, today
	 101	
Legal professionals see much promise in the future of AI
	
APPENDIX A
	
103	
HOURLY RATES AND KPIS
	 105	
Hourly rates by state
	 106	
Adjusted rates by state
	 107	
Hourly rates by practice area
	 108	
Utilization rates by state
	 109	
Realization and collection rates by state
	 110	
Realization and collection rates by practice area
	
APPENDIX B
	111	
DETAILED METHODOLOGY
	 112	
App data collection
	 114	
Survey design


Introduction
Unlocking the potential to succeed
4 | Legal Trends Report 2023


5 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Introduction: Unlocking the potential to succeed
In our fast-paced world, efficiency and effectiveness 
are of the utmost importance. In the practice of  
law, this has been never more true since Clio first 
started publishing the Legal Trends Report in 2016. 
With rapid advancements in new systems and 
technologies, today’s legal professionals have more 
tools and opportunities for innovation than ever 
before, and they are driving never-seen-before 
productivity as a result. 
But the landscape for success continues to evolve. What defined innovation  
in the last decade has since become foundational. With radical advancements 
in artificial intelligence, law firms are once again finding themselves at the 
cusp of transformative change. 
This is where a client-centered approach is more important than ever.  
In the midst of uncertainty, certain values still—and always will—hold up.  
The lawyers and practices that continue to adapt and evolve in the interests  
of their clients are the ones that will ultimately succeed in the long run.
What defined innovation in the last decade  
has since become foundational.


6 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Introduction: Unlocking the potential to succeed
LEGAL PRODUCTIVITY IS HIGHER  
THAN EVER BEFORE
Today, legal professionals work heavier caseloads—and earn over two  
and a half times more for their firms than in years past. This is an 
unprecedented achievement in the legal industry. It means that lawyers 
and their firms are doing a lot more of what they set out to do—provide 
legal services to clients. And they’re earning substantially more for 
themselves in the process. This growth in productivity also means that the 
capacity of the legal profession as a whole has, in turn, increased the scale 
of services available to clients. This growth couldn’t be more timely. 
Over the last three years, businesses have dealt with inflation rates that 
have reached their highest levels in decades. Rising costs put law firms  
in a challenging position—on the one hand, looking for ways to reduce 
costs, while on the other, having to find new ways to increase revenues. 
Lawyers may be hesitant to raise their hourly rates—since clients are 
also dealing with the effects of inflation—and many are instead turning 
to technology to improve efficiency and productivity. Technology is a 
powerful lever that businesses use to get more done while also improving 
client experiences. Certain capabilities can have a revolutionary impact  
on business. However, finding the right tool for the job at hand is critical.
Technology is a powerful lever that businesses 
use to get more done while also improving 
client experiences.


7 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Introduction: Unlocking the potential to succeed
THE POWER OF LEVERAGE
A lever is a mechanism that amplifies the impact and outcomes of  
our work efforts. When using a lever, a small amount of effort can  
be multiplied several times over to apply a substantially larger force.  
When used strategically in the practice of law, certain business levers  
can transform a firm’s operations to make them incredibly more efficient, 
productive, and capable of delivering the best client experiences possible. 
When applying the principles of leverage to business, knowing  
where to apply them is just as important as knowing what tools to use.  
We’ve seen the massive impact that technology can have in improving 
the success of law firms. Throughout this report, we look at key leverage 
points that include utilization, realization, and collection rates— 
and discuss cash flow with the introduction of our new lockup metric. 
We also look at key technologies as business levers that have had the 
most impact on firm success. Billing and payment systems in particular 
continue to be a crucial point of focus for any law firm. As simple as  
it might seem to bill work to clients, the undertaking grows more  
complex with scale. Even small inefficiencies can result in delayed  
cash flow and lost earnings. 
Electronic billing and payments are powerful business levers that  
allow law firms to find new efficiencies, create better client experiences,  
and open the door for more advanced automation. Even simple workflow 
improvements see law firms billing 18% more of their work to clients  
over other firms, resulting in substantial revenue gains. 
Throughout this report, we look at key 
leverage points that include utilization, 
realization, and collection rates—and 
discuss cash flow with the introduction 
of our new lockup metric.


8 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Introduction: Unlocking the potential to succeed
THE ADVENT OF GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE
By far, the most impactful technological advancement made in the last 
decade has been the public launch of generative artificial intelligence (AI) 
with the release of ChatGPT. For the first time, law firms have access to 
technology that doesn’t just help manage and process information. With 
generative AI, legal professionals have new tools that simulate cognitive 
functions for interpreting, summarizing, and creating new content based  
on large language models (LLMs) trained on enormous datasets.
AI has the potential to transform so many facets of everyday business 
operations, and we’ve only just scratched the surface in terms of what  
it will be capable of in the years and decades to come. As more legal 
professionals adopt AI in their practices, the benefits are becoming 
increasingly apparent. Already, AI has given firms the ability to  
summarize key information, assist in drafting documents, identify  
high-risk clauses in a contract, and automatically generate demand  
letters for personal injury cases. 
The early days of generative AI have also highlighted the risks inherent in 
this technology. A New York lawyer learned this the hard way when he used 
ChatGPT to cite court decisions relevant to an airline lawsuit. Unfortunately, 
ChatGPT invented—or “hallucinated,” the term used when AI software 
creates incorrect information presented as fact—precedent cases, which  
was only revealed during court proceedings. Such episodes highlight that, 
like any new technology, lawyers must ensure they understand both the 
benefits and the risks of the technologies used in their law practices.
Remarkably, the evolution of legal through AI has already begun,  
and it’s more important than ever that legal professionals stay abreast  
of these developments as they occur. In this report, we look at how  
legal professionals—and their clients—are equipped to embrace  
these changes, both in their firms and in the wider justice system. 
AI has the potential to transform so many  
facets of everyday business operations.


9 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Introduction: Unlocking the potential to succeed
NEW THIS YEAR
EXPANDED ANALYSIS OF THE STATE  
OF LEGAL PRACTICE
We’ve broadened our analysis of business performance to include data 
as far back as 2016. This expanded historical view allows us to identify 
longer-term trends that provide a more robust picture of how far the 
industry has come—and puts in perspective more recent changes  
relative to past performance.  
A NEW METRIC FOR FIRM PERFORMANCE: LOCKUP
This year, we’ve introduced the concept of “lockup” as a measure of law 
firm cash flow. This metric includes both realization lockup, which looks 
at how much of a firm’s revenue sits in an unbilled state, and collection 
lockup, which measures how much of a firm’s revenue has been billed  
but remains unpaid. Reducing total lockup increases cash flow and is  
key to better business management. 
COMPARATIVE IMPACT OF KPI LEVERS
In analyzing several capabilities within the Clio platform, we’ve identified 
some of the most impactful features that see law firms earn consistently  
more revenue. In turn, they help illustrate some of the significant 
productivity gains we’ve seen industry-wide. 
PERCEPTIONS ON AI IN LEGAL PRACTICE
In our surveys of legal professionals and the general population, we’ve 
undertaken an extensive study that looks at new important perspectives 
on the use of AI for legal practice. With its rapid public adoption, this 
data gives insight into where the industry is at in the earliest stages of AI 
adoption, and where the greatest opportunities lie for future innovation.  
Reducing total lockup increases 
cash flow and is key to better 
business management.


10 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Introduction: Unlocking the potential to succeed
DATA SOURCES
The Legal Trends Report uses a range of methodological approaches and 
data sources to deliver the best insights about the state of legal practice 
and strategies for future growth.
CLIO DATA
We’ve analyzed aggregated and anonymized data from tens of thousands 
of legal professionals in the US. This data provides important insights 
about how technology is currently being used by legal professionals,  
as well as its impact on firm performance. 
SURVEY OF LEGAL PROFESSIONALS
We surveyed 1,446 US legal professionals from May 31 to July 20, 2023. 
The legal professionals we surveyed included lawyers as well as support 
staff—such as paralegals and administrators—who are engaged in the 
management side of their practice. 
SURVEY OF THE GENERAL POPULATION
We surveyed 1,012 adults in the US general population from June 13 to 
June 22, 2023. This survey was designed to gauge attitudes, opinions, 
preferences, and behaviors regarding the legal profession among 
individuals who have hired lawyers in the past or who may become 
potential legal clients in the future. This sample is representative of  
the US population by age, gender, region, income, and race/ethnicity 
based on the most recent US census statistics. 
We’ve analyzed aggregated and 
anonymized data from tens of thousands  
of legal professionals in the US.


Part 1
The thriving business of legal
11 | Legal Trends Report 2023


12 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
Since 2016, Clio’s Legal Trends Report has provided 
data and analyses fundamental to the success of  
law firms—and deep insights into trends across  
the wider legal profession.  
Featuring data from tens of thousands of legal professionals, no other 
system of record provides the scale or reliability of analysis that we 
feature in this report. That’s why countless legal professionals—both those 
who have been in the business for decades and those just starting their 
careers—rely on the Legal Trends Report to uncover insights and strategies 
to improve their practices.
The data in this section shows exactly how firms have achieved substantial 
success to date and why further growth is not just possible but achievable 
by legal professionals who have the knowledge and tools to build a better 
future for their firms. 
No other system of record provides  
the scale or reliability of analysis  
that we feature in this report.


13 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
LAWYERS HAVE MATCHED RATES WITH 
INFLATION, BUT NON-LAWYERS ARE  
WAY BEHIND
A major concern for law firms—and any business—in the last few  
years has been the steady increase in both inflation and lending rates. 
Looking back to 2016, we see that the cost of legal services has also 
increased for clients.
Lawyer hourly rates have risen steadily since 2016, increasing by 28%  
from $256 to $327 in August 2023. For comparison, rates for non-lawyers 
(e.g., non-licensed legal professionals, such as paralegals, who bill for 
their work) have only increased by 19%, rising from $150 to $178 since 
January 2016.1
1	
See Appendix A for detailed breakdowns of hourly rates by state and practice area.


14 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
By looking at the average of what both lawyers and non-lawyers have  
been charging over this period, we get a blended law firm rate, giving  
an approximation of what an hour of legal service costs the average  
client in the US. Overall, the blended law firm rate has increased  
by 22%, from $239 to $292, over the same period. 
Inflation used to be a nominal factor in running a business, but in  
recent years it’s become something that business owners need to pay  
more attention to. When comparing to the Consumer Price Index (CPI)—
which is used to measure annual inflation rates—we can see how well 
hourly rates have (or have not) kept pace with inflation. Overall,  
the CPI has increased by 29%, from 238 to 306, since the start of 2016. 
In our analysis last year, we found that consumer prices increased at a rate 
that exceeded hourly rates for lawyers (illustrated in the charts below). 
Lawyer rates fell behind consumer prices by as much as 2%. This decrease 
followed a period when lawyer rates were increasing at a much faster pace 
than the CPI, likely in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. During this 
time, lawyer rates actually increased by as much as 8% more than the CPI. 
This year, lawyer rates have recovered relative to inflation and remained 
steady throughout 2023. As of Q3 (July to September), when compared to 
the rate of change since 2016, lawyer rates are on par with increases in 
consumer prices. 


15 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal


16 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
When comparing to the Consumer Price  
Index, we can see how well hourly rates  
have (or have not) kept pace with inflation.
While non-lawyer rates have also recovered slightly in the last year,  
they remain far below the trend in consumer price increases.  
Historically, increases in non-lawyer rates have fallen below those  
of lawyers and the CPI since 2019. Between 2021 and 2022, increases  
in non-lawyer rates trailed behind the CPI by as much as 10%. 
As for blended firm rates, the average cost for legal services has not  
kept pace with inflation, falling 5% behind the CPI. Compared to the  
other goods and services that clients pay for, legal services may be  
slightly more affordable compared to 2016. 
The chart below shows hourly rates in real dollars (adjusted for inflation).


17 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
A NEW ERA OF LEGAL PRODUCTIVITY
Compared to 2016, we’ve seen a staggering increase in workforce 
productivity within the legal industry. 
The average legal professional earns much more for their firm by  
working a heavier caseload and putting in more billable hours.  
Firms are also collecting an outsized return on that work through  
better administrative efficiencies and capitalizing on the work of  
their lawyers and staff.  
On average, legal professionals are working over 25% more cases 
compared to 2016 and recording 35% more billable hours. In addition  
to increasing billables, law firms are collecting a higher proportion  
of revenue for every hour worked. In total, legal professionals are  
billing and collecting over two and a half times more than in 2016. 
After controlling for increases in hourly rates, the average legal 
professional still earns nearly three-quarters more revenue for  
their firm than they did in 2016.


18 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
While these gains may seem unbelievable at first glance, they are 
explained by the substantial improvements across a set of key 
performance indicators—each compounding to drive colossal  
business growth.
SMALL EFFICIENCY GAINS COMPOUND 
INTO MASSIVE REVENUE GROWTH
Clio’s key performance indicators (KPIs) provide benchmark insights  
into how law practices are performing over time, giving firms insight  
into how to measure and improve their performance.
LAW FIRM KPIS
•	 Utilization rate = percent of an eight-hour day put towards  
billable work
•	 Realization rate = percent of billable work that gets invoiced  
to clients
•	 Collection rate = percent of invoiced work that gets paid 
The average legal professional earns  
nearly three-quarters more revenue  
for their firm than they did in 2016.


19 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
UTILIZATION
A law firm’s utilization rate measures how much of a lawyer’s eight-hour  
day gets put towards billable work. Since 2016, lawyer utilization rates 
have significantly increased from 28% to 37%—an improvement of 32%. 
This increase represents nearly three-quarters of an hour of billable  
time added for every day worked. 
The fact that legal professionals are—as discussed above—working 25% 
more cases and putting in 35% more billable hours is a direct reflection  
of law firms increasing their utilization.
Yet, despite the massive boost in lawyer productivity, nearly two-thirds  
of the workday still goes underutilized with respect to billable client  
work, meaning there is still much room for improvement. 


20 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
Two issues in law firms often contribute to lower utilization rates: 
(1) lawyers may be overwhelmed with administrative and business 
development tasks, reducing their ability to spend time on billable work, 
and (2) law firms may struggle to find enough clients to keep their lawyers 
busy. Past research shows that 48% of a lawyer’s non-billable time gets 
put toward administrative tasks like office administration, generating and 
sending bills, and collections. Another 33% of non-billable time gets put 
into business development.2 
This is where adopting the right systems for organizing and improving 
access to firm information—and using efficient tools for timekeeping,  
task management, and collaboration—can keep lawyers focused on  
their most important, and most billable, work. 
Firms that struggle to bring enough clients into the firm can also  
look at increasing word-of-mouth referrals, marketing their services,  
building reputation with past clients, and putting proficient systems  
in place to intake clients in an effective, timely, and convenient way. 
2	
Clio, 2017 Legal Trends Report, 2017.
Since 2016, lawyer utilization rates 
have significantly increased from  
28% to 37%—an improvement of 32%.


21 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
REALIZATION 
Realization rates measure how much of a law firm’s billable work actually 
gets included in client bills. Since 2016, realization rates have increased  
from 77% to 86%. This means that law firms are invoicing 12% more of  
their billable hours—adding a significant amount of revenue potential  
for every hour of billable time worked. 
There are a number of reasons why the remaining 14% of billable hours 
might not get billed to clients. Some firms offer discounts. Others worry  
that clients may perceive their lawyers to be spending more time than 
necessary on their case, resulting in write-downs when sending out bills. 
Unresolved or dropped cases can also account for work that doesn’t get billed. 
Additionally, firms may feel pressured by clients to invoice fewer hours  
than actually worked when their terms are unclear or aren’t communicated 
well in their engagement letters. Issues can also arise when attorneys don’t 
establish reasonable billing expectations with clients or when cases haven’t 
been appropriately vetted during the intake phase.
More efficient billing systems can help law practices accurately communicate 
to clients how much time they actually spend on casework while accelerating 
the process for invoicing and getting paid. Conversely, firms that don’t use 
efficient billing and payment collection systems put themselves at significant 
risk of losing revenue that has been earned but ends up lost.


22 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
COLLECTION 
Collection rates measure how much of a law firm’s bills get paid by  
clients. Once billable work is successfully tracked (utilization) and  
invoiced (realization), it finally becomes revenue to the firm when  
it is collected. Without collection, there is no revenue.
Since 2016, collection rates rose from 86% to a high of 90% in 2021,  
but fell slightly to 89% in 2022. Collection rates are expected to remain  
at this level through the end of 2023, amounting to a total net increase  
of only 3% compared to 2016. While firms have made modest gains,  
payment collection remains a critical point of friction between law  
firms and their clients. 
The fact that collection rates haven’t increased as much as utilization  
and realization rates over the past several years shows that getting  
paid is a crucial area in which most firms can improve.
Not collecting on bills in a timely fashion has an impact beyond simply 
foregoing revenue—it often inflicts other incremental costs on a law firm, 
including staff time to chase after unpaid bills, fees paid to collection firms 
for bad debts, and carrying costs of any loans that may be necessary to 
provide interim operating capital.
Part 3 of this report looks more in-depth into some of the challenges that 
firms have in collecting payments from clients and how they can improve. 
Law firms are invoicing 12% more of  
their billable hours—adding a significant 
amount of revenue potential for every  
hour of billable time worked.


23 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
While firms have been able to make modest 
gains, payment collection remains a critical point 
of friction between law firms and their clients.


24 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
THE LAWYER’S FUNNEL SHOWS 
NARROWING EARNING POTENTIAL
Utilization, realization, and collection rates are powerful measures  
of a firm’s performance. Alone, they each tell us a lot about the state  
of the industry. Examined as a group, they tell us even more about  
the health and dynamics at play. 
Utilization doesn’t just tell us how much time a lawyer puts towards 
billable work; it also impacts how much work can be billed (realized)  
and collected. In effect, low utilization rates limit realization and 
collection. Similarly, if firms suffer from low realization and collection 
rates, it limits how well law firms capitalize on the work performed  
by their staff.
When looking at utilization, realization, and collection rates together,  
we get a broader view of how much of an average lawyer’s day actually 
goes to earning revenue. 


25 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
In 2023, when applying realization and collection rates to overall 
utilization, 28% of the average lawyer’s workday contributed to firm 
revenues—which amounts to just over two hours per day. In other words, 
while firms have made significant gains in utilization (with still more 
opportunity to improve), any continuing inefficiencies in realization or 
collection only dampens the benefit of those productivity gains. 
Compare this to 2016: lawyers had a utilization rate of 29%, but they were 
only able to realize 77% of that work to bills, and of the bills they sent out, 
only 86% got paid. As a result, only 18% of the average lawyer’s workday 
ended up getting invoiced and paid. In terms of hours, this amounts to just 
under 1.5 hours of paid—utilized, realized and collected—work per day.
If firms suffer from low realization and collection 
rates, it limits how well law firms capitalize on  
the work performed by their staff.


26 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 1: The thriving business of legal
A NEED TO MEASURE PERFORMANCE 
OVER TIME...
In addition to how much law firms are getting paid, lawyers need to  
pay close attention to how quickly and consistently they are getting  
paid. While realization and collection rates give insight into how much 
revenue firms earn overall, they don’t give any insight into the period— 
or latency—in which they collect that revenue. 
A law firm could bill and collect a significant amount of revenue.  
However, if they aren’t able to do this in a timely and efficient manner, 
their business could actually be suffering in terms of its net cash flow  
and, as a result, performing very poorly at a given point in time. In the 
next section, we introduce a new KPI called "lockup" to help firms assess 
their cash flow.
Lawyers need to pay close attention  
to how quickly and consistently they  
are getting paid. 


Part 2
Lockup—a new indicator  
of cash flow
27 | Legal Trends Report 2023


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
28 | Legal Trends Report 2023
A healthy business brings in more money than  
it spends. This is what creates positive cash  
flow, which ensures that money is on hand  
when it’s needed.   
Cash flow is about more than  
just doing the work for clients.
INTRODUCING “LOCKUP”—A CRUCIAL 
MEASURE FOR HEALTHY BUSINESSES
“Lockup” is a term used in accounting to assess cash flow in businesses. 
For law firms, it shows how much revenue—measured in days of work— 
is unbilled and uncollected at any given time. 
Knowing how many days worth of work are held in lockup gives us  
an understanding of what cash flow looks like in a law firm. Firms with  
a high amount of their revenue stuck in lockup—relative to their expected 
annual earnings—have slower cash flow. Whereas, firms that can bill out 
and collect on their work more efficiently will have less of their revenue  
in lockup, which will see them achieve higher cash flow. 
Lockup consists of three measures within the billing process and is 
measured in days:
•	 Realization lockup. This is the amount of revenue that is unbilled  
at any given time (also known as “work-in-progress lockup”).


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
29 | Legal Trends Report 2023
•	 Collection lockup. This is the amount of revenue that is uncollected 
at any given time (also known as “debtor lockup”).
•	 Total lockup. This is a combination of revenue held in both 
realization and collection lockup. 
HOW TO MEASURE LOCKUP IN TERMS OF DAYS  
OF WORK
•	 Realization lockup = (work in progress ÷ previous fiscal year’s 
collections) × 365 days
•	 Collection lockup = (accounts receivable ÷ previous fiscal year’s 
collections) × 365 days
•	 Total lockup = realization lockup + collection lockup
Realization and collection lockup can be looked at on their own, and each 
has its own challenges and opportunities within a business. Each of these 
measures also influences total lockup, which is the bottom-line evaluation 
that determines how well a law firm is set up to succeed—or how it will 
struggle—with its cash flow over time. 
Lockup is a term used in accounting  
to assess cash flow in businesses.


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
30 | Legal Trends Report 2023
PROLONGED LOCKUP PERIODS  
RUIN BUSINESSES
Having cash on hand means that a business has the working capital  
to cover all of its short and long-term costs and can pay them out on  
time. These costs include staff salaries, office leases, utility fees, and  
any other administrative costs that firms may incur. 
Not having cash on hand has the opposite effect on a business. In fact, 
poor cash flow is a primary reason that businesses fail. The phrase “cash 
is king” couldn’t be more accurate in managing a business—making cash 
flow is an existential issue for law firms. 
Businesses that don’t have a steady or predictable cash flow need to make 
up for it with a sizable operating account to pay expenses when collections 
are slow. And even if a firm has plenty of earned revenue in its accounts 
receivable, if it can’t collect on that revenue, it can become insolvent— 
and eventually bankrupt—if it can’t afford to pay its bills at any given time. 
Businesses with poor cash flow may have the option to borrow money  
to make up for shortfalls in the near term, but this only leaves them on  
the hook to pay that money back—while also incurring additional costs  
in the form of interest. Finally, there are also opportunity costs to 
consider; unpaid bills require staff hours to monitor and follow up  
with clients when they could be taking on other work instead. 


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
31 | Legal Trends Report 2023
The impact of lockup can be seen at the macro level as well. According 
to a report by Citi Law Firm Group and Hildebrandt Consulting, large 
law firms in the US saw significant increases in their unbilled time and 
accounts receivable, which amounted to a 3.7% increase in lockup in  
2022. Researchers of the study attributed the increased collection cycle  
to a slowdown in revenue earnings for the industry, which saw growth  
fall from a high of 14.7% in 2021 to 4.1% in 2022.3,4 
The benefit of minimizing lockup is that it supports a healthy cash flow, 
giving law firms more cash on hand, ensuring peace of mind in paying 
expenses, and having more revenue available to invest in future growth. 
3	
Citi Law Firm Group and Hildebrandt Consulting, 2023 Citi Hildebrandt Client Advisory, 2023.
4	
Citi Law Firm Group and Hildebrandt Consulting, 2022 Citi Hildebrandt Client Advisory, 2022.
Even if a firm has plenty of earned 
revenue in its accounts receivable,  
it can become insolvent—and eventually 
bankrupt—if it can’t afford to pay its  
bills at any given time.


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
32 | Legal Trends Report 2023
REDUCING LOCKUP PUTS MORE CASH  
IN HAND
Lockup provides an indication of cash flow. Decreases in lockup mean 
firms have more annual revenue on hand to better cover expenses or  
fund expansion. However, increases in lockup trap revenue in unbilled  
or uncollected states, leaving firms vulnerable to liquidity problems  
and stalled growth. 
If a firm that expects to collect $500,000 in annual revenue has 100 days  
of total lockup, then there is, on average, $137,000 in potential revenue 
sitting unbilled or uncollected at any point in time. This would amount  
to just over one-quarter of the firm’s annual earnings. 
Compare this to a firm that expects the same revenue but has a total 
lockup of 50 days. This firm would have, on average $68,500—14% of  
its annual earnings—in unbilled and uncollected revenue. Compared  
to the firm with 100 days of revenue in lockup, this firm would have 
$68,500 more cash on hand at any given time. 


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
33 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Compared to the firm with 100 days  
of revenue in lockup, this firm would  
have $68,500 more cash on hand at  
any given time.
REALIZATION LOCKUP
Realization lockup is calculated by taking the value of a firm’s unbilled 
work (also known as “work in progress”), dividing it by the value of total 
collections from the previous fiscal year, and multiplying that value by 
365 days. This data tells us how many days worth of a law firm’s expected 
annual revenue currently sits in an unbilled state. 
Our analysis indicates that the median amount of realization lockup  
that firms carry is 38 days—or just over five weeks worth of annual 
revenue. For comparison, the top 25% of law firms have realization  
lockup of 18 or fewer days (approximately 2.5 weeks) and the bottom  
25% have more than 78 days worth (over 2.5 months) of their annual 
revenue in an unbilled state. 


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
34 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Greater realization lockup indicates that firms have a large portion of their 
work that has yet to be billed to clients. The longer a law firm waits to bill a 
client, the greater the risk of clients being unable to pay, since any number 
of misfortunes could befall them before they get their bill. For example, 
they could lose their job, lose money in a bad investment, or be negatively 
impacted by a struggling economy or natural disaster. Waiting too long to 
issue bills leaves law firms vulnerable to these types of situations beyond 
their control.


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
35 | Legal Trends Report 2023
The longer a law firm 
waits to bill a client, the 
greater the risk of clients 
not being able to pay.
COLLECTION LOCKUP
Collection lockup is calculated by taking the value of a firm’s total 
outstanding accounts receivable, dividing it by the value of total 
collections from the previous year’s fiscal collections, and then 
multiplying that value by 365 days. This data tells us how many  
days worth of a law firm’s expected annual revenue is unpaid  
within a firm’s accounts receivable. 
Our data indicates that the median collection lockup among  
law firms is 45 days—about 1.5 months worth of annual revenue.  
For comparison, the top 25% of law firms have collection lockup  
of 19 or fewer days (just under three weeks), and the bottom  
25% have more than 90 days worth (three months) of their  
annual revenue in their accounts receivable. 


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
36 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Collection lockup is vulnerable to the same risks as realization lockup but 
with an additional component. Many of a law firm’s expenses operate on 
fixed schedules. Rent, salaries, professional liability insurance, telephone 
utilities, and more must be paid on fixed, recurring schedules. As a result, 
high collection lockup puts fiscal pressure on a law firm. While firms need 
to pay bills every month, they may have to deal with clients who pay on  
a different schedule. Firms that carry a large amount of collection lockup 
may be more willing to accept decreased payments to keep the lights on, 
or they are forced to take out loans to manage cash flow due to protracted 
payment dates.
While firms need to pay bills on a monthly  
basis, they may have to deal with clients  
who pay on a different schedule.


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
37 | Legal Trends Report 2023
TOTAL LOCKUP
Total lockup is calculated by adding a firm’s realization and collection 
lockup days. This data tells us how many days worth of a law firm’s 
expected annual revenue sits in an unbilled or unpaid state, and it  
gives us an indication of a law firm’s overall cash flow. 
The median total lockup among law firms is 97 days—or 3.2 months  
worth of its annual revenue. For comparison, the top 25% of law firms 
have total lockup of 51 days (over seven weeks), and the bottom 25%  
have 173 days (almost six months) worth of annual revenue in either  
an unbilled or unpaid state at any given time.


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
38 | Legal Trends Report 2023
CLIO USERS ENJOY SHORTER TOTAL 
LOCKUP PERIODS
When compared to other reports on lockup, law firms using Clio have 
much less revenue tied up in unbilled or uncollected states and likely  
have much higher cash flows. 
For comparison, The Law Society of England and Wales reports median 
lockup values in 2022 at 140 days, down from 150 days in 2021.5 In 2022,  
law firms using Clio had lockup amounts that were smaller by 43 days 
(over six weeks) worth of annual revenue compared to the firms studied  
by The Law Society. 
LEVERS FOR REDUCING LOCKUP
When looking at how law firms can reduce their lockup, the ability  
to bill clients in a timely manner is critical. Timely billing requires 
accurately capturing client work in a bill that can be shared quickly  
and efficiently. In fact, we see that certain billing capabilities correlate 
with lower lockup. 
ELECTRONIC BILLING SOLUTIONS
Firms that use electronic billing systems to draft and send bills to clients 
have realization lockup that is smaller by two days worth of revenue  
(40 days instead of 42 days), collection lockup that’s smaller by five days 
worth of revenue (41 days instead of 46 days), and total lockup that’s 
smaller by six days worth of revenue. In other words, firms sharing  
bills through Clio have nearly a week’s worth of their annual revenue  
on hand at any given time.
5	
The Law Society of England and Wales, Financial Benchmarking Survey 2023, 2023.
Law firms using Clio have much less  
of their revenue tied up in unbilled  
or uncollected states.


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
39 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Legal billing software is designed to help law firms get their bills out 
faster. Law firms can instantly generate bills for individual clients and 
matters, and once the bills have been approved, they can be sent directly 
to client inboxes, allowing clients to pay them that much faster as well. 
Billing software also provides several options for sending bills to clients. 
Law firms can email bills directly to their clients’ inboxes, or they can 
use a client portal or app. Clio for Clients is a mobile app that clients can 
download onto their mobile devices, giving them a place to manage all of 
their firm communications, documents, billing and payments, and more. 


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
40 | Legal Trends Report 2023
When looking at specific methods for sending bills, we can see that 
certain types of workflows correlate with reductions in lockup: 
•	 Email. When law firms email clients directly from their billing 
software, they carry realization lockup that is smaller by five days 
worth of revenue. Their collection lockup is also smaller by one  
day worth of revenue, and total lockup is smaller by seven days 
worth of revenue. 
•	 Client app. When law firms use a client app to send bills, their 
realization lockup is smaller by five days worth of realization  
lockup. Their collection lockup is smaller by two days worth of 
revenue, and total lockup is smaller by 12 days worth of revenue. 


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
41 | Legal Trends Report 2023
ONLINE PAYMENTS
Online payments can also significantly reduce lockup periods. When law 
firms use online payments to collect money from clients, their realization 
and collection lockup is smaller by two days worth of revenue, and total 
lockup by four days. To return to the example of a law firm with $500,000 
in revenue in the previous year and a total lockup of 140 days, a reduction 
of 6 days amounts to having over $8,000 in additional funds available at 
any given time.


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
42 | Legal Trends Report 2023


Part 2: Lockup—a new indicator of cash flow
43 | Legal Trends Report 2023
When law firms use online 
payments to collect money from 
clients, their realization lockup 
is smaller by two days worth of 
revenue, collection lockup by five 
days, and total lockup by six days.
Shortening lockup periods reduces the time it takes 
to get paid for client work, leading to healthier cash 
flows, less time spent chasing unpaid bills, and less 
risk in not getting paid. 
To reduce lockup, law firms can: 
•	 Bill clients smaller amounts regularly instead  
of one large lump sum
•	 Improve processes for getting bills out on time
•	 Automate bill follow-ups to get paid on time
•	 Collect advanced fees that can be put toward  
bills as they are issued (e.g., retainers)
•	 Explore alternative billing arrangements  
that provide steadier income
How law firms 
can reduce lockup


Part 3
Getting paid faster
44 | Legal Trends Report 2023


45 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
Billing and getting paid represent some of the 
most challenging touchpoints law firms have with 
their clients. In Part 1, industry-wide realization 
rates showed that 14% of billable hours never get 
invoiced, and collection rates showed that 11%  
of bills never get paid by clients. In Part 2, we also 
saw how poor cash flow can put significant strain 
on a firm, even when it is billing and getting paid 
eventually.  
This section sheds more light on the nature of the problems inherent 
to billing and collecting payment from clients and how to implement 
solutions that improve overall collections while increasing cash flow. 
At a certain point, the client’s 
perception of value reaches its 
highest point, which is also when  
they are likely most willing to pay 
their legal bills.


46 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
FOONBERG’S GRATITUDE CURVE AND  
THE KEY TO GETTING PAID
There is an art to sending bills in a timely manner. Jay G. Foonberg,  
author of ​
​
How to Start & Build a Law Practice, provides an insightful  
model that illustrates a hypothetical client perspective on how the 
perception of a lawyer’s value can change over time. These mindsets  
can, in turn, influence a client’s willingness to pay their legal bills. 
Foonberg’s Gratitude Curve suggests that when clients start working 
with a lawyer, they are highly invested and often feel a sense of urgency 
regarding their legal matters. At a certain point, the client’s perception  
of value reaches its highest point, which is also when they are likely  
most willing to pay their legal bills.


47 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
However, one of the biggest takeaways from Foonberg’s model is that 
eventually the client’s perception of value begins to diminish. With the 
urgency of their legal matter in the past, clients may question why they 
needed a lawyer in the first place. Eventually, when they forget how 
critical or dire their situation once was, the desire and willingness to  
pay their legal bills slowly diminishes, putting firms in a place where  
they need to follow up and remind clients of their duty to pay. 
The longer this drags on, the greater risk the client won’t pay at all— 
and with each passing day, unpaid bills inhibit a firm’s cash flow. 
Eventually the client’s 
perception of value  
begins to diminish.


48 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
A KNOWN PROBLEM BETWEEN LAWYERS 
AND THEIR CLIENTS
It’s no secret that many law firms struggle to invoice their work  
and collect payments in a timely manner. Almost one in three legal 
professionals agree that their firm takes too long to get bills out to  
clients, and less than half would say they bill in a timely fashion. 
But from the client’s point of view, the problem is even worse. Of those 
who have hired a lawyer at some point in the past, 15% of clients said  
they didn’t receive a bill at all. 
While it may be hard to believe that firms could fall short on billing 15% 
of their cases, a couple of factors are likely at play here. On the one hand, 
clients may either have missed or forgotten about the bills their lawyer 
sent them; on the other, when firms share bills, there is always the chance 
that they can get lost in the mail or flagged by spam filters. In either 
situation, however, the onus is ultimately on lawyers and their firms  
to stay on top of their bills. 


49 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
And of the clients that did receive a bill, 28% said that it was at least  
a noticeably long time—if not a very long time—after their lawyer did  
the work. Even if firms are getting their bills out to clients, many aren’t 
doing so in a timely manner.
Of those who have hired a lawyer at some 
point in the past, 15% of clients said they didn’t 
receive a bill at all.


50 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
THE CHALLENGE TO GET PAID
Forty-one percent of legal professionals say that clients don’t pay  
on time, and almost one in four said that too many of their clients  
don’t pay them at all. But on the client side, most say that they pay  
their legal bills on time—and would prefer to pay their lawyer on  
time if they were to hire one. 
Of those who have hired a lawyer in the past, the vast majority say  
they paid their bills in a timely manner. A small contingent, however, 
admit that they struggled to pay their bills on time (or at all).


51 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
A bill should provide a clear and timely communication of what should 
be paid, when it should be paid, and how it should be paid. Arguably,  
a bill should also be easy for clients to pay. 
Given the frustrations that both lawyers and their clients express 
regarding billing, law firms should be hyper-focused on implementing 
and maintaining the best systems and experiences for their billing and 
payment collections. At the end of the day, when billing systems are not 
in order—or at least not optimized to ensure the best-possible results—
law firms are the ones that pay the price. 
A bill should provide a clear and timely communication 
of what should be paid, when it should be paid,  
and how it should be paid.


52 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
MANY LAW FIRMS ARE STILL COMMITTED 
TO “SNAIL MAIL” 
When we look at why many clients wait so long for their legal bills,  
the mediums firms use to share them have an obvious impact. 
In our survey of those who have worked with a lawyer in the past,  
37% of clients said that they received their bills by mail and 39% said 
they received them by email. By default, firms sending bills by mail  
add to their collection lockup waiting for bills to get to their clients. 
It’s worth noting that 54% of clients say they received their bills in 
person, likely after an appointment or consultation at their lawyer’s 
office. Firms may also be using multiple methods to bill clients 
throughout the duration of their legal matter.


53 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
37% of clients said that they 
received their bills by mail and 39% 
said they received them by email.


54 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
ONLINE PAYMENTS GET FIRMS  
PAID FASTER
Offering online payments significantly reduces the friction involved for 
clients in paying their legal bills. In fact, law firms using online payments 
get paid more than twice as fast. When looking at the number of days  
it takes to get bills paid, those using online payments have a median  
waiting period of seven days compared to 15 days for those not using 
online payments.
Without the ability to pay a law firm electronically, clients typically have 
to rely on other means, such as paying by check, which slows the entire 
payment process. It requires that clients have a checkbook on hand and 
the time to mail or drop off the check in person, both of which only add  
to a law firm’s collection and total lockup.
When comparing how many bills get paid, the largest difference is in 
the first 50 days from issuing a bill. Firms using online payments see the 
greatest benefits within the first several weeks, as this is when bills are 
likely to get paid the quickest, helping give law firms more cash on hand  
at any given time. 


55 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
To put this into greater perspective, law firms using online payments 
collect, on average, 50% of their bills within seven days of issuing them 
and 80% of their bills within 49 days (see chart below). Law firms not using 
online payments take more than twice as long—15 days—to collect 50%  
of their bills and it takes 70 days—over two months—to collect 80% of bills. 


56 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
Law firms using online payments on 
average collect 50% of their bills 
within 7 days of issuing them, and 
80% of their bills within 49 days.
ENCOURAGING CLIENTS TO PAY 
ELECTRONICALLY PAYS OFF
Beyond offering electronic payments, we can look at the extent to which 
firms are able to get their clients to actually pay electronically and the 
effect this has on their ability to collect payments from clients. 
We see a strong connection between law firms with a high percentage  
of bills that are paid electronically and how quickly they get paid. 
Firms that collect 75% or more of their payments electronically collect 
half of their bills within three days of issuing them. This is five times  
faster than a firm that doesn’t collect electronic payments at all. 


57 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
CLIENTS ACTUALLY WANT TO PAY BY 
CREDIT CARD
As it turns out, what’s good for law firms aligns really well with what 
clients are looking for when it comes to payment options. In our survey  
of consumers, paying by credit card was the most preferred option  
for paying a lawyer, accounting for almost half of all respondents  
across all age groups. Only one in five consumers wanted to pay by  
check, and even fewer by cash. 
Firms that collect 75% or more of their payments 
electronically collect half of their bills within 
three days of issuing them.


58 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
More 55 year-olds and older (24%) prefer to pay by check compared  
to 18-to-34 year-olds (18%) and 35-to-54 year-olds (17%). Interestingly, 
more 18-to-34 year-olds prefer to pay in cash (22%) compared to  
35-to-54 year-olds (15%) and those 55 years and older (7%). 
Since many clients are not just willing, but actually prefer to pay their 
legal bills with credit cards, law firms should implement strategies  
to ensure that clients know they have the option to pay electronically  
and educate clients on the ease and convenience of electronic  
payments. Doing so could result in getting bills paid exponentially  
faster, which in turn will result in a drastic increase in cash flow. 
consumers wanted to pay by 
check, and even fewer  
by cash.
Only
1 in 5


59 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 3: Getting paid faster
How to make  
electronic payments 
more convenient  
for clients
Law firms can implement several methods to make it 
easier and more convenient for clients to pay quickly. 
These include:
•	 Electronic payment links. Including payment 
links in bills make it easy for clients to pay as 
soon as they receive their bill. 
•	 QR codes. QR codes can be added to bills or 
displayed in the office so clients can make quick 
payments to the firm from their mobile device. 
•	 Saved payment methods. Storing a client’s 
payment information means they don’t need to 
look up and enter their payment information 
every time they make a payment. 
•	 Automated payment plans. Setting up automated 
payment transactions as a monthly subscription-
type fee ensures that money gets paid every 
month for continuous work or consultation.
•	 Evergreen trust requests. Collecting automated 
trust deposits can be used to collect advanced 
fees, helping to ensure that funds are available  
to pay bills as they’re issued. 


Part 4
Business levers to improve  
firm performance
60 | Legal Trends Report 2023


61 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 4: Business levers to improve firm performance
One of the biggest points of improvement that law 
firms have seen over the years is in their ability  
to bill and collect payment for more of their work.  
As we see below, many of these gains correlate with 
the use of better billing and collection technology. 
But while many law firms have increased their 
capability to bill and collect more, other firms  
are being left behind. 
This section looks at important business levers—technological capabilities 
that improve billing and payment collections—used by law firms and how 
these tools can have an outsized impact on revenue. 
 
But while many law firms have 
increased their capability to bill 
 
and collect more, other firms 
are being left behind.


62 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 4: Business levers to improve firm performance
BUSINESS LEVERS FOR IMPROVING 
REALIZATION RATES
We looked at several business levers in Clio, each of which are  
designed to improve billing and payment collections in law firms.  
When comparing firms that use these capabilities to those that  
don’t, we see a vast difference in how much of a firm’s work  
actually gets billed to clients.  


63 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 4: Business levers to improve firm performance
TOP 3 DIFFERENCES IN REALIZATION
When looking at the business levers that have the most profound  
impact on realization rates among law firms, the top three are: 
1.	Email billing. When law firms create a bill using the billable hours 
tracked in Clio, they have the option to email the bill directly to 
the client. This feature saves having to download the bill to send 
manually, either through another email platform or physically by 
mail. Law firms that emailed bills directly from Clio had realization 
rates 25% higher than firms that did not (91% compared to 73%).
2.	Outstanding balances summary. When working with a client that 
has multiple outstanding bills, law firms can summarize a total 
of what the client owes in an email sent from Clio. The summary 
itemizes the bills, the amounts unpaid for each, and a total amount 
owed, which can be paid from an embedded payment link. Firms 
using this feature to follow up with unpaid bills had realization rates 
that were 26% higher than firms that did not (88% compared to 70%).
3.	Bulk billing. Bulk billing is a workflow that allows law firms to 
instantly draft all of its bills—or a selection of bills—for clients with 
unbilled activities. The ability to automate an otherwise tedious 
process saves significant time and can lead to more billable work 
being invoiced to the client. Law firms using bulk billing have 
realization rates that are 21% higher than firms not using the  
feature (94% compared to 78%).
FEE-FORWARD BILLING ENSURES CLIENT FUNDS  
ARE AVAILABLE TO PAY LEGAL BILLS
Trust requests and evergreen trust requests are features in Clio  
that make it easy for law firms to request advance fee deposits and  
stay on top of requests to keep trust accounts topped up each month.  
Since firms know that funds are on hand to pay their clients bills,  
lawyers may be less likely to apply write-downs or discounts.  
As a result, their realization rates remain high. 
 


64 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 4: Business levers to improve firm performance
LAWYERS VALUE THEIR WORK MORE WITH BETTER 
SYSTEMS IN PLACE
A surprising outcome of our analysis was that Clio’s bill approval workflow 
correlated with increased realization rates. The bill approval workflow 
allows someone, usually a non-legal professional like an office manager 
or bookkeeper, to draft an invoice which is then sent to a lawyer for review 
and approval. Our initial expectation was that putting more time toward 
reviewing bills would result in added write-downs or discounts, but 
instead it had the opposite effect, resulting in realization rates that were 
9% higher (89% compared to 82%) than firms not using this feature. 
AUTOMATED BILLING AND PAYMENT COLLECTIONS 
CREATE SMOOTHER EXPERIENCES FOR CLIENTS
Many of the business levers looked at in this analysis automate important 
tasks for billing and payment collections that take up a lot of time when 
done manually. Having better systems in place allows lawyers to include 
more of their billable work on client invoices and gives them confidence  
in knowing that follow-ups will be handled automatically for the lawyer. 
And, if lawyers are concerned that billing more of their work will make 
clients less likely to pay, these higher realization rates generally don’t 
appear to affect collection rates, as we see below. 


65 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 4: Business levers to improve firm performance
TOP BUSINESS LEVERS FOR IMPROVING 
COLLECTION RATES
We also examined collection rates when analyzing business levers 
associated with increased realization rates. In most cases, firms using 
these features also saw modest increases in their collection rates.  
In other words, not only does the average law firm bill more using  
these levers—they often collect a greater proportion of their bills as well.   
TOP 3 DIFFERENCES IN COLLECTION RATES
When looking at the business levers that have the largest difference  
in collection rates among firms, the top three are
1.	Outstanding balances summary. This feature helps law firms stay 
on top of their clients’ bills if and when they have more than one 
balance outstanding with the firm. It’s not surprising that the use  
of this feature was associated with the most significant difference  
in collection rates. Firms using this feature had collection rates  
that were 5% higher than firms not using it (90% compared to 86%).


66 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 4: Business levers to improve firm performance
2.	Email billing. This feature can free up a significant amount of time 
for lawyers and staff when sending out bills while making it easier 
for clients to pay, since bills include a link for instant electronic 
payment. Not only does email billing put invoices directly into a 
client’s inbox; it also makes it convenient for clients to then click the 
link to pay immediately, reducing the risk that the bill will get lost  
or forgotten. Firms using email bill sharing had 3% higher collection 
rates than firms not using it (90% compared to 87%). 
3.	Trust requests. Similar to how firms saw higher realization rates 
when they used this feature, the ability to easily collect advanced  
fee deposits ensures that money is on hand to pay legal bills as  
they are issued. Firms using this feature had collection rates that 
were 3% higher than firms not using them (90% compared to 87%).
COMPARING THE IMPACT OF REALIZATION  
AND COLLECTION
Consider a lawyer that completes $100,000 worth of billable work over  
a period of time. When we compare realization rates between firms  
using email bill sharing versus those not, those using this capability  
will bill out 91% of the work on average, compared to 73% for those  
not using the feature.
Then, when we factor in the difference in collection rates, that same 
firm using the feature will, on average, collect 90% of the work they bill 
out compared to only 87% for those not using the feature. Based on the 
difference in realization and collection rates, the firm using email bill 
sharing will collect $18,390 more based on the same amount of work. 


67 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 4: Business levers to improve firm performance
PAYMENT PLANS
When comparing collection rates above, firms offering payment plans 
to clients saw collection rates that were 2% lower than firms not offering 
them. However, while firms offering payment plans had lower collection 
rates, these firms collected much more revenue overall. 
Across firms of all sizes, those using payment plans collected 49% more 
monthly revenue per lawyer than firms that did not. Solo law firms using 
payment plans saw the greatest difference: a total of 71% in increased 
monthly revenue compared to solos that did not offer payment plans  
to clients. Small and mid-sized law firms saw substantial differences  
in collection rates as well—39% and 32%, respectively. 


is the average installment  
amount that clients pay  
when on a payment plan
$300
68 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 4: Business levers to improve firm performance
However, according to our survey research, almost one in three 
firms (30%) don’t offer payment plans. This finding provides a major 
opportunity for many firms to earn more by simply offering this payment 
option. Not only do payment plans offer law firms more predictability 
in their revenues, but they also provide transparency and flexibility for 
clients to pay their legal bills over time, resulting in more clients being 
able to afford and pay for their legal services overall. 


69 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 4: Business levers to improve firm performance
AUTOMATED BILL REMINDERS
Automated bill reminders are also associated with a substantial difference 
in revenue collection. Firms that automate bill follow-ups not only free up 
time among firm staff, but also ensure that clients get timely reminders 
when their invoices are past due. 
Among firms of all sizes, those using automated bill reminders collected, 
on average, 49% more monthly revenue per lawyer than firms that did 
not. Solo law firms saw the greatest difference: those using this feature 
collected 29% more monthly revenue compared to solos not using it.  
Small and mid-sized firms saw substantially more revenue collection  
as well—15% and 20% respectively. 


70 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 4: Business levers to improve firm performance
Business levers
GUIDE TO BUSINESS LEVERS THAT 
IMPROVE BILLING AND PAYMENT 
COLLECTION WORKFLOWS
•	 Bill approval workflow. Review bills for  
accuracy and completeness prior to sending 
them to clients.
•	 Automated bill reminders. Send outstanding 
balance reminders to clients and bill recipients 
on a cadence that you select.
•	 Bulk billing. Send all approved, unsent bills  
to bill recipients in a single action.
•	 Clio for Clients. Clients can view and pay bills 
from their mobile app, in addition to uploading 
documents, keeping track of case details, 
and more.
•	 Email billing. Send bills directly to a bill 
recipient’s email address with a link to pay 
immediately online.
•	 Evergreen trust requests. Get notified when  
it’s time to replenish a client’s trust fund to  
pay for the work done on their case.
•	 Outstanding balance summary. Manually  
send clients reminders for outstanding bills  
and balances with a link to pay online.
•	 Payment plans. Receive payments toward  
a client’s outstanding balance in specified 
intervals until the bill is paid.
•	 Secure payments link. Send clients secure 
payment links that route payments directly  
to your specified bank accounts.
•	 Stored payment methods. Clients can store 
payment methods for future bill payments.
•	 Trust requests. Send trust requests to clients  
that will deposit funds directly into your  
specified Clio trust account.


71 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 4: Business levers to improve firm performance
LEVERAGE POINTS THAT FIRMS 
STRUGGLE WITH MOST
When comparing firms that were satisfied with their revenue to those 
that were not, we looked at the differences in where they experience 
frustrations in their day-to-day operations. In all cases, firms that 
were not satisfied with their revenue were more likely to experience 
frustration across every type of work. 
The most frustration experienced by firms that were unsatisfied  
with their revenue was in general accounting, which saw a 50% 
difference (72% compared to 48%). Collecting payments from clients, 
managing client communications, and tracking billable hours were  
also frustrating to many firms that were unsatisfied with their revenue. 
Each of these points of frustration represents areas of business that 
likely see inefficiencies that firms could improve with better systems 
and processes. 


72 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Part 4: Business levers to improve firm performance
MORE LEVERS FOR IMPROVING 
BUSINESS PERFORMANCE
We also asked survey respondents to tell us which of their practice 
management-related tasks involve technology. By then comparing  
firms that were satisfied and unsatisfied with their revenue,  
we identified what types of features successful firms were more  
likely to use. 
When looking at the types of workflows in which firms with good 
revenue are most likely to use technology, there are three that  
stand out: 
•	 Billing and accounting. Expense tracking, revenue tracking,  
and trust accounting capabilities
•	 Client-facing communications. Client communications,  
client intake, and online marketing
•	 Document management. Document drafting, e-filing,  
and e-signatures
In short, by using technology tools for these three workstreams,  
a firm can increase its revenue significantly. 


Part 5
The promise of AI
73 | Legal Trends Report 2023


Part 5: The promise of AI
74 | Legal Trends Report 2023
The advent of generative artificial intelligence 
(AI) marks the most significant technological 
development in recent years—if not a generation. 
Unlike any technology before it, generative AI  
can perform many of the complex tasks that  
only the human mind has been capable of. 
The growing number of AI solutions available today can perceive, learn, 
reason, and perform creative tasks. And while the recent developments 
in AI are altogether new, they are based on a foundational machine 
learning framework known as the neural network, which simulates how 
the human brain processes information. Neural networks have been 
around for decades, and they form the basis for established machine 
learning solutions like Amazon’s product recommendations, Google 
Assistant, and Apple’s Siri. 
More recently, the breakthrough of a new deep learning architecture, 
known as a “transformer,” builds on the foundational concept of a 
neural network and has resulted in the development of large language 
models (LLMs) that have an unparalleled ability to understand and 
create text.6 In the six years since the invention of the transformer, 
coupled with inexorable increases in computing power, we’ve seen an 
unparalleled explosion in the number of AI startups, with applications 
being explored in every imaginable facet of the human experience. 
What makes LLMs more advanced is that they can not only understand 
vast amounts of text but also generate new content based on their 
derived interpretations of human language, which is what many  
of us have seen firsthand with ChatGPT. 
6	
Vaswani, Ashish et al, “Attention Is All You Need,” 31st Conference on Neural Information 
Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.


Part 5: The promise of AI
75 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Launched publicly at the end of November 2022, ChatGPT was the first 
generative AI to achieve widespread use. Within just five days of release, 
ChatGPT had amassed 1 million users.7 Within two months, it grew to 
over 100 million users, making ChatGPT the fastest-growing consumer 
application in history. For comparison, TikTok took nine months to reach 
the same milestone and Instagram took two-and-a-half years.8 
7	
Ahmed, Arooj, “Chat GPT Achieved One Million Users in Record Time - Revolutionizing Time-
Saving in Various Fields,” Digital Information World, January, 27, 2023.
8	
Hu Krystal, “ChatGPT sets record for fastest-growing user base,” February 2, 2023, Reuters.
What makes LLMs more advanced is that 
they can not only understand vast amounts 
of text but also generate new content based 
on their derived interpretations of human 
language, which is what many of us have 
seen firsthand with ChatGPT.


Part 5: The promise of AI
76 | Legal Trends Report 2023
A FUTURE OF RAPID ADVANCEMENT IN LEGAL
What does the rise of AI mean for lawyers? There is no question that  
we are at the precipice of another massive technological advancement 
that promises to radically transform the legal profession. We’ve only  
just seen the first iterations of AI’s capabilities—how technology can  
take on advanced cognitive processes at a level of quality and speed  
far beyond anything we’ve seen before. 
The situation today parallels the first breakthroughs in cloud-based 
technologies more than 20 years ago or in modern mobile devices 
15 years ago. When these technologies first emerged, it wasn’t clear 
how they would manifest within our society—yet their future ubiquity 
was palpable even then. We are at a similar stage with AI. While the 
advancement in both the capabilities and use of AI is certain, it is not 
necessarily clear what an AI-assisted world will look like in the future. 
With these latest developments, AI has the opportunity to radically 
transform our society. Many also see extreme risk—the potential for 
millions of job eliminations, further widening of wealth inequality,  
and increasing polarization within the global political climate.  
AI’s potential implications on the world are so profound that some 
scientists and politicians are calling for temporary—and in some  
cases, indefinite—moratoriums on AI development. How we deploy  
AI ethically, safely, and responsibly will be a critical issue for the  
legal profession to navigate over the coming years.
Both cloud computing and mobile technologies enabled us to create, 
share, and find information with exponentially greater speed and 
accessibility. AI will give us even greater capability to not just access  
but create knowledge and perspective with almost zero effort.  
For knowledge-based professions like legal—and others that will  
surely include finance, technology innovation, and creative arts— 
these capabilities will be revolutionary, giving legal professionals the 
freedom and opportunity to reimagine how they spend their workdays. 
We’ve seen technology disrupt industries in the past. But through these 
disruptions, we typically see a net positive benefit. For example, prior  
to 1979, whole floors of accountants used to do the work that can now  
be done by a single person in a modern spreadsheet. When Don Bricklin 
invented the first computer spreadsheet with VisiCalc, many feared it 
would replace the need for accountants—whom, until then, individually 
performed the work that could now be done within a single cell in Excel. 


Part 5: The promise of AI
77 | Legal Trends Report 2023
But since the arrival of spreadsheets, employment in accounting  
has nearly doubled.9 Far from being replaced, accountants moved  
up the value chain, shifting from the work of mechanical computation  
to being strategic partners to their businesses—and delivering more  
with less. 
AI will be no different. It will enable those who embrace it—and those 
who embrace it will displace those who don’t. 
A BIGGER, SMARTER LEVER
The KPI levers we looked at earlier in this report provided insight into 
some of the most powerful tools that law firms have at their disposal  
to improve their businesses today. But AI promises to be a different  
type of lever, one that can get more done faster and take on a much 
broader set of tasks. 
There is no question as to whether AI will categorically transform  
legal work. Instead, lawyers should be asking how AI will impact  
their practices and what they are doing to prepare. The answer  
to these questions will prove critical since it won’t be long before  
lawyers who use AI will see significant advantages over those  
who do not. 
9	
Association of International Certified Professional Accountants, “2019 trends in the supply of 
accounting graduates and the demand for public accounting recruits,” 2019.
AI will give us even greater capability  
to not just access but create knowledge  
and perspective with almost zero effort.


Part 5: The promise of AI
78 | Legal Trends Report 2023
There is no question as to 
whether AI will categorically 
transform legal work.
AI is still in its earliest stages of development, but the rate of  
advancement has been incredibly rapid. The attitudes, opinions,  
and behaviors discussed in this section provide a snapshot of the  
legal profession and its clients’ perspectives on AI, demonstrating  
ample ground to cover in helping realize its transformative potential.
LEGAL PROFESSIONALS ARE INTERESTED 
YET CAUTIOUS OF AI
Most lawyers are at least aware of AI, and many see its potential.  
Sixty-three percent of legal professionals said that they were interested 
in learning more about AI. This interest is higher than the general 
population, including both clients and potential clients, of which  
only 54% showed interest. 
Moreover, lawyers are significantly more interested: 68% of lawyers, 
compared to 54% of paralegals and 48% of administrative staff, want  
to learn more about AI. With greater interest, lawyers may have an 
advantage in staying on top of the developments and opportunities 
available. Rather than falling behind and having to catch up to evolving 
client expectations, lawyers have the opportunity to be the real leaders 
and innovators in the space. 
Clio is a leader in legal technology innovation.
Read about our work in AI at clio.com/ai 


Part 5: The promise of AI
79 | Legal Trends Report 2023
At the same time, while both legal professionals and clients are 
interested in AI, the majority are also cautious. Fifty-eight percent of 
legal professionals don’t believe AI is advanced enough to be considered 
reliable, and 39% say they don’t trust it. Clients and potential clients have  
a similar view regarding AI’s reliability but are even less likely to trust it. 
As with any new technology, lawyers especially need to be aware of  
the risks. To leverage AI to their advantage, lawyers need to know  
what types of tasks are suitable for an AI to take on, what oversight  
is required, and what solutions are available in the first place.
At the time of surveying, ChatGPT was the most widely-used form of 
generative AI, but it was also the first of its kind and designed for general 
use by the wider public. It was also trained on open datasets that may  
be unsuitable for certain types of law firm tasks due to the inherent 
biases and lack of context-specific parameters. As more solutions become 
available, lawyers should ensure that they use technologies based on 
secure, reliable data sources managed by reputable businesses. This will 
help ensure the security of their practices while building trust with clients. 
In the meantime, the perceived barriers to adoption are low, as most  
see AI as easy to use. Only 8% of legal professionals and 28% of clients 
believe that AI software is too difficult to learn.


Part 5: The promise of AI
80 | Legal Trends Report 2023
of legal professionals said that 
they were interested in learning 
more about AI.
63%
AI POSES BOTH RISKS AND REWARDS
A sizable minority of legal professionals see the potential benefits  
of AI in legal practice. Twenty-one percent think that AI will improve  
the quality of legal services, 31% believe it will make them more 
affordable, and 38% expect AI to improve efficiency. 
Lawyers are more likely than others in the firm to see the efficiency 
benefits of AI: 42% of lawyers, compared to 24% of paralegals and  
30% of administrative staff, believe that AI can make law practices  
more efficient. Clients and potential clients are only slightly more 
optimistic about the benefits of AI in legal practices. 


Part 5: The promise of AI
81 | Legal Trends Report 2023
When it comes to the potential risks that AI could pose, many legal 
professionals express concern. Forty-one percent believe AI would  
open them up to professional liability, 57% are concerned about client 
privacy and confidentiality issues, and 37% worry about the risks of 
copyright issues. 
Larger firms are more likely to be concerned about copyright risks: almost 
half (47%) of firms with 20 or more full-time employees have copyright-
related worries regarding AI, compared to 33% of solo firms and 36% of 
firms with two to 19 employees. Administrative staff are more concerned 
about copyright than lawyers: of our survey respondents, 46% of law firm 
administrators, 41% of paralegals, and 34% of lawyers were concerned 
about this issue. 
For some, perceived trust may be at the heart of the issue. Thirty-nine 
percent of legal professionals think clients won’t trust a lawyer who uses 
AI in their practice. Just over one in three (37%) clients or potential clients 
say they’d be less likely to trust a lawyer who uses AI. 


Part 5: The promise of AI
82 | Legal Trends Report 2023
It will be up to vendors developing AI technologies to stay abreast of  
these concerns and develop solutions that protect lawyers from all 
perceived risks. 
As AI continues to integrate into our everyday lives, it will become more 
commonplace, much like other technologies—including spreadsheets, 
email, and social media—when they were first introduced. Despite being 
faster, more efficient, and key to unlocking new efficiencies, businesses 
and clients need time to adapt their perceptions. 
Lawyers can play a role in highlighting advantages in conversations  
with clients and, more importantly, prove the benefits through the  
quality and responsiveness of their work. 
Transparency surrounding the use of AI is top of mind for both lawyers 
and clients. Seventy percent of clients say they would want lawyers to 
disclose whether or not they use AI in their practice, and nearly half  
(47%) of legal professionals say they would want their clients to know  
if they used it. 
And if lawyers weren’t forthcoming about their use of AI, only 12% of  
legal professionals and 33% of clients believe it would be easy to know 
whether a lawyer was using AI. 


Part 5: The promise of AI
83 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Lawyers are more likely than 
others in the firm to see the 
efficiency benefits of AI.
Lawyers can play a role in highlighting 
advantages in conversations with 
clients and, more importantly, prove 
the benefits through the quality and 
responsiveness of their work.
of legal professionals think  
clients won’t trust a lawyer who 
uses AI in their practice.


Part 5: The promise of AI
84 | Legal Trends Report 2023
THE UNSEEN POTENTIAL OF AI IN THE 
JUSTICE SYSTEM
How AI will support the wider justice system is not yet clear to most  
legal professionals. As a new technology, members of the legal system  
will need to work with trusted providers to develop solutions that will  
have a positive impact, and the actual benefits will emerge as more 
innovations and capabilities become widely available. 
Overall, only 19% of legal professionals believe that the benefits of using 
AI in a law firm outweigh the costs; 32% of clients and potential clients 
agree, suggesting that more consumers see the potential advantages of  
AI to improve efficiencies and reduce the overall cost of legal services. 
Among legal professionals, lawyers (22%) are more likely than paralegals 
(12%) and administrative staff (15%) to see the benefits of AI. Yet, over  
half of legal professionals (54%) have serious concerns about AI being 
used in the legal profession, with more lawyers (57%) than administrative 
staff (43%) feeling this way. Over half of clients and potential clients (55%)  
have serious concerns about AI being used within the legal profession. 


Part 5: The promise of AI
85 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Regarding AI’s use within the justice system, few legal professionals  
(only 19%) think that AI will help improve it, and 35% say they would  
lose trust in the legal system if courts started using AI. Only 17% of  
legal professionals think that courts should use AI.
Clients and potential clients are more polarized on the issue. More think 
that AI should be used in courts and that AI will help improve the justice 
system. At the same time, more clients than legal professionals say they 
would lose their trust in the legal system if it were to use AI. 
A common fear in any profession is that AI will replace the need for 
humans in their jobs. In the legal industry, paralegals are considered  
most at risk. Although one in four (27%) legal professionals believe AI 
could make paralegals less necessary, most either disagree or are neutral 
on the issue. And, surprisingly, paralegals are no more likely than lawyers  
to feel this way. 


Part 5: The promise of AI
86 | Legal Trends Report 2023
But firm size seems inversely related to the belief that AI will be  
a substitute for paralegals: 53% of firms with 20 or more full-time  
employees do not believe AI would make paralegals less necessary, 
compared to 31% of solo firms, 35% of firms with two to four employees,  
and 37% of firms with five to 19 employees.
As of publishing this report, no US bar association has issued an opinion 
about the use of AI among legal professionals. However, the ABA has 
announced the creation of a task force to study the emerging impact and 
ethical implications for legal practice.10 Still, 20% of legal professionals 
believe that bar associations will never approve of practices using AI. 
And larger firms—those with 20 or more full-time employees—are more 
likely to believe that bar associations wouldn’t approve of using AI in the 
legal profession. Specifically, 31% of these firms, compared to 17% of 
solo firms, 21% of firms with two to four employees, and 19% of firms 
with five to 19 employees say that bar associations wouldn’t support the 
use of AI. Moreover, paralegals are more likely than lawyers to agree: 
25% of paralegals, compared to 18% of lawyers, believe their bar would 
disapprove of AI in the legal profession. 
10	 American Bar Association, “Artificial Intelligence task force explores legal impact,” September 4, 
2023, americanbar.org.


Part 5: The promise of AI
87 | Legal Trends Report 2023
With so many lawyers and clients potentially concerned with the 
implications of AI being used in legal practice, it will be an issue  
that professional licensing and regulation bodies will need to stay  
abreast of—to guide their members through the potential risks and  
realize the potentially-extensive benefits.
19%
20%
of legal professionals 
believe that the benefits 
of using AI in a law firm 
outweigh the costs.
of legal professionals 
believe that bar associations 
will never approve of 
practices using AI.


Part 5: The promise of AI
88 | Legal Trends Report 2023
HOW AI CAN BE USED BY LEGAL 
PROFESSIONALS
Even in its earliest iterations, AI offers many applications for legal 
professionals. Some of these uses include:
•	 Drafting letters or other legal content based on a set of criteria  
for a case
•	 Identifying and summarizing key components from a set  
of documents or text
•	 Reviewing a text for grammatical accuracy
•	 Recommending strategies for legal situations, career advancement, 
and business development
Lawyers can use most of these applications with a general, out-of-the-box 
solution like ChatGPT. Still, more solutions are being rapidly developed  
for specific tasks, providing results tailored to specific use cases. 
When it comes to applying AI to certain tasks, again, many lawyers  
and their clients see both advantages and risks. 
AI offers many applications 
 
for legal professionals.


Part 5: The promise of AI
89 | Legal Trends Report 2023
CLIENT COMMUNICATIONS
Since the most widely-available AI-powered tools today are conversation-
based, they have significant potential to improve communications-based 
tasks. Using AI to draft email responses to clients, for example, can save 
lawyers a significant amount of time. 
In fact, 32% of lawyers agree that AI can help reduce workloads. But 38% 
think that generating email responses with AI will lead to too much error 
and 38% also believe that letting an AI respond entirely on a lawyer’s 
behalf would be unethical. 
Of course, review and oversight of AI-powered communications may  
be necessary for some time. Given the tendency for AI to “hallucinate,”  
or provide inaccurate information, any work produced by an AI should  
be carefully reviewed—similar to how a senior firm member would  
review the work of an intern. While AI offers the benefit of an overall 
increase in work capacity, lawyers must still remain accountable for  
their work product.


Part 5: The promise of AI
90 | Legal Trends Report 2023
LEGAL RESEARCH
Since AI uses advanced natural language processing, AI-powered tools  
can review, analyze, and summarize large amounts of text in a very  
short time. 
It’s no wonder, then, that 40% of lawyers see potential value in using AI for 
legal research, saying it would dramatically improve efficiency. But only 
28% believe that AI would be reliable in performing legal research for a 
client and 38% said that using AI would lead to too much error in legal 
research. In other words, while lawyers see a lot of time-saving value in 
using AI for legal research, many remain cautious with respect to quality 
and the risks this could pose to client work. 
Lawyers should be aware that not all AI solutions—especially the more 
general, consumer-oriented products—have a nuanced understanding 
of what is required for legal application. Depending on the nature and 
context of the task they are being used for in their research, lawyers 
should seek AI solutions that have been trained specifically for legal 
document review and summation, with strict provisions in maintaining 
privacy and data security that are in line with their ethical obligations. 
of lawyers agree that AI  
can help reduce workloads.
32%


Part 5: The promise of AI
91 | Legal Trends Report 2023
AI-powered tools can review, analyze,  
and summarize large amounts of text  
in a very short time.


Part 5: The promise of AI
92 | Legal Trends Report 2023
LEGAL DECISIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
It’s again worth noting the difference between leveraging AI  
to synthesize and analyze massive amounts of information,  
which can be used to make decisions, versus using AI to  
perform legal work without oversight by a legal professional. 
When it comes to using AI for decision-making and client 
recommendations, legal professionals are more skeptical.  
Only 27% of legal professionals would consider relying on  
AI to help provide legal advice to clients, and just 10% felt  
comfortable relying on AI to make decisions on their behalf.  
Interestingly, lawyers (32%), more so than paralegals (14%)  
and administrative staff (16%), say they’d consider relying  
on AI-powered software to help advise their clients.


Part 5: The promise of AI
93 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Only 27% of legal professionals 
would consider relying on AI to help 
provide legal advice to clients, and 
just 10% felt comfortable relying on 
AI to make decisions on their behalf.
MANY CLIENTS SEE THE BENEFIT OF 
HIRING A LAWYER WHO USES AI
Ethics and quality considerations are essential in the AI discussion,  
but the client perspective is also relevant. How clients and potential  
clients feel about the use of AI in the legal profession should be just  
as important in determining how and where to consider using AI in  
legal practice. 
Even if AI solutions were to become unquestionably reliable for legal 
work, if clients aren’t prepared to accept the use of these technologies,  
law firms may have to carefully weigh the benefits of using AI against  
the potential loss of client trust—or find ways to win stronger trust  
with clients through better reputation building. 
As it turns out, despite being a relatively new technology, many clients 
express a fair amount of comfort with the idea of using AI, as long as  
its benefits are clear. Close to half of clients or potential clients surveyed 
said they would be comfortable hiring a lawyer who uses AI for client 
communications if it made legal services more affordable, gave lawyers 
more time to work on their case, and they knew that the technology  
was reliable. 


Part 5: The promise of AI
94 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Many older individuals would agree, though to a somewhat lesser extent. 
Forty percent of those 55 and older would be comfortable hiring a lawyer 
who uses AI if it made that lawyer more affordable; 48% of 18-to-34 year-
olds and 51% of 35-to-54 year-olds would agree. And 42% of those in the 
55-plus age group would hire a lawyer if their use of AI gave them more 
time to work on cases, compared to 51% of 18-to-34 year-olds and 49%  
of 35-to-54 year-olds. 
The use of AI by lawyers is also more welcomed if done transparently: 
almost half of consumers say they’d hire a lawyer who uses AI if that 
lawyer told them they did so. Also, many clients and potential clients  
seem permissive of lawyers using AI-powered tools for important tasks 
like legal research and client communications.


Part 5: The promise of AI
95 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Aside from whether AI affects hireability from a potential client’s 
perspective, its use can shape how the general public perceives  
a lawyer’s reputation. Our data indicates that many in the general 
population perceive lawyers who use AI for client communications  
as efficient, organized, and effective. 
However, clients also see lawyers who choose to use AI as too busy  
and prone to error, which may be a perception that lawyers need  
to manage if and when they implement AI solutions in their practice. 


Part 5: The promise of AI
96 | Legal Trends Report 2023


Part 5: The promise of AI
97 | Legal Trends Report 2023
USE OF AI IN LEGAL, TODAY
Regardless of perception or opinion, the use of AI is already well underway 
in legal practice. Nearly one in five (19%) legal professionals say they are 
using AI in some form in their practices. At the time of surveying, ChatGPT 
had only been available for about six months, which marks an astounding 
rate of adoption among legal professionals. In fact, more lawyers than 
people in the general public are using some form of AI: according to a 
March 2023 Pew study, only 14% of US adults had tried ChatGPT.11 
11	 Vogels, Emily A., “A majority of Americans have heard of ChatGPT, but few have tried it themselves,” 
Pew Research Center.
Almost half of customers say they’d hire  
a lawyer who uses AI if that lawyer told  
them they did so. 


Part 5: The promise of AI
98 | Legal Trends Report 2023
And while most legal professionals don’t use AI now, there is a strong 
appetite for future use. About half (51%) of legal professionals say they’d 
like to see more AI used in their practice; among them, 34% say they’d 
like to use it in their firms within the next six months, and 37% say within 
the next year. Smaller firms seem to have a greater appetite for more 
immediate future AI use: while 64% of firms with five to 19 employees  
and 61% of firms with 20 or more employees say they’d like to use AI  
more within the next year and 76% of solos and 74% of firms with two  
to four employees feel the same. 


Part 5: The promise of AI
99 | Legal Trends Report 2023
5.17
While AI is still in its infancy, there will be much opportunity to develop 
tailored solutions for specific types of legal work. When asked what 
types of tasks they’d like AI to take on, more lawyers agreed that they 
wanted it to help with document-oriented tasks, such as finding and 
storing documents (51%), getting documents signed (49%), and drafting 
documents (45%).


Part 5: The promise of AI
100 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Lawyers also see billing and payments tasks as a great use of AI: 
specifically, tracking billable hours (47%), collecting payments from 
clients (45%), and tracking expenses (45%). Calendaring (49%) on its  
own was also one of the most desired use cases for AI. 
Lower on the list of tasks that legal professionals see AI suited for are 
accounting-related tasks like general accounting (32%), paying employees 
(23%), and trust accounting (22%). And fewer legal professionals (28%) 
want AI to help them respond to client emails, calls, and texts. Smaller 
firms are more interested in using AI for payments-related tasks, like 
collecting payments from clients, tracking expenses and revenue,  
paying employees, and general accounting. 
Overall, many clients and potential clients had similar perspectives  
on how law firms should use AI. Tracking expenses (36%), tracking 
billable hours, (33%) and calendaring (33%) were most common. 
In terms of what legal professionals are already using AI for in their 
practice, legal research is the most common among respondents (9%). 
Drafting documents was the second-most common at 7% of respondents. 


Part 5: The promise of AI
101 | Legal Trends Report 2023
LEGAL PROFESSIONALS SEE MUCH 
PROMISE IN THE FUTURE OF AI
Even though the latest AI technologies have only just become available, 
many legal professionals have shown interest in its future adoption in 
legal practice, and a minority have already begun to use it. 
As more tailored solutions become available, legal professionals will 
have substantial opportunities to significantly enhance their productivity, 
increasing both the speed and quality of their legal work products. 
In the meantime, the more legal professionals can do to stay abreast of the 
opportunities and risks AI presents, the more prepared they will be to take 
advantage of AI’s benefits as they develop and become more reliable and 
widely available for legal practice. 
About half of legal professionals 
say they’d like to see more AI 
used in their practice.
51%


Part 5: The promise of AI
102 | Legal Trends Report 2023
As more tailored solutions become 
available, legal professionals will have 
substantial opportunities to significantly 
enhance their productivity, increasing 
both the speed and quality of their legal 
work products.


Appendix A
Hourly rates and KPIs
103 | Legal Trends Report 2023


Appendix A: Hourly rates and KPIs
104 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Each Legal Trends Report includes data on average 
hourly rates and key performance indicators (KPIs) 
to help analyze lawyer and law firm productivity, 
efficiency, and revenue generation. 


Appendix A: Hourly rates and KPIs
105 | Legal Trends Report 2023
State
Law Firms
Lawyers
Non-lawyers
State
Law Firms
Lawyers
Non-lawyers
AL
$195
$208
$115
NC
$229
$254
$132
AR
$229
$242
$152
ND
$231
$253
$145
AZ
$242
$266
$154
NE
$217
$218
$212
CA
$313
$344
$186
NH
$230
$248
$145
CO
$236
$261
$142
NJ
$291
$306
$174
CT
$314
$342
$196
NM
$219
$242
$132
DC
$365
$392
$202
NV
$283
$311
$172
DE
$308
$344
$173
NY
$339
$358
$215
FL
$264
$297
$151
OH
$212
$224
$137
GA
$262
$286
$154
OK
$218
$235
$122
IA
$193
$202
$130
OR
$230
$255
$133
ID
$218
$233
$121
PA
$272
$288
$183
IL
$286
$305
$179
RI
$234
$240
$170
IN
$225
$242
$134
SC
$218
$249
$122
KS
$213
$227
$133
SD
$195
$199
$158
KY
$193
$204
$121
TN
$218
$233
$127
LA
$226
$245
$104
TX
$264
$300
$146
MA
$273
$285
$184
UT
$231
$250
$135
MD
$286
$310
$175
VA
$273
$295
$165
ME
$183
$193
$130
VT
$216
$226
$119
MI
$249
$266
$138
WA
$258
$288
$149
MN
$250
$271
$146
WI
$219
$231
$157
MO
$227
$249
$131
WV
$160
$162
$148
MS
$199
$217
$127
WY
$224
$241
$145
MT
$187
$199
$111
HOURLY RATES BY STATE


Appendix A: Hourly rates and KPIs
106 | Legal Trends Report 2023
State
Law Firms
Lawyers
Non-lawyers
State
Law Firms
Lawyers
Non-lawyers
AL
$221
$236
$130
NC
$245
$271
$141
AR
$256
$271
$170
ND
$254
$277
$159
AZ
$250
$275
$159
NE
$236
$237
$231
CA
$280
$308
$166
NH
$224
$242
$141
CO
$229
$253
$138
NJ
$267
$281
$160
CT
$306
$334
$191
NM
$243
$269
$147
DC
$328
$352
$182
NV
$296
$326
$180
DE
$316
$352
$177
NY
$310
$327
$196
FL
$260
$293
$149
OH
$229
$242
$148
GA
$274
$299
$161
OK
$242
$261
$135
IA
$215
$225
$145
OR
$224
$248
$129
ID
$238
$254
$132
PA
$283
$299
$190
IL
$282
$301
$176
RI
$229
$235
$167
IN
$243
$261
$144
SC
$232
$266
$130
KS
$234
$249
$146
SD
$216
$221
$175
KY
$217
$230
$136
TN
$240
$257
$140
LA
$247
$268
$114
TX
$268
$305
$148
MA
$256
$267
$172
UT
$244
$264
$143
MD
$270
$291
$165
VA
$267
$288
$161
ME
$188
$199
$134
VT
$218
$229
$121
MI
$264
$282
$147
WA
$237
$264
$136
MN
$254
$276
$148
WI
$235
$247
$168
MO
$246
$271
$142
WV
$176
$178
$163
MS
$229
$251
$147
WY
$245
$263
$158
MT
$204
$217
$121
ADJUSTED RATES BY STATE*
*Adjusted rates reflect cost of living for each state.


Appendix A: Hourly rates and KPIs
107 | Legal Trends Report 2023
Practice Area
Law Firms
Lawyers
Non-lawyers
Practice Area
Law Firms
Lawyers
Non-lawyers
Administrative
$257
$305
$136
Government
$264
$274
$175
Appellate
$286
$305
$167
Immigration
$330
$375
$287
Bankruptcy
$370
$428
$192
Insurance
$210
$229
$116
Business
$323
$341
$180
Intellectual 
Property 
$377
$408
$237
Civil Litigation
$299
$325
$158
Juvenile
$125
$127
$112
Civil Rights/ 
Constitutional 
Law
$303
$330
$158
Mediation/
Arbitration
$308
$340
$142
Collections
$266
$305
$175
Medical 
Malpractice
$211
$241
$118
Commercial/ 
Sale of Goods
$359
$378
$209
Personal Injury
$244
$280
$135
Construction
$241
$269
$134
Real Estate
$328
$354
$181
Contracts
$312
$330
$170
Small Claims
$176
$194
$111
Corporate
$376
$400
$201
Tax
$369
$409
$236
Criminal
$208
$211
$183
Traffic Offenses
$286
$318
$206
Elder Law
$260
$290
$176
Trusts
$324
$381
$192
Employment/
Labor
$350
$377
$175
Wills & Estates
$296
$344
$180
Family
$273
$312
$165
Workers' 
Compensation
$168
$175
$142
HOURLY RATES BY PRACTICE AREA


Appendix A: Hourly rates and KPIs
108 | Legal Trends Report 2023
State
Lawyers
Non-lawyers
State
Lawyers
Non-lawyers
AL
35%
21%
NC
31%
20%
AR
26%
14%
ND
30%
18%
AZ
35%
25%
NE
43%
25%
CA
33%
26%
NH
27%
17%
CO
36%
28%
NJ
34%
22%
CT
29%
23%
NM
34%
25%
DC
27%
24%
NV
35%
24%
DE
33%
15%
NY
31%
22%
FL
33%
25%
OH
30%
19%
GA
31%
21%
OK
34%
19%
IA
34%
16%
OR
34%
21%
ID
36%
16%
PA
35%
23%
IL
34%
20%
RI
36%
18%
IN
34%
16%
SC
34%
25%
KS
32%
18%
SD
35%
15%
KY
29%
16%
TN
31%
21%
LA
31%
19%
TX
33%
27%
MA
31%
25%
UT
36%
25%
MD
30%
19%
VA
27%
17%
ME
34%
13%
VT
29%
15%
MI
32%
20%
WA
34%
26%
MN
30%
18%
WI
37%
19%
MO
31%
19%
WV
35%
16%
MS
29%
19%
WY
32%
17%
MT
36%
21%
UTILIZATION RATES BY STATE


Appendix A: Hourly rates and KPIs
109 | Legal Trends Report 2023
State
Realization Rate
Collection Rate
State
Realization Rate
Collection Rate
AL
84%
89%
NC
90%
89%
AR
87%
89%
ND
94%
93%
AZ
88%
91%
NE
78%
92%
CA
82%
88%
NH
92%
92%
CO
93%
93%
NJ
81%
89%
CT
77%
91%
NM
91%
92%
DC
70%
91%
NV
87%
91%
DE
88%
93%
NY
78%
88%
FL
77%
91%
OH
87%
90%
GA
84%
91%
OK
87%
90%
IA
77%
89%
OR
91%
93%
ID
94%
91%
PA
86%
92%
IL
87%
87%
RI
85%
81%
IN
77%
89%
SC
91%
92%
KS
91%
91%
SD
82%
92%
KY
89%
90%
TN
81%
90%
LA
84%
89%
TX
89%
89%
MA
82%
92%
UT
92%
90%
MD
87%
89%
VA
91%
91%
ME
89%
92%
VT
95%
95%
MI
89%
89%
WA
90%
93%
MN
90%
93%
WI
88%
91%
MO
84%
88%
WV
78%
87%
MS
82%
89%
WY
92%
93%
MT
93%
94%
REALIZATION AND COLLECTION RATES BY STATE


Appendix A: Hourly rates and KPIs
110 | Legal Trends Report 2023
REALIZATION AND COLLECTION RATES BY PRACTICE AREA
Practice Area
Realization Rate
Collection Rate
Practice Area
Realization Rate
Collection Rate
Administrative
58%
90%
Government
84%
96%
Appellate
70%
89%
Immigration
42%
87%
Bankruptcy
61%
77%
Insurance
69%
95%
Business
82%
94%
Intellectual 
Property
84%
93%
Civil Litigation
76%
90%
Juvenile
69%
84%
Civil Rights/
Constitutional 
Law
31%
75%
Mediation/
Arbitration
78%
95%
Collections
70%
86%
Medical 
Malpractice
76%
99%
Commercial/
Sale of Goods
82%
92%
Personal Injury
43%
87%
Construction
72%
92%
Real Estate
79%
93%
Contracts
79%
94%
Small Claims
92%
90%
Corporate
83%
93%
Tax
83%
94%
Criminal
58%
87%
Traffic Offenses
57%
83%
Elder Law
64%
83%
Trusts
74%
95%
Employment/
Labor
63%
94%
Wills & Estates
69%
93%
Family
85%
90%
Workers' 
Compensation
73%
94%


Appendix B
Detailed methodology
111 | Legal Trends Report 2023


Appendix B: Detailed methodology
112 | Legal Trends Report 2023
APP DATA COLLECTION
The Legal Trends Report uses aggregated and anonymized data  
collected from the Clio platform. By synthesizing actual usage  
data, we’re able to identify trends that would be otherwise  
invisible to most firms. 
The Legal Trends Report has been prepared using data aggregated  
and anonymized from tens of thousands of legal professionals.  
These customers were included in our data set using the  
following criteria:
•	 They were paid subscribers to Clio. Customers who  
were evaluating the product via a free trial or were  
using Clio as part of our Academic Access Program  
were not included.
•	 They were located in the contiguous United States.  
This includes the District of Columbia but excludes  
Hawaii and Alaska. No customers in other countries  
were included.
•	 Any data from customers who opted out of aggregate  
reporting was excluded.
•	 Outlier detection measures were implemented to  
systematically remove statistical anomalies. 


Appendix B: Detailed methodology
113 | Legal Trends Report 2023
DATA USAGE AND PRIVACY
The security and privacy of customer data is our top priority at Clio.  
In preparing the Legal Trends Report, Clio’s data operations team 
observed the highest standard of data collection and reporting.
DATA COLLECTION
•	 All data insights were obtained in strict accordance with  
Clio’s Terms of Service (section 2.12).
•	 All extracted data was aggregated and anonymized.
•	 No personally-identifiable information was used.
•	 No data belonging to any law firm’s clients was used.
REPORTING
Aggregate data has been generalized where necessary to avoid instances 
where individual firm data could be identified. For example, to avoid 
reporting data on a small town with only one law firm, which would 
implicate all of this town’s data to this firm, we only report at country, 
state, and metropolitan levels.
Additionally, raw data sets will never be shared externally. Clio is 
effectively a tally counter for user interactions—much like stadiums  
use turnstiles to count visitors without collecting any personally 
identifiable information from their customers. Similarly, as users 
interact with the Clio platform they trigger usage signals we can count 
and aggregate into data sets. We can identify trends without collecting 
information that reveals anything specific about individual customers.


Appendix B: Detailed methodology
114 | Legal Trends Report 2023
SURVEY DESIGN
Survey of US legal professionals
We surveyed 1,446 US legal professionals from May 31 to July 20, 2023.  
The legal professionals we surveyed included lawyers as well as support 
staff—such as paralegals and administrators—who are engaged in the 
management side of their practice. 
Survey of US consumers (general population)
We surveyed 1,012 adults in the US general population from June 13  
to June 22, 2023. This survey was designed to gauge attitudes, opinions, 
preferences, and behaviors regarding the legal profession among  
individuals who have hired lawyers in the past or who may become  
potential legal clients in the future. This sample is representative of  
the US population by age, gender, region, income, and race/ethnicity  
based on the most recent US census statistics.