Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
1 of 17
N E U R O S C I E N C E
Fast and slow: Recording neuromodulator dynamics 
across both transient and chronic time scales
Neuromodulators transform animal behaviors. Recent research has demonstrated the importance of both sus-
tained and transient change in neuromodulators, likely due to tonic and phasic neuromodulator release. However, 
no method could simultaneously record both types of dynamics. Fluorescence lifetime of optical reporters could 
offer a solution because it allows high temporal resolution and is impervious to sensor expression differences 
across chronic periods. Nevertheless, no fluorescence lifetime change across the entire classes of neuromodulator 
sensors was previously known. Unexpectedly, we find that several intensity-­
based neuromodulator sensors also 
exhibit fluorescence lifetime responses. Furthermore, we show that lifetime measures in vivo neuromodulator 
dynamics both with high temporal resolution and with consistency across animals and time. Thus, we report a 
method that can simultaneously measure neuromodulator change over transient and chronic time scales, promising 
to reveal the roles of multi–time scale neuromodulator dynamics in diseases, in response to therapies, and across 
development and aging.
INTRODUCTION
Neuromodulators such as acetylcholine (ACh) and dopamine (DA) 
can reconfigure neural circuits and transform animal behaviors (1–11), 
and their misregulation is implicated in mental disorders (12–19). 
Recent research has demonstrated the importance of both transient 
and sustained change of neuromodulators, likely due to phasic and 
tonic neuromodulator release, for brain functions (20–24). For example, 
as animals learn to associate a cue with a subsequent reward, DA 
transient shifts from reward to cue, showing the importance of transient 
neuromodulator dynamics for behavior state transitions (7, 25, 26). 
Demonstrating the critical role of sustained change of neuromodulators, 
elevated baseline dopamine levels precede and predict hallucination-­
like behavior (24). Thus, to advance our understanding of the function 
of neuromodulators in animal behavior, we need methods to simulta-
neously capture both transient and sustained neuromodulator changes.
Although both transient and sustained neuromodulator changes 
are important, no method could simultaneously record both types 
of changes. Classical methods such as microdialysis and electro-
chemical methods allow comparison of neuromodulator concentration 
over long periods of time and between animals (27–31). However, 
these methods lack spatial resolution, temporal resolution, or chemical 
specificity. Fluorescence intensity–based optical reporters of neuro-
modulators are now transforming the field of neuromodulation due 
to their high spatial and temporal resolution (32–36). However, fluo-
rescence intensity does not only respond to changing neuromodulator 
concentrations but also depends on excitation light power and sensor 
expression level, which varies across long time periods, between brain 
regions, and between animals. As a result, intensity measurement 
cannot be used to compare sustained change in neuromodulator 
concentrations across these domains. Therefore, an ideal method 
would combine the benefits of classical methods and fluorescence 
intensity–based sensors to enable measurement of both transient 
changes in neuromodulator concentration at high-­
resolution and 
sustained changes across time and animals.
Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) measurement 
of optical sensors could fulfil the requirement of such an ideal method. 
Fluorescence lifetime measures the time between excitation and light 
emission of a fluorophore and is therefore independent of sensor 
expression levels or fluctuation in excitation light power (32, 37–40). 
FLIM has been used successfully to uncover spatiotemporal dynamics 
of intracellular signals and voltage with biosensors (40–51).
Most optical sensors of neuromodulators are derived from G 
protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs) for the specific neuromodulators, 
where the third intracellular loop is replaced by a single circularly 
permuted fluorescent protein (34–36). Whereas one can rationally 
design FLIM sensors based on Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) 
(40, 45–48, 52–57), it is extremely hard to predict whether a single 
fluorophore-­
based sensor will show lifetime change (58). Most single 
fluorophore sensors change their absorption coefficient upon confor-
mational change (58, 59) and thus show no lifetime change. Although 
a few dyes and single fluorescent protein–based sensors show life-
time change (41–44, 49–51), no GPCR-­
based single fluorophore 
sensors were reported to show lifetime responses. Thus, it is unclear 
whether any intensity-­
based neuromodulator sensors can display 
fluorescence lifetime change; nor is it known whether FLIM is a viable 
technique to reliably measure neuromodulator levels across excitation 
light powers, different individual animals, and chronic time periods.
Here, we report a method that can accurately measure both tran-
sient and sustained change in neuromodulators in living animals. 
We found fluorescence lifetime response in single fluorophore neuro-
modulator sensors based on GPCRs. To determine whether lifetime 
changes can be leveraged to study neuromodulation in vivo, we 
tested the probe with the largest dynamic range, the ACh sensor 
GRABACh3.0 (GPCR activation-­
based acetylcholine sensor 3.0) (60). 
We found that, similar to intensity, lifetime measurement of 
GRABACh3.0 is dose sensitive and can detect ACh dynamics with 
high spatial and temporal resolution. In contrast to intensity, life-
time measurement of endogenous ACh shows high consistency 
across individual animals, across imaging conditions, and across 
chronic time periods in vivo. Our results have broad implications 


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
2 of 17
beyond ACh sensors. Methodologically, these results demonstrate 
the power of FLIM for neuromodulator measurement and the value 
of making fluorescence lifetime-­
compatible neuromodulator sensors. 
Biologically, FLIM measurement of neuromodulator sensors enables 
us to simultaneously capture both acute and sustained changes of 
neuromodulators, promising to reveal the role of transient change 
and basal level of neuromodulator release in disease models, in re-
sponse to therapies, and across development and aging.
RESULTS
Fluorescence lifetime responses of neuromodulator sensors
We tested whether any intensity-­
based neuromodulator sensors 
showed a fluorescence lifetime change (Fig. 1A). We expressed indi-
vidual sensors in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 T cells and 
measured sensor fluorescence intensity and lifetime with two-­
photon 
FLIM (2pFLIM). Unexpectedly, although not every sensor showed 
lifetime change, multiple sensors showed a significant fluorescence 
Fig. 1. The ACh sensor GRABACh3.0 shows fluorescence lifetime response. (A) Schematic illustrating the question under investigation: Neuromodulator sensors show fluores-
cence intensity increase, but it is unclear whether they show any fluorescence lifetime change. The schematic was created with BioRender. (B) Summaries of fluorescence intensity 
and lifetime changes of different neuromodulator sensors in response to saturating concentrations of the corresponding neuromodulators in HEK 293T cells. Wilcoxon test, 
**P < 0.01, versus baseline change. Data are represented as median with interquartile range. (C and D) Representative heatmaps (C) and traces (D) showing fluorescence intensity 
(top panels) or fluorescence lifetime (bottom panels) of GRABACh3.0 in response to saturating concentration of ACh (100 μM) with the cholinesterase inhibitor (AChEi) donepezil (Don; 
5 μM), muscarinic ACh receptor (mAChR) antagonist tiotropium (Tio; 5 μM), or ACh + Tio + Don in HEK 293T cells. The traces in (D) are from the cell denoted by a triangle in (C). 
(E) Histogram of fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 sensor under baseline and with 100 μM ACh. (F) Summaries of intensity and fluorescence lifetime changes of GRABACh3.0 sensor in 
HEK 293T cells. Note that these data are the same as those displayed for GRABACh3.0 in (B). Friedman one-­
way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test with Dunn’s multiple comparison, 
**adjusted P < 0.01 versus baseline and ##adjusted P < 0.01 versus ACh. (G) Summaries of the dose-­
dependent intensity and fluorescence lifetime change of GRABACh3.0 sensor in 
response to different concentrations of ACh in the presence of 5 μM AChEi donepezil. Data are represented as mean with SEM. EC50, half maximal effective concentration.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
3 of 17
lifetime change in response to saturating concentrations of the 
corresponding neuromodulators [Fig. 1B; GRABACh3.0 (60), n = 18, 
P < 0.0001; intensity-­
based ACh-­
sensing fluorescent reporter (iACh-
SnFR) (61), n = 11, P = 0.001; 5-­
hydroxytryptamine (5-­
HT) sensor 
gGRAB5-­
HT2h (62), n = 29, P = 0.0004; norepinephrine (NE) sensor 
GRABNE2m (63), n = 15, P = 0.1514; and DA sensor GRABDA2m (64), 
n = 19, P = 0.001). Notably, the ACh sensor GRABACh3.0, not previously 
optimized for lifetime, displayed a dynamic range of lifetime changes 
that are comparable to those of many FRET sensors (46–48, 52–57). 
These results demonstrate that single fluorophore-­
based neuromodu-
lator sensors can show fluorescence lifetime responses.
We subsequently used the ACh sensor GRABACh3.0 (60) to investi-
gate the power of lifetime measurement because of the following 
reasons. First, GRABACh3.0 showed the largest fluorescence lifetime 
change among all the neuromodulator sensors tested (Fig. 1B; median 
of 0.17 ns with interquartile range of 0.14 to 0.19 ns in response to 
100 μM ACh; n = 18, P < 0.0001). The large dynamic range makes it 
easier to explore the power of lifetime measurement in vivo. Second, 
ACh is one of the best-­
characterized neuromodulators. It increases 
during defined behavior state transitions, such as from resting to 
running (60, 65–67) and from nonrapid eye movement (NREM) 
sleep to REM sleep (60, 68–73), thus making it feasible to test the 
power of the technology with known ground truth. Third, ACh is 
one of the most important neuromodulators in the brain (17, 74), 
playing critical roles in neuronal processes including learning and 
memory (75), attention (76), and sleep (77).
In the initial characterization of GRABACh3.0, similar to intensity, 
lifetime of GRABACh3.0 increased in response to saturating concen-
tration of ACh (100 μM), and this increase was blocked by the addition 
of the muscarinic ACh receptor (mAChR) antagonist tiotropium 
(Tio; 5 μM) (n = 18, adjusted P = 0.0007 for intensity and P < 0.0001 
for lifetime; ACh + Tio versus ACh; Fig. 1, C, D, and F). Further-
more, a mutant sensor that does not bind ACh (GRABACh3.0mut) did 
not show any intensity or fluorescence lifetime change in response 
to ACh (n = 5, P = 0.31 for intensity and 0.63 for lifetime; fig. S1). 
The fluorescence lifetime histogram of GRABACh3.0 showed slower 
decay with 100 μM ACh than without ACh at baseline (Fig. 1E), 
indicating that ACh binding increases fluorescence lifetime. Thus, both 
intensity and lifetime respond to ACh in cells expressing GRABACh3.0.
To test whether lifetime of GRABACh3.0 responds to graded ACh, 
we measured the dose-­
response curve of GRABACh3.0. In response to 
different concentrations of ACh ranging from physiologically relevant 
to saturating concentrations (1 nM to 100 μM) (78–80), fluorescence 
lifetime of GRABACh3.0 in HEK cells showed a dose-­
dependent 
increase (n = 13; Fig. 1G). In addition, fluorescence lifetime showed 
different sensitive concentration range to intensity [half maximal 
effective concentration (EC50) = 0.24 μM for lifetime and 1.30 μM 
for intensity; Fig. 1G]. These results indicate that lifetime measure-
ment of GRABACh3.0 report graded ACh increase.
In principle, an increase in fluorescence lifetime of cells ex-
pressing GRABACh3.0 could be due to true lifetime response to ACh 
by GRABACh3.0 or due to an increase in intensity of GRABACh3.0 rela-
tive to the autofluorescence of cells without any change of GRABACh3.0 
lifetime. The latter possibility exists because both the fluorescent 
sensor and autofluorescence contribute to fluorescence measurement 
of cells, and the lifetime of GRABACh3.0 is longer than that of autofluo-
rescence (fig. S2A). To test the null hypothesis that GRABACh3.0 showed 
no lifetime change, we performed computational simulations (81) 
to test how much cellular lifetime would increase if GRABACh3.0 only 
increased in intensity and not lifetime. For the simulation, we con-
structed photon populations of GRABACh3.0 sensor as double 
exponential decay (fig. S2B). Subsequently, we sampled from this 
population with low and high photon numbers corresponding to 
measurements at 0 and 100 μM ACh, respectively (Fig. 2A). We addi-
tionally added autofluorescence based on measurement in cells 
without sensor expression. Our simulation showed that if the sensor 
itself did not show any fluorescence lifetime increase, an increase in 
intensity only caused a small increase of overall lifetime (from 3.242 
± 0.012 ns to 3.247 ± 0.0065 ns; n = 500 simulations for both low and 
high photons; Fig. 2B). In contrast, the experimentally measured 
Fig. 2. Simulation reveals authentic fluorescence lifetime response of GRABACh3.0. (A) Schematic illustrating the process of simulation. Fluorescence lifetime histogram 
of the sensor was modeled as a double exponential decay, sampled with different number of photons, and convolved with measured pulse response function (PRF). 
Subsequently, afterpulse and autofluorescence (sampled from measured distribution) were added. Empirical fluorescence lifetime was then calculated from the simulated 
distribution. (B) Fluorescence lifetime distribution of cells expressing GRABACh3.0 based on experimental data (n = 3) and based on simulation (n = 500 simulations under 
each condition). Experimental data were collected in the absence or presence of ACh (100 μM). Simulation assumed only intensity change, and no lifetime change of the 
fluorescence sensor, and simulated with low or high photon counts corresponding to baseline and ACh conditions, respectively. Data are represented as mean with SD.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
4 of 17
lifetime increased much more in response to 100 μM ACh (n = 3; 
mean difference = 0.19 ns; Fig. 2B): The increase was more than 
10 times of the standard deviation (SD) (0.014 ns) of the difference 
between low and high photons from simulation. Therefore, the ob-
served fluorescence lifetime response in cells expressing GRABACh3.0 
is not solely due to an increase in fluorescence intensity. Rather, 
GRABACh3.0 sensor itself responds to ACh with authentic fluorescence 
lifetime increase.
Fluorescence lifetime of ACh sensor detects graded and 
transient ACh change in the brain
To test whether fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 can report ACh 
levels in brain tissue, we delivered the reporter via adeno-­
associated 
virus (AAV) injection to CA1 pyramidal neurons of the mouse hippo-
campus and imaged reporter responses in acute hippocampal slices. 
Bath application of ACh (1 μM and 100 μM) induced both fluores-
cence lifetime (n = 8 cells; adjusted P = 0.023 for baseline versus 
1 μM, baseline versus 100 μM, and 1 μM versus 100 μM; Fig. 3, A and B) 
and intensity (n = 8; adjusted P = 0.023 for baseline versus 1 μM, 
baseline versus 100 μM, and 1 μM versus 100 μM; fig. S3, A and B) 
increase of GRABACh3.0. To mimic the response of GRABACh3.0 
through an optical fiber in vivo, we also imaged whole fields of view 
of the CA1 region including populations of cell bodies and dendrites 
(Fig. 3C and fig. S3C). GRABACh3.0 showed dose-­
dependent fluo-
rescence lifetime (n  = 5 fields of view; Fig.  3D) and intensity 
(fig. S3D, n = 5) responses to ACh. In addition, the absolute values of 
fluorescence lifetime correlated with ACh concentrations (Fig. 3D). 
These results indicate that fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 can 
report graded ACh increase in brain tissue.
For fluorescence lifetime measurement of GRABACh3.0 to be useful 
in biological applications, it needs to be sensitive enough to detect 
transient ACh in the brain. To test this, we puffed ACh (200 μM) onto 
the soma of CA1 pyramidal neurons in acute hippocampal slices 
(Fig. 3E) at temporal duration (10 s) comparable to ACh release 
measured in behaving animals in vivo (82). Both fluorescence life-
time (n = 27, P < 0.0001; Fig. 3F) and intensity (n = 27, P < 0.0001; 
fig. S3E) of GRABACh3.0 increased in response to ACh delivery, indi-
cating that lifetime of GRABACh3.0 can report in brain tissue ACh 
release that is temporally relevant and transient. Together, these results 
show that similar to intensity, fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 
can report graded and transient increase of ACh in the brain.
Fluorescence lifetime of ACh sensor is independent of 
laser power
Unlike intensity, fluorescence lifetime should be independent of 
laser power fluctuation. To explore the extent of this advantage, we 
measured both fluorescence lifetime and intensity under different 
laser excitation powers, both in cultured HEK 293T cells and in brain 
slices. In 293T cells, we first evaluated whether the relative change of 
intensity or lifetime can reliably reflect change of ACh concentration 
despite varying laser powers. As laser power increased, the change of 
fluorescence lifetime in response to ACh remained consistent, whereas 
intensity change showed a small decrease under higher laser powers 
(n = 10; baseline: P = 0.055 for intensity and P = 0.71 for lifetime; 
ACh: P = 0.0003 for intensity and P = 0.95 for lifetime; fig. S4A). We 
subsequently evaluated whether absolute ACh concentration can be 
measured with sensor properties despite changing laser powers. 
As expected, fluorescence intensity of GRABACh3.0 increased with 
increasing laser power (n = 10; adjusted P = 0.0005 for baseline and 
P < 0.0001 for ACh, low versus high laser power; Fig. 4, A to C). 
Both laser power and the presence of ACh contributed significantly 
to the variability of fluorescence intensity across cells (P < 0.0001 for 
both ACh and laser power; Fig. 4D). Only 49% of sensor intensity 
variance could be explained by ACh concentrations (Fig. 4D). In 
contrast, fluorescence lifetime of the ACh sensor was stable across 
different laser powers (n = 10; adjusted P = 0.71 for baseline and 
0.68 for ACh, low versus high laser power; Fig. 4, A to C). Only the 
presence or absence of ACh, and not laser power, significantly con-
tributed to the variation of fluorescence lifetime across cells (P < 
0.0001 for ACh and P = 0.12 for laser power; Fig. 4D). Notably, the 
majority (73%) of the variance of sensor lifetime could be explained 
by ACh concentration, with minimal contributions from laser power 
(0.11%) or cell identity (23%; Fig. 4D).
To test the stability of lifetime in brain tissue with varying laser 
excitation powers, we also imaged large fields of view in brain slices 
(Fig. 4, E to G). Whereas fluorescence intensity of GRABACh3.0 
increased with increasing laser power (n = 6, adjusted P = 0.018 for 
baseline and P = 0.0052 for ACh, low versus high laser power; Fig. 4, 
F and G), fluorescence lifetime of the ACh sensor was stable across 
different laser powers (n = 6; adjusted P = 0.12 for baseline and 
P = 0.091 for ACh, low versus high laser power; Fig. 4, F to G). 
Whereas only 42% of sensor intensity variance could be explained 
by ACh concentration, the majority (87%) of the variance of sensor 
lifetime could be explained by ACh concentration (Fig. 4H). Together, 
these results indicate that fluorescence lifetime is a more reliable 
measurement of ACh concentration than fluorescence intensity under 
fluctuating laser powers.
Fluorescence lifetime is consistent within a cell and 
between cells
If absolute fluorescence lifetime were to be used to predict ACh con-
centrations, then lifetime values would need to be stable within a 
cell for a given ACh concentration and consistent between cells. To 
test the stability of lifetime within a cell, we repeatedly applied ACh 
(1 μM). Similar to intensity, fluorescence lifetime was consistent 
within a cell across repeated application of the same concentration 
of ACh (n = 8; P > 0.99 for intensity and P = 0.95 for lifetime, first 
versus second flow-­
in; fig. S4, B and C). Thus, lifetime is consistent 
for a given ACh concentration within a cell.
To test whether absolute fluorescence lifetime correlates well with 
ACh concentration between cells, we measured both lifetime and 
intensity exposed to a specified ACh concentration that is comparable 
to that reported in vivo (78–80). As expected, fluorescence intensity 
varied greatly between cells at a given ACh concentration [1 μM: 
coefficient of variation (CV) = 53.23% at baseline and 44.36% with 
ACh, n = 77 and 99; 10 μM: CV = 59.06% at baseline and 52.51% 
with ACh, n = 35 and 114; Fig. 5], likely due to different sensor expres-
sion levels across cells. Although fluorescence intensity increased in 
response to ACh (P < 0.0001 for baseline versus ACh, both 1 and 10 μM 
ACh; Fig. 5), intensity alone correlated poorly with ACh concentra-
tion [baseline versus ACh, pseudo-­
​
R2 (coefficient of determina-
tion) = 0.12 for 1 μM ACh and 0.13 for 10 μM ACh; Fig. 5]. In 
contrast, for fluorescence lifetime, variation between cells was much 
smaller (1 μM: CV = 0.91% at baseline and 1.17% with ACh, n = 77 
and 99; 10 μM: CV = 0.63% at baseline and 0.75% with ACh, n = 35 
and 114; Fig. 5). The signal-­
to-­
noise ratio for lifetime was thus higher. 
Absolute lifetime values correlated with ACh concentration with 
high accuracy (baseline versus ACh, pseudo-­
​
R2 = 0.77 for 1 μM 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
5 of 17
Fig. 3. Fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 responds to graded and transient ACh in brain tissue. (A and B) Heatmaps (A), example trace, and summaries (B) showing 
fluorescence lifetime of individual hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons expressing GRABACh3.0 in response to ACh (1 and 100 μM, with 5 μM AChEi donepezil). Wilcoxon 
test with Bonferroni correction, *adjusted P < 0.05 versus baseline and #adjusted P < 0.05 versus 1 μM. Data are represented as median with interquartile range. (C and 
D) Heatmaps (C), example trace, and summaries (D) showing dose-­
response curve of fluorescence lifetime of a population of hippocampal CA1 neurons expressing 
GRABACh3.0 in response to various concentrations of ACh (with 5 μM AChEi donepezil). Data in (D) were from the whole field of view with a size of 90 μm by 90 μm. The 
summaries show the dose-­
response curve of the absolute fluorescence lifetime measurement (middle panel) and the percentage of the maximum response (right panel). 
Summary data in (D) are represented as mean with SEM. (E) Gradient contrast image showing puffing of ACh onto a CA1 pyramidal neuron with a glass pipette connected 
to a Picospritzer. (F) Example trace and summaries showing fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 in CA1 pyramidal neurons in response to a 10-­
s puff of ACh (200 μM). 
Wilcoxon test, **P < 0.01 versus baseline. Data are represented as median with interquartile range. Schematic illustrations from (A) and (C) were created with BioRender.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
6 of 17
ACh and pseudo-­
​
R2 = 1 for 10 μM ACh; Fig. 5). Similarly, in brain 
slices, the intensity values across CA1 neurons showed large variation 
(CV = 30.96% at baseline and 35.57% with 1 μM ACh, n = 23 and 
30; fig.  S5A), whereas the variation of fluorescence lifetime was 
much smaller (CV = 0.69% at baseline and 0.81% with 1 μM ACh; 
n = 23 and 30; fig. S5A). The variation of lifetime across cells was not 
due to the presence of varied amount of ACh at baseline (n = 13; P = 
0.64 for baseline versus Tio; fig. S5B) or varied amount of cholines-
terase activity [P = 0.67; CV = 1.12% without and 1.01% with cholines-
terase inhibitor (AChEi) donepezil (5 μM); n = 40 and 61, respectively; 
fig.  S5C]. The variability was comparable to the mutant sensor 
GRABACh3.0mut that cannot bind ACh (P  =  0.6041; CV  =  0.79% 
without and 0.92% with ACh; n = 42 and 53 respectively; fig. S5D). 
These data suggest that lifetime variability between cells is likely due 
to the flexibility of sensor conformation. Furthermore, fluorescence 
lifetime, unlike fluorescence intensity, correlates with ACh concen-
tration with high accuracy despite different sensor expression levels 
across individual cells.
Fluorescence lifetime correlates with ACh-­
associated 
running-­
resting states with high accuracy across individual 
mice and varying excitation light powers
If a method can measure endogenous neuromodulator dynamics 
in vivo at multiple time scales, it needs to fulfill two criteria. (i) It 
Fig. 4. Fluorescence lifetime is stable across different excitation light powers. (A and B) Representative heatmaps (A) and traces (B) of intensity and fluorescence 
lifetime of HEK 293T cells expressing GRABACh3.0 in response to ACh (100 μM, with 5 μM AChEi donepezil), imaged at different laser powers. (C) Summaries of intensity and 
fluorescence lifetime of cells expressing GRABACh3.0 under different laser powers and in the absence and presence of ACh. Two-­
way ANOVA with Šídák’s multiple com-
parison, **adjusted P < 0.01, n.s., not significant; low versus high laser power. Data are represented as median with interquartile range. (D) Two-­
way ANOVA analysis 
showing the contribution to the total variance of the measurements due to ACh concentration, laser power, or cell identities. **P < 0.01. (E) Schematic and two photon 
image of a whole field of view (90 μm by 90 μm) of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons expressing GRABACh3.0 in acute brain slices. The schematic was created with 
BioRender. (F) Representative traces of intensity and fluorescence lifetime of the whole field of view of hippocampal CA1 cells expressing GRABACh3.0 in response to ACh 
(100 μM, with 5 μM AChEi donepezil), imaged at different laser powers. (G) Summaries of whole fields of view intensity and fluorescence lifetime of hippocampal CA1 cells 
expressing GRABACh3.0 under different laser powers and in the absence and presence of ACh. Two-­
way ANOVA with Šídák’s multiple comparison, *adjusted P < 0.05 and 
**adjusted P < 0.01, low versus high laser power. Data are represented as median with interquartile range. (H) Two-­
way ANOVA analysis showing the contribution to the 
total variance of the measurements due to ACh concentration, laser power, or brain slice identities. **P < 0.01.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
7 of 17
should capture acute changes during rapid behavior state transitions. 
(ii) To capture sustained change, the measurement at the same neuro-
modulator concentration needs to be consistent across individual 
animals, imaging conditions, and chronic time scales. Although 
fluorescence lifetime should be robust, it can show variability due to 
conformational flexibility of the sensor or autofluorescence, and it 
has rarely been used to make comparisons across individual animals 
and weeks. To test whether lifetime measurement of GRABACh3.0 can 
fulfill these two criteria, we need to use known correlation between ACh 
and behavior states as ground truth. Here, we measured GRABACh3.0 
across running-­
resting and sleep-­
wake states. ACh level is known to 
be higher during REM sleep, active wake (AW), and running and lower 
during NREM sleep, quiet wake (QW), and resting, respectively (60, 
65–73). These known ground truths allow us to perform proof-­
of-­
principle experiments to test whether lifetime can fulfill the criteria 
of an ideal method that can measure neuromodulator dynamics at 
multiple time scales.
We measured GRABACh3.0 in the hippocampus in freely moving 
mice via fluorescence lifetime photometry (FLiP) (83). FLiP measures 
the bulk fluorescence from a population of cells surrounding the tip 
of the fiber implant, allowing for the measurement of neuromodulator 
dynamics in genetically defined neurons in a brain region in vivo 
(83). The signal-­
to-­
noise ratio for the bulk signal is thus even higher 
than methods with cellular resolution. The variance of the lifetime 
from the bulk signal is inversely proportional to the number of cells. 
Thus, if the bulk signal of ~1000 cells were analyzed, the SD of life-
time distribution would be 
1
√1000 ∼1
32 
 of the SD across single cells 
(fig.  S6A), making FLiP a superb method to measure ACh level 
in vivo.
First, we tested whether fluorescence lifetime measurement of the 
ACh sensor can capture transient ACh increase as mice transitioned 
from resting to running. AAV virus carrying Cre-­
dependent GRABACh3.0 
was delivered to hippocampal CA1 region of Emx1IRES cre mice (84), 
labeling excitatory neurons and a subset of glia with the ACh sensor 
(Fig. 6A). We recorded fluorescence lifetime, intensity, and running 
speed simultaneously as mice voluntarily ran or rested on a treadmill 
(Fig. 6A). Both intensity and lifetime of GRABACh3.0 increased from 
resting to running (n = 233 running epochs, P < 0.0001 for intensity 
and P < 0.0001 for lifetime, baseline versus resting-­
to-­
running tran-
sition; Fig. 6, B and C). These results indicate that both properties 
capture transient ACh changes effectively. The increased intensity or 
lifetime from resting to running was not observed in control ex-
periments with the mutant sensor GRABACh3.0mut (fig. S6, B to D), 
Fig. 5. Fluorescence lifetime shows much less variability across cells and correlates better with ACh concentration than intensity. (A and B) Left: Distribution of 
intensity and fluorescence lifetime measurements of GRABACh3.0 in HEK 293T cells, at baseline, and with different concentrations of ACh (1 and 10 μM, with 5 μM AChEi 
donepezil). Mann-­
Whitney test, **P < 0.01 versus baseline. Data are represented as median with interquartile range. Right: Pseudo-­
​
R2 values between intensity/lifetime 
and ACh concentrations based on logistic regression, showing that lifetime measurement has much greater explanatory power than intensity for ACh concentration.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
8 of 17
Fig. 6. Fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 correlates with running versus resting states accurately despite varying laser powers and varying sensor expression 
levels across mice in vivo. (A) Schematic showing the experimental setup. AAV carrying Cre-­
dependent GRABACh3.0 was delivered to CA1 cells in the hippocampus of 
Emx1IRES cre mice. FLiP was performed as head-­
fixed mice ran or rested on a treadmill. The schematic was created with BioRender. (B) Example traces showing intensity (top, 
blue) or fluorescence lifetime (bottom, blue) measurements from FLiP, and running speed (red) of GRABACh3.0-­
expressing mice on a treadmill. (C) Summaries of the change 
of intensity and lifetime of GRABACh3.0 within resting states and from resting to running. Data were pooled from different mice with different imaging laser powers. Nested 
t test, **P < 0.01. (D) Distribution of intensity and fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 in resting or running states from the same mouse but under different laser powers. 
(E) Distribution of intensity and fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 in resting or running states under the same laser power but from different mice. (F) Distribution of 
intensity and fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 in running or resting states, pooled from all mice across different laser powers (12 recordings from six mice under three 
different laser powers). Nested t test, **P < 0.01. (G) Results from stepwise-­
GLM analysis showing the contribution to the total variation of intensity or fluorescence life-
time of GRABACh3.0 from behavior states, laser power, and animal identities. Contribution was based on adjusted incremental R2. (H) Results from logistic regression analy-
sis showing the power of explaining running or resting states with either intensity or fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0, regardless of imaging laser powers or animal 
identities. Data are represented as median with interquartile range.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
9 of 17
indicating that the optical responses of GRABACh3.0 reflect endogenous 
release of ACh.
Second, we tested whether absolute values of lifetime can consis-
tently report ACh concentrations across varying laser powers and 
across individual mice. These conditions mimic realistic scenarios 
because fluctuating laser power can arise from an unstable laser 
source or movement artifacts, and comparison across mice is essential 
if we want to compare wild type and disease models. Lifetime values 
during running did not correlate with running speed or duration of 
the running epochs (n = 233 running epochs; P = 0.29 for running 
speed and P = 0.13 for running duration; fig. S6, E and F). Thus, we 
treated all running epochs as the same state. Across varying laser 
powers, intensity showed large variation within the same behavioral 
state, whereas fluorescence lifetime remained remarkably stable 
(Fig. 6D). Similarly, with one laser power across different mice, in-
tensity varied greatly within the same running or resting state, likely 
due to different sensor expression levels across mice. In contrast, 
lifetime remained stable within each state (Fig. 6E). When data from 
different imaging conditions and mice were combined, fluorescence 
intensity was not statistically different between running and resting 
(n = 226 resting epochs and 233 running epochs from 6 mice, P = 0.36; 
Fig. 6F), indicating that the absolute values of intensity could not be 
used to distinguish ACh levels between mice and between imaging 
conditions. Despite these differing conditions, lifetime showed 
significant increase from resting to running (P < 0.0001; Fig. 6F). These 
results indicate that in contrast to intensity, lifetime is consistent 
across imaging powers and across mice and can distinguish ACh-­
associated behavior states across these conditions.
To quantitate the power of fluorescence lifetime, we performed 
two statistical tests. First, we asked how much of the variance of life-
time and intensity could be explained by running versus resting 
states, laser power, and animal identity. For fluorescence intensity, most 
of the variance was explained by animal identity (59%), followed by 
laser power fluctuation (29%), with minimal variance explained by 
behavior state (2.8%) [adjusted incremental R2 of stepwise generalized 
linear model (stepwise-­
GLM); Fig. 6G]. In contrast, most of the 
variance in lifetime was explained by behavior state (73%), with 
small contributions from laser power (17%) and animal identity 
(1.7%) (adjusted incremental R2 of stepwise-­
GLM; Fig. 6G). Second, 
we performed logistic regression to ask how much we could explain 
running versus resting state solely based on lifetime or intensity. 
Lifetime showed much better explanatory power than intensity 
(pseudo-­
​
R2 = 0.84 for lifetime and pseudo-­
​
R2 = 0.01 for intensity; 
Fig. 6H). These results indicate that fluorescence lifetime, but not 
intensity, correlates with neuromodulator-­
associated behavior states 
despite fluctuating laser powers and expression level changes across 
animals. Together, although both intensity and lifetime of GRABACh3.0 
capture acute neuromodulator changes effectively, lifetime excels 
when experiments call for comparison of neuromodulator levels 
across fluctuating laser powers and across animals.
Fluorescence lifetime is consistent across chronic time scales
In vivo, the expression levels of a fluorescent sensor vary both across 
animals and across chronic time scales. We thus investigated whether 
fluorescence lifetime can accurately track ACh levels over many 
weeks, even as sensor expression levels change. We used sleep-­
wake 
cycles of mice as our proof-­
of-­
principle experiment. To evaluate the 
power of lifetime and intensity in explaining ACh-­
associated sleep 
and wake stages, we measured lifetime and intensity of the ACh sensor 
in the hippocampus with FLiP in freely behaving mice while simul-
taneously performing electroencephalogram (EEG), electromyography 
(EMG), and video recordings to determine sleep-­
wake stages (Fig. 7A).
We first asked whether lifetime, similar to intensity, reported acute 
changes of ACh as mice transitioned between different sleep-­
wake 
stages. For a given mouse recorded within a single day, both fluorescence 
lifetime and intensity of GRABACh3.0 increased from QW to AW and 
from NREM to REM sleep (n = 42, 42, 26, and 6 epochs for AW
, QW
, 
NREM, and REM respectively; adjusted P < 0.0001 for AW versus QW 
and NREM versus REM of both intensity and lifetime; Fig. 7, B and C). 
Both intensity and fluorescence lifetime change of ACh sensor could re-
liably detect ACh change associated with rapid sleep/wake stage tran-
sitions such as NREM to REM transitions (n = 217 transitions from six 
mice; Fig. 7D). These results indicate that fluorescence lifetime, similar 
to intensity (60), can detect acute ACh changes across sleep/wake stages.
To control for the specificity of the response, we performed the 
same experiment with the mutant ACh sensor GRABACh3.0mut that 
does not bind to ACh (fig. S7, A to C). Unexpectedly, GRABACh3.0mut 
showed an acute decrease in fluorescence intensity as mice transi-
tioned from NREM to REM sleep (n = 42, 22, 50, and 14 epochs for 
AW, QW, NREM, and REM, respectively; adjusted P = 0.25 for AW 
versus QW and 0.0002 for NREM versus REM; fig. S7, A and B). 
Fluorescence lifetime did not show significant change between AW 
and QW or between NREM and REM (adjusted P = 0.46 for AW 
versus QW and 0.51 for NREM versus REM; fig. S7B), indicating that 
lifetime response of GRABACh3.0 during these behavior state transi-
tions reflect changes in endogenous ACh release. Because the intensity 
of mutant ACh sensor responds to other environmental factors and 
not ACh, these data emphasize the importance of mutant sensor 
controls in the use of neuromodulator sensors.
To test the consistency of fluorescence lifetime as sensor expression 
level varies across long periods of time, after viral delivery of 
GRABACh3.0, we measured lifetime and intensity at three different 
time points that were weeks apart. We first determined whether 
acute ACh change upon behavior transitions can be stably detected 
over weeks. The changes of both GRABACh3.0 intensity and fluores-
cence lifetime from NREM to REM remained consistent (n = 61, 59, 
and 88 transitions for 3, 6, and 8 weeks after sensor expression, 
respectively; P = 0.15 for intensity and P = 0.25 for lifetime, across 
sensor expression time; fig. S7D), indicating that acute ACh change 
can be reliably detected by both intensity and lifetime. Second, we 
assessed how well the absolute values of fluorescence intensity and 
lifetime correlate with ACh levels that are associated with specific 
behavior states. As expected, fluorescence intensity showed marked 
changes over time (Fig. 7, E and F). When results were pooled across 
sensor expression time, intensity values were not significantly different 
between different behavior states (n = 169, 152, 48, and 18 total 
epochs for AW, QW, NREM, and REM, respectively; P = 0.77 for 
AW versus QW, and 0.61 for NREM vs. REM; Fig. 7F). In contrast, 
fluorescence lifetime remained remarkably stable for a given behavioral 
state, even as sensor expression changed over time (Fig. 7, E and F). 
Lifetime values were significantly different between behavior states 
despite sensor expression variation (P = 0.0007 for AW versus QW, 
and P < 0.0001 for NREM versus REM; Fig. 7F). Therefore, these 
results indicate that fluorescence lifetime, unlike intensity, is a 
consistent readout of ACh concentration over weeks and is strongly 
correlated with ACh-­
associated behavior states.
To ask whether lifetime correlates with ACh-­
associated NREM/
REM states despite varying sensor expression levels across chronic 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
10 of 17
Fig. 7. Fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 correlates with sleep-­
wake stages accurately despite variation in sensor expression levels across weeks and across animals. (A) 
Schematic showing the experimental setup. AAV carrying Cre-­
dependent GRABACh3.0 was delivered to the hippocampal CA1 region of Emx1IRES cre mice. FLiP
, EEG, EMG, and video 
recordings were performed across sleep-­
wake cycles over 9 hours in freely moving mice. The schematic was created with BioRender. (B) Example of EEG spectrogram, EMG trace, the 
scored sleep-­
wake states, as well as intensity and fluorescence lifetime traces from a mouse. (C) Distribution of intensity and fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 in different sleep-­
wake states from a 9-­
hour FLiP recording of one mouse. Kruskal-­
Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparison, **adjusted P < 0.01. (D) Summary traces of changes in intensity and 
fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 from NREM to REM sleep transitions. Data are represented as means with SEM. (E) Representative traces of intensity and fluorescence lifetime of 
GRABACh3.0 during NREM at two time points after virus injection. (F) Summaries of intensity and fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 in different sleep-­
wake stages in one mouse across 
sensor expression time. Nested t test, **P < 0.01. (G) Distribution of intensity and fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 across NREM and REM sleep states, pooled from all mice across 
different sensor expression time (18 recordings from six mice at three sensor expression time points). Nested t test, **P < 0.01. (H) Results from stepwise-­
GLM analysis showing the 
contribution to the total variation of intensity or fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0 from behavior states, sensor expression time, or animal identities. (I) Results from logistic regres-
sion showing the power of explaining NREM versus REM states with either intensity or fluorescence lifetime of GRABACh3.0, regardless of sensor expression time or animal identities. 
Other than (D), data are represented as median with interquartile range.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
11 of 17
time scales and across mice, we combined results from different sen-
sor expression time and mice. Lifetime, unlike intensity, was still 
significantly different between NREM and REM sleep states (n = 444 
NREM epochs and 183 REM epochs from 6 mice; P = 0.72 for in-
tensity and P = 0.0006 for lifetime; Fig. 7G).
To quantitate the contributions to variation of lifetime and intensity 
by different factors, we calculated adjusted incremental R2 from 
stepwise-­
GLM. The variation of fluorescence intensity was largely 
explained by animal identity (66%), followed by sensor expression 
time (16%), with minimal contribution from behavior states (1.1%) 
(Fig. 7H). In contrast, lifetime variation was largely explained by 
NREM versus REM states (47%), with much less contribution from 
animal identity (23%) and sensor expression time (7.3%; Fig. 7H).
Conversely, we tested the extent to which lifetime or intensity 
could distinguish ACh-­
associated sleep stages. Lifetime showed 
much higher explanatory power for NREM versus REM states than 
intensity despite changing expression level and across different animals 
(pseudo-­
​
R2 = 0.006 for intensity and 0.47 for lifetime; Fig. 7I). There-
fore, fluorescence lifetime is a better correlate of behavior state than 
intensity, when data from multiple animals and across weeks need to 
be considered.
Together, these results indicate that in vivo, fluorescence lifetime, 
similar to intensity, captures acute changes in neuromodulator levels 
within one animal. Fluorescence lifetime, and not intensity, correlates 
with neuromodulator levels and has much greater explanatory power 
than intensity when experiments call for comparison between animals 
and across long periods of time.
DISCUSSION
In summary, we found fluorescence lifetime responses for multiple 
neuromodulator sensors and thus reported a method that can accu-
rately measure neuromodulator dynamics at multiple time scales. 
Similar to fluorescence intensity, fluorescence lifetime can detect 
transient neuromodulator changes and is dose sensitive. In contrast 
to fluorescence intensity, fluorescence lifetime is a consistent readout 
of neuromodulator concentration despite varying laser powers and 
with different sensor expression levels between cells. In  vivo, we 
show that fluorescence lifetime, unlike intensity, consistently reports 
neuromodulator levels even as sensor expression level changes across 
weeks and across animals. Thus, fluorescence lifetime measurement 
of neuromodulator sensors opens doors to study neuromodulator 
dynamics both at high spatial and temporal resolution, and across 
animals, brain regions, and chronic time scale (Fig. 8).
Advantages of using fluorescence lifetime to measure 
neuromodulator concentrations
When should we use lifetime over intensity measurement? On the 
basis of our results (Figs. 6 and 7), both lifetime and intensity can 
report acute (subsecond to second) and endogenous neuromodulator 
release in vivo. Fluorescence lifetime excels over intensity because 
lifetime measurement is independent of sensor expression (32, 37–40). 
Because of this property, we demonstrate three major advantages 
of lifetime measurement in our proof-­
of-­
principle experiments. 
First, using behavior states as correlates of neuromodulator levels, 
we find that lifetime correlates with neuromodulator concentration 
with higher accuracy than intensity despite large variation of sensor 
expression levels over chronic time scale of weeks (Fig. 7), across 
individual animals (Figs. 6 and 7), and despite fluctuating excitation 
light power (Fig. 4 and Fig. 6). Second, absolute fluorescence lifetime 
correlates well with neuromodulator concentrations in brain slices 
(Fig. 3D), thus offering the potential of estimating absolute concen-
trations of ACh with lifetime measurement in vivo. Third, as demon-
strated in our mutant sensor data, fluorescence lifetime is less prone 
than intensity to neuromodulator-­
independent change associated with 
NREM to REM transitions (fig. S7). This REM-­
associated intensity 
decrease calls for careful interpretation of data to distinguish neuro-
modulator change from other brain state-­
associated intensity change 
such as hemodynamic change.
What is the limitation of lifetime over intensity measurement? 
Accurate construction of fluorescence lifetime histogram requires a 
substantial number of photons (81). This necessitates longer integra-
tion time and lower sampling rates compared to intensity measure-
ments. This may explain the ability for us to detect physiologically 
released ACh in vivo, and the challenge we encountered in brain 
slices. To detect optogenetically induced ACh release in brain slices, 
the brief duration of ACh transients demands a shorter integration 
time, resulting in fewer photons for lifetime estimates and a diminished 
signal-­
to-­
noise ratio (81). In contrast, in FLiP experiments in vivo, 
the collection of light from a larger number of cells leads to higher 
photon counts, resulting in an enhanced signal-­
to-­
noise ratio even 
at faster sampling rates. This study (Figs. 6 and 7) and others (7) 
demonstrate the capability of fluorescence lifetime to detect physio-
logically relevant signals with subsecond to second temporal resolution 
in vivo. Recent innovations in lifetime measurements have enabled 
higher sampling rate (85–87). Moreover, the lower sampling rate of 
lifetime measurements can be addressed by concurrent intensity 
measurement at a higher sampling rate. Notably, given the different 
EC50 values for intensity and lifetime measurements of the ACh sensor 
Fig. 8. Comparison of intensity and lifetime measurement of fluorescent neuro-
modulator sensors. Fluorescence lifetime reflects conformation change of the 
sensor, whereas intensity is also influenced by sensor expression level, excitation 
light power, and other artifacts such as bleaching and movement. As a result, 
although fluorescence intensity enables measurements of neuromodulator con-
centrations with cell type specificity, high spatial resolution, and high temporal 
resolution to detect transient/phasic changes of neuromodulators, it cannot be 
used to compare sustained/tonic changes of neuromodulators and compare neuro-
modulator levels across animals or chronic time scale. Fluorescence lifetime, in contrast, 
excels in all these categories.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
12 of 17
(Fig. 1G), simultaneous intensity and lifetime measurements offer 
the added advantage of expanding the sensitivity range of 
the sensor.
In summary, fluorescence lifetime excels over intensity when one 
needs to compare changes across individual animals, across fluctuating 
excitation light power, and across chronic time scale, and simultaneous 
intensity and lifetime measurements can expand sensitivity range of 
sensors and provide benefits of both methods.
Opportunities for biological discoveries
Despite decades of research on neuromodulators, many questions 
remain. Notably, although recent findings reveal the importance of 
both tonic and phasic release of neuromodulators, it is unknown 
when tonic versus phasic change of neuromodulator release occurs 
during animal behavior. In addition, neuromodulators are released 
widely into many brain regions (88), but it is unclear whether their 
release is differentially regulated in different regions. Last, most drugs 
for psychiatric disorders target neuromodulators or their receptors 
(13, 16, 17, 89–92), but we cannot easily compare neuromodulator 
levels between control and disease models and between pre-­
drug and 
post-­
drug periods, and we understand even less whether these drugs 
alter transient or sustained levels of neuromodulators. All these 
questions were hindered by the lack of a method to measure both 
transient and sustained change of neuromodulators simultaneously.
The discovery and demonstration of the power of fluorescence 
lifetime-­
based sensors open avenues for biological discoveries (Fig. 8). 
We demonstrate consistent in vivo lifetime measurement of neuro-
modulator concentrations across individual animals, imaging condi-
tions, and chronic time scale (Figs. 6 and 7). Fluorescence lifetime 
can record neuromodulator dynamics across multiple time scales: 
On the fast end, it can resolve transient neuromodulator changes 
over subseconds; on the slow end, lifetime is stable over long periods 
of time and can therefore track slow biological processes happening 
across days, weeks, and months, when intensity loses its fidelity due 
to changing sensor expression level and variation of imaging condi-
tions. Thus, our method enables dissection of transient and sustained 
neuromodulator changes between behavior states, between brain 
regions, and across aging. Furthermore, it allows us to disambiguate 
whether transient or sustained change of neuromodulator release is 
the predominant driver of disease conditions and in response to 
therapies. Thus, lifetime measurement of neuromodulators holds 
exciting potential for studying normal physiology, disease processes, 
and drug effects.
Opportunities for sensor design
We report a method that can accurately measure both transient and 
sustained change of neuromodulators. Our discovery of lifetime 
response by GPCR-­
based single fluorophore sensors provides the 
foundation for developing more lifetime-­
based neuromodulator 
sensors. Current neuromodulator sensors have not been optimized 
for lifetime measurement because they have generally been selected 
for low intensity at baseline and not for lifetime response. Despite the 
lack of optimization for fluorescence lifetime measurement, lifetime 
of GRABACh3.0 shows high signal-­
to-­
noise ratio that is comparable 
to most FRET-­
based sensors and can be used to distinguish ACh 
between different behavior states in vivo (Figs. 6 and 7). In contrast, 
the sensors for DA, NE, and serotonin showed a lifetime change too 
small to be useful in practice (Fig. 1B). The connection between the 
magnitude of lifetime changes and the sequences of the sensors is 
indirect. On one hand, these differing responses highlight the surprise 
of lifetime change in GPCR-­
based single fluorophore sensors. On 
the other hand, they show future promise of turning intensity-­
based 
sensors into lifetime-­
based sensors by systematic mutagenesis and 
screening.
To optimize for lifetime response, sensors need to be screened 
for (i) increased brightness to make measurement of fluorescence 
lifetime reliable at all neuromodulator concentrations because auto-
fluorescence can distort lifetime measurement when sensor brightness 
is low, (ii) lack of formation of aggregates because the difference in 
lifetime between aggregates and functional sensors (Fig. 3A) com-
plicates the quantitation of absolute neuromodulator concentrations 
in photometry experiments in vivo, (iii) larger dynamic range between 
different neuromodulator concentrations, and (iv) minimal variation 
in lifetime readout with the same neuromodulator concentration 
between cells and between animals. Given the demonstrated power 
of fluorescence lifetime for comparison of transient and sustained 
neuromodulator changes across animals, between imaging conditions, 
and across chronic time periods, all sensor developers should 
consider fluorescence lifetime, in addition to intensity, as a criterion 
for sensor screening and optimization in the future.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
HEK 293T cells
HEK 293T cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium 
with 10% fetal bovine serum (Millipore Sigma), GlutaMAX (Invitro-
gen), and penicillin/streptavidin (50 U/ml; Corning) at 37°C in 5% 
CO2. All cells were female. The cell line has not been authenticated. 
They were plated on coverslips in 24-­
well plates and transfected with 
plasmids (0.4 to 0.8 μg per well) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitro-
gen). Two days after transfection, the cells were imaged with perfusion 
of artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF; concentrations: 127 mM NaCl, 
25 mM Na2CO3, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4·H2O, 2.5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 
2 mM CaCl2, and 25 mM glucose).
Animals
All procedures for rodent husbandry and surgery were performed 
following protocols approved by the Washington University Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee and in accordance with 
National Institutes of Health guidelines. Either adult wild-­
type 
C57BL/6J mice (JAX, 000664) or Emx1IRES cre (JAX, 005628) mice 
were used.
DNA plasmids
The constructs pdisplay-­
CMV-­
GRABACh3.0 (60), pdisplay-­
CMV-­
gGRAB5-­
HT2h (62), pdisplay-­
CMV-­
GRABNE2m (63), pdisplay-­
GRABACh3.0mut (60), and pdisplay-­
GRABDA2m (64) were gifts from 
Y. Li’s laboratory. pAAV-­
CAG-­
iAChSnFR (Addgene, #137955) was 
from L. Looger’s laboratory (61).
Virus production and stereotaxic injections
AAV9-­
hSyn-­
DIO-­
GRABACh3.0 (60) (DNA corresponding to Addgene, 
#121923) and AAV9-­
hSyn-­
GRABACh3.0mut (60) viruses were packaged 
at Vigene Biosciences. AAV5-­
CamKII-­
Cre was from J. M. Wilson and 
packaged at Addgene (Addgene, #105558-­
AAV5). For stereotaxic injec-
tion, dorsal hippocampus CA1 was targeted with coordinates of poste-
rior 1.78 mm and lateral 1.58 mm relative to Bregma and 1.36 mm 
from the pia. All injections were made at a rate of 100 nl/min through 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
13 of 17
a UMP3 micro-­
syringe pump (World Precision Instruments) via 
glass pipette. For acute brain slice imaging, bilateral injections of 
500 nl of AAV9-­
hSyn-­
DIO-­
GRABACh3.0 [3.1 × 1012 genome copies 
(GC)/ml] and AAV5-­
CamKII-­
Cre (3 × 1012 GC/ml) were made in 
wild-­
type mice. For FLiP experiments, 500 nl of AAV9-­
hSyn-­
DIO-­
GRABACh3.0 (3.9 × 1012 GC/ml) was injected into left hemispheres 
of Emx1IRES cre mice. For control experiments, 500 nl of AAV9-­
hSyn-­
GRABACh3.0mut (3.1 × 1012 GC/ml) was injected into the left
 
hemispheres of wild-­
type mice. Following virus injection, optical 
fibers, EEG/EMG implants, and headplates were placed.
Implantation of optic fibers, EEG/EMG implants, 
and headplate
After stereotaxic injection and withdrawal of the glass pipette, an 
optical fiber (Doric Lenses, MFC_200/245-­
0.37_2.5mm_MF1.25_
FLT) was inserted into the same injection site, at 0.05 mm above the 
viral injection site. The fiber was stabilized to the skull with glue. To 
implant the EEG and EMG implants, four stainless steel screws were 
inserted into the skull, with two above the cerebellum, one above the 
right hippocampus, and one above the right frontal cortex. The 
screws were wired to an EEG/EMG headmount (Pinnacle, 8402). 
Two EMG electrodes from the headmount were inserted into the 
neck muscle of the mice. A headplate was placed directly onto the 
skull. All the implants were secured to the skull with dental cement. 
An additional layer of dental cement with black paint was applied 
for lightproofing. All experiments were carried out at least 2 weeks 
after the surgery.
Acute brain slice preparation
Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane followed by intracardial per-
fusion with cold N-­
methyl-­
​
d-­
glucamine (NMDG)–based cutting 
solution (concentrations: 92 mM NMDG, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.25 mM 
NaH2PO4, 30 mM NaHCO3, 20 mM Hepes, 25 mM glucose, 10 mM 
MgSO4, 0.5 mM CaCl2, 5 mM sodium ascorbate, 2 mM thiourea, and 
3 mM sodium pyruvate) (93). Their brains were rapidly dissected out. 
Coronal sections (300 μm thick) were obtained with a vibratome 
(Leica Instruments, VT1200S) in cold NMDG-­
based cutting solution. 
After sectioning, slices were transferred to NMDG-­
based solution and 
incubated at 34°C for 12 min and then kept in Hepes-­
based hold-
ing solution (concentrations: 92 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.25 mM 
NaH2PO4, 30 mM NaHCO3, 20 mM Hepes, 2 mM thiourea, 5 mM 
sodium ascorbate, 3 mM sodium pyruvate, 2 mM CaCl2, 2 mM 
MgSO4, and 25 mM glucose) at room temperature with 5% CO2 
and 95% O2. Slices were then transferred to a microscope cham-
ber, and ACSF was perfused at a flow rate of 2 to 4  ml/min 
for imaging.
Histology of brain slices
After FLiP experiments, histology of each mouse brain was checked 
and only those with correct sensor expression and fiber implant 
location were used for further analyses. Mice were anesthetized with 
isoflurane, underwent intracardial perfusion with cold phosphate-­
buffered saline, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). Their brains 
were harvested and placed in 4% PFA overnight at 4°C. Coronal slices 
(50 μm thick) were obtained with a vibratome (Leica Instruments, 
VT1200S). The slices were mounted with mounting media and then 
imaged with an epifluorescence microscope (Nikon E800). Images 
were taken by a camera (Teledyne Photometrics, CoolSnap EZ) and 
software QCapture Pro. Series of images were stitched using Fiji.
2pFLIM and image analysis
Two photon imaging was achieved by a custom-­
built microscope with 
a mode-­
locked laser source (Spectra-­
Physics, Insight X3 operating 
at 80 MHz). Photons were collected with fast photomultiplier tubes 
(PMTs, Hamamatsu, H10770PB-­
40). A 60× [Olympus, numerical 
aperture (NA) 1.1] or 20× (Nikon Fluor, NA 0.75) objectives were 
used for cellular resolution or whole field of view imaging, respectively. 
Image acquisition was performed with the custom-­
written software 
ScanImage (94) in MATLAB 2012b.
FLIM was performed as described previously (45, 46). For all the 
green fluorescent protein–based neuromodulator sensors, 920 nm 
was used as the excitation wavelength. Emission light was collected 
through a dichroic mirror (FF580-­
FDi01-­
25X36, Semrock) and a 
band-­
pass filter (FF03-­
525/50-­
25, Semrock). The 128 × 128 pixel 
images were collected by frame scan at 4 Hz. The FLIM board SPC-­
150 (Becker and Hickl GmbH) was used, and time-­
domain single-­
photon counting was performed in 256 time channels. Photons from 
20 frames were pooled for intensity and fluorescence lifetime calcu-
lation, which gave a sampling rate of ~0.2 Hz. For cellular resolution 
imaging, only healthy cells (judged by gradient contrast images) 
with membrane expression pattern were selected. Cells with round 
shape, sensor expression aggregates, or cell-­
filling expression patterns 
were excluded. The membrane of individual cells was selected as 
region of interest (ROI). To minimize the effect of movement artifact 
on intensity measurement, pixels with photon counts below 5 was 
omitted and then the top 66% brightest pixels were selected as effective 
pixels. Photons from effective pixels of a given ROI were pooled for 
further analysis. For whole field of view based FLIM analysis, pixels 
with more than 300 photons were excluded to avoid dead time arti-
fact of the FLIM driver board. Photons from the rest of the pixels in 
the field of view were pooled for further analysis. The average photon 
count per pixel was used for intensity measurement. The average 
lifetime of all the photons in this ROI was calculated as follows
in which F(t) is the photon count from a certain fluorescence 
lifetime histogram time channel, and t is the lifetime measurement 
corresponding to the same time channel. We performed the calcula-
tion from 0.0489 to 11.5 ns in the lifetime histogram. Because of the 
change of cable length in FLIM or FLiP setup, the empirical lifetime 
across different experiments showed different absolute values. The 
cable length was kept consistent within one set of experiments.
Change of fluorescence lifetime at baseline was quantitated as 
lifetime measurement averaged over the first five data points of 
baseline subtracted from lifetime measurement averaged over the 
last five data points of baseline. Change of lifetime due to treatment 
was calculated as the average lifetime of the last five data points of 
baseline subtracted from that of the last five data points of treatment 
period. Cells with unstable baseline (coefficient of variation for 
baseline lifetime larger than 0.8%) were excluded. Similar calculations 
were performed for intensity change, with change of intensity divided 
by the average intensity of the first five data points of baseline as ΔF/F0.
For puffing experiments, imaging was performed at a sampling 
rate of ~0.7 Hz. Changes of fluorescence lifetime or intensity were 
quantitated as baseline measurement (average of the first 10 data 
points of baseline) subtracted from the maximum of a given period 
τ =
∑F(t) ∗t
∑F(t)
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
14 of 17
(baseline or puffing). Change of intensity was expressed as ΔF/F0. 
For dose-­
dependent response experiments, the response of each 
concentration of ACh treatment was expressed as the percentage of 
the peak responses.
FLiP and analysis
A FLiP setup was custom built and used similar to that previously 
described (83). Briefly, a pulsed 473-­
nm laser (Becker and Hickl, BDS-­
473-­
SM-­
FBE operating at 50 MHz) was used as the excitation light 
source. An optical fiber patch cord (Doric Lenses, MFP_200/220/900–
0.37_1.5m_FCM-­
MF1.25_LAF) was used to direct the excitation laser 
beam to the optical fiber implanted in the mouse brain. A dichroic 
mirror (Thorlabs, DMLP505R) and band-­
pass filter (Semrock, FF01-­
525/39-­
25) were used to select the green emission light from the 
blue excitation light. Emission light was detected with a fast PMT 
(Hamamatsu, H10770PA-­
40), and a time-­
correlated single-­
photon 
counting (TCSPC; SPC-­
150, Becker and Hickl GmbH) board was 
used to measure fluorescence lifetime binned into 256 time channels. 
The data were collected by customized software in MATLAB 2012b 
at 1 Hz. Excitation light power was adjusted with a neutral density 
filter, so the photon arrival rate was between 1 × 105/s and 8 × 105/s. 
The lower limit was chosen for accurate estimation of lifetime, and the 
upper limit chosen based on the dead time of the TCSPC driver board. 
The typical excitation power needed to generate the appropriate rate 
of photons for TCSPC was 0.01 to 0.18 μW (measured at the output 
end of the patch cord). Location of viral injection and fiber implants 
examined by histology after experiments. Only mice with tip of the 
fiber above hippocampus CA1 were used in the behavior analysis. 
For data analysis, we calculated average lifetime from 2.148 to 18.555 ns 
in the lifetime histogram.
Running and resting recording and analysis
Mice with optic fiber implant and headplate were head-­
fixed on a 
treadmill and recorded in the dark. An incremental rotary encoder 
(SparkFun, COM-­
11102) was used to record the speed of the voluntary 
running. Rotary signals were collected at 25 Hz via an Arduino Due 
board (Arduino, A000062). The signals were sent to Bonsai (https://
bonsai-­
rx.org/) via serial port communication and timestamped in 
Bonsai. Videos were simultaneously recorded at 25 frames per second 
(fps) in Bonsai. FLiP data were collected at 1 Hz.
Raw data of running speed were binned to 4 Hz for analysis. 
Running epochs were defined by the following criteria: (i) continuous 
forward or backward movement above a speed of 1 cm/s, (ii) no 
more than three consecutive subthreshold data points, (iii) preceded 
by at least 10 s of subthreshold resting, and (iv) at least 5 s in duration. 
For ACh sensor fluorescence analysis during running, to account 
for sensor kinetics, 3 s at the beginning of each running epoch was 
excluded for analysis. Each resting epoch was specified as continuous 
below-­
threshold speed that lasts for more than 150 s. To account for 
sensor kinetics and ACh kinetics, the first and last 30 s of each resting 
epoch were excluded for analysis. If a trimmed resting epoch is longer 
than 90 s, then it is split into 90-­
s epoch segments.
The median values of fluorescence intensity or fluorescence life-
time of ACh sensor for each running or resting segment were quanti-
tated for subsequent analysis. For resting-­
to-­
running transition-­
related 
change, the median values of the fluorescence intensity or lifetime 
during −10 to −5 and − 5 to 0 s before the transition were quanti-
tated as baseline start and baseline end, respectively. The differences 
between baseline end and baseline start were calculated as baseline 
changes. The differences between running and baseline end were cal-
culated as resting→running changes.
FLiP, EEG/EMG, and video recordings
Mice that underwent GRABACh3.0 virus injection, optical fiber im-
plantation, and EEG/EMG implant were placed in a chamber with 
12-­
hour/12-­
hour light-­
dark cycle (6 a.m. to 6 p.m. light). Record-
ings from 9 p.m. to 6 a.m. (dark phase) were collected and analyzed. 
An additional infrared light was used for video recording during the 
dark phase. Fluorescence lifetime and intensity data were collected 
at 1 Hz with our custom-­
built FLiP setup. EEG/EMG recording was 
performed at 400 Hz with a system from Pinnacle Technology using 
our ScanImage software. Video recording was performed at 25 fps 
in Bonsai. Video data were synchronized with FLiP and EEG/EMG 
data via a TTL (transistor-­
transistor logic) signal from MATLAB to 
Arduino Due board (Arduino, A000062) to Bonsai to trigger the 
start of video recording.
Sleep stage scoring and analysis
Sleep stages were scored for every 4-­
s bin based on the EEG, EMG, 
and motion detection from the video using a custom-­
written pro-
gram in Python. Briefly, sleep scoring prediction was generated with 
a random forest model, followed by user correction. The following 
criteria were used to determine sleep/wake stages (60, 95): (i) AW: 
low variance in EEG, high variance in EMG, and high movement 
based on video; (ii) quiet wakefulness: low variance in EEG, low 
variance in EMG, and low movement based on video; (iii) NREM 
sleep: high variance in EEG with high delta power (0.5 to 4 Hz), low 
variance in EMG, and no movement based on video; (iv) REM sleep: 
high theta (5 to 8 Hz) to delta power ratio based on EEG, low vari-
ance in EMG, and no movement based on video.
For quantification of ACh sensor measurement in a given behav-
ior epoch, to minimize the effect of kinetics of the sensor or behav-
ior state-­
related ACh change, epochs longer than 40 s were included, 
and within each epoch, 12 s were trimmed at each end with the 
middle portion used for subsequent analyses. The median values of 
ACh sensor measurement in each epoch were quantitated for subse-
quent analysis. To quantify ACh change upon NREM to REM sleep 
transitions, transition events with at least 50 s of NREM sleep before 
transition time were included. The median values of ACh measure-
ments from −50 to −35 s were quantified as baseline start. The base-
line end and transition response were defined as the median values 
of ACh sensor measurements during the equilibrium period before 
(from −35 to −20 s) and after (from 20 to 35 s) NREM-­
REM transi-
tion time. The differences between baseline end and baseline start 
and between transition response and baseline end were quantified 
as baseline change and NREM→REM transition-­
related change. For 
quantitation of intensity change ΔF/F0, F0 was the average photon 
count across the whole recording.
Pharmacology
Unless otherwise noted, all chemicals were applied via bath perfu-
sion: They were either added to the perfusion reservoir or premade 
buffers with the specified chemicals were switched from one to an-
other. Lifetime was allowed to stabilize before a chemical was added. 
When there was no clear lifetime change, 10 min was recorded be-
fore the addition of another chemical or the end of the experiment. 
The final concentrations of chemicals are specified in parentheses: 
ACh chloride (0.001 to 100 μM), NE bitartrate monohydrate 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
15 of 17
(10 μM), and DA hydrochloride (10 μM) were from Sigma-­
Aldrich; 
serotonin hydrochloride (5-­
HT; 100 μM), mAChR antagonist tiotropium 
bromide (Tio; 5 μM), and cholinesterase inhibitor donepezil hydro-
chloride (5 μM) were from Tocris. For puffing experiments, a glass 
patch pipette was used to locally puff ACh (200 μM in ACSF) for 
10 s onto a neuron in a brain slice through a Picospritzer (Parker, 
052-­
0500-­
900) at 2 psi.
FLIM simulation
The simulation was performed by customized MATLAB code, and 
the simulation procedures and codes were described in detail in 
(81). For the simulation in this study, the null hypothesis is that with 
or without ACh binding, GRABACh3.0 has the same fluorescence life-
time and can be described by the same equation—thus, the apparent 
fluorescence lifetime change was solely due to altered proportion of 
autofluorescence contribution. The simulated lifetime distribution 
includes photons from multiple sources. (i) The fluorescence of 
GRABACh3.0 was modeled by a double exponential decay.
τ1, τ2, p1, and p2 were determined empirically by measuring the 
fluorescence decay of ACh 3.0 expressed in HEK cells at saturating 
concentration (100 μM) of ACh. A large population of photons 
(~6 × 106) with specific lifetimes was generated on the basis of the 
double exponential decay and binned into 256 time channels over 12.5 ns 
(time interval between laser pulses for an 80-­
MHz laser). To simulate 
lifetime measurements across cells, a small sample of photons was 
drawn with replacement from the large population, and the number 
of photons in the sample corresponded to the average of measured 
photons at either 0 or 100 μM of ACh, respectively. To simulate 
noise from the instruments, the lifetime of a specific photon from 
the sample was then transformed into a convolved lifetime based on 
random draw from the distribution of a pulse response function 
(PRF). The PRF was measured empirically with second harmonic 
generation of collagen fibers with mouse tails. (ii) We added photons 
due to afterpulse (0.32% of total photon count that is measured 
empirically, with even distribution across lifetime). (iii) Lifetime of 
photons due to autofluorescence were sampled with replacement from 
empirically determined autofluorescence distribution, produced 
through imaging of untransfected HEK 293T cells. Simulation was 
repeated 500 times for each sample size corresponding to 0 or 100 μM 
ACh. Empirical fluorescence lifetime was calculated for each simulated 
combination and compared to experimentally observed values.
Quantification and statistical analysis
Detailed information of the quantification, sample size, and statistics 
used are summarized in figure legends, figures, and Results. Wilcoxon 
test (with Bonferroni correction when appropriate) was performed 
for paired data. Mann-­
Whitney test was performed for unpaired data. 
Dose-­
response curves were fitted to an asymmetrical generalized 
Hill equation model to calculate the EC50. For analysis of variance, 
Friedman test was performed for matched data, and Kruskal-­
Wallis 
test was performed for unmatched data, followed by Dunn’s multiple 
comparison [one-­
way analysis of variance (ANOVA)], or Šídák’s 
multiple comparison (two-­
way ANOVA). Nested t test or one-­
way 
ANOVA was performed when comparison was made with hierarchical 
data. Two-­
way ANOVA was used to determine the contribution to 
the total variance from two independent variables. All these statisti-
cal analyses were performed in GraphPad Prism 9.
GLM was used to analyze the correlation between independent 
variable and dependent variable in MATLAB. For S6E and S6F, 
GLM was applied with the independent variables being running 
speed or duration, mouse ID, and laser power. For Figs. 6G and 7H, 
a stepwise-­
GLM model was performed in MATLAB to determine 
the contribution to the total variance. The independent variables 
were added in order of weights (largest first based on adjusted R2), 
and the subsequent improvement to overall adjusted R2 was calcu-
lated as the contribution to the variance for each independent 
variable.
Logistic regression (LR) was used to identify the strength of the 
relationship of individual independent variables (intensity and life-
time) on states (resting/running; REM/NREM). LR was performed 
using Scikit-­
Learn in Python. McFadden’s pseudo-­
​
R2 values were 
used to evaluate the performance of the model.
Supplementary Materials
This PDF file includes:
Figs. S1 to S7
REFERENCES AND NOTES
	 1.	 C. I. Bargmann, E. Marder, From the connectome to brain function. Nat. Methods 10, 
438–490 (2013).
	 2.	 E. Marder, Neuromodulation of neuronal circuits: Back to the future. Neuron 76, 1–11 (2012).
	 3.	 S. J. Gershman, N. Uchida, Believing in dopamine. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 20, 703–714 (2019).
	 4.	 S. X. Zhang, A. Lutas, S. Yang, A. Diaz, H. Fluhr, G. Nagel, S. Gao, M. L. Andermann, 
Hypothalamic dopamine neurons motivate mating through persistent cAMP signalling. 
Nature 597, 245–249 (2021).
	 5.	 C. M. V. Weele, C. A. Siciliano, K. M. Tye, Dopamine tunes prefrontal outputs to orchestrate 
aversive processing. Brain Res. 1713, 16–31 (2019).
	 6.	 L. Xiao, M. F. Priest, J. Nasenbeny, T. Lu, Y. Kozorovitskiy, Biased oxytocinergic modulation 
of midbrain dopamine systems. Neuron 95, 368–384.e5 (2017).
	 7.	 S. J. Lee, B. Lodder, Y. Chen, T. Patriarchi, L. Tian, B. L. Sabatini, Cell-­
type-­
specific 
asynchronous modulation of PKA by dopamine in learning. Nature 590, 451–456 (2021).
	 8.	 A. Lutas, H. Kucukdereli, O. Alturkistani, C. Carty, A. U. Sugden, K. Fernando, V. Diaz,  
V. Flores-­
Maldonado, M. L. Andermann, State-­
specific gating of salient cues by midbrain 
dopaminergic input to basal amygdala. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1820–1833 (2019).
	 9.	 R. C. Froemke, L. J. Young, Oxytocin, Neural Plasticity, and Social Behavior. Annu. Rev. 
Neurosci. 44, 359–381 (2021).
	10.	 T. Sippy, N. X. Tritsch, Unraveling the dynamics of dopamine release and its actions on 
target cells. Trends Neurosci. 46, 228–239 (2023).
	11.	 S. T. Lubejko, R. D. Graham, G. Livrizzi, R. Schaefer, M. R. Banghart, M. C. Creed, The role of 
endogenous opioid neuropeptides in neurostimulation-­
driven analgesia. Front. Syst. 
Neurosci. 16, 1044686 (2022).
	12.	 P. T. Francis, A. M. Palmer, M. Snape, G. K. Wilcock, The cholinergic hypothesis of 
Alzheimer’s disease: A review of progress. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 66, 137–147 
(1999).
	13.	 M. Spies, G. M. Knudsen, R. Lanzenberger, S. Kasper, The serotonin transporter in 
psychiatric disorders: Insights from PET imaging. Lancet Psychiatry 2, 743–755 (2015).
	14.	 E. J. Nestler, W. A. Carlezon, The mesolimbic dopamine reward circuit in depression.  
Biol. Psychiatry 59, 1151–1159 (2006).
	15.	 A. H. Evans, A. J. Lees, Dopamine dysregulation syndrome in Parkinson’s disease.  
Curr. Opin. Neurol. 17, 393–398 (2004).
	16.	 A. A. Grace, Dysregulation of the dopamine system in the pathophysiology of 
schizophrenia and depression. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 524–532 (2016).
	17.	 M. J. Higley, M. R. Picciotto, Neuromodulation by acetylcholine: Examples from 
schizophrenia and depression. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 29, 88–95 (2014).
	18.	 D. M. Lovinger, V. A. Alvarez, Alcohol and basal ganglia circuitry: Animal models. 
Neuropharmacology 122, 46–55 (2017).
	19.	 N. K. Savalia, L.-­
X. Shao, A. C. Kwan, A dendrite-­
focused framework for understanding the 
actions of ketamine and psychedelics. Trends Neurosci. 44, 260–275 (2021).
	20.	 J. G. McCall, R. Al-­
Hasani, E. R. Siuda, D. Y. Hong, A. J. Norris, C. P. Ford, M. R. Bruchas, CRH 
rngagement of the locus coeruleus noradrenergic system mediates stress-­
induced 
anxiety. Neuron 87, 605–620 (2015).
F = F0 ⋅
[
p1 ⋅e
(
−t
τ1
)
+ p2 ⋅e
(
−t
τ2
)]
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
16 of 17
	21.	 K. R. Jensen, C. Berthoux, K. Nasrallah, P. E. Castillo, Multiple cannabinoid signaling 
cascades powerfully suppress recurrent excitation in the hippocampus. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2017590118 (2021).
	22.	 G. Oikonomou, M. Altermatt, R.-­
W. Zhang, G. M. Coughlin, C. Montz, V. Gradinaru,  
D. A. Prober, The serotonergic raphe promote sleep in zebrafish and mice. Neuron 103, 
686–701.e8 (2019).
	23.	 B. Hangya, S. P. Ranade, M. Lorenc, A. Kepecs, Central cholinergic neurons are rapidly 
recruited by reinforcement feedback. Cell 162, 1155–1168 (2015).
	24.	 K. Schmack, M. Bosc, T. Ott, J. F. Sturgill, A. Kepecs, Striatal dopamine mediates 
hallucination-­
like perception in mice. Science 372, eabf4740 (2021).
	 25.	 T. Patriarchi, J. R. Cho, K. Merten, M. W. Howe, A. Marley, W. H. Xiong, R. W. Folk,  
G. J. Broussard, R. Liang, M. J. Jang, H. Zhong, D. Dombeck, M. von Zastrow,  
A. Nimmerjahn, V. Gradinaru, J. T. Williams, L. Tian, Ultrafast neuronal imaging of dopamine 
dynamics with designed genetically encoded sensors. Science 360, eaat4422 (2018).
	26.	 F. Sun, J. Zeng, M. Jing, J. Zhou, J. Zhou, J. Feng, S. F. Owen, Y. Luo, F. Li, H. Wang,  
T. Yamaguchi, Z. Yong, Y. Gao, W. Peng, L. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Du, D. Lin, M. Xu, A. C. Kreitzer, 
G. Cui, Y. Li, A genetically encoded fluorescent sensor enables rapid and specific 
detection of dopamine in flies, fish, and mice. Cell 174, 481–496.e19 (2018).
	27.	 R. M. Wightman, Probing cellular chemistry in biological systems with microelectrodes. 
Science 311, 1570–1574 (2006).
	28.	 M. Ganesana, S. T. Lee, Y. Wang, B. J. Venton, Analytical techniques in neuroscience: 
Recent advances in imaging, separation, and electrochemical methods. Anal. Chem. 89, 
314–341 (2017).
	29.	 U. Ungerstedt, Å. Hallström, In vivo microdialysis -­
 a new approach to the analysis of 
neurotransmitters in the brain. Life Sci. 41, 861–864 (1987).
	30.	 B. J. Venton, Q. Cao, Fundamentals of fast-­
scan cyclic voltammetry for dopamine 
detection. Analyst 145, 1158–1168 (2020).
	31.	 P. Puthongkham, B. J. Venton, Recent advances in fast-­
scan cyclic voltammetry. Analyst 
145, 1087–1102 (2020).
	32.	 J. Day-­
Cooney, R. Dalangin, H. Zhong, T. Mao, Genetically encoded fluorescent sensors for 
imaging neuronal dynamics in vivo. J. Neurochem. 164, 284–308 (2023).
	33.	 A. G. Beyene, K. Delevich, J. T. Del Bonis-­
O’Donnell, D. J. Piekarski, W. C. Lin, A. W. Thomas, 
S. J. Yang, P. Kosillo, D. Yang, G. S. Prounis, L. Wilbrecht, M. P. Landry, Imaging striatal 
dopamine release using a nongenetically encoded near infrared fluorescent 
catecholamine nanosensor. Sci. Adv. 5, eaaw3108 (2019).
	34.	 B. L. Sabatini, L. Tian, Imaging neurotransmitter and neuromodulator dynamics in vivo 
with genetically encoded indicators. Neuron 108, 17–32 (2020).
	35.	 Z. Wu, D. Lin, Y. Li, Pushing the frontiers: Tools for monitoring neurotransmitters and 
neuromodulators. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 23, 257–274 (2022).
	36.	 C. Dong, Y. Zheng, K. Long-­
Iyer, E. C. Wright, Y. Li, L. Tian, Fluorescence imaging of neural 
activity, neurochemical dynamics, and drug-­
specific receptor conformation with 
genetically encoded Sensors. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 45, 273–294 (2022).
	37.	 Y. Chen, B. L. Sabatini, Signaling in dendritic spines and spine microdomains. Curr. Opin. 
Neurobiol. 22, 389–396 (2012).
	38.	 W. Becker, A. Bergmann, Lifetime imaging techniques for optical microscopy. (Becker & 
Hickl GmbH, 2002) p. 1–41.
	39.	 D. Koveal, C. M. Díaz-­
García, G. Yellen, Fluorescent biosensors for neuronal metabolism 
and the challenges of quantitation. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 63, 111–121 (2020).
	40.	 R. Yasuda, Imaging spatiotemporal dynamics of neuronal signaling using fluorescence 
resonance energy transfer and fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy. Curr. Opin. 
Neurobiol. 16, 551–561 (2006).
	41.	 J. R. Lazzari-­
Dean, A. M. M. Gest, E. W. Miller, Optical estimation of absolute membrane 
potential using fluorescence lifetime imaging. eLife 8, e44522 (2019).
	42.	 D. Brinks, A. J. Klein, A. E. Cohen, Two-­
photon lifetime imaging of voltage indicating 
proteins as a probe of absolute membrane voltage. Biophys. J. 109, 914–921 (2015).
	43.	 F. H. van der Linden, E. K. Mahlandt, J. J. G. Arts, J. Beumer, J. Puschhof, S. M. A. de Man,  
A. O. Chertkova, B. Ponsioen, H. Clevers, J. D. van Buul, M. Postma, T. W. J. Gadella,  
J. Goedhart, A turquoise fluorescence lifetime-­
based biosensor for quantitative imaging 
of intracellular calcium. Nat. Commun. 12, 7159 (2021).
	44.	 K. Zheng, L. Bard, J. P. Reynolds, C. King, T. P. Jensen, A. V. Gourine, D. A. Rusakov, 
Time-­
resolved imaging reveals heterogeneous landscapes of nanomolar Ca2+ in 
neurons and astroglia. Neuron 88, 277–288 (2015).
	45.	 Y. Chen, A. J. Granger, T. Tran, J. L. Saulnier, A. Kirkwood, B. L. Sabatini, Endogenous 
Gαq-­
coupled neuromodulator receptors activate protein kinase A. Neuron 96, 
1070–1083.e5 (2017).
	46.	 Y. Chen, J. L. Saulnier, G. Yellen, B. L. Sabatini, A PKA activity sensor for quantitative 
analysis of endogenous GPCR signaling via 2-­
photon FRET-­
FLIM imaging. Front. 
Pharmacol. 5, 56 (2014).
	47.	 C. I. Massengill, L. Bayless-­
Edwards, C. C. Ceballos, E. R. Cebul, J. Cahill, A. Bharadwaj,  
E. Wilson, M. Qin, M. R. Whorton, I. Baconguis, B. Ye, T. Mao, H. Zhong, Sensitive genetically 
encoded sensors for population and subcellular imaging of cAMP in vivo. Nat. Methods 
19, 1461–1471 (2022).
	48.	 T. Laviv, B. Scholl, P. Parra-­
Bueno, B. Foote, C. Zhang, L. Yan, Y. Hayano, J. Chu, R. Yasuda, In 
vivo imaging of the coupling between neuronal and creb activity in the mouse brain. 
Neuron 105, 799–812.e5 (2020).
	49.	 R. Mongeon, V. Venkatachalam, G. Yellen, Cytosolic NADH-­
NAD(+) redox visualized in 
brain slices by two-­
photon fluorescence lifetime biosensor imaging. Antioxid. Redox 
Signal. 25, 553–563 (2016).
	50.	 K. Zheng, T. P. Jensen, D. A. Rusakov, Monitoring intracellular nanomolar calcium using 
fluorescence lifetime imaging. Nat. Protoc. 13, 581–597 (2018).
	51.	 J. R. Lakowicz, H. Szmacinski, M. L. Johnson, Calcium imaging using fluorescence lifetimes 
and long-­
wavelength probes. J. Fluoresc. 2, 47–62 (1992).
	52.	 R. Yasuda, C. D. Harvey, H. Zhong, A. Sobczyk, L. van Aelst, K. Svoboda, Supersensitive Ras 
activation in dendrites and spines revealed by two-­
photon fluorescence lifetime 
imaging. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 283–291 (2006).
	53.	 S. Tang, R. Yasuda, Imaging ERK and PKA activation in single dendritic spines during 
structural plasticity. Neuron 93, 1315–1324.e3 (2017).
	54.	 H. Murakoshi, H. Wang, R. Yasuda, Local, persistent activation of Rho GTPases during 
plasticity of single dendritic spines. Nature 472, 100–104 (2011).
	55.	 C. D. Harvey, R. Yasuda, H. Zhong, K. Svoboda, The spread of Ras activity triggered by 
activation of a single dendritic spine. Science 321, 136–140 (2008).
	56.	 S. J. Lee, Y. Escobedo-­
Lozoya, E. M. Szatmari, R. Yasuda, Activation of CaMKII in single 
dendritic spines during long-­
term potentiation. Nature 458, 299–304 (2009).
	57.	 L. Ma, B. C. Jongbloets, W. H. Xiong, J. B. Melander, M. Qin, T. J. Lameyer, M. F. Harrison,  
B. V. Zemelman, T. Mao, H. Zhong, A highly sensitive A-­
Kinase activity reporter for 
imaging neuromodulatory events in awake mice. Neuron 99, 665–679.e5 (2018).
	58.	 L. Ravotto, L. Duffet, X. Zhou, B. Weber, T. Patriarchi, A bright and colorful future for 
G-­
protein coupled receptor sensors. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 14, 67 (2020).
	59.	 L. M. Barnett, T. E. Hughes, M. Drobizhev, Deciphering the molecular mechanism 
responsible for GCaMP6m’s Ca2+−dependent change in fluorescence. PLOS ONE 12, 
e0170934 (2017).
	60.	 M. Jing, Y. Li, J. Zeng, P. Huang, M. Skirzewski, O. Kljakic, W. Peng, T. Qian, K. Tan, J. Zou,  
S. Trinh, R. Wu, S. Zhang, S. Pan, S. A. Hires, M. Xu, H. Li, L. M. Saksida, V. F. Prado,  
T. J. Bussey, M. A. M. Prado, L. Chen, H. Cheng, Y. Li, An optimized acetylcholine sensor for 
monitoring in vivo cholinergic activity. Nat. Methods 17, 1139–1146 (2020).
	61.	 P. M. Borden, P. Zhang, A. V Shivange, J. S. Marvin, J. Cichon, C. Dan, K. Podgorski,  
A. Figueiredo, O. Novak, M. Tanimoto, E. Shigetomi, M. A. Lobas, H. Kim, P. Zhu, Y. Zhang, 
W. S. Zheng, C. Fan, G. Wang, B. Xiang, L. Gan, G.-­
X. Zhang, K. Guo, L. Lin, Y. Cai, A. G. Yee, 
A. Aggarwal, H. Bao, X. Lou, E. R. Chapman, C. P. Ford, D. Rees, D. Dietrich, B. S. Khakh,  
J. S. Dittman, W.-­
B. Gan, M. Koyama, V. Jayaraman, J. F. Cheer, H. A. Lester, J. J. Zhu,  
L. Looger, A fast genetically encoded fluorescent sensor for faithful in vivo acetylcholine 
detection in mice, fish, worms and flies, worms and flies. bioRxiv 939504 [Preprint].  
8 February 2020. www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.02.07.939504v1.
	62.	 F. Deng, J. Wan, G. Li, H. Dong, X. Xia, Y. Wang, X. Li, C. Zhuang, Y. Zheng, L. Liu, Y. Yan,  
J. Feng, Y. Zhao, H. Xie, Y. Li, Dual-­
color GRAB sensors for monitoring spatiotemporal 
serotonin release in vivo. bioRxiv 542566 [Preprint]. 30 May 2023. www.biorxiv.org/conte
nt/10.1101/2023.05.27.542566v1.
	63.	 J. Feng, H. Dong, J. Lischinsky, J. Zhou, F. Deng, C. Zhuang, X. Miao, H. Wang, H. Xie, G. Cui, 
D. Lin, Y. Li, Monitoring norepinephrine release in vivo using next-­
generation GRABNE 
sensors. bioRxiv 546075 [Preprint]. 25 June 2023. www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023
.06.22.546075v1.
	64.	 F. Sun, J. Zhou, B. Dai, T. Qian, J. Zeng, X. Li, Y. Zhuo, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Qian, K. Tan,  
J. Feng, H. Dong, D. Lin, G. Cui, Y. Li, Next-­
generation GRAB sensors for monitoring 
dopaminergic activity in vivo. Nat. Methods 17, 1156–1166 (2020).
	65.	 M. Howe, I. Ridouh, A. L. A. Mascaro, A. Larios, M. Azcorra, D. A. Dombeck, Coordination of 
rapid cholinergic and dopaminergic signaling in striatum during spontaneous 
movement. eLife 8, e44903 (2019).
	66.	 G. Buzsaki, R. G. Bickford, G. Ponomareff, L. J. Thal, R. Mandel, F. H. Gage, Nucleus basalis 
and thalamic control of neocortical activity in the freely moving rat. J. Neurosci. 8, 
4007–4026 (1988).
	67.	 J. D. Dudar, I. Q. Whishaw, J. C. Szerb, Release of acetylcholine from the hippocampus of 
freely moving rats during sensory stimulation and running. Neuropharmacology 18, 
673–678 (1979).
	68.	 M. Xu, S. Chung, S. Zhang, P. Zhong, C. Ma, W. C. Chang, B. Weissbourd, N. Sakai, L. Luo,  
S. Nishino, Y. Dan, Basal forebrain circuit for sleep-­
wake control. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 
1641–1647 (2015).
	69.	 J. Vazquez, H. A. Baghdoyan, Basal forebrain acetylcholine release during REM sleep is 
significantly greater than during waking. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 280, 
R598–R601 (2001).
	70.	 M. G. Lee, O. K. Hassani, A. Alonso, B. E. Jones, Cholinergic basal forebrain neurons burst 
with theta during waking and paradoxical sleep. J. Neurosci. 25, 4365–4369 (2005).
	71.	 F. Marrosu, C. Portas, M. S. Mascia, M. A. Casu, M. Fà, M. Giagheddu, A. Imperato,  
G. L. Gessa, Microdialysis measurement of cortical and hippocampal acetylcholine 
release during sleep-­
wake cycle in freely moving cats. Brain Res. 671, 329–332 (1995).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024


Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadi0643 (2024)     21 February 2024
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  R e s o u r c e
17 of 17
	72.	 R. Szymusiak, D. McGinty, Sleep-­
related neuronal discharge in the basal forebrain of cats. 
Brain Res. 370, 82–92 (1986).
	73.	 L. Détári, G. Juhász, T. Kukorelli, Firing properties of cat basal forebrain neurones during 
sleep-­
wakefulness cycle. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 58, 362–368 (1984).
	74.	 M. R. Picciotto, M. J. Higley, Y. S. Mineur, Acetylcholine as a neuromodulator: Cholinergic 
signaling shapes nervous system function and behavior. Neuron 76, 116–129 (2012).
	75.	 M. E. Hasselmo, The role of acetylcholine in learning and memory. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 
16, 710–715 (2006).
	76.	 I. Klinkenberg, A. Sambeth, A. Blokland, Acetylcholine and attention. Behav. Brain Res. 
221, 430–442 (2011).
	77.	 A. E. Power, Slow-­
wave sleep, acetylcholine, and memory consolidation. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A. 101, 1795–1796 (2004).
	78.	 J. Xia, H. Yang, M. Mu, N. Micovic, K. E. Poskanzer, J. R. Monaghan, H. A. Clark, Imaging 
in vivo acetylcholine release in the peripheral nervous system with a fluorescent 
nanosensor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2023807118 (2021).
	79.	 A. Scimemi, M. Beato, Determining the neurotransmitter concentration profile at active 
synapses. Mol. Neurobiol. 40, 289–306 (2009).
	80.	 R. Nirogi, K. Mudigonda, V. Kandikere, R. Ponnamaneni, Quantification of acetylcholine, 
an essential neurotransmitter, in brain microdialysis samples by liquid chromatography 
mass spectrometry. Biomed. Chromatogr. 24, 39–48 (2010).
	81.	 P. Ma, Y. Chen, Beyond conventional wisdom: Unveiling quantitative insights in 
fluorescence lifetime imaging via realistic simulation of biological systems. bioRxiv 572686 
[Preprint]. 21 December 2023. www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.12.20.572686v1.
	82.	 V. Parikh, R. Kozak, V. Martinez, M. Sarter, Prefrontal acetylcholine release controls cue 
detection on multiple timescales. Neuron 56, 141–154 (2007).
	83.	 S. J. Lee, Y. Chen, B. Lodder, B. L. Sabatini, Monitoring behaviorally induced biochemical 
changes using fluorescence lifetime photometry. Front. Neurosci. 13, 766 (2019).
	84.	 J. A. Gorski, T. Talley, M. Qiu, L. Puelles, J. L. R. Rubenstein, K. R. Jones, Cortical excitatory 
neurons and glia, but not GABAergic neurons, are produced in the Emx1-­
expressing 
lineage. J. Neurosci. 22, 6309–6314 (2002).
	85.	 M. Raspe, K. M. Kedziora, B. Van Den Broek, Q. Zhao, S. De Jong, J. Herz, M. Mastop,  
J. Goedhart, T. W. J. Gadella, I. T. Young, K. Jalink, SiFLIM: Single-­
image frequency-­
domain 
FLIM provides fast and photon-­
efficient lifetime data. Nat. Methods 13, 501–504 (2016).
	86.	 Y. Zhang, I. H. Guldner, E. L. Nichols, D. Benirschke, C. J. Smith, S. Zhang, S. S. Howard, 
Instant FLIM enables 4D in vivo lifetime imaging of intact and injured zebrafish and 
mouse brains. Optica 8, 885–897 (2021).
	 87.	 A. J. Bowman, C. Huang, M. J. Schnitzer, M. A. Kasevich, Wide-­
field fluorescence lifetime 
imaging of neuron spiking and subthreshold activity in vivo. Science 380, 1270–1275 (2023).
	88.	 H. J. Rho, J. H. Kim, S. H. Lee, Function of selective neuromodulatory projections in the 
mammalian cerebral cortex: Comparison between cholinergic and noradrenergic 
systems. Front. Neural Circuits 12, 47 (2018).
	 89.	 G. Marucci, M. Buccioni, D. D. Ben, C. Lambertucci, R. Volpini, F. Amenta, Efficacy of 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropharmacology 190, 108352 (2021).
	90.	 C. W. Olanow, J. A. Obeso, F. Stocchi, Continuous dopamine-­
receptor treatment of 
Parkinson’s disease: Scientific rationale and clinical implications. Lancet Neurol. 5, 
677–687 (2006).
	91.	 M. Wu, S. Minkowicz, V. Dumrongprechachan, P. Hamilton, L. Xiao, Y. Kozorovitskiy, 
Attenuated dopamine signaling after aversive learning is restored by ketamine to rescue 
escape actions. eLife 10, e64041 (2021).
	92.	 R. J. Post, M. R. Warden, Depression: The search for separable behaviors and circuits. Curr. 
Opin. Neurobiol. 49, 192–200 (2018).
	93.	 J. T. Ting, B. R. Lee, P. Chong, G. Soler-­
Llavina, C. Cobbs, C. Koch, H. Zeng, E. Lein, 
Preparation of acute brain slices using an optimized N-­
Methyl-­
D-­
glucamine protective 
recovery method. J. Vis. Exp., 53825 (2018).
	94.	 T. A. Pologruto, B. L. Sabatini, K. Svoboda, ScanImage: Flexible software for operating 
laser scanning microscopes. Biomed. Eng. Online 2, 13 (2003).
	95.	 Y. Oishi, Y. Takata, Y. Taguchi, S. Kohtoh, Y. Urade, M. Lazarus, Polygraphic recording 
procedure for measuring sleep in mice. J. Vis. Exp., 53678 (2016).
Acknowledgments: We thank Y. Li and laboratory for sharing plasmids of neuromodulator 
sensors and for discussions. We thank S. Ma for validation of sleep scoring results. We thank  
A. Kepecs, M. Creed, and the laboratories of Y.C., T. Holy, and D. Kerschensteiner for helpful 
feedback on the project. We thank M. Bagnall, Y. (Miko) Dai, K. Grens, T. Holy, Y. Li, A. Maduskar, 
and T. Papouin for critical comments on the manuscript. Schematic illustrations from Figs. 1A, 
3A, 3C, 4E, 6A, and 7A and fig. S6B were created with BioRender. Funding: This work was 
supported by the U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke R01 NS119821 
(to Y.C.), The Whitehall Foundation 2019-­
08-­
64 (to Y.C.), a gift from the Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute (to Y.C.), and The McDonnell International Scholars Academy of Washington University 
in St. Louis (to P.M.). Author contributions: Conceptualization: P.M. and Y.C. Methodology: 
P.M., P.C., E.I.T., and Y.C. Software: P.M., P.C., E.I.T., S.A., and Y.C. Validation: P.M., P.C., and Y.C. 
Formal analysis: P.M., P.C., S.A., and A.O. Investigation: P.M., A.O., and Y.C. Resources: P.M., P.C., 
E.I.T., and Y.C. Data curation: P.M., P.C., and Y.C. Writing—original draft: P.M., P.C., and Y.C. 
Writing—review and editing: P.M., P.C., E.I.T., S.A., A.O., and Y.C. Visualization: P.M., P.C., and Y.C. 
Supervision: Y.C. Project administration: P.M. and Y.C. Funding acquisition: Y.C. Competing 
interests: Y.C. and P.M. have filed a provisional patent application on the use of fluorescence 
lifetime to record neuromodulator dynamics across both transient and chronic time scales. The 
other authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: 
All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper, the 
Supplementary Materials, and/or deposited at https://github.com/YaoChenLabWashU/
Publication/tree/main/NM_Sensor_Lifetime (DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.10032449). The MATLAB 
programs for ScanImage for data acquisition and analysis are available at https://github.com/
YaoChenLabWashU/2pFLIM_acquisition (DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.10031982). The MATLAB codes 
for simulation are available at https://github.com/YaoChenLabWashU/Simulation (DOI: 
10.5281/zenodo.10031784). The Python codes for analysis of running versus resting states are 
available at https://github.com/YaoChenLabWashU/RVR_v2/ (DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.10032192). 
The Python codes for sleep staging are available at https://github.com/YaoChenLabWashU/
neuroscience_sleep_scoring (DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.10031987).
Submitted 3 May 2023 
Accepted 17 January 2024 
Published 21 February 2024 
10.1126/sciadv.adi0643
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 07, 2024